In this work, the extraction of microalgal protein from wet Chlorella sorokiniana species using alcohol/salt liquid biphasic flotation (LBF) with the aid of ultrasonication for cell rupturing was proposed. The effect of varying crude feedstock concentration, flotation time, salt type, salt concentration, alcohol type, alcohol concentration, initial volumes of salt and alcohol were investigated. After the optimization process, the highest proportion of protein recovered in the top phase was achieved with 250g/L ammonium sulphate, 60% (v/v) 2-propanol, 1.0VR,initial, 20g/L crude biomass load, 4mm3/min air flowrate and 10min of flotation time. The recycling of phase components was introduced to minimize the use of alcohol and salt in the corresponding LBF. It was demonstrated that top phase (alcohol) recycling can achieve increasing performance for three consecutive recycling runs. Under optimized process conditions, the proportion of protein recovered in the top phase was 88.86% for the third recycle run.Comprehensive analyses and nutritional studies have shown that microalgae are highly rich with protein ( The use of traditional separation techniques such as membrane separation, column chromatography and precipitation are generally time-consuming, involves batch operation and complex scale-up ( LBF is generally made of two polymers or a polymer and a salt ( Up to the current date, no study has been made on recovery of protein from wet microalgae biomass using alcohol/salt LBF. Partitioning of the algal protein into the alcohol phase through LBF using low-cost and recyclable phase forming components would lead to a cost-efficient protein recovery process. Additionally, alcohol-salts LBF has a low viscosity, easy constituent for recovery and short settling time. As such, this approach would enable the production of microalgal protein to be economically feasible and sustainable. In this paper, the novel approach of alcohol/salt LBF was applied in the protein extraction of algal biomass cultivated using A detailed study was made with aims to obtain optimal operating conditions for the extraction of protein from the cultivated microalgae biomass (wet-basis) using alcohol/salt LBF. The effect of biomass amount, flotation time, type of salt, concentration of salt solution, concentration of alcohol solution, type of alcohol, total volume of alcohol phase, total volume of salt phase, recycling usages of alcohol phase (with make-up fresh alcohol) and scaled-up LBF system with recycling were studied. Alcohols (methanol, ethanol, 1-propanol and 2-propanol) and salts (dipotassium hydrogen phosphate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, ammonium sulphate and magnesium sulphate) were purchased from R&M Chemicals (United Kingdom). All of the chemicals are of analytical grade. The small scale LBF apparatus (50 One high protein-yielding microalgae species was used in this study, namely The aforementioned microalgae strain was cultivated in an indoor photo-bioreactor (PBR) based on a study by Tan et al. The PBR used was a 500 The microalgae biomass was cultured for 8–10 The microalgae cell concentration in the photo-bioreactor was determined regularly by using an optical density measurement technique after proper dilution with distilled water. The spectrophotometrical absorbance of the microalgae is correlated to the light absorbance of chlorophyll. Previous studies showed that microalgae have peak absorbance ranging from 624 to 750 The extracted proteins from the microalgae biomass were tested using Bradford method ( The separation efficiency ( The partition coefficient ( The volume ratio ( For experiments involving recycling of alcohol phase, the recovery yield ( The total protein content in NTP is the nitrogen-to-protein conversion factor, with a constant value of 4.78 ( Proportion of protein recovered (P Aqueous solutions of different salts (dipotassium hydrogen phosphate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, ammonium sulphate and magnesium sulphate) were prepared based on experimental requirements, which were then mixed with required amount of wet-basis microalgae. The salt solution and microalgae suspension mixture was processed using an ultrasonic processor (Hielscher, UP400S) fitted with a standard sonotrodes H At the end of each ultrasonication process, the pre-treated biomass feedstocks were measured in terms of volume, and added to the flotation units in desired amount. Alcohol was then added slowly on top to ensure formation of aqueous two-phase in the flotation unit. The air flowrate can then be introduced to allow the experiment to commence. At the end of each experiment, the top and bottom phases were pipetted out and placed in measuring cylinders. The volumes of each phase were recorded. Small amount of samples in 0.25 The LBF parameters [amount of biomass, flotation time, type of salt (potassium dihydrogen phosphate, dipotassium hydrogen phosphate, ammonium sulphate and magnesium sulphate), concentration of salt solution, concentration of alcohol solution, type of alcohol (methanol, ethanol, 1-propanol and 2-propanol), total volume of alcohol phase (V The recycling experiments were carried out by in both small scale and scaled-up flotation units. The small scale recycling was done by recycling top alcohol phase, followed by recycling of bottom salt solution phase components to determine which phase is more suitable for recycling. For the bottom phase recycling, the remaining top phase were pipetted out with cautious to not accidentally extract the bottom phase. Upon complete extraction of the top phase, the remaining bottom phase were then measured in terms of volume, and added with fresh feedstock biomass to achieve the optimum biomass load concentration. The refurbished bottom phase is then reused for the next recycling run, with fresh alcohol at optimum concentration and volume as the top phase. Whereas for the top phase recycling, the alcohol phase was isolated from the LBF system using a pipette and placed into a rotary evaporator (model Laborota 4003, Heidolph, Schwabach, Germany) to induce thermo-separation. The process purifies the protein contained in the alcohol phase, whereby the corresponding alcohol solution can be recovered through the thermo-separation. Fresh alcohol was added to the recovered alcohol solution to meet the optimized condition of the LBF if necessary, proceeding to the next recycling run. As the small scale recycling indicated satisfactory results in recycling the alcohol phase while keeping bottom phase at optimum conditions, the larger scale recycling was proceeded by recycling the top alcohol phase. Both the small-scale and large-scale LBF units were tested with recycling of the alcohol phase. The bottom phase was kept constant by using the optimized conditions to study the effect of recycling top alcohol phase. Thus, crude feedstock (with biomass) was introduced for each recycling experiment runs. Four successive recovery operations of protein were performed until the performance of the recycled alcohol dropped. After each recovery process, the total protein content and volumes of both phases were recorded. It has been reported that biological feedstocks in the flotation system could affect the two-phase system in respect of the binodal, tie-line length (TLL) and volume ratio when loaded with more than modest quantities of 5% (w/w) of the system (  This part of the experiment was conducted by using four types of ionic salts to determine the optimum salt, followed by varying the chosen salt’s concentration to study its effects in the LBF. The proposed salts were based on literature reviews, which include potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH Alcohol-salt two-phase systems are formed when aliphatic alcohols with low molecular weight (e.g. ethanol, 1-propanol, 2-propanol, and butanol) are mixed with highly concentrated salt (e.g. phosphate, sulphate and citrate salts) solutions to induce the salting out effect, yielding two immiscible phases ( The effect of different types of alcohol and concentration of the corresponding alcohol upon the LBF performance was investigated in this part of study and the results were shown in To study the effects of varying 2-propanol in the LBF, the alcohol concentration was varied from 20% (v/v) up to undiluted (99.7% (v/v)). As shown in     The third recycling indicates significant increases compared to the first extraction, where the values of Y As the recovery yield does not take the nitrogen content factor into account, the proportion of proteins recovered from the total proteins in the microalgae biomass was further determined for a better evaluation. Measurement of total nitrogen by elemental analysis and the conversion of nitrogen-to-protein (NTP) can be used as a first approximation to estimate the total protein content in a particular biomass. It had been previously reported that the standard NTP conversion factor value is 6.25. However, that particular value may be unsuitable for microalgae, as the biomass commonly contains a significant amount of non-protein nitrogen distributed in algal pigments (chlorophyll), as well as inorganic nitrogen, leading to overestimation of the actual protein content ( In this work, protein was successfully extracted from wet This work is supported financially by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 