Carbonated non-alcoholic soft drinks are an important sector of worldwide beverage markets. They are produced by adding carbon dioxide gas either directly to the beverage or to water used to dilute a concentrated syrup. Carbon dioxide may come from a variety of industrial sources but it should comply with appropriate standards. Carbonation levels vary depending on product type. Typical ingredients are discussed as are types of packaging. During filling and processing, most products are subject to pasteurisation to ensure microbiological safety and stability. Carbonated natural mineral water is also discussed briefly.This article deals with carbonated soft drinks and carbonated (or sparkling) bottled water. It does not include carbonated alcoholic drinks although the underlying science and technology is mostly applicable. Carbonated soft drinks are a very important sector of the global drinks market and in 2013 some 196 billion litres were consumed. The first carbonated drinks were produced in the eighteenth century when a young watchmaker and amateur scientist, Jacob Schweppe, perfected an efficient system for producing carbonated mineral water. He founded the Schweppes Company in Geneva but moved the business to London in 1790. Carbonated products are now available worldwide in many different packaging formats including glass and PET (polyethylene terphthalate) bottles and cans. In order to manufacture a carbonated beverage, it is necessary to inject carbon dioxide gas (CO The gas is very soluble in water; the amount increasing with reducing temperature. When CO The level of carbonation varies with product types with around 4.0–7.0 Except in the case of naturally carbonated mineral water (see Contaminants arising in gas from varying processes can affect aroma and taste of the product and also introduce toxic substances. Since potential contaminants in the gas may vary, it is essential for beverage use that the material supplied complies with an appropriate quality standard such as that endorsed by the European Industrial Gases Association (EIGA). A typical specification for CO Since much industrial CO Soft drinks are typically formulated to offer the consumer a taste of fruit, particularly orange or lemon, or spices and herbs as in a cola drink. The underlying taste will be a balanced blend of sweetness and sharpness with flavour and colour being added to meet the required product characteristics. Ingredients such as preservatives and antioxidants may be added to enhance the keeping qualities of the product. Other widely used ingredients are described below. The traditional source of sweetness is carbohydrate, mainly sucrose or high fructose corn syrup (HFCS). Glucose syrup, which usually contains a wide range of carbohydrates of differing molecular weight, is used in energy drinks where a lower sweetness level is required for a given level of carbohydrate addition. A typical beverage would contain around 10–12.5 % w/v of sucrose or HFCS. Alternative intense sweeteners are also widely used. Depending on the particular substance, these may provide up to 500 times the sweetness of sucrose per unit weight. Because of worldwide concerns about excessive calorie intake and the associated diseases of obesity and diabetes, intense sweeteners are increasingly used to provide all or part of the sweetness in beverages. The most widely used intense sweeteners include the synthetic substances saccharin, cyclamates, aspartame, acesulfame K, and sucralose. A natural intense sweetener extracted from the leaves of the plant To provide the acidity or sharpness of beverages, organic acids such as citric or malic acids are used. Citric acid is usually the preferred ingredient in fruit-flavoured drinks as it normally available at lower cost than alternatives. In cola drinks, phosphoric acid is normally employed. The ratio between sweetness and sharpness determines the underlying taste characteristic of the product. When carbonated products are formulated, it is usual to reduce slightly the level of added acid compared with the level that would be employed in a non carbonated drink. This is to recognise that when carbon dioxide is dissolved in water carbonic acid is formed in equilibrium with CO A wide range of permitted flavours and colourings are available for use in products. Flavourings are usually a solution of aroma substances from either natural or synthetic sources dissolved in a permitted solvent, usually ethanol. Alternative solvents may be employed to comply with cultural or religious needs. When a carbonated drink is formulated, the amount of flavouring used, typically around 0.1% w/v, may need to be adjusted to account for the potential volatilising effect of CO Colourings used are increasingly from natural sources. Carotenoids, anthocyanins and caramels are the most widely used. Specific synthetic food azo dyes are also widely permitted and used. Despite their permitted status, some synthetic colourings are claimed to be associated with hyperactivity in children and many major retailers now refuse to sell drinks containing them. Fruit juices, mainly added in the form of concentrates, are also widely used as ingredients in fruit drinks. Typical use will be between 2 and 10% by volume of the product when calculated as reconstituted juice. A potential problem when fruit juices are used in carbonated drinks is that any particulate material can provide a nucleation point for release of CO Traditionally, preservatives have been added to soft drinks to minimise the risk of microbial spoilage. The most widely used are benzoic and sorbic acids added as their sodium or potassium salts. Dimethyl dicarbonate is also used but must be injected directly into a stream of product. The once widely used sulphur dioxide (SO Increasingly, the use of in-pack pasteurisation or aseptic filling (see Anti-oxidants such as ascorbic acid (vitamin C) are often added to improve stability of colour and flavour. Other ingredients may include vitamins, minerals and herbal extracts. Nutritional and health claims permitted for products are very tightly controlled by legislation. Manufacture of carbonated beverages involves several distinct stages. The first is to mix all the required ingredients, except as noted below, in an appropriate vessel. Because as indicated in Carbonated beverages are manufactured by one of two basic methods. The In the alternative Water for addition is separately chilled and carbonated then, using a proportioning system, the two components are blended in the required and closely controlled amounts. The carbonated product is then fed to the required filler. The process of carbonation involves either injecting the gas into a stream of water or product or adding it to the static liquid in a pressurised vessel. Counter-pressure filling systems are frequently used. An alternative system is based on liquid level in the container. Product is usually filled at a cool temperature to minimise the loss of CO Depending on the ingredients and formulation filled, capped products may be subjected to in-pack pasteurisation in a tunnel unit. This would usually be an alternative to flash pasteurisation. Pasteurisation is now widely used as it provides greater assurance of safety and protection from microbial spoilage although with simple flavoured carbonated products produced in a plant with good hygiene standards, risks are low if pasteurisation is not carried out. Pasteurisation is essential when ingredients such as fruit juices are incorporated. Flash pasteurisation involves the use of a heat exchanger to rapidly raise a stream of product to a temperature between about 85° and 95 Filled products are likely to have moisture on them either as a result of condensation on a cold bottle or from the water sprays in a tunnel unit. It is almost always desirable to remove surface moisture using an air blast as it may interfere with subsequent label application and/or weaken secondary packaging. After pasteurisation, filled and dried bottles are labelled if necessary, collated and packed as required into the stock keeping units (SKUs) such as packs containing 6, 9 12 or 24 bottles. The use of plastic sleeve labels pre-applied to bottles before filling provides an alternative. If cans are to be used, they are supplied pre–printed to the filling plant. Increasingly, the use of aseptic filling systems provides an attractive, if expensive, means of packaging products without any need for the use of preservatives. In such a system, PET bottles are blown from heated ‘preforms’ (see Traditionally, glass bottles were the preferred form of packaging for carbonated beverages. They are still preferred today in many applications, usually to enhance a brand image or to provide longer shelf life. There are disadvantages of weight and brittleness but provided effective closures are correctly applied, the retention of gas is excellent. Oxygen ingress is also effectively minimised. Unless appropriately tinted, oversleeved or covered with a large label, glass allows ingress of light which may damage the product and affect shelf life. Cans are also widely used for carbonated beverages. Most cans are now made from two pieces of aluminium; the body produced by a process of “drawing and wall ironing” and the can end applied after filling. Cans are now almost always pre-printed and only the data relating to traceability and product durability is applied at or immediately after filling, usually by an ink-jet labeller. Provided can ends are correctly applied and steps taken to minimise the risk of corrosion, cans provide arguably the best protection of a carbonated product as they do not allow ingress of light or oxygen. In most markets, the majority of carbonated products are packed in PET bottles. Typical sizes range from 250 For small bottles the weight of plastic used is typically around 15–25 Shelf-life of carbonated drinks in PET is shorter than for products packaged in glass or cans. This is due to the loss of CO Closures for carbonated products may be either metal or plastic but all now incorporate tamper evidence. Aluminium is normally used for metal closures as it is highly malleable whilst high density polyethylene (HDPE) is normally used for PET bottle closures. Because the nature of glass bottle production can lead to minor variations in moulding, metal caps are usually preferred. Caps without a screw thread are applied to bottle tops and by use of a rotating chuck on the capping machine, are formed to fit the exact profile of the screw thread on each bottle. A gas tight seal is obtained by incorporating a plastic sealant into the cap at manufacture. The sealant also acts to protect the cap against corrosion from ingredients. Since PET bottle moulds give bottles with tighter manufacturing tolerances, plastic caps are usually moulded to the exact thread profile required. In the past a small number of serious injuries have been caused when closures on carbonated drinks have been suddenly and explosively released causing them to become missiles. Most bottle moulds now incorporate vertical slots into the screw threads to which closures are applied. On initial release, this allows venting of excess gas pressure whilst the closure is still attached to the container body and an explosive cap release can be avoided. Natural mineral water is a product description protected by law in European Union countries. It describes a natural water source of confirmed exceptional stability and purity which must be bottled at source. Such water may be sold still (i.e., not carbonated) or with CO