The crystallization behavior and kinetics of glasses produced from coal fly ashes, red mud and silica fume were investigated by using differential thermal analysis, X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy techniques. The kinetic parameters of the glass-crystallization transformation were estimated under non-isothermal conditions applying three different equations, namely, Kissinger, Matusuta-Sakka and Ozawa. Non-isothermal differential thermal analysis curves were obtained using both coarse and fine glass samples. The crystallization activation energies of coarse glasses are in the range of 233–439kJ/mol while the activation energies of fine glasses change in the range of 369–450kJ/mol. Avrami exponent, n, values of coarse glasses indicated the three-dimensional bulk crystallization. This result is in well agreement with the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy investigations. The values of the n obtained experimentally are in the range of 1.24–1.36 for fine glasses which show the one-dimensional surface crystallization. The crystallized phase of the glass-ceramic samples produced from waste glasses by applying the controlled heat treatment process was identified as diopside by X-ray diffraction analysis.An increasingly urgent problem for the near future of human kind is the recycling of industrial wastes. One of the major wastes is coal fly ash, which is produced in significant amounts in Turkey. Fly ash is a major source for environmental pollution since it is in a fine powder form and its heavy metal content is very high. Because of increasingly stringent environmental regulations, coal fly ash is regarded as hazardous material in most countries. Therefore, it must be recycled or, at least, be deposited in standard landfill sites with minimum risk. Vitrification technology is one of the most promising solutions for the utilization of industrial wastes. It is feasible to use coal fly ash as a raw material source to develop glass materials since it contains large amounts SiO In recent years, the production of glass-ceramic materials made by recycling industrial wastes such as, coal fly ash, iron blast furnace slags, municipal incinerator fly ash and even red mud from aluminum production have been investigated by many researchers Thermal analysis is widely used in studying the crystallization kinetics of glasses because of providing rapid and convenient means In this study, the crystallization behavior of glasses produced from mixtures of coal fly ashes obtained from two different thermal power plants, red mud and silica fume was investigated by using DTA. For this purpose, Kissinger The raw materials used in this study were coal fly ashes obtained from the Çayırhan and Orhaneli thermal power plants in Turkey, red mud from aluminum production and silica fume. Chemical compositions of these wastes were given in Glass samples were prepared from the mixed wastes. In each batch 20 CR and ORS codes were given to the glasses produced from Çayırhan fly ash Differential thermal analysis (DTA) experiments were performed by heating 20 The variation of the crystallization peaks with different DTA heating rates can be used to estimate the activation energy for crystallization and to determine the crystallization mechanism. The crystallization behavior of glasses was determined by using non-isothermal methods. DTA was performed on both coarse and fine glass samples to determine the particle size effect on the crystallization mechanism. As non-isothermal methods Kissinger, Matusita–Sakka and Ozawa methods were used. Nucleation and crystallization experiments were carried according to the results obtained in the other studies The characterization of the produced glass-ceramic samples was carried out using both electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) investigations were operated at 25 X-ray diffraction was utilized to determine that the crystalline phases occurred in the glass-ceramic samples. The X-ray diffraction investigations were carried out using CuKα radiation at 40 The kinetic parameters of the glass-crystallization transformation were estimated under non-isothermal conditions applying three different equations, namely, Kissinger Apparent activation energies for crystallization may be determined employing non-isothermal methods to the crystallization peak. For example, in the Kissinger equation where Matusita–Sakka where In addition, when surface crystallization predominates, In the presence of bulk crystallization, For most oxide glass systems, For From the exothermic peak, the Avrami parameter, where Non-isothermal DTA curves were obtained with selected heating rates (5, 10, 15 and 20 At a particular heating rate, the Assuming that the nucleation and growth processes had occurred simultaneously in as-quenched samples during the DTA measurements, the data for as-quenched glasses were analyzed by the Matusita–Sakka equation (Eq. Using The Ozawa plots of ln(−ln(1 By plotting ln(  In order to identify the crystalline phase(s), X-ray scans were carried out on both CR and ORS glass-ceramic samples. In the XRD scan of CR glass-ceramic sample, the  Cross-sectional SEM investigations were carried out to characterize the crystalline morphology in the bulk of the sample. The microstructural studies were performed on the bulk glass-ceramic samples using SEM.  In this study, the kinetic parameters of both coarse and fine glass samples obtained from waste materials were estimated under non-isothermal conditions applying three different equations, namely, Kissinger As seen from The explanation for different The studied glasses are in the SiO Only a few researchers studied on crystallization kinetics of coal fly ash based glasses. Activation energy values of crystallization for glasses produced from coal fly ashes were found 283 and 318 From the experimental results the following conclusions can be drawn: DTA results showed that the crystallization peak temperatures increased with the increase in particle size. The crystallization behavior of glass samples has been investigated under non-isothermal conditions. Using the Ozawa equation, the Avrami constants ( The crystallization activation energies of coarse glasses are in the range of 233–439 XRD results revealed that the CR and ORS glass-ceramic samples produced from the different mixed wastes which had similar chemical compositions have the same crystalline phase determined as the diopside phase. SEM investigations revealed that crystallites were uniformly dispersed in the microstructure for both glass-ceramic samples. The cross-sectional SEM investigations on the bulk CR and ORS glass-ceramic samples indicated that this result is in well agreement with those determined by the Ozawa equation.