Pulsating high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) achieves high separation efficiency to fine weakly magnetic minerals with a rod matrix. In practice, the matrix is made of numerous cylindrical wires, so that an insight into the magnetic capture of single wires to magnetic minerals would provide a crucial foundation for the analysis, design and choice of matrix. In the investigation, the magnetic capture of single wires to ilmenite minerals and its dependence on the key parameters of a pilot-scale pulsating HGMS separator, i.e., magnetic induction, pulsating frequency and feed velocity, is investigated using an innovatively experimental method. It is found that these parameters have significant effects on the magnetic capture of single wires; the mass weight of magnetic particles captured onto the wires increases with increase in magnetic induction, and it is opposite for pulsating frequency and feed velocity. The cylindrical wire captures more particles than that of rectangular one, due to its larger capture area, and it has a stronger adaptability to variations in the parameters. The single wire captures more magnetic particles but a greatly reduced stability to the parameters' variation, compared to the multi-wires. This experimental method provides a new perspective in the understanding of magnetic capture to magnetic particles in a HGMS process, contributing to the optimal design of matrix and to the improvement of HGMS performance.The performance of high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) in the past three decades is dramatically enhanced in the field of mineral processing, allowing it to play a key role in the concentration of weakly magnetic minerals from metallic ores and in the removal of such minerals from non-metallic ores. This accomplishment is essentially resulted from the technical breakthrough in pulsating HGMS, which addressed the long-term problem of matrix clogging as encountered in conventional HGMS methods It should be noted that the use of rod matrix as shown in These investigations and discussions are encouraging, as they provide a potential possibility for improving the HGMS performance. But, it is also interesting to note that these works are basically restricted in the theoretical and simulative descriptions on the magnetic capture of single wires to magnetic particles A cyclic pilot-scale pulsating HGMS separator is used for the investigation. As can be seen from This separator is fed periodically. When a batch of feed is finished, the energizing current is switched off and the magnetic particles captured onto the matrix are washed out to get a magnetic product. A more detailed description on the pulsating HGMS is reported As shown in The magnetic field gradient of this magnetic induction component is derived from Eq. While the magnetic particle is far smaller than the magnetic wire and is near to the surface of the cylindrical wire, i.e., From Eq. It is clear that the magnetic force depends on the properties of particle such as particle size and magnetic susceptibility, the applied magnetic induction and the wire radius. The competing forces against on the capture by the magnetic force are the hydrodynamic drag caused by the feed and pulsating velocities of slurry in the separating zone of the separator and the gravitational force as shown in In a pulsating HGMS process for fine particles, the gravity is significantly smaller than that of the hydrodynamic force, and thus the possibility From Eq. The Magnetic Capture Analysis (MCA) method It can be seen from All the investigations for the magnetic capture of magnetic wires are achieved with the pilot-scale pulsating HGMS separator as shown in A low-grade titanium sand assaying 7.12% TiO For each investigation, excessive material was fully mixed in a stir beaker at around 10% solid concentration, and then it was fed to the separator at a given time. The material was separated in the separator for a sufficiently long time to ensure that all the magnetic wires inserted in the frame reach full capture for magnetic particles from slurry. In this work, cylindrical wires with 1.5, 2.0 and 3.0 For all the investigations, the mass weight for magnetic particles captured onto a unit length of single wires is calculated and adopted for evaluations purpose. The feed velocity of slurry presents one of the important feed parameters, and it together with the pulsating velocity of slurry determines the hydrodynamic drag acting upon a magnetic particle, thereby producing an effect on the magnetic capture of single wires to magnetic particles. It can be seen from Overall, the rectangular wire achieved a visibly smaller mass weight for magnetic particles than the cylindrical ones, as this irregularly-shaped wire has a smaller capture area for magnetic particles. When the feed velocity is increased to high levels such as 2.0 From As theoretically discussed afore, the magnetic field gradient increases with increase in the induced magnetization and decrease in the radius of magnetic wires; it reaches the maximum when the magnetic induction arrives at a certain high level and the wire of given size is magnetically saturated. This magnetization characteristic of wires is fairly embodied in the capture to magnetic particles as shown in From As mentioned above, the feed and pulsating velocities of slurry determine the hydrodynamic drag acting upon a magnetic particle in a pulsating HGMS process, so that these two variables would produce their significant effects on the magnetic capture of single wires to magnetic particles. Combining From As we can see from This investigation has a practical significance for the evaluation and design of matrix, while the MCA method is intended for industrial purposes. As the multi-wires is near to a real matrix as used in industry, such a multi-wires matrix may provide a reference for the design of real matrix, on the basis of single magnetic capture investigations for a given material.  The single cylindrical wire captures more magnetic particles than that of rectangular one; while the magnetic induction, pulsating velocity and feed velocity are respectively controlled at 1.1 The size of single wires does not produce a significant effect on the capture capability for magnetic particles, but for the multi-wires it does; under the same operating conditions (magnetic induction 0.5 This quantitative investigation provides a new perspective in the understanding of wires' magnetic capture to magnetic particles in a HGMS process. For instance, the magnetic capture of single wires for magnetic particles is not significantly affected by the size of magnetic wires and there is a distinct capture difference between the single and multi wires. Overall, the innovative MCA method has provided an effective means for the deep understanding on the capture of matrix to magnetic particles, which contributes to the optimal design of matrix and to the improvement of HGMS performance. This creative research work was supported by the