Background Context
                  The load sharing classification (LSC) laid foundations for a scoring system able to indicate which thoracolumbar fractures, after short-segment posterior-only fixations, would need longer instrumentations or additional anterior supports.
               
                  Purpose
                  We analyzed surgically treated thoracolumbar fractures, quantifying the vertebral body's fragment displacement with the aim of identifying a new parameter that could predict the posterior-only construct failure.
               
                  Study Design
                  This is a retrospective cohort study from a single institution.
               
                  Patient Sample
                  One hundred twenty-one consecutive patients were surgically treated for thoracolumbar burst fractures.
               
                  Outcome Measures
                  Grade of kyphosis correction (GKC) expressed radiological outcome; Oswestry Disability Index and visual analog scale were considered.
               
                  Methods
                  One hundred twenty-one consecutive patients who underwent posterior fixation for unstable thoracolumbar burst fractures were retrospectively evaluated clinically and radiologically. Supplementary anterior fixations were performed in 34 cases with posterior instrumentation failure, determined on clinic-radiological evidence or symptomatic loss of kyphosis correction. Segmental kyphosis angle and GKC were calculated according to the Cobb method. The displacement of fracture fragments was obtained from the mean of the adjacent end plate areas subtracted from the area enclosed by the maximum contour of vertebral fragmentation. The “spread” was derived from the ratio between this subtraction and the mean of the adjacent end plate areas. Analysis of variance, Mann-Whitney, and receiver operating characteristic were performed for statistical analysis. The authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materials or methods used in the present study or the findings specified in this paper. No funds or grants have been received for the present study.
               
                  Results
                  The spread revealed to be a helpful quantitative measurement of vertebral body fragment displacement, easily reproducible with the current computed tomography (CT) imaging technologies. There were no failures of posterior fixations with preoperative spreads <42% and losses of correction (LOC)<10°, whereas spreads >62.7% required supplementary anterior supports whenever LOC>10° were recorded. Most of the patients in a “gray zone,” with spreads between 42% and 62.7%, needed additional anterior supports because of clinical-radiological evidence of impending mechanical failures, which developed independently from the GKC. Preoperative kyphosis (p<.001), load sharing score (p=.002), and spread (p<.001) significantly affected the final surgical treatment (posterior or circumferential).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Twenty-two years after the LSC, both improvements in spinal stabilization systems and software imaging innovations have modified surgical concepts and approach on spinal trauma care. Spread was found to be an additional tool that could help in predicting the posterior construct failure, providing an objective preoperative indicator, easily reproducible with the modern viewers for CT images.Vertebral body burst fractures represent 10%–20% of all spinal fractures, accounting for more than 50% of those involving the thoracolumbar segment. Their management still remains a controversial topic The load sharing classification (LSC) adopts a scoring system able to predict in which fractures posterior-only instrumentations are more prone to fail We experienced premature failures of posterior thoracolumbar fixations, whenever an initial severe kyphosis, an extreme vertebral body fragmentation, together with vacuum disc and bone resorption, were encountered From January 2008 through December 2014, 121 consecutive cases treated for traumatic unstable thoracolumbar spine fractures were included in this retrospective analysis. The institutional ethics committee approved the study. Inclusion criteria required the presence of a single-level burst fracture from T10 to L2, with or without posterior ligament disruption, neurologic deficit, and extraspinal fractures. Patients with pathologic fractures, previous spine surgery, and active infectious disease were excluded from the study. All of the enrolled patients underwent a baseline CT evaluation at the hospital admission, a CT between 1 and 2 months after surgery, or whenever a complication occurred. During postoperative follow-up, orthostatic x-ray images were taken within 60 days and then annually to evaluate the stability of kyphosis correction over time. Functional outcome was evaluated through the Oswestry Disability Index 12 months postoperatively in the 108 patients available at that follow-up time. Disability was classified as minimal (0%–30%), moderate (31%–50%), and severe (51%-100%). Pain was assessed using a visual analog scale at 6 and 12 months after surgery in 119 and 108 patients, respectively. Computed tomography scans of the spine were performed using a clinical multidetector scanner (Philips Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Images always contained multiplanar reconstructions with a thickness of 1.5 mm, which were systematically reviewed by two operators (GL, MC), in single-blind fashion, to classify each fracture according to the AO Spine classification and the LSC. Pre- and postprocedural segmental kyphosis were calculated on CT spine images according to the Cobb method, tracing the angle enclosed by a line drawn parallel to the inferior end plate of the intact vertebra above and a line parallel to superior end plate of the intact vertebra below the fractured one. Cobb angle, recalculated on images acquired at the admission and 12 months after the decisive posterior-only or two-step circumferential procedure, provided the degree of kyphosis correction named “grade of kyphosis correction” (GKC). The baseline axial CT slice showing the most extensive destruction and fragmentation of the vertebral body was selected. The spread was calculated in single blinding using local RIS/PACS platform (Carestream Health, Inc, Rochester, NY, USA, Version 11.4.1.1102) by contouring the largest area inscribed in the scattered fragments of the fractured vertebral body ( Surgery was performed within 8 hours after trauma in patients neurologically compromised and within 3 days in patients without neurologic deficits. One hundred twenty-one patients underwent posterior pedicle screw fixation and 34 of them needed an additional anterior support through anterolateral retroperitoneal or thoracotomy approach 1–2 months after posterior fixation or whenever a mechanical failure occurred. Laminectomy was performed in patients suffering from neurologic impairment due to spinal cord compression and laminar bone chips were exploited for posterolateral fusion. When needed, indirect canal decompression by ligamentotaxis was performed. Short segment fixations one above-one below with monoaxial screws were favored whenever a mild vertebral body fragmentation and a segmental kyphosis<5° were recorded, whereas in the other cases, two above-one below implants with polyaxial screws were chosen. Screws with diameters of 5.5 and 6.5 mm, respectively, for thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, and a length of 35 to 55 mm were used, preferring constructs with tulip heads and rods in cobalt-chrome alloy. No pedicle screws were introduced in the fractured vertebral body, nor transpedicular augmentations were performed. Postoperative bracing was not recommended. Additional anterior approaches plus posterior screw-rod revisions were always performed as soon as possible in case of breakdown of instrumentation. Anterior column reconstructions were generally needed 2 to 4 months after the posterior fixation in those patients showing signs of impending mechanical failure such as vertebral body's cancellous bone resorption, vacuum disc, progressive kyphosis without posterior ligament disruption, weight-bearing pain, screws or rod bending, screw loosening. An additional plate was implanted in those patients operated anteriorly as a consequence of a posterior fixation loosen or broken. Left-sided mini-open retroperitoneal laparotomy and mini-open retropleural thoracotomy were, respectively, performed for L2 and T10–L1 fractures. The support was usually provided by a hollow expandable titanium cage filled with autologous bone chips. Statistical analyses were performed with MedCalc, version 15.4 (MedCalc bvba 1993-2015, Ostend, Belgium). Qualitative variables were expressed as number of cases (percentages), whereas quantitative variables were expressed as median and interquartile range or minimum and maximum values whether appropriate. For preoperative kyphosis, load sharing score (LSS), and spread, the Mann-Whitney test and the analysis of variance were adopted to identify factors affecting surgery. Spearman rank correlation was used to analyze nonparametric variables. The GKC correlated with the posterior fixations with or without the additional anterior approach was analyzed with the analysis of variance. The role of the different factors to address surgery toward the most appropriate strategy of spinal realignment was investigated with a logistic regression model: receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and area under curve (AUC) [95% CI] were displayed for the most significant results. All of the 121 patients (79 male and 42 female) with thoracolumbar fractures underwent posterior screw-rod–based fixations, but 34 of them needed an additional anterior approach because of an impending or true posterior instrumentation failure. The mean age of these latter was 41.5 years, whereas the group who took advantage of a posterior-only fixation revealed a mean age of 51.2 years ( The majority of traumas (n=63 of 121) involved the first lumbar vertebra. A complete burst fracture (A4) was recorded in 53% of patients who required an additional anterior support, but only in 24.4% of patients who underwent a posterior-only procedure (chi-square test, Among patients who needed an additional anterior support after posterior construct loosening or breakage, 82.4% had an LSS≥6. No circumferential fixations with an LSS<5 were recorded. The median LSS in posterior-only and posterior plus anterior fixations was 6 (95% CI 5–7) and 7 (95% CI 6–8) ( Whenever the anterior approach became necessary, this additional support ensured a median GKC of 13° (95% CI 9.8°–14.1°) instead of the 8° (95% CI 6°–9°) obtained with screw-rod fixations ( The analysis on factors affecting surgery showed that preoperative kyphosis (OR 1.18 [1.09–1.28]; The Oswestry Disability Index at 12-month follow-up showed 68% of patients had minimal disability, 23% of patients had moderate disability, and 9% had severe disability. In 119 patients available at 6-month follow-up, a mean visual analog scale score of 3 was noted, whereas an average score of 2 was recorded for 108 patients followed up 12 months after surgery. No significant differences were found whether patients underwent posterior-only or posterior plus anterior fixation. No major perioperative complications were observed on the posterior approach apart from two surgical wound revisions for superficial infection and one screw malpositioning without neurological injury. Three failures of abdominal wall not requiring further surgery and with uneventful clinical course were reported after the anterior approach. Three cage subsidence during its expansion required additional plating without compromising the final result. After the anterior approach, no infections occurred, and no revision surgeries were required. In the latest AO classification system, the simplification of thoracolumbar burst fractures from three types (A3.1, A3.2, A3.3) to two types (A3, A4) has highlighted the load-bearing capacity of the vertebral body but has lowered the emphasis on fragmentation The present study is limited by a relatively small sample size, a short radiological follow-up, and the lack of a comparative group whose second step surgery was planned relying on the LSC. The relatively small number of posterior plus anterior fixations represents another limitation. On the contrary, the strength of the present study lies in the homogeneous population of thoracolumbar burst fractures, in the anterior support provided always with titanium expandable cages, and in the easy reproducibility of the spread's calculation. Indicators supporting the choice of a supplementary procedure during the surgical planning could play a role in the prevention of posterior fixation failures. Twenty-two years after the LSC, both improvements in spinal stabilization systems and software imaging innovations of our times have modified the surgical concepts and approach on spinal trauma care The authors are grateful to Francesca Molino for her precious help in imaging analysis.