A consequence of lignite stripping in the Lusatia mining district (East Germany) is the backfilling of dumps that mainly consist of low-compacted fine and medium-grained sands. When the ground-water table, which had been lowered while stripping the coal, is rising again, these dumps might be affected by a settlement flow due to the liquefaction of soils. Common methods for stabilisation as, for instance, blasting or vibrator-jetting deep compaction, are not very useful in ecologically sensitive areas, where dumps have been afforested and embankment areas of residual lakes have developed into highly valuable biotopes. A new so-called air-impulse method in combination with directional horizontal drilling has been developed, which does not have a considerably negative impact on the vegetation during compaction. The experience gained during the first employment of this method at the lake “Katja”, a residual lake of lignite stripping, is presented in this paper.In the Lusatian lignite mining district as well as in most parts of northern Germany, the surface strata are Pleistocene sediments. The overburden soils of Miocene lignite deposits consist of these Pleistocene fine and medium-grained sands and Tertiary non-cohesive soils. In the lignite opencast mines, these overburden sediments had to be removed and refilled into the pits after the coal had been worked out. Depending on the technique of dumping (by belt lines of overburden conveyor bridges leading across the pits or by rail wagons, for example), the compacted fill densities of dumps vary widely both in vertical and lateral direction. Above all, the so-called plough dumps built up in the past when the overburden soils were conveyed by wagons, then dumped and distributed by ploughs, were compacted insufficiently. This also applies to stacker spoil dumps. Backfilled insufficiently compacted materials are very often found in the upper parts of dumps, with a thickness between 20 m and a maximum of 80 m, especially when the dumps had been refilled into the opencast mines between the 1930s and the 1970s. Low density of the granular dump material in combination with its grain size in the range of fine to medium-grained sands, well-rounded and smoothed shapes of particles, leads to unstable bank slopes. Since most of the mines have been abandoned, the formerly lowered ground-water table is rising again and saturating the pores of the dump soils. Under these circumstances, it takes only little dynamic loading as, for instance, a wave on the residual lake, to cause a local increase of pore water pressure. Subsequently, a loss of contact between the grains occurs and the effective stress is reduced. This local liquefaction is able to extend very quickly. Many disasters happened in the past. Even in 1998, when investigations for limiting the retrogressive extension of liquefaction were to be made at one of the residual lakes of coal stripping near Cottbus, one of the workers got killed by the sudden settlement of bank slopes. The criteria for the estimation of safety of dump soils against liquefaction cannot be calculated by realistic mathematical models. Therefore, technical procedures for dump stabilisation for the areas of lignite mining in East Germany have been developed So-called hidden dams are created by compacting the backfilled materials. Their density has to be sufficiently increased no longer to be affected by liquefaction and geometric parameters have to be chosen to prevent a settlement flow landwards. In order to achieve a high shear resistance, the base of the hidden dam should be in contact with the natural floor or the dump segments, which are not prone to liquefy, as, for instance, hydraulic fills. There are several methods known for stabilisation of low-density dump materials, but only very few of them are useful in practical terms. In the Lusatian lignite district, about 150 km of dump slopes are considered to be unstable. Expensive methods like the so-called dynamic compaction or injection techniques may only be applied in special cases. The compaction by blasting or by vibrator-jetting deep compaction are the most favourable methods and have been used very successfully so far. Hidden dams with a length of several kilometres have already been set up Compaction by blasting is the least expensive method, but it can only be used if the dump material in place is water-saturated. Within the water-saturated dump, the sudden discharge of gas causes compressive waves. The pore water pressure increases within a soil cylinder around the borehole. As a consequence, a loss of effective stress between the grains occurs that facilitates a local liquefaction. During the dissipation of the excessive pore water pressure through the borehole, the soil's compactness increases considerably. The compaction by vibrator-jetting is much more expensive than blasting, but it is more suitable for dump sections which are extremely sensitive to liquefaction where slope failures can be triggered off already by dynamic loading by means of blasting. In materials that are not water-saturated, the compaction cannot be achieved by blasting, but by vibrator-jetting. Both methods include several disadvantages, especially if the ground-water table has already risen up to its original level. The hidden dam cannot be established next to the shoreline, as mentioned above. Working on unstable dumps is dangerous. The forests, which have tried very hard to grow on generally poor acidic dump soils, and highly valuable biotopes, which have developed by natural succession, are adversely affected in the process of creating the hidden dam. Trees have to be cut down in order to provide access for machinery for drilling boreholes both for blasting and vibrator-jetting. If the ground-water table is not covered by soils with a thickness of at least several meters, ground failures might be dangerous for workers and machines; thus, soil layers may have to be filled up additionally. The lake “Katja” is the residual hole of an abandoned strip mine near the city of Frankfurt/Oder with an areal extension of 550,000 m The results of the investigation of the slope stability made in 1996 revealed a strong tendency of dumps to liquefy.  Calculations for the design of a hidden dam, which is capable of preventing a backward-directed extension of liquefaction near the slope surface, have resulted in a required dam with an overall width of 21 m. It should get in contact with the hydraulic fill and border the shoreline. Because of the risks for workers and machines and the potential damage to forests and biotopes, the blasting method had to be excluded. The method of vibrator-jetting deep compaction is quite expensive and land-consuming because of the access employment of huge cranes and the coning effect of the vibrating cylinder. The authority for ecological matters neither allowed cutting down forests nor damaging biotopes. For this reason, a new method, which had only been tried in theoretical terms and on a laboratory scale so far, was chosen for the first time at the lake “Katja” in October 1997. This innovative method was developed by STOLL, Tudeshki et al. As shown in The air-impulse method has been used at the eastern shore of the lake “Katja” in order to create a hidden dam with an overall width of 21 m. Its depth depended on the level of the hydraulic fill below the plough dump and varied between 9 and 13 m. The diameter of the soil cylinder, which might be compacted by a single horizontal drilling, has been estimated to approximately 7 m. This is the reason why three parallel drillings had to be made as shown in Settlements are visible by ruptures on the dump's surface (see In general, a compactness of medium density resulted ( The safety of shoreline area, i.e. the shallow-water slopes of the dump, has been assured. There is no risk of liquefaction that might be triggered off by the impulses of walking along the shoreline, for example. Strong impulses caused by, heavy machines etc. have to be avoided in further use of this area. The slight decrease of compactness in the top parts of the dump might be caused by the lack of lithostatic stress and by roots of trees, but it has neither significance for the function of the hidden dam nor for the further growth of trees. There is no doubt about the fact that an internal hidden dam, which can resist a landwards extension of liquefaction triggered off by a slope failure near the shoreline, was successfully created by the air-impulse method in combination with directional drilling. Neither workers nor machinery needed to had to enter hazardous areas that are prone to dangerous settlement flows during operation. Clearing of land to provide access for machinery was avoided. The ruptures on the dump's surface that go along with compaction, do not have a considerably negative impact on the forest and the biotopes. These are the main advantages of the new method in comparison to the compaction by blasting or vibrator-jetting (see Now, the hidden dam on the eastern shore of the lake “Katja” allows its normal use for recreational activities. Access is prohibited to bank slopes of many old residual lakes of mining that are potentially failure-prone on the dumpside. Therefore, they cannot be used for any purpose. These slopes may be rehabilitated by the new method without causing damage to highly valuable vegetation and biotopes which may have developed in the meantime. As the new method is somewhat more expensive than compaction by blasting or vibrator-jetting, it will therefore not substitute these generally applied methods, but will be a useful addition to them. Nevertheless, the air-impulse method has to prove itself under more complicated geomechanical conditions, in particular, if the thickness of dumps to be compacted amounts to more than 10–15 m. In the future, it has to be established that compaction of dumps by air gun in various depths of dumps is possible, depending on successful compaction of an approximate cylinder of 10 m along a single bore hole axis of directional horizontal drilling. The calculations aiming at the design of a hidden dam, the field investigations and the technical procedure, have been made by Bergsicherung Cottbus GmbH in co-operation with NACAP Netherlands B.V. (responsible for the directional horizontal drilling). Financial support was given by the Ministerium für Wirtschaft, Mittelstand und Technologie des Landes Brandenburg, Germany (the ministry of economics, medium-sized industry and technology of the German land of Brandenburg).