Introduction
                  Several studies report on functional outcome after operative treatment for midshaft clavicular fractures. According to the published data not much is known about the quality of life after operative treatment. The purpose of this study is to investigate long term patient reported quality of life (QoL) and functional outcome after plating for midshaft clavicular fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Patients between 16 and 65 years of age, with a midshaft clavicular fracture which were treated with plate fixation between 2006 and 2014, were included. Information was extracted from hospital records and all patients were asked to participate in an online survey. Primary outcome was QoL (SF-36 and EQ-5D-5L). Secondary outcomes were complications, reoperation rate, patient– and cosmetic satisfaction, pain, and functional outcome (DASH).
               
                  Results
                  In a retrospective cohort design, 164 patients were included, 101 completed the online survey. Patients reported a good QoL and functional outcome. The mean physical- and mental SF36 score were 53.9±7.3 and 52.3±9.9 (0–100), the EQ-5D-5L score was 0.88±0.17 (−0.59 to 1.0) and the average DASH was 8.45±14.0 (0–100). Furthermore, there was a strong correlation between the functional outcome and QoL (p<0,001). Seventeen patients developed at least one complication (10%) and seventy-seven patients got a reoperation, with isolated implant removal as the leading cause of reoperation (80,5%).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Patients which received operative treatment for a midshaft clavicle fracture have an excellent QoL, and a good functional outcome. Furthermore, there is a strong relationship between functional outcome and the QoL.Clavicular fractures are common injuries, occurring mainly in young, and active males. Together, clavicle fractures account for approximately 15% of the fractures in the upper extremity, and 5% of all fractures Conservative versus operative treatment remains controversial. Although operative treatment has few complications, there is no evidence it will result in better functional outcome on the long term Several studies have been done on the treatment of midshaft clavicular fractures, resulting in a substantial amount of publications about functional outcome after plate fixation This study is a single center cohort study in a large hospital, which is one of the 12 major trauma centers in the Netherlands. Included are patients which were treated with ORIF using platefixation for a fractured clavicle between January 2006 and December 2014. The study was reviewed and approved by the institutional review committee. Informed consent was obtained, and all eligible patients were contacted and asked to participate in an online survey. In addition, patients received an information letter explaining the purpose of our research. Inclusion criteria for this study were: all patients between the age of sixteen and sixty-five who received ORIF for a midshaft clavicular fracture (Orthopedic Trauma Association [OTA] type 15-B) Exclusion criteria were: surgical treatment other than plate fixation, conservative treatment, non-midshaft fractures, concomitant injury to the upper extremity at the same side as the fractured clavicle, significant other injuries and insufficient understanding of the Dutch language. Patients who were deemed incompetent or mentally incapable of participating were also excluded from our study. The primary outcome measure was: (1) quality of life (QoL) using the “Short Form 36” (SF-36) Secondary outcome measures were: (1) postoperative complications, (2) reoperation rate, (3) patient satisfaction, (4) cosmetic satisfaction, (5) pain, and (6) functional outcome using the “Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand” (DASH) questionnaire Clinical records were retrospectively examined in order to acquire patient characteristics and information about the course of treatment. Furthermore, radiographic images and operation reports were reviewed to determine the sustained type of fracture– and type of plate used for operative treatment. Commonly used for measuring health or health-related QoL, the SF-36 consists of 36 items which measure health related QoL on eight different domains. These scores add up to a psychological– and mental component score (PCS/MCS), ranging from 0 to 100 (0 worst health possible, 100 best health possible), providing information about the psychical and mental wellbeing. The EQ-5D-5L is a standardized measure of health status, increasingly used in orthopedic research, and as an outcome measure after trauma surgery Impaired fracture healing and postoperative complications are common problem in patients with midshaft clavicle fractures Statistical analyses was performed using SPSS software, version 22 (IBM corp A total of 2.730 patients with a clavicle fracture were seen at our hospital between January 2006 and December 2014. One hundred and sixty-four patients were operated for a midshaft clavicle fracture, with a mean age (and standard deviation) of 44,9 The most common mechanism of injury was a fall from a bicycle, followed by accidents with motorized vehicles and sports ( Overall patients reported an good quality of life, with a mean physical– and mental component score of 53.9 The results of a comparison between patients with delayed– or nonunion prior to operation, and patients who were primarily treated with an operation are reported in A comparison between patients with– and without a complication after the initial operation is summarized in There were no (significant) differences on the domains of age, dominance of the arm, comminution–, dislocation– or shortening of the fracture and type of plate used, in both functional outcome and QoL questionnaires. However, we did find that both male- and older patients (>45 The relationship between functional outcome and the other PROM’s was investigated using Pearsons correlation coefficient, the results are presented in Seventeen patients suffered from at least one complication (10%). Failure of the OSM was the most frequent complication, occurring in seven cases, followed by infection in five–, and neuropraxia in two patients. Other complications included nonunion due to low-grade infection, arterial thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) and re-fracture, all occurring in one patient. All but two of the patients underwent a reoperation. Almost half of the patients (47%) developed a second complication. Refractures and infection were most common, both occurring in two cases. Other complications included hyperesthesia, nonunion, pain caused by a protruding fragment and exposure of a plate due to wound healing problems, all occurring in one patient. Seven patients underwent a second reoperation, the refractures were re-plated and the nonunion was treated using open reposition and external fixation. Three patients suffered from a third complication. One patient had failure of the OSM requiring removal of the plate. The others suffered from nonunion and adhesion of the skin to the clavicle. Both were treated with physiotherapy. There was no (significant) association between gender, age, comminution of the fracture, impaired fracture healing or type plate used, and the occurrence of complications. After initial plating a total of seventy-seven patients (47%) needed a reoperation. Isolated removal of the hardware was the leading cause of reoperation (81%), followed by failure– (9%) and infection (5%) of the OSM. Seven patients received a new plate after removal of the old one. In this study we reported on long term patient reported quality of life (QoL) and functional outcome after plating for midshaft clavicular fractures. One hundred forty-six patients suffering from a midshaft clavicle fracture and treated with plate fixation were included, finally 101 completed the online survey. Overall patients reported a good quality of life and functional outcome. Patients who developed postoperative complications, or suffered from a delayed union prior to surgery, reported inferior quality of life and functional outcome compared to patient who made an uneventful recovery, or suffered from recent fractures. Furthermore, there was a strong correlation between the QoL and functional outcome questionnaires. Compared to current literature our population reported a good QoL, with EQ-5D-5L scores consistent with a study by Naimark et al. One in ten patients (10,7%) suffered from one or several, mostly implant related, complications. Most complications were mild to moderate. Often subsequent reoperation was required, but the majority of patients did not sustain permanent damage or disability. Compared to the literature (23–37%) we reported a low number of complications (10%) Whereas a previous study reported only 14 patients (10%) who were treated with surgery for delayed fracture healing, our study included 25 patients (25%) with either a delayed– or nonunion, ( Another interesting finding in our study was the strong correlation between the DASH and the two of the three domains of the QoL questionnaires ( Previous studies suggest that operative treatment also leads to a better result on the domain of overall patient– and cosmetic satisfaction than conservative treatment To our knowledge this research is the first to extensively assess the QoL in patients after plating for midshaft clavicle fractures. We recognize that our study has some limitations. Fist of all, this study was designed as a single cohort study. Hence, there is no (conservatively treated) control with whom we can compare our results. Another limitation is that patients were only assessed at one point in time. Therefore, we were unable to follow the development of QoL and functional outcome over the course of time. Also, this approach reduces the possibility of assessing possible confounding variables which could influence our results. Additional research, using PROM’s in high quality randomized controlled trials, is required to further clarify the role of plating on the QoL of patients with midshaft clavicle fractures. The results of this study provide a baseline for future research in patients with midshaft clavicle fractures. Furthermore, we suggest that early treatments should be initiated in patient who present with signs of inadequate bone healing after primary conservative treatment, since delayed surgery may lead to inferior QoL and functional outcome on the long term. Patients with a midshaft clavicular fracture have an excellent QoL and functional outcome more than one 1 None. Medical ethical committee Isala, Hospital, Zwolle, Study number: #15.0963. No source of funding played a role in this study.