Commonly used at the coarser end of the comminution process, cone crushers often operate as the final crushing stage in the aggregate industry, or as the supplier of feed material for HPGRs or ball mills in the mining industry. As such, the performance of cone crushers undoubtedly affects the performance and efficiency of the overall process. The aim of this study is therefore to implement theoretical optimizations of compressive crushing for two different applications.
                  Three different prototypes of crushing chambers have been manufactured based on the conceptual designs obtained from theoretical optimizations. Tested in full scale experiments, the results for these prototypes (designed for aggregate production and mining operation) were subsequently compared to the measured data for the corresponding reference crushing chambers. The performed analysis suggests that the performance of cone crushers can be improved in terms of product yield as well as reduction ratio.Products of minerals, ores, and rock materials can be found almost anywhere in modern society. Whether it is the railway built with actual aggregates, the road paved with asphalt, the construction built of concrete, or the kitchenware made out of metal, the raw materials of minerals, ores and rock material have all passed through some kind of size reduction process. In this context, a common mechanical device is for instance the cone crusher, which is often used as the final crushing stage in the aggregate industry, or as the supplier of feed material to HPGRs or ball mills in the mining industry. As part of these processes, the performance of cone crushers will without a doubt affect the overall process performance and efficiency. Thus, by improving the performance of cone crushers, subsequent gains in the overall process stand to be made. For instance, With the hypothesis that modern cone crushers do not operate optimally, the aim of this study is to implement theoretical optimization results for two existing crushing applications and to compare the implemented results to those of the reference applications. To achieve this, the gneissic rock material used in the reference applications was initially characterized in laboratory crushing tests. The mathematical models subsequently obtained to describe the compressive breakage behavior of the material were then applied to theoretically optimize the crushing processes of the two studied applications. By translating the optimization results to crushing chamber geometries, the results were able to be implemented in prototypes and tested in full scale experiments. An overview of this work process is depicted in According to The breakage characteristics of the different compressive breakage modes are material specific and can be described by mathematical models as proposed by In order to model the compressive breakage behavior of the tested material, the models proposed by  As shown by Theoretical optimizations of two different crushing applications (one aggregate and one mining) were conducted in this study. In the aggregate application, the objective was to produce several different products with different economic values as shown in In contrast, the studied mining application only produces one product (0–4 Both studied applications are assumed to have the same feed material consisting of a 13–50 The performed optimizations were conducted using a mathematical optimization routine based on a genetic algorithm ( Also to be noted is that the simulated single particle compressions were calculated from the randomly generated system compression ratios and strokes, and were also calibrated after the largest particle in the feed. This means that differently sized particles experience different compression ratios. The single particle compression ratio should, in other words, not be confused with the system compression ratio which happens to be the same as the interparticle compression ratio.  With the interparticle compression ratio allowed to be zero, obtained optimization results revealed that, in terms of the studied aspects, no interparticle compression should be applied. This is believed to be explained by the larger amounts of fine material generated by interparticle crushing as well as the better efficiency of single particle crushing in reducing top size. However, in the aggregate industry, product quality is often measured in particle shape with a more cubical form considered as better particle shape ( Having concluded that the optimal crushing process for the studied application should only contain single particle crushing, new optimizations were conducted. All 10 compressions in the optimized crushing sequences were in other words assumed to be single particle. The results from these optimizations are presented in Moreover, the results show that despite an allowed system stroke of 36  Comparison between the optimization results with unlimited system stroke and those of an increasing system stroke shows that larger system strokes as well as system compression ratios are applied, when an increasing system stroke is required. This means that the bed height for the optimizations with an increasing system stroke is also generally larger. Further comparison shows that although the system compression ratios are larger for the optimizations with an increasing system stroke, the single particles are in fact compressed with similar single particle compressions. As a result, only a marginal difference of 1% in the balanced product yield (according to Eq. As opposed to the results of the aggregate application, initial optimizations indicated that both interparticle and single particle compressions should be used for the studied mining application. The use of both breakage modes is believed to be explained by the larger amounts of fine material generated by interparticle crushing, as well as the larger efficiency of single particle crushing in reducing top size. Optimizations were therefore conducted for crushing sequences with four interparticle compressions and six single particle compressions as previously motivated. The results from these optimizations can be seen in To summarize, the results indicate that a constant system stroke as well as constant interparticle compressions should be applied in terms of the studied aspects of the examined mining application. However, while the constant interparticle compressions are achievable as interparticle crushing only considers the applied compression ratio, the constant system stroke for the single particle compressions cannot be implemented in a Hydrocone construction. Another approach was therefore taken – optimizations with a reduced ratio of interparticle crushing were performed. This approach was motivated by the fact that the overall design aspects of a cone crusher imply a cross sectional area, which normally increases towards the outlet for fine crushing chambers. As particle beds cannot easily be formed at a gradually increasing cross sectional area, interparticle crushing is not likely to occur. Thus, by reducing the proportion of interparticle crushing, one is actually raising the choke level of a virtual crushing chamber. Reducing the proportion of interparticle crushing while maintaining the length of the crushing sequence resulted in optimizations of crushing sequences with three interparticle compressions and seven single particle compressions. As shown in Further analysis of the results (see Comparisons between the optimizations with different proportions of breakage modes indicate that better results are obtained by crushing sequences with a larger proportion of single particle crushing (see A fine crushing chamber was chosen as the reference crushing chamber for the aggregate application. The geometry of this chamber was consequently used to develop the geometry for a prototype based on the obtained optimization results. Comparisons between this reference chamber and the prototype show an altered chamber outlet for the proposed chamber as illustrated in In contrast, in the mining application the chosen reference crushing chamber was a chamber classified as extra fine (EF). Comparisons between this reference crushing chamber and the crushing chamber developed from the optimization results show that the proposed chamber has both a larger inlet and a smaller outlet than the original chamber (see Full scale experiments were conducted for the reference crushing chambers as well as the prototype chambers. The objective of these experiments was to test the performances of the prototypes and to map the corresponding performances for the reference chambers. In order to do so, parameter studies were carried out for all examined crushing chambers during which the effects of the CSS and eccentric speed were examined. The tests were carried out using a CH430 cone crusher in the Sandvik test facility in Dalby, Southern Sweden. All crushing chambers were tested for five different eccentric speeds; the standard eccentric speed of 360 By using the measured data, the performance of the different crushing chambers could be evaluated in terms of the balanced product yield shown in A comparison of the production of 0–4 In terms of power draw, the figures show that, in comparison to the reference chamber, a significantly larger relative amount of 0–4 These comparisons between the prototypes and the reference clearly indicate that the reference has a power or pressure limit preventing it from being pushed further as opposed to the prototypes. However, further studies reveal that the reference chamber actually has a higher 0–4 Finally, the results indicate that the inlet affects the crusher capacity. More specifically, the larger difference in capacity between the prototypes (i.e. different inlets, but the same outlet) than between the reference and mining prototype 2 (i.e. the same inlet, but different outlets) suggests that in terms of this study the inlet affects the crusher capacity to a larger extent than the outlet. The obtained optimization results indicate that in terms of the studied aspect of balanced product yield, only single particle crushing should be applied. This is believed to be explained by the superiority of single particle crushing in reducing top size as well as in generating small amounts of fine material. It should, however, also be noted that single particle crushing generates worse particle shape than interparticle crushing ( In contrast, the optimization results for the studied mining application indicate that both interparticle and single particle crushing should be applied. Comparisons with the reference crushing chamber show that larger single particle compressions should be used in the single particle crushing zone. This can be compared with the results of the aggregate application, which indicate that crushing should be more cautiously performed. Three different prototypes were manufactured as result of the performed optimizations. These prototypes were tested in full scale experiments and compared to their respective reference chambers. Analysis of the aggregate application shows that a larger balanced product yield is obtained by the aggregate prototype. This indicates that, in terms of the studied aspects, the aggregate prototype is performing better than the reference chamber. In terms of the mining application, analysis shows that finer crushing is achieved by the mining prototypes but at the cost of a lower total capacity, which can however be compensated. The results thus successfully affirm the optimization results indicating that more single particle crushing should be applied if the relative amount of 0–4 Finally, the larger capacity difference between the mining prototypes (with different inlets) than between the reference and mining prototype 2 (with different outlets) suggests that the inlet affects the capacity to a larger extent than the outlet. The authors would like to thank Sandvik, the Swedish Mineral Processing Research Association (MinFo), the Swedish national research program MinBaS, the Ellen, Walter and Lennart Hesselman’s Foundation for Scientific Research, and the Knutberg Foundation for their financial support. The Crushing Chambers and Materials Development group along with Richard Bern, Torbjörn Nilsson-Wulff, Nils-Åke Hallberg, and Bengt-Olof Tjell at Sandvik are especially acknowledged for their assistance in the implementation and the full scale experiments. Finally, this work has been carried out within the Sustainable Production Initiative and the Production Area of Advance at Chalmers University of Technology. The support is gratefully acknowledged.