W–30wt%Cu composite powders were prepared by a novel precipitation process using ammonium meta tungstate and copper nitrate as precursors. The initial precipitates were obtained by adding aqueous ammonia to a mixture of ammonium meta tungstate and copper nitrate solutions and then heating the solution up to 95°C. In order to synthesis W–Cu composite powders, the dried precipitates were calcined in air at 500°C and then reduced by hydrogen. The calcination temperature was determined by thermogravimetry analysis. The powders were characterized by X-ray diffraction technique and scanning electron microscopy analysis. The effect of sintering temperature was investigated on densification of the synthesized powders. Relative density over 98% was achieved for the samples which were sintered at 1150°C. Good electrical conductivity and relatively high hardness were achieved for the samples which sintered above melting point of copper.W–Cu composites are widely used as arcing tips, resistance welding electrodes, electrode materials for electro discharge machining, heat sink materials for microelectronics packaging and materials in MHD (magnetohydrodynamics) power generation systems. These groups of composites combine the high hardness, hot strength and wear resistance of tungsten with the outstanding electrical and thermal conductivity of copper In this study, in order to synthesis W–Cu composite powders, ammonium meta tungstate and copper nitrate were used as raw materials. The introduced synthesizing procedure does not include mechanical milling so the prepared powders would not be contaminated from the milling media. Also, the effect of sintering temperature on consolidation, electrical conductivity and hardness of the powders was investigated. White colored ammonium meta tungstate-AMT (H In order to determine the appropriate calcination temperature, the dried precipitates were subjected to thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) (NETZSCH STA 409 PC/PG) up to 750  The thermogravimetry of the initial precipitates up to 750 The XRD pattern of the calcined precipitates at 500 The XRD pattern of the reduced powders is shown in The effect of sintering temperature on the relative density and diametral shrinkage of the samples is shown in Below melting point of copper, solid state sintering is the main mechanism for densification of W–Cu compacts. During solid state sintering, diffusion of copper from the bulk of the composite particles resulted to formation of Cu necks between the composite particles. This phenomenon favors densification in solid state sintering according to Refs. Above 1083  The effect of sintering temperature on hardness of the sintered specimens is shown in W–30 The authors would like to appreciate from Materials and Energy Research Centre (MERC) for their financial support.