A statistical analysis was done to investigate the relationship between grinding variables and structural changes during mechanical activation of hematite concentrate. Experiments were carried out according to a statistical design by varying the grinding time, media surface and mill type. Several multivariate techniques are applied to interpret the grinding processes.
                  The variance analysis revealed that the media surface and grinding time significantly influence the five main response variables at 95% confidence level. The use of multivariate analysis allows the projection of high-dimensional data to a low subdimensional subspace. An overview of principal component analysis (PCA) on 27 variables yielded a three component model explaining 89% and predicting 76% of the total variance. It was found that the observations belonging to low and high levels of media surfaces fall into two groups. Most of the microstructural characteristics such as microstrain, dislocation and amorphization and granulometric surface area, BET specific surface area, specific energy input, stored energy, portion of smaller particles and stress energy coincide with high level of media surface group. The variables crystallite size, peak intensity and mean particle size appear with lower media surface. The PLS-DA (partial least squares discrimination analysis) made it possible to discriminate the three types of mills. From the projection of dummy variables, it was concluded that the vibratory mill caused comparatively less structural changes in hematite than the other mills in spite of releasing higher stress energy. The planetary mill introduced relatively higher dislocation defects and generated higher lattice strain. The hematite ground in the tumbling and planetary mills had comparatively higher X-ray amorphization degree and subsequently higher excess energy than the hematite ground in the vibratory mill. The tumbling mill produced relatively lower specific surface than the others. It was concluded that the products of the tumbling mill represented higher defect concentration (amorphization) per unit surface area despite releasing lower stress energy level. From the PLS modeling of the five main response variables, it was found that the X-variables specific energy input and stress energy are the most influencing factors.In recent years, mechanical activation of minerals is attracting a lot of interest from both technological and scientific point of view since structural changes affect strongly the properties of mechanically activated materials. The requirements for finer powders having specific microstructure characteristics have been arisen as results of the development of new processes and products in chemical, minerals and ceramics industries. In these areas, a variety of milling equipments such as attritor, vibratory, planetary and tumbling mills have been used for mechanical activation and the production of nanoparticles. In this area, the detailed explanation of the correlation between grinding variables and structure defects to control their properties is of major significance. However, since the grinding processes include a large number of variables, it is thought that the multivariate analysis is a powerful technique to describe such processes. Mechanical activation by grinding is a complex process involving alteration of structure, chemical composition, phase transformation and solid reactivity. According to Several attempts have been made to understand the relationships between grinding factors and changes in structure during mechanical activation. To exploit the data to get a better understanding of the behaviors of process, it is important to identify the salient features underlying the data. PCA effectively reduces the observation space, which facilitates process behavior diagnosis through the capture of the correlation between the variables. The reduction in dimensionality of the problem enables the engineer to summarize the information captured in a large number of variables by a smaller number of latent variables ( Various structural and geometrical characteristics change during ultrafine grinding. The objective of this study is to investigate the effects of grinding variables of mill type, grinding time and media surface on the microstructure evolution during the mechanical activation of hematite concentrate from a statistical view point. In addition to significance level and importance of the grinding variables, attempts have been made to find how microstructure characteristics differ vs. grinding variables and what grinding conditions are appropriate for inducing large structural changes. In addition, the study put forward a key for prediction of structural changes considering simultaneously several grinding variables in stead of a single variable. For data collection, a full factorial design with one qualitative and two quantitative factors was constructed. The qualitative factor, grinding mill, was set at three levels; tumbling, vibratory and planetary mills. The quantitative grinding time factor was leveled at 1, 3 and 9 h. The two levels 1 and 4 m Dry grinding experiments were conducted according to the design in air atmosphere. The grinding tests were made in closed condition, i.e., the lids of the mills were kept bolted during the grinding. Steel media between 22.2 and 6 mm with bulk density (apparent density) of 4875 kg/m The particle size distribution of samples was measured by a method of laser diffraction (CILAS 1064) in the liquid mode. The mean particle size and granulometric surface area were calculated based on the particle size distribution assuming spherical shapes for particles. The specific surface area was determined using the nitrogen adsorption method (BET) with Flow Sorb II 2300 (Micromeretics Co. Ltd., USA), from which another mean particle size was estimated. The density of samples was measured by a Pycnometer (Micromeretics Co. Ltd., USA). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected using a Siemens D5000 powder diffractometer with Bragg–Brentano geometry equipped with a curved graphite monochromator in a diffracted beam arm. Cu Kα ( The dislocation density was estimated according to the Energy fractions of newly-formed phases (our investigations suggested only amorphization not the formation of other new phases) and the BET specific surface area were evaluated by equations expressed by Based on a full factorial design, 18 experiments were conducted. At the first step, the five main response variables were considered, which are thought to be of interest and importance in the mechanical activation process. The design and response variables are given in The initial analysis of the design suggested that the underlying assumptions were not valid for crystallite size response. Therefore, its natural logarithm was tested and considered in analysis. The significance levels ( From In our case study, the grinding tests were considered as objects. The microstructure characters and grinding factors were regarded as variables. In addition to the five main response variables ( From the score plot (t1/t3) in According to the loading plot (p1/p3) in In addition, the variable media surface has a strong and positive correlation with ball to powder weight ratio. Interestingly, the portion of particles smaller than 1 μm is positively correlated with granulometric specific surface area. This suggests the role and importance of such fraction of particles in dry grinding in the agglomeration of particles. As the agglomeration takes place, the BET surface area and the portion of particles fr The comparison of the loading and score plots ( It is desirable to analyze the similarities in the observations in terms of grinding variables. The question is, can the observations be separated and, if so, how do they differ with respect to each other and grinding variables. To find how the observations belonging to the levels of media surfaces are differentiated, the SIMCA (soft independent modeling of class analogy) method ( As discussed earlier, the classification of mill types has not been identified using score plots. In order to understand whether further separations are possible and which variables contribute to the separation, PLS-DA (partial least squares discrimination analysis) method ( The analysis of dummy variables is valuable. The three dummy variables are named by $DA1 (tumbling mill), $DA2 (vibratory mill) and $DA3 (planetary mill) ( On the other hand, some discrepancies can be observed between tumbling and planetary mills. In addition to the production of larger particles in grinding with the tumbling mill, it has been granted approximately the same level of amorphization, amorphization energy and total stored energy in the planetary mill. The observations of tumbling mill have relatively lower BET surface area; therefore, it can be concluded that the amorphization degree per unit surface area in the tumbling mill is slightly higher than planetary and vibratory mills. Comparing the stress energy and specific energy input shows that the vibratory mill needs more stress energy to reach the same effect as tumbling and planetary mills. In addition, the vibratory grinding device produces relatively smaller particles but does not lead to smaller crystallite size in spite of the planetary mill, i.e. the crystallite size depends not only on particle size reduction, but also on defect concentration in hematite. To investigate the discriminatory power of each variable, the variable importance plot (VIP) was constructed, which is an overall assessment of the variable importance. PLS is used to connect the information in two blocks of variables From the PLS modeling, it is clear that the input energy (EI) and the stress energy (SE) have strong impact on the responses. In order to increase the structural changes in hematite, one should focus on running a high level of stress energy and energy input and media surface. The response variables X-ray amorphization (A) and overall stored energy (Ht) exhibit similar regression coefficient profiles which suggest that the energy contribution from the amorphization component is dominant. Finally, the possibility of the modeling of the microstructure characters vs. several grinding variables is promising because the modeling vs. single variable, e.g. grinding time, does not give appropriate prediction equations, i.e. the evaluated model deviates from one to another mill because of the variation of stress energy, media surface, etc. and subsequently their influences on the microstructure characters.  According to the PCA analysis, the mechanical stress of the studied hematite in the course of energy-intensive grinding brings about size reduction and accumulation of defects in the hematite network. The structural distortion was reflected on XRD pattern data with increasing the line breadths (integral breadth) and reflection intensity reduction. The energetic excitation of the hematite structure is manifested by an increase in the excess enthalpy content in the ground hematite. The changes in the dislocation density, BET surface area and the formation of the amorphous material are the energy contributions to the excess enthalpy. The strongest correlation of amorphization (A) with excess enthalpy (Ht) indicates that the energy contribution from the amorphization to the excess enthalpy (stored energy) is decisive. This is in line with previous study ( The effects of three different mills with loose media on microstructural evolution have studied from a statistical view point. According to From the PCA ( Statistical analyses reveal some distinguished features in data analysis and facilitate the interpretation of data by considering simultaneously all variables in a data set. From the statistical analysis, the following conclusions can be made: ANOVA analysis revealed that the two design factors of milling time and media surface have statistically significant effect on the five main response variables at 95% confidence. The type of grinding mill used has no statistically significant effect at 95% confidence on the production of the BET surface area. Besides, no interaction terms have statistically significant effect on any responses at 95% confidence. PCA analysis revealed that with increasing the grinding intensity, the structural damages are enlarged. PCA makes it possible to predict easily which condition (observations) leads to the production of similar properties or microstructure characters (e.g. Vi11 and Pl11). Milling with higher media surface favors the production of more defects and plastic deformation of hematite and increasing stored energy (enthalpy) in activated hematite. This was also confirmed by soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA). PLS-DA analysis suggested that mills could be separated and differentiated from each other, i.e., the mills are different at 95% confidence level. The tumbling mill results in higher amorphization concentration per unit surface area in spite of lower stress energy and specific energy input. From the PLS analysis, it was found that the specific energy input and stress energy influence the response variables more than the other The obtained results show that tumbling and planetary mills favor the induction of structural changes and subsequently higher reactivity potential irrespective to capacity and specific energy input and stress energy. The financial support for the project by Agricola Research Centre (ARC) is gratefully acknowledged. 