High grade phosphoric acid was obtained using liquid–liquid extraction with aliphatic alcohols to separate metal and fluoride ion impurities in the aqueous phase. The influence of alcohol chain length, alcohol concentration, organic/aqueous phase ratio, temperature, shaking time and phosphoric acid concentration on P2O5 extraction was studied. Scrubbing with acid and stripping with water were also investigated. n-Octanol proved to be the most efficient and selective alcohol. The temperature had a slight positive effect and the extraction was enhanced by increasing P2O5 and with the increase of organic/aqueous phase ratio. The optimum organic/aqueous phase ratio for stripping was determined to be 2.0. For 9.2M H3PO4, 98% of fluoride ion was removed whereas almost complete removal of iron, manganese, copper, cadmium and zinc was attained.Wet process phosphoric acid (WPA) contains many impurities beside solids and organic matters ( Normal butanol, hexanol and octanol (BDH) with 99% purity were used. Commercial WPA with the following components (P The distribution ratio (D) was calculated from the total concentration of P Crude phosphoric acid (9.2 Pre-treated phosphoric acid was partially purified ( The extraction of P Shaking time is an important factor in reaching equilibrium in liquid-liquid extraction processes. In this work, the effect of shaking time was investigated between 1 and 30 The organic extract was preferably scrubbed (washed) with pure aqueous phosphoric acid before stripping with water at 25 The effect of the alcohol carbon chain length on E The effect of partially purified phosphoric acid concentration on E  The effect of solvent concentration on the P When the distribution coefficient was calculated and log D was plotted versus log [alcohol], The effect of changing O/A. phase ratio between 1.0 and 6.0 on E The extraction of P The results are also plotted in The calculated enthalpy changes (∆H) for butanol, hexanol and octanol are 3.1, 3.5 and 3.9 McCabe Thiele diagrams were established to optimize P The organic extract may still have impurities. Scrubbing of the organic extract is conventionally carried out using an aqueous solution of pure phosphoric acid. Because the scrubbing process is an important step towards getting high grade product, the effect of the concentration of pure phosphoric acid used for washing was studied at 25 When using a ratio of loaded organic phase to washing acid of 1.0, the results revealed that by increasing the acid wash concentration, the P The re-extraction of P The effect of increasing the A/O phase ratio from 0.25 to 4.00 on the P Phosphoric acids are graded according to their physical properties and the concentration of some metallic and non-metallic impurities contained. Four grades are reported in literature. These grades are arranged according to their quality as: technical grade acid TGA < food grade acid FGA < pharmaceutical grade acid PGA < analytical grade acid AGA. The impurities determined in this investigation for crude acid, partially purified acid and finally produced acid are shown in Purification of wet process phosphoric acid was carried out by solvent extraction using n-butanol, n-hexanol and n-octanol. Acid was extracted from impure 9.2