The sporadic motion of a single cubic particle hydraulically conveyed up an inclined pipe has been investigated. The distribution of lift forces acting on the particle was inferred by assuming the sporadic motion conformed to simple binomial statistics. Experimental data were found to support the hypothesis, with the frequency decreasing exponentially with increasing rest time. By combining the binomial probability value with the critical lift force required for motion to occur, the full distribution of lift forces was determined. Interestingly, these forces were rarely sufficient to produce movement, exhibiting negative values most of the time. We suspect the negative lift-forces are, in part, a consequence of the cubic particle geometry. Boundary layer separation at the leading edge of the particle may give rise to a downward pressure force on the particle. Indeed, with a vertical pipe configuration, the particles were observed to be forced against the wall for brief intervals of time.The hydraulic conveying of particles has many industrial applications ranging from coal and mineral processing, and oil drilling, to the pharmaceutical and food industries. The issues of particle sedimentation and subsequent particle re-suspension are important to the successful design and operation of these systems. In most hydraulic conveying lines it is undesirable to have a settled bed of particles at the invert of the pipe. In some industrial situations, such as sand transport in subsea flow lines Considerable effort has been expended in defining a ‘critical velocity’ for particle motion. Recently seven distinct definitions of the threshold for particle motion have been proposed by Stevenson et al. Other authors such as Halow Several authors have investigated lift forces for spherical and cylindrical particles. Saffman Lift force variations have been investigated in the past. Willmarth and Enlow In this work, we are interested in the threshold at which an isolated cubic particle that is larger than the viscous sub-layer depth just moves. Our objective is to infer from the observations of such movements the full probability distribution of the lift forces responsible for the onset of movement. We believe our approach to be novel. Consider the forces acting on a cubic particle at rest on an inclined surface, subjected to the effects of a fluid flow ( In general, the hydrodynamic drag force acting on a particle is: The force of friction provides a resistance to movement when the particle is in contact with the incline. The maximum force of friction is, The coefficient of static friction is, The overall horizontal force balance is given by, As the fluid velocity increases, the drag force acting on the particle also increases. Once the maximum friction force is reached, any further increase in the drag force will produce particle movement. In practice the situation is more complex due to the fluctuations in the overall normal force governing the maximum friction force. These fluctuations are believed to be predominantly a consequence of the shear rate and the associated turbulent state of the fluid. These fluctuations are described here in terms of a lift force, Thus, for any drag force in excess of the tangential net weight force, there will exist a critical lift force, Consider now the sporadic movement of a single particle along a pipe wall due to the flow of a fluid. In this study, we hypothesise that the sporadic movement of the particle is binomial in nature. Thus, in principle, the probability the particle will not move in a small time interval, The relevant statistics are formally described as a geometric distribution, constructed from an infinite sequence of independent Bernoulli trials The distribution, The hypothesis, that the sporadic particle movement can be described as a binomial problem, is supported if the frequency histogram of particle rest times, Assuming the distribution of the lift forces, The test pipe, made of Perspex, had a length of 5.0 m and internal diameter of 50.8 mm. It was mounted on a frame that was hinged approximately 1.5 m from the inlet and supported using a steel pillar and a pulley system so that the angle of inclination of the pipe could be varied easily. Water was supplied to the test pipe via a centrifugal pump. The volumetric flow rate was maintained at 900 L/h, corresponding to a superficial flow velocity of 0.123 m s A fixed hydrodynamic state was established by running water through the system for approximately 30 min before experiments began. All experiments were performed 2 m down stream of the pipe inlet to avoid entry effects. Two cubic particles of the same physical dimensions (3 mm) were used in the experiments. The particles were made from iron powder compacted into a plastic matrix, resulting in one having a density of 1340 kg/m In order to improve the accuracy of the lift force distribution determination, six independent pairs of experiments were conducted based on the conditions in The four independent experiments resulted in six independent pairs of simultaneous equations (see Eqs. The coefficients of static friction of the particles on the pipe were determined by filling the pipe with water and placing the particle at the invert of the pipe, and then carefully increasing the inclination using a jack until the particle just moved. This test was performed ten times for each particle producing average critical inclination angles of 33.5° for the brown cubic particle and 34.1° for the red cubic particle. The corresponding coefficients of friction were thus 0.66 and 0.68 for the brown and red particles respectively, and both coefficients had a standard deviation of 0.04. Thus, in the analysis a single coefficient of static friction of 0.67 was used for both particles, with the standard deviation 0.04. The drag force acting on the cubic particle (near the wall) was obtained in separate experiments conducted using a vertical pipe configuration with the same pipe diameter. A magnet was used to hold the red particle on the vessel wall, with the fluid flowing vertically past. The magnet was then removed, and the resulting particle motion recorded in detail by video for about 0.25 s. It is noted that for a brief period of up to 0.08 s the particle remained fixed on the wall, indicating a possible negative lift force was in action. With a superficial flow velocity of 0.0685 m/s, the particle eventually accelerated downwards. A force balance was then applied to the particle, taking into account the weight force, buoyancy force, drag force, and inertial force. The force of friction was assumed to be negligible because there is no weight force in the horizontal direction. With the particle accelerating downwards we suspect there was also no solid–solid contact. The inertial force was based on the product of the particle acceleration and the effective mass of the particle. The effective mass was based on the actual particle mass and the so-called “added mass”. The “added mass” was set equal to half the mass of the fluid displaced by the particle, which is typical for spheres. The expression used to describe the drag force was based on the form given by Kürten et al. The time between particle motions varied greatly over the course of each experiment as shown in   The final lift force distribution and critical lift forces for all four cubic experiments are shown in The lift force distribution is applicable to a 3 mm cubic particle in a 50.8 mm diameter pipe subjected to a water flow rate of 900 L/h. It is noted that, although the lift force distribution has not been measured directly, the distribution does provide an explanation for the sporadic particle movement observed in the experiments, especially the distribution of the rest times, and does indicate the significance of negative lift forces. It is also worth commenting on the significance of the uncertainty in the coefficient of friction. In the measurement of the critical angle required to produce sliding there is always some variation. Indeed, one could consider the variation to be described using a normal distribution with a given mean and standard deviation. The question therefore arises as to whether the sporadic particle movement is a consequence of this variability. If the lift force is assumed to be zero, it can be shown that for Case 1 the friction coefficient would need to be as low as 0.42 before the particle could move. This value is well below the lower limit that was measured. Hence, a positive lift force exceeding the critical lift force value appears to be essential for the particle to move. We also checked the significance of the uncertainty in the coefficient of friction by using a Monte Carlo simulation. With the introduction of the measured uncertainty in the friction coefficient, together with the provision of uncertainty in the lift force value, it was possible to determine the new standard deviation for the distribution of lift forces. The standard deviation was found to be almost identical to that reported in this study. Thus it is reasonable to neglect the significance of the variation in the friction coefficient. In practice, there will be considerable variation in the lift force acting on the particle at small time scales. If the critical lift force is exerted for an exceedingly brief interval, a response in the particle may not necessarily follow. The particle is, in effect, a measurement probe, with a limited level of sensitivity. Thus the onset of movement requires a sufficient impulse, and therefore this binomial analysis should only be valid beyond some minimum time interval, which we assume is less than 1 s. A much more complex treatment of this problem would require a consideration of the minimum impulse needed to cause the particle to physically move, which might in turn depend on the nature of the solid–solid contact between the particle and the wall. The more complete treatment may also require a consideration of the detailed fluctuations and autocorrelation in the lift force experienced by the particle at exceedingly small time scales. The basic assumption in the present study is that a time interval of 1 s is sufficient for the binomial analysis, and hence it is reasonable to assume the particle will move the instant the critical lift force is exceeded. A single cubic particle was located on the wall of an inclined pipe and subjected to the flow of water. The particle motion was sporadic with the time between particle movements exhibiting exponential frequency distribution dependence, thus supporting the use of a binomial analysis. The lift force distribution derived from the binomial analysis was found to be given by a mean value,  Discussions with Dr Djenidi and Professor Antonia on the possible existence of negative lift forces were appreciated. Financial support from the Australian Research Council is also acknowledged.