A symposium on research carried out using the TOUGH family of numerical simulation codes was held May 15–17, 2006, at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The TOUGH Symposium 2006 was attended by approximately 100 people from more than a dozen countries, with 60 papers presented in oral and poster formats. This symposium was the fifth time since 1990 that scientists and engineers from around the world have gathered in Berkeley to present applications and enhancements of the TOUGH codes. The TOUGH codes are general purpose numerical simulators for multidimensional fluid and heat flows in porous and fractured media. The TOUGH codes use an integral finite difference method for discretizing space, fully implicit time-stepping, and Newton–Raphson iteration to solve the fully coupled heat and mass balance equations at each time step. A flexible architecture allows the TOUGH codes to handle a wide variety of multicomponent fluid mixtures specified in the many EOS (equation of state) modules that have been developed over the years. TOUGH was released in 1987 with capabilities for modeling non-isothermal systems of water and air. A set of codes with more choices of fluid components and mixtures was released under the name TOUGH2 in 1991. The growth in variety and complexity of EOS modules continued with the release of TOUGH2 v. 2 in 1999. Application areas of TOUGH2 include geothermal energy, mining engineering, contaminant hydrology, vadose zone flow and transport, and nuclear waste isolation, among others. Growth in the capabilities of TOUGH2 continues as demonstrated by the two energy sector applications presented in this Special Issue, namely (1) subsurface methane hydrate production, and (2) geologic carbon dioxide storage. These two research areas require accurate descriptions of complex mixtures of methane, carbon dioxide, water, and other chemical components in phases ranging from liquids and gases to solids and supercritical fluids. In recognition of the potential importance of methane hydrates and carbon dioxide storage to energy supply on the one hand, and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions on the other, we have compiled this Special Issue to bring the work to a wide audience. This Special Issue presents seven papers in the area of geological carbon dioxide storage, and three papers in the area of methane-hydrate resources and production. The TOUGH codes are currently undergoing re-engineering in a modern language for improved ease of maintenance and extensibility. A new code called TOUGH+ will be released by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory within a year. We expect TOUGH+ to be the code of choice for advanced modeling of fluid systems in cutting-edge subsurface scientific and industrial research for decades to come.