Direct determination of intergranular fracture during multiphase particle breakage is a difficult task to achieve. Perhaps the only method of analysis is measurement of interphase area before and after comminution. Conservation of interfacial area after crushing is indicative of transgranular random breakage. On the other hand, if interfacial area is diminished after breakage some degree of preferential grain boundary fracture has occurred. For complete liberation of all grains after crushing the interfacial area goes to zero. Thus the interfacial area criterion is an important metric to assess the significance of preferential grain boundary fracture for different breakage conditions. This study describes the development of procedures for detailed analysis to quantify the extent of preferential grain boundary fracture for different breakage conditions using X-ray microtomography (XMT). The breakage of single multiphase copper ore particles (3mm cubic particles) by slow compression is examined. Procedures developed for interfacial area measurements are discussed and determination of the extent of grain boundary fracture of multiphase particles for different breakage conditions is presented. For the copper ore studied, it is shown that preferential grain boundary fracture occurs at low energy dissipation rates.It is obvious that significant grain boundary fracture will enhance the exposure/liberation of minerals during communition. However, there is no convincing experimental evidence to describe the extent to which this actually occurs in practice or to indicate what processes can be employed to enhance intergranular fracture. There is a lack of fundamental understanding of the behavior of the crack tip and its propagation on approach to a grain boundary during brittle fracture of multiphase ore particles. Conditions or breakage mechanisms that are favorable for intergranular fracture have not been identified and the potential increase in exposure/liberation that can be expected from grain boundary fracture has never been quantified. Except for very small sizes, ore particles may be considered to behave as brittle materials. The fracture of these brittle particles can be considered to take place in two steps: crack initiation and crack propagation. Propagation of cracks breaks chemical bonding and eventually leads to the fracture of the particle. The first documented attempt to develop a liberation model was reported by With 3D X-ray microtomography (XMT) technology, the surface areas (including both exposed and internal) for different irregular 3D multiphase ore particles can be directly determined for the volume data set obtained from XMT scans. In this study, development of the CT tools (computed tomography tools) necessary to measure interfacial area before and after breakage is reported in order to quantify the extent of preferential grain boundary fracture. With these CT tools we can then evaluate different breakage conditions to see if preferential grain boundary fracture can be promoted. In this regard, the scope of this exploratory research involved two tasks: first, the software development for interfacial area determination from XMT data and, second, the determination of the extent of grain boundary fracture of single multiphase particles for different breakage conditions. Using a diamond saw rectangular shaped sulfide copper ore samples (11 Preliminary tests were done with the MTS 810 system using the load control mode, at an application rate of 0.004 After preliminary tests, it was decided to do slow compression tests using the displacement control mode. The MTS 810 machine was set to stop compression of the sample after a reduction of 0.1  The totality of the fragments that resulted from breakage during compression were sized using precision VECO micro sieves, 7 Before sieving the progeny products of a sample, each sieve was cleaned and their individual weight recorded. Then the micro sieves were assembled in descending order of opening size. With the broken sample on the top screen, all the sieves were shaken in a vibrating holder for a few minutes. Once this procedure was done each sieve was weighed again and the mass for each size class obtained by difference in the weight of the sieve with and without the broken material of that size class. To be able to determine if any loss of material occurred during breakage and screening operations the ratio of the weight of the cubic sample before and after breakage was calculated giving as a result the fraction recovered. In general, more than 97% of the broken cubic particle was recovered after breakage. Once the weight of each size class was registered, the progeny particles from each size class were glued to 6 First, the gangue phases, internal and exposed grains are classified based on the exposure analysis procedures developed from previous XMT research ( The 3D XMT image gives only the digitized version of the original multiphase particles. The precision and accuracy of measurement for the 3D mineral grain interfacial area from XMT data of the digitized particles needs to be addressed. It is noted that particle volume is less sensitive to the analytical procedure. However, surface area significantly depends on the number of sampling points due to the fractal nature of the particle surface. The Marching Cube method ( Based on the original gray level XMT image, a triangular mesh of the grain/particle surface with a linear intercept inside each surface voxel can be reconstructed to provide a more accurate representation of the grain/particle surface. The undesirable consequence is that the triangle mesh table can lead to cracks and inconsistent topology. A topologically corrected Marching Cube method based on the Chernyaev’s technique was proposed ( Once the triangular mesh surface of the particle is reconstructed, the volume and the surface area of the grain/particle can be determined ( In order to determine any significant differences in progeny particle size distribution between the four samples compressed in 2 and 6 Also, it is noted that the resulting progeny fragment size distribution conforms to the prediction from statistical theory for brittle fracture, with the volume flaw mechanism predominating, especially for particles larger than 1 A 3D reconstructed image of each 3 An attenuation coefficient histogram is a mathematical representation of the frequency of each attenuation coefficient value inside the 3  For each 3 Geometrical properties, such as volume and surface area of each mineral phase for each particle is determined from the XMT reconstructed images. These geometrical properties are then used to calculate the interfacial area. The gray value illustrates the relative attenuation coefficient of each mineral phase for particle number 26 as shown in After image analysis of the XMT data for the 3 For example in the case of particle number 26 the volume of the 3 Recall that interfacial area can be calculated based on (Eq. Taking as an example, the values for the 3 Now dividing by the volume (mm The same steps are repeated to calculate the specific interfacial area for each progeny particle size class created during breakage by slow compression to fracture. In the case of particle number 26 the cube was slowly compressed for 6 The ratio of specific interfacial area after breakage by slow compression to specific interfacial area before breakage is an indicator of the degree of preferential grain boundary fracture. If the ratio is close to 1 there is no preferential breakage and random breakage is predominant. On the other hand as the ratio gets smaller the degree of preferential breakage (or loss of interfacial area) increases. In the case of particle number 26 the ratio is 0.65, which indicates there is a 35% decrease in the specific interfacial area. The measurement and calculation of specific interfacial area ratios (after fracture/before fracture) obtained for different times are summarized in Inspection of these results suggests that there is a tendency for a decrease in specific interfacial area ratio as the time of compression increases. To test this hypothesis a statistical analysis of the data was performed. It is assumed that a normal distribution is followed for all 22 measurements. Using the Minitab statistical package, regression analysis was performed to build a model to predict the specific interfacial area ratio ( Detailed analysis of this scatter diagram indicates that, although no simple curve will pass exactly through all the points, there is some indication that the points lie scattered randomly around a straight line. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that the mean of the random variable R is linearly related to t. Results of the fitted linear regression model are presented in The regression equation is  Force and displacement data were obtained from the MTS 810 system used in the compression tests, as mentioned previously. Force/displacement data for different particles compressed in 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 6 Unlike the extent of particle size reduction, which is well known to depend on energy, the extent of grain boundary fracture is expected to be dependent on the rate of energy dissipation rather than the amount of energy used in size reduction. In this regard the apparent dependence of grain boundary fracture on energy is rather artificial since the rate of energy dissipation is not constant. A better approach is to examine the extent of grain boundary fracture with energy dissipation rate (power) as is done in Finally it must be noted for this andesite copper ore that the energy dissipation rate (power) is much less than what would be the case for traditional breakage in mineral processing operations. For example the specific power for cone crushing is calculated to be about 100 Geometrical properties, such as volume and surface area of each mineral phase for each multiphase particle can be determined from the XMT reconstructed images using specially designed algorithms. These geometrical properties were used to calculate the interfacial areas of mineral grains in the cubic particle and in their progeny fragments after slow compression. Further attention was given to the calculation of the volume and surfaces areas for different samples and their progeny, noting that without use of the Marching Cube smoothing method, the 3D image analysis would be compromised, because of overestimation in volume and especially surface area due to its fractal nature. Breakage of individual 3 The ratio of specific interfacial area after breakage by slow compression to specific interfacial area before breakage was used as an indicator of the degree of preferential grain boundary fracture. Results show that significant grain boundary fracture is achieved at low rates of energy dissipation (power) which facilitates crack propagation at grain boundaries. For example, at the lowest energy dissipation rate about 35% of the interfacial area was lost. At higher rates little interfacial area is lost and breakage occurs primarily by random fracture. Specific power calculations suggest that preferential grain boundary breakage of this material will not be achieved with traditional cone crushers under normal operating conditions. Appreciation is expressed for discussion with Professor Raj Rajamani, for experimental assistance from Professor Ravi Chandran and Rob Byrnes, and for calculations by Wenjing Xu, graduate student, all of the University of Utah. Funding from the University of Utah Seed Grant Research Program is recognized with thanks.