Food mechanical properties (FMPs) directly impact decisions up to, and including, putting foods into the mouth, chewing, and swallowing. Thus, studying the interactions between an individual and the physical properties of its foods allows us to glimpse the very process of selection on phenotypes such as, for example, behavioral compensations to gain access to a hard nut, dental enamel properties facilitating access to abrasive foods, or, even negatively, avoidance of a resource that is ceded to individuals better able to cope with it. Research on mechanical dietary properties in biological anthropology has gained impetus in recent years with the introduction of portable in-field testing devices. This special issue developed from an invited poster symposium, “Food materials testing and its relevance for primate biology,” at the 82nd annual meeting of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists in Knoxville, Tennessee in 2013. In this volume, as in the symposium, we highlight the diversity of research on food properties that has emerged. The contributing studies address questions on topics such as the role/influence of FMPs in diet selection, social behavior, and cranio-dental morphology across primates. As a group, these contributions sound a common theme of how FMPs impact morphology, and it is this empirical aspect that we believe has direct relevance to furthering our understanding and interpretation of the human fossil record. We conclude the volume with a meta-analysis of the current dataset on FMPs in relation to primate body mass, feeding time, and dietary quality. Such a synthesis is essential for better understanding the functional significance of variation in dietary ecology within primates generally and in the hominid lineage more specifically. By determining how foods with specific mechanical properties interact with tissues (e.g., through wear/damage on teeth or remodeling of the jaw), we can more specifically reconstruct diet given particular fossil morphologies. Furthermore, extant field studies provide direct links between feeding behaviors and FMPs, which can provide a broader context for interpreting cranio-dental remains. Mechanics undoubtedly play a very important role in foraging and feeding decisions by primates, but until recently there were few studies that quantified this influence in the field. The central reason has been the dearth of suitable equipment, but the need for such measurements may not always have been recognized. The response of a solid food object to a force applied to it by a primate in feeding consists of a combination of its material properties, the size and shape of the object (which determines the form of the contact), force direction and its rate of application. We can envisage this to be very complicated and without solutions, supposing for example that a range of heterogeneous objects, or their fragments, all with different sizes and shapes, is being chewed. Or we can simplify it (in words) to say that the response of the food object will depend mainly on material properties and geometry, with the rest thrown in as a spoiler. The direction of the force matters largely because of the structure and cellular nature of foods and the ways in which they fracture ( What matters most for a general analysis? If geometry is more important than material properties in feeding studies, then perhaps the latter could be neglected. This is, in fact, the traditional view in biology. Descriptive terms such as shearing, cutting, crushing and grinding (which infer aspects of both the direction of movement and the shape of contact surfaces) coupled with video recordings of feeding and some imitative testing to gage the possible force range, might be thought sufficient for an analysis. Adding to this analysis is the modern vogue for finite elements analysis, which plugs in constants for material properties but otherwise examines geometrical effects. Of course, if geometry were to be sufficient, then it would render the efforts made in the papers contained in this issue slightly superfluous, but the answer to whether it is dominant has to be negative on various grounds. It would lead inevitably to the suggestion that one tooth type would be more efficient than any other. Such claims have been made ( If the actual conditions of loading cannot be specified in any exact way, which is generally true for feeding, then there is a need for theories that can specify the combination of food properties that controls breakdown under circumstances where the size and shape of contacts are unclear. Such theories exist. Borrowing from overarching theory created for quite different reasons ( So how to go about measuring material properties? Ecologists have been making mechanical measurements in the field for a very long time, with several early publications indicating the importance of fracture resistance in deterring leaf predation by biting insects ( An attempt to review results from a range of techniques for leaf fracture has been published by The main reason that primatologists started to become interested in measuring food properties in the field has been through theories of how dental and jaw anatomy in primates are adapted to diet ( Measurement started in earnest in the early 1990's led by In 2011, the Lucas/Wagner Scientific FLS-1 tester replaced the Darvell tester, containing several improvements including a central ball screw that largely eliminates backlash and the sensing of crosshead movement directly via a linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) rather than a shaft encoder. The tester can also record magnified images of the specimen as it is loaded with the force and displacement stamped on each frame of the video record. This is demonstrated by The papers that form the issue take a very practical approach to the subject. They include pioneering studies that extend our understanding of how FMPs can affect feeding ecology and behaviors and a summary of what can be gleaned from current knowledge ( We thank all the participants in the 2013 symposium and the contributors to this volume, who through their innovation and sheer hard work move this field forward. We gratefully acknowledge the Editor of Special Issues for the