The influence of co-substitution of Sr2+ and Ta5+ on the structural, morphological, electrical and magnetic properties of BiFeO3 ceramics was investigated. The ceramic pellets of Bi0.8Sr0.2Fe1−xTaxO3 (x = 0 to 0.15) were synthesized by adopting solid state reaction method. Rietveld refinement of X-ray diffraction data reflected that all ceramics had rhombohedral structure (R3c). A second phase was observed to appear for maximum amount of Ta5+ (x = 0.15) doping. The effect of Sr2+ and Ta5+ doping on the grain size distribution was monitored and their corresponding relation with electrical and magnetic properties were elucidated. Theoretical bond strength was calculated with thermodynamic analysis for different phases to correlate with the experimental findings. Although the addition of Sr2+ increased leakage current, Ta5+ doping suppressed it by approximately 2 orders of magnitude. Dielectric property measurement also showed a decrease in dielectric constant at room temperature with an increase of Ta5+. Moreover, the addition of Ta5+ up to 10 mol.% enhanced the magnetic property. The possible reasons for the reduction of leakage current and improvement of ferromagnetic property were also discussed in this contribution.BiFeO Nevertheless, ion doping has been widely explored to reduce the leakage current, improve the ferroelectric behavior, and intensify the magnetoelectric coupling in BFO Bi  The XRD patterns ( In BSFTO-0 there was no second phase. This can be explained with the help of ionic bond strength (I The electronegativity values of A-site cations (i.e. Bi When 15 mol.% Ta  The peak position of (104) plane for pure BFO is situated at 2θ = 31.72°. However in this case from The tolerance factor (t) also helps to indicate the structural stability of BSFTO ceramics. The values of tolerance factor of BSTFO ceramics listed in FESEM images in  For the addition of 5% Ta Interestingly with Ta The I-V characteristics of the ceramics in In this study with the addition of Sr The measured leakage current densities of BSFTO-(5, 10, 15) were 1.97 × 10 However, the reduced leakage current of BSFTO-15 ceramic was still found to be higher than that of pure BFO. One aspect is that the addition of excessive amount of Sr There are mainly two probable conduction mechanisms viz. space-charge-limited-conduction and ohmic conduction which are obeyed by BFO P-E loops of the BSFTO-0, BSFTO-5, BSFTO-10 and (d) BSFTO-15 ceramics are presented in  In summary, BSFTO-(0, 5, 10, 15) multiferroic ceramics were synthesized by using conventional solid-state reaction route. The charge imbalance produced by 20% Sr The authors would like to thank the