Fe-based catalysts were acquired by one-step Fe-MIL-88B pyrolyzation and it showed high catalytic performance on hydrogenated conversion of carbon dioxide to valuable hydrocarbons. The iron compositions and catalytic performance of the catalysts were determined by pyrolysis temperatures according to XRD, SEM, TEM, N2-physisorption, Raman and evaluation results. Magnetite was obtained at 773K while metallic iron was the main phase when the pyrolysis temperature increased to 973K. Different catalytic performances over these catalysts were attributed to the transformation of iron species under the reaction conditions. Olefin-to-paraffin ratio (O/P) over pyrolyzed and K-doped catalysts was 1.3 and 5.5, respectively, and the two samples exhibited CO2 conversion with 46.0% and 43.1%, respectively. Higher catalytic performance was achieved when certain amount of Fe3O4 and χ-Fe5C2 existed in catalysts whereas metallic iron and/or θ-Fe3C had detrimental effects on lower conversion of CO2 and selectivity of valuable hydrocarbons.Carbon dioxide capture and utilization (CCU) have recently attracted considerable attentions because of the increasing concentration of CO Fe-based support catalysts have been widely used for CO Recently, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have drawn intensive attention, mainly due to their high accessible surface areas and ultra-high porosity as well as tunable functionalities, which make them feasible for gas storage and separation, catalysis, sensing, drug delivery and so on Meng et al. fabricated a porous Fe Herein, we prepared the catalysts with carbon material support for CO 3.32 1.0 The 10Fe/Al The catalytic hydrogenation of CO The products were analyzed on-line by using a gas chromatograph (FULI GC 97). Carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and methane were analyzed on a carbon molecular sieve column with TCD, while methane and C X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of fresh and used catalysts were recorded on a Rigaku SmartLab(9) diffractometer using a CuKαradiation source at a step size of 0.02° and a scanning rate of 8°/min between 5° and 80°. The crystallite phases were identified by comparing the diffraction patterns with the data of the Joint Committee on Powder Standards (JCPDS). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a Hitachi S-5500 instrument with an acceleration voltage of 3 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken by using a Tecnai G2 20 S-twin instrument (FEI Company) with an acceleration voltage of 200 Raman spectra were collected by using a Nicolet Almega XR Raman system with a 532 N X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was measured on a Thermo Scientific ESCA Lab250 spectrometer which consists of a monochromatic Al Ka as the X-ray source. All of the binding energies were calibrated by the C 1s peak at 284.6 X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns ( Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images reveal that Fe-MIL-88B is uniform micro-sized fusiform rod (  The Raman spectra of N-500-4, N-600-0, N-600-4, N-700-0 and N-K-600-0 are shown in The catalytic performances of the carbon supported catalysts for hydrogenation of CO Compared with aluminium oxide supported catalysts, MOF-derived catalysts performed a higher CO  The iron phase component of catalysts for CO  XPS was performed to investigate the nature of the surface iron and carbon species (shown in Barrault et al. indicated that the catalytic activity of iron supported alumina with high surface area is much lower than that with low surface area It is generally accepted that CO Dopping of potassium accelerates the formation of χ-Fe MOF-derived catalysts, where iron or iron oxides were dispersed in carbon matrix were prepared through a simple pyrolysis method. The iron phase was magnetite at lower pyrolysis temperature while metallic iron was the main phase at higher temperature. And the content of iron increased when temperature improved. N-600-0 exhibited the best catalytic activation and stability for the hydrogenation of CO This work was financially supported in part by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: XRD patterns of 10Fe/Al