Continuous iron oxidation and removal of jarosite precipitates from solution at low pH, ambient temperature and pressure was successfully demonstrated with a two-stage airlift bioreactor (ALBR) system. The ALBR system, comprising of two ALBRs, each with its own settler, was operated for iron oxidation and precipitation at room temperature with a mixed culture of mesophilic iron oxidisers. The two-stage reactor design allowed optimization of the overall reactor kinetics by facilitating the growth of two distinct groups of iron oxidizers at low (430mV vs. Ag/AgCl) and high (517mV) redox potential in the two reactors, respectively. The influent with pH1.5 contained (gL−1) 15 Fe2+, 1.5 Cu, 1.5 Ni, nutrients and trace elements. The hydraulic retention time (HRT) was decreased stepwise to evaluate process performance. With the lowest HRTs (8h in ALBR1 and 10h in ALBR2), the overall iron oxidation and precipitation rates of the two-stage system were 0.75±0.02gL−1
                     h−1 and 0.15±0.01gL−1
                     h−1, respectively and overall iron oxidation and precipitation of 94±3% and 18±1%, respectively. The percent of influent Fe, S, Cu and Ni removed as precipitates from settlers were 30.9%, 16.7%, 1.1% and 0.2%, respectively. The precipitates were predominately comprised of (>95%) jarosite with potassium jarosite being the dominant form, followed by hydronium, ammonium and sodium jarosites. In conclusion, the two-stage ALBR system allowed efficient iron oxidation and precipitation of the oxidised iron as well settling jarosite with only minor loss of Cu and Ni via co-precipitation. The process demonstrated performance that is promising for a variety of hydrometallurgical process flow sheets, where it allows iron removal from ferrous solutions without chemical addition and with negligible base metal co-precipitation losses.Ferric iron (Fe Jarosite formation is common at low pH (< Microorganisms commonly used in iron oxidising bioreactors are A mixed culture inoculum of iron-oxidising microorganisms was cultivated in a stirred tank reactor (1.5 A continuous-flow two-stage ALBR system was set up for iron oxidation and precipitation at room temperature (23 The ALBR influents and effluents were sampled for pH, redox potential, Fe Influent and bioreactor solution pH was measured using a TPS smart-CHEM meter (with pH – TPS, plastic body pH sensor, double junction with porous teflon junction and BNC plug, part # 121207) after removing precipitates by centrifugation at 21,800 For analysis of Fe For elemental, mineralogical and particle size analysis, precipitates collected from the settlers were centrifuged at 25,000 The mineralogy of the precipitates was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The XRD traces were obtained after addition of calcium fluoride (CaF Another aliquot of the washed precipitates was submitted as suspension in DI water for particle size analysis by Malvern Mastersizer 2000 at the Analytical Services laboratories of CSIRO Process Science and Engineering at Waterford, WA. Immediately prior to analysis the precipitates were resuspended in neutral pH water to prevent damage to the particle size analyser. Settling characteristics of the precipitates were analysed by determining sludge volume index (SVI) by the standard method 2710 D ( volume of sludge after settling (mL) volume of the well mixed sludge before settling (L) total suspended solid concentration (g Total solids (TS) of sludge samples was determined by drying a known volume of sludge at 50 weight of crucible, filter weight of crucible filtered volume (mL) Sludge filterability was determined for sludge removed from the settlers by the standard method time-to-filter test 2710H ( Precipitates and microbial cells in the bioreactor sludge were visualised using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). For visualising precipitates, the solids were allowed to settle on double sided carbon tape ( Samples for visualising microbial cells were treated using a filtration method ( After the ethanol series, both carbon tape and filters were transferred into a sample holder filled with 100% ethanol for critical point drying with a 30 For counting cells in bioreactor samples, microorganisms were detached from the precipitates by sonicating the samples 5 times for 1 The ALBR system was monitored regularly for determination of iron oxidation and precipitation, pH, redox potential, solid concentration and cell counts. Soluble Fe Fe  The redox potential in the influent was between + The contents of selected elements in the precipitates formed in the ALBR system are shown in The percent of influent Fe, Cu, Ni and S removed as precipitates in bleed from settlers as calculated based on the TSS concentration in the settler underflow and concentrations of various elements in the removed solids were 30.9%, 16.7%, 1.1% and 0.17% for Fe, S, Cu and Ni, respectively. An example of an X-ray diffractogram and QXRD analysis for the precipitates removed from the settlers of the ALBR system is shown in The percent of influent Fe, Cu, Ni and S removed as precipitates in bleed from settlers as calculated based on the TSS concentration in the settler underflow and concentrations of various elements in the removed solids were 30.9%, 16.7%, 1.1% and 0.17% for Fe, S, Cu and Ni, respectively. An example of an X-ray diffractogram and QXRD analysis for the precipitates removed from the settlers of the ALBR system is shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. The precipitates formed in the airlift system were predominantly (95–100 The size distribution of the precipitated particles removed from the settlers of the ALBR system is shown in The size distribution of the precipitated particles removed from the settlers of the ALBR system is shown in Supplementary Fig. 2, and a summary of the results of the particle size analysis is shown in The SVIs for the precipitates were 24 and 12 The filterability of the sludge removed from the settlers of the ALBR system was characterised by time-to-filter test. The time to filter 25 Examples of SEM images for precipitates obtained from the ALBR system are shown in The microbial communities were also characterised by PCR-DGGE-sequencing approach to identify closest related species. This molecular approach showed the presence of This study provided the first demonstration of transient performance response to imposed process parameters for a two-stage ALBR system for biological iron oxidation and precipitation, which can be used as a unit process in a variety of hydrometallurgical flow sheets where Fe The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The financial support from