The main objective of this work was to study the effect of three organic wastes (municipal solid waste, MSW, sheep manure, SM, and green forage vermicomposts, GFV) applied during five consecutive years to a calcaric Cambisol soil located near Córdoba (Spain). The effects of these amendments on soil biochemical properties (enzymatic activities and humus-enzymatic complexes) and olive yield were determined. At the end of the experimental period, soil enzymatic activities were highest in soils amended with GFV, followed by SM and MSW, whereas the humus-enzyme complexes were highest in soils amended with MSW, followed by SM and GFV. The application of organic matter to soil increased the levels of macro- and micronutrients in leaf. At the end of the experiment, the leaf N concentration was 49.6%, 43% and 34.1% higher in GFV, SM and MSW treatments, when compared with non-organic amended soil. Similarly, and compared with the non-organic amended soil, leaf P, K, Ca and Mg contents increased in GFV, SM and MSW-amended soils. Compared to the non-organic amended soil and at the end of the experimental period, olive yield increased 26.8% in soils amended with SM and 35.5% in soils amended with GFV. Also, the olive oil content in fruits showed only significant differences with the GFV treatment. These results suggested that the organic matter quality influenced the olive yield, suggesting that this parameter increased in soils amended with organic matter with higher fulvic acid and higher protein content and low molecular weight contents, readily degradable by soil microorganisms and assimilated by the olive tree.In Mediterranean agricultural soils, the olive ( Due to extensive cultivation of olive trees and to some agricultural practices such as excessive application of chemical fertilizers and intensive plowing, agricultural soils associated with olive trees often have low organic matter content, something that can cause lower yield and increase the deterioration of soil properties, increasing the risk of erosion ( Currently, the study of soil biochemical properties as opposed to studying the soil’s physical and chemical properties in order to assess the effects of applying organic matter in soil properties due to biochemical properties is a widespread phenomenon. Studies of soil biochemical properties are very sensitive and can provide immediate and accurate information on changes that may occur on the soil, while physical and chemical properties change very slowly and it takes many years to obtain significant results ( The objectives of this study were (1) to evaluate the effects of using different organic wastes as soil amendment on biochemical properties, and (2) the olive yield of an olive grove located in a semiarid Mediterranean agro-ecosystem. The study was conducted over five experimental seasons at Espejo (Córdoba, Andalusia, Spain) (37° 40′ 51″ N 4° 33′ 13″ W). The rainfed olive grove is practically the only one that is developed in the study area. Olive trees (cv. The climate of the study area is semiarid. According to The experimental soil was a calcaric Cambisol ( Three organic wastes were used: a municipal solid waste (MSW), sheep manure (SM), and green forage vermicomposts (GFV). MSW and SM were composted under aerobic conditions in a trapezoidal pile (4 m long, 2 m wide at the base and 1 m high) containing approximately 5000 kg each pile and for each organic waste. The piles were turned every two weeks and water was regularly added to maintain appropriate moisture levels. In order to prevent possible alterations in the microflora and losses of NH The general properties of all organic wastes are shown in For both organic wastes, the proteins were extracted at pH = 9, temperature=55 °C and time = 3 h. The molecular mass distribution of protein was determined ( The experimental layout was in a randomized complete block design with 4 treatments and three replicates pertreatment. Each plot consisted of 20 trees in 5 × 4 orientation, in which only the central trees were used in sampling. The treatments were the following: C, non-organically amended, control plot MSW, plots amended with 10 t ha SM, plots amended with 13 t ha GFV, plots amended with 12.6 t ha  Crop yield (kg ha Soil samples (0–25 cm) were collected from each plot (three replicates per plot) with a gauge auger (30-mm diameter), after the harvest of olives. To ascertain the nutritional status of the olive trees, leaf samples (100 for each experimental season) were collected in mid-July 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014, respectively, in order to observe the mineral nutrition of olive trees. Fully expanded, mature leaves from the middle portion of non bearing, current season shoots were removed for analysis oftheir mineral nutrients ( After drying at room temperature, the soil samples were ground to pass through a 2-mm sieve and stored in sealed polyethylene bags at 4 °C until analysis. Generally the time elapsed from storage to soil analysis was 15–20 days. The activity levels of five soil enzymes were measured. Dehydrogenase activity (DHA) was measured as the reduction of 2- Soil humus-enzymatic complexes were also determined. The extraction was carried out with 0.1 mol l The leaves were washed, dried, ground and digested by wet oxidation with concentrated HNO Data were subjected to two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with treatment and sampling time as factors followed by Tukey significant difference as a post hoc test using the Statgraphics Plus 2.1. For the ANOVA, triplicate data were used for each treatment. During the experiment, DHA was significantly (p < 0.05) stimulated in the organic-matter-amended soils throughout the experiment ( With respect to the extracellular enzymes, the highest enzymatic activities were observed in organically amended soils ( The behavior of soil humus-enzyme complexes indicated that the highest values of enzymes adsorbed to humus were highest in organically-amended soils with higher humic acid contents ( The application of organic matter to soil increased the levels of macro- and micronutrients in leaf ( For the 2011 and 2013 seasons, the contents of macro- and micronutrients in leaves decreased, probably due to the effect of alternate bearing in the olive trees. However, and similar to the other experimental seasons (2010, 2011 and 2014), the highest values were in the plots amended with GFV, followed by SM and MSW, respectively. Olive yield showed significant (p < 0.05) differences at the end of the experimental period for SM and GFV-amended soils ( Similar to the results obtained by other authors, the application of organic matter to the soil significantly stimulated soil enzymatic activities analyzed ( The increase in DHA in organic soils suggests the availability of biodegradable compounds in the applied organic material, thereby increasing the soil microbial activity ( However, the enzymatic activities’ stimulation differed greatly depending on the chemical composition of the organic waste applied to soil. Our results indicate that stimulation of the biochemical properties was higher in soils amended with GFW, followed by SM and MSW, respectively. There are two aspects that may be responsible for this cause.Firstly, the content of lower molecular weight protein is greater in GFW than SM and MSW, respectively. Generally, and unlike proteins of high molecular weight, proteins of lower molecular weight make the N more easily available promoting greater proliferation of soil microorganisms through the action of microorganisms ( The humus-enzyme complexes showed different results, suggesting that the chemical composition of the organic material applied to the soil also affects these complexes. Several authors have found that the humus-enzyme complexes formation occurs mainly in humic than in the fulvic acids ( For the three experimental seasons, the mineral nutrient contents in olive leaves were within the normal range for olive trees grown under similar climatic and environmental conditions ( As a result of soil microbial activity, the degradation of organic matter may release nutrients required for plant growth. These results are in agreement with those obtained by Since microbial activity was higher in soils amended with GFW, followed by SM and MSW, this resulted in GFW leaves’mineral content being higher than those of SM and MSW treatments, respectively ( The 2011 and 2013 years showed minor mineral contains in the olive leaves ( The application of different sources of organic matter to the soil did not overcome the alternate bearing phenomenon of the olive tree, although the mineral contents in leaves indicate that it significantly palliated the physiological state of the plant, showing higher values than non-organic amended soil. Again, and in this alternate bearing state, the importance of the chemical composition of the organic matter applied to the soil was highlighted,observing the higher mineral contents in soil amended with GFW, followed by SM and MSW, respectively. After five years of continuous application of experimental organic wastes, the only significant increase in olive yield was found in the SM and GFV-amended soils. These results are in agreement with those obtained by In the experimental years 2012 and 2014 olive yields decreased compared with the other experimental seasons studied, possibly due to the alternate bearing in the olive tree. This peculiar behavior of the olive tree gives a high-yield crop year followed by a low-yield year, severely affecting average fruit yield ( The application of organic matter increased soil biochemical activity. However, this increase depended on the chemical composition of the organic matter. The response of olive trees to organic treatments was very slow over time, increasing at the end of the experimental period of five years, the olive yield in soils amended with organic matter with higher fulvic acid and higher protein content and low molecular weight contents, readily degradable by soil microorganisms and assimilated by the olive tree. Consequently, of the three organic residues studied, the most advisable for its use was the vermicompost obtained from green forages. However, we believe that this is the beginning of future studies in which the main use of this type of vermicompost in olive crops developed in other types of soils with different physicochemical properties and in other olive varieties typical of study area, such as the "hojiblanca" variety.