Coupled electrochemical advanced oxidation processes like electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) were evaluated for the treatment of an aqueous solution containing 100mgL–1 total organic carbon of the low biodegradable azo dye Orange-G (Acid Orange 10) using a boron-doped diamond (BDD)/air-diffusion cell. It was confirmed the existence of synergic effects between UVA light photo-oxidation and/or hydroxyl radicals (
                        
                     OH) formed from water oxidation at the BDD anode and the Fenton reaction between added Fe2+ and H2O2 produced at the air-diffusion cathode. A rapid discoloration of the solution was always obtained, mainly attributed to the oxidation of the azo dye with 
                        
                     OH generated from Fenton’s reaction in EF and PEF. The color loss followed a pseudo-first-order kinetics, controlled by the applied current. The dye mineralization was enhanced with increasing current due to the greater production of 
                        
                     OH and finally, short-linear carboxylic acids like oxalic and oxamic were pre-eminently accumulated. The Fe(III) complexes of these acids were slowly removed by 
                        
                     OH in EF and rapidly photodecomposed by UVA light in PEF up to 98% mineralization. Sulfate and nitrate ions were accumulated in the medium during both EF and PEF treatments. The more powerful coupled PEF process is then able to efficiently degrade streams contaminated with Orange G.The use of water and the treatment of wastewater from large production industries, such as oil or textile industries, have promoted the search for more intensive and smart treatment techniques to reduce these impacts. Therefore, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), specifically electrochemical AOPs (EAOPs), are alternatives that are being explored for water remediation AOPs are a particularly attractive treatment option for non-biodegradable or toxic wastewaters. They have capacity to remove any type of dissolved organic pollutant in a non-selective manner, regardless of its chemical nature and the availability of dissolved oxygen. In some cases, mineralization occurs, in other cases, a conversion occurs leading to increased biodegradability of the effluent. Among the EAOPs, electrochemical oxidation methods and coupled chemical–electrochemical methods minimize the use of additional chemical reagents and reaction by-products AOPs generate high oxidative radical species, mainly hydroxyl radicals ( The selected model compound in this study is the azo dye Orange G (Acid Orange 10, C.I. 16,230, Na Recently, the heterogeneous photo-Fenton process was employed to degrade Orange G using waste iron oxide as catalyst in a three-phase fluidized bed reactor. Only 78.9% total organic carbon (TOC) removal was obtained for 50 In this study, we compare coupled EAOPs like EF and PEF for the treatment of water polluted with the Orange G commercial azo dye to identify the possible synergy of these processes and evaluate their efficiency on the discoloration and mineralization of the selected organic molecule. For the Fenton’s reaction, hydrogen peroxide was produced in-situ by the electrochemical reduction of oxygen at a gas diffusion cathode. Commercial Orange G (80% purity), ferrous sulfate pentahydrate and anhydrous sodium sulfate were of analytical grade supplied by Sigma–Aldrich. Analytical grade sulfuric acid was purchased from Merck. The solutions were prepared with high-purity water obtained with a Millipore Milli-Q system ( The electrochemical tests were conducted in a 100 Aqueous solutions of Orange G at concentration of 295 Hydrogen peroxide concentration was determined from the light absorption of its Ti(IV) colored complex at The percentage of color removal was calculated using Eq. The mineralization current efficiency (MCE) was calculated from TOC decay by Eq. A preliminary study was carried out to clarify the ability of H The increase in H Small contents of Fe When the 0.05 These results evidence that the electrolytic system is able of accumulating a H The current is a key parameter in the electrochemical processes because it regulates the amount of generated oxidizing agents It is well-known that when an electrical current is applied to the undivided BDD/air-diffusion cell, organic pollutants can be attacked by physisorbed BDD( Although the BBD anode is the best electrode for electrochemical oxidation Discoloration process was slightly more rapid for the PEF process compared with the EF one up to 100 The discoloration process of the Orange G solution was analyzed by different kinetic equations and excellent linear correlations were found for a pseudo-first-order reaction by representing ln( Further degradation of the products formed from the  The relative oxidation power of the EAOPs tested was quantified by analyzing the corresponding ln(TOC This effect was also reflected in the MCE values calculated for the treatments of The influence of applied current between 50 and 150 The These waste reactions also occur in PEF, where the quicker destruction of products with From the above results, one can infer that the PEF process is powerful enough to rapidly decolorize and mineralize aqueous streams contaminated with Orange G. The synergic effect of The Orange G solutions degraded by EF and PEF were also analyzed by ion-exclusion HPLC. These chromatograms revealed the presence of peaks related to oxalic (retention time: 7.0  For the PEF process at 100 The inorganic ions produced during the EF and PEF degradations of the Orange G solution at 200 It has been shown that a BDD/air-diffusion cell operating at 100–200 The authors thank to