Modelling and optimization of the power draw of large SAG/AG mills is important due to the large power draw which modern mills require (5–10 MW). The cost of grinding is the single biggest cost within the entire process of mineral extraction. Traditionally, modelling of the mill power draw has been done using empirical models. Although these models are reliable, they cannot model mills and operating conditions which are not within the model database boundaries. Also, due to its static nature, the impact of the changing conditions within the mill on the power draw cannot be determined using such models.
                  Despite advances in computing power, discrete element method (DEM) modelling of large mills with many thousands of particles could be a time consuming task. The speed of computation is determined principally by two parameters: number of particles involved and material properties. The computational time step is determined by the size of the smallest particle present in the model and material properties (stiffness).
                  In the case of small particles, the computational time step will be short, whilst in the case of large particles; the computation time step will be larger. Hence, from the point of view of time required for modelling (which usually corresponds to time required for 3–4 mill revolutions), it will be advantageous that the smallest particles in the model are not unnecessarily too small. The objective of this work is to compare the net power draw of the mill whose charge is characterised by different size distributions, while preserving the constant mass of the charge and mill speed.Recent developments in computational technology created an opportunity to use DEM for modelling of mills from the first principle. Application of DEM for modelling power draw demonstrated that the numerical approach produced results were close to the measured values and comparable with the results obtained using empirical based models ( To illuminate the possible effect of charge size distribution on power draw, we modelled net-power draw of the experimental mill (diameter 0.98 m) which was equipped with 9 rectangular lifters whose height and width was 5 cm. Modelling has been performed using Five modelling runs has been performed for charges composed from 5 size fractions, 4, 3, 2 and 1 size fraction. In the case of 4 size fractions, the mass of the smallest particles from the 5th size fractions are assigned to the next coarser size fractions (4th) by increasing the number of particles in its size fractions. Hence, the total mass of particles in the model remained almost exactly the same, although the number of particles gradually decreased as the average size of particles increased. The mill was run with the same velocity (70% of critical) and average power was monitored as a function of time. Modelled power refers to the net-power of the mill. It excludes no-load power (power required to rotate an empty mill and which includes all mechanical and electrical loses that may occur in reality). PFC3D code models the behaviour of particles, which may be enclosed within a finite volume by non-deformable walls. The code keeps a record of individual particles and updates any contact with other particles or walls. Each calculation step includes application of the laws of motion to a particle, a force–displacement law to each contact, and constant updating of the wall position. The PFC3D modelling is based on the assumption that the individual particles (balls) are treated as stiff bodies. At contact, rigid particles can overlap. The magnitude of the overlap is related to the contact force. Overlaps are small relative to the size of the particles. During contact, the behaviour of a material is simulated using a linear contact model. The contact force vector between two balls or ball and wall is composed of normal and shear components. The normal contact force vector is calculated using the formula: The incremental shear force is calculated using the formula: To equations of motion in PFC3D are solved using a cantered finite-difference scheme. The computed solution will remain stable only if the time-step does not exceed a critical time step. The critical time-step is determined by the equation: Hence, critical time step will increase with an increase in the mass (size) of the particles and/or decrease of particle stiffness. If we use net-power computed for the case of full size distribution as the reference value, cutting the size distribution produces an initially minimal change in net-power draw. Specific power (power divided with mass of charge) shows minimal change when the smallest size fraction (10 mm) is eliminated, and its mass assigned to the next coarser size fraction (20 mm). The shape of the charge also remains practically the same, Power also remains almost constant when particles with diameter 20 mm are eliminated and their mass transferred to the next coarser size fraction (diameter 40 mm). Considering that accuracy achieved by presently used empirical models is about ±10%, the difference between reference case and truncated size distributions cases (1% and 2.4%) is insignificant. This modest absolute error increases when size distribution is reduced further to particles whose diameter is 60 mm and even more when only coarser particles are present whose diameter is 80 mm, This dramatic increase in absolute error (from 2.4% to 8.7% and 14.5%) occurs when the diameter of the remaining particles in the charge becomes larger than the lifter height (50 mm). Due to the increased number of large particles, lifting action of the lifters is less effective, Similar results were obtained during modelling of a large 5 m diameter mill. Charge of the mill was composed from particles whose diameter varied in the range from 5 to 20 cm. Mill was equipped with 10 cm high lifters. Total mass of the charge was kept constant (3790 kg). Assuming that modelled net power for the charge composed from the most widely varying particles (5–20 cm) is accurate, then removing the smallest particles and replacing them with the equivalent number of larger particles, results in insignificant error, Based on the observed results we can conclude that 3D DEM modelled net power of the mill can be more efficiently computed with satisfactory accuracy by removing fine size fractions from the model and assigning their mass to the next coarser size fractions. The maximum size fraction to be replaced with its coarser equivalent should be sufficiently smaller than the height of the lifters. By increasing the size of the smallest particle in the modelled mill, the number of particles will be reduced. As a result of the increased computational time step and speed of computation, it becomes possible to model power draw of the large mills using desktop computers. Due to the fact that mass of the charge is preserved and size of the remaining particles is not too large, accuracy of modelling is similar to the accuracy of traditional modelling methods. Perhaps this is not surprising considering that empirical models do not include parameters that describe size distribution of the charge. Due to the inherently greater flexibility of the DEM, power draw modelling using 3D DEM appears to be a viable alternative to empirical models. The author wishes to thank Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre for permission to publish this paper.