This paper introduces a new method to study the hydroelastic behavior of hinged Very Large Floating Structures (VLFSs). A hinged two-module structure is used to confirm the present approach. For each module, the hydroelasticity theory proposed by Lu et al. (2016) is adopted to consider the coupled effects of wave dynamics and structural deformation. The continuous condition at the connection position between two adjacent modules is also satisfied. Then the hydroelastic motion equation can be established and numerically solved to obtain the vertical displacement, force and bending moment of the hinged structure. The results calculated by the present new method are compared with those obtained using three-dimensional hydroelasticity theory (Fu et al., 2007), which shows rather good agreement.Very Large Floating Structures (VLFSs) are very flexible offshore structures which are widely regarded as an alternative option of ocean space utilization. Due to their obvious advantages including environmental friendliness, easy and fast construction and removal and low cost in construction, VLFSs have been gradually designed for various applications such as floating airports, bridges, oil storage facilities and floating artificial island. Most VLFSs can be categorized into two types, i.e. single-module VLFS and interconnected multi-module VLFS. For these flexible floating structures, the coupling between structural deformation and fluid field becomes a significant factor when it comes to their dynamic response in waves. For single-module VLFSs, many theories have been proposed to predict their response ( For hinged multi-module VLFSs, some researchers ( The purpose of this paper is to propose a new method to calculate the hydroelastic response of interconnected multi-module VLFSs. The hinge is assumed to be rigid while each module of the VLFSs is assumed to be flexible with structural deformation considered. As a simple case, the hinged two-module VLFS model adopted by As the results calculated using the present approach are compared with those obtained by three-dimensional hydroelasticity theory proposed by Evaluation of the dry natural oscillation mode for hinged two-module flexible structure. Evaluation of the hydrodynamic coefficients (added mass, radiation damping and wave excitation force) for each mode. Solving the coupling modal equation to obtain the hydroelastic response of the hinged flexible structure. The hydroelasticity theory for a continuous flexible structure proposed by  In the frequency domain, the excitation forces are related to the incident and diffracted wave potentials as follows: The added mass and radiation damping is given by The equation of motion of freely floating multi-body system (In If the displacement restraint due to the existence of hinge connections is taken into account (for example, the hinge connection between the submodule In Eq. We denote the force (and moment) on the If we apply the method proposed by By solving Eq. In order to approximately consider the coupling between the structural deformation and fluid field, the six degree-of-freedom (DOF) motion of a submodule's center is restricted by the deformation condition of the equivalent beam between two adjacent submodules (For more details, refer to Each side of the beam element The relationship between { Next, we will give the expression of  It can be seen from Eq. Eq. The force { In order to calculate the displacement { Then the displacement { Eq. In the origin work of Lu, the continuous distribution force are simplified as the concentrated force on the gravity center of the sub-module, only the connection interface of the sub-modules are exactly right. However, it can be seen from Eq. Since in the current method, both the bending moment and the shear force are taken into account when solving the bending moment distribution along the VLFS, then the interpolation accuracy must be higher than the original method of Lu. In order to validate the new method proposed in this paper, we investigated two cases in this section: one is a hinged two-module rigid structure; the other is a hinged two-module flexible structure. The hinged two-module rigid structure investigated by Based on the numerical calculation, the relative pitch angle of the two square modules and the displacement at the connection point is compared with Newman's results. To illustrate this methodology, this paper uses the model described by Yokosuka (see the reference, In In In The force on the connector was not given by The structure's bending moment is obtained using Lu's method ( As shown in This paper presents a new method to calculate the hydroelastic response of hinged VLFSs. A hinged two-module flexible structure is used to confirm the present approach. For each module, the hydroelasticity theory proposed by The stiffness matrix [ The size of the symmetric matrix is 12 × 12. The matrix is affected by the size of each submodule, Young modulus and Poisson ratio.