Cellulase from Humicola insolens was encapsulated in hydrophilic silica aerogels by sol–gel procedure and supercritical carbon dioxide (SC CO2) drying. Such on aerogel immobilized cellulase was used as biocatalyst for hydrolysis of carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) in aqueous medium at atmospheric pressure and in high-pressure system CO2/H2O. Influence of different reaction parameters, such as biocatalyst concentration and temperature on enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis of CMC, were studied.
                  As the major advantage of immobilized enzymes is easier separation from the product solution the reusability studies of immobilized enzyme preparation were performed at atmospheric pressure and in system CO2/H2O at pressure of 10MPa. The immobilized cellulase was successfully reused for more than 20 times without any significant loss of activity. Thermal stability studies of immobilized and crude cellulase in SC CO2 showed that the activity of in SC CO2 pre-incubated immobilized cellulase was much higher than the activity of crude cellulase exposed in SC CO2 at the same conditions. The residual activity of pre-incubated on aerogel immobilized cellulase at 110°C was 172%.Cellulose is a fibrous, insoluble, and crystalline polysaccharide composed of β- Cellulose is converted to sugars by enzymatic and/or acid hydrolysis to be further fermented to produce ethanol or other valuable products The high cost of the enzymes often makes the enzymatic processes economically unattractive. The key step in enzymatic processes lies in successful immobilization of the enzyme, which confers numerous benefits, such as facile recovery of the enzyme and its reuse Nanomaterials can offer larger surface areas, pores sizes tailored to protein molecule dimensions, multiple sites for interaction or attachment, etc., and therefore they represent a new opportunities for improving the intrinsic and operational stabilities of enzyme. One of the most promised nanomaterials are aerogels which could be obtained by supercritical carbon dioxide drying of gels, produced by sol–gel method. Aerogel is advanced material with unique properties such as high porosity, large surface area, low density and low thermal conductivity Up to now enzyme-catalyzed reactions have been performed in non-solvent and different solvent systems: aqueous systems In recent years, the use of supercritical carbon dioxide (SC CO The aim of this work was the application of a sol–gel encapsulation technique for the immobilization of cellulase from Non-immobilized cellulase from fungus The immobilization process of the enzyme into the sol–gel matrix of silica aerogels includes two steps: (i) the entrapment of enzyme by sol–gel synthesis and (ii) supercritical drying with carbon dioxide The cellulase powder (Celluzyme 0.7T from The silica precursor used in this study was tetramethoxysilan (TMOS). TMOS and ethanol (molar ratio TMOS:ethanol was 1:13.33) were added in a glass reactor and stirred with magnetic stirrer. Stirring was maintained for 15 During SC CO Cellulase immobilized on silica aerogel, stored in refrigerator at 5 Concentration of reduced sugar ( Hydrolysis of CMC, catalyzed by on aerogel immobilized cellulase, was performed in a BSTR at atmospheric pressure. The reaction mixture consisted of CMC (15 Hydrolysis of CMC, catalyzed by on aerogel immobilized cellulase, was performed in system CO Crude cellulase and immobilized cellulase from Residual activity of on aerogel immobilized and crude cellulase was determined as a difference between the conversion of the reaction, catalyzed by untreated crude enzyme preparation and that of reaction, catalyzed by enzyme preparation, previously treated with SC CO To determine the stability of immobilized enzyme preparation, the catalyst reusability studies were carried out. Therefore the same on aerogel immobilized cellulase was used as biocatalyst for many reaction cycles. One reaction cycle presents one reaction performed in the BSTR, which lasted 5 Reusability studies were performed at atmospheric pressure at 40 A primary objective of any treatment system should be to minimize cost. The enzyme could represent one of the main cost components and therefore, it is reasonable to optimise its concentration. Influence of immobilized enzyme concentration on initial reaction rate of enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis of CMC was investigated. The protein concentration in enzyme preparation was determined by Folin-Lowry protein assay (0.0072 Hydrolysis of CMC was performed at following different concentrations of on aerogel immobilized cellulase expressed as mass of immobilized enzyme preparation on volume of reaction mixture: 24 The influence of concentration of immobilized cellulase from With increase in enzyme concentration the initial reaction rates slightly increase till the maximal initial reaction rate was reached at enzyme concentration of 40 At higher enzyme concentrations (60 For all further experiments, the optimal concentration of on aerogel immobilized cellulase (40 To determine optimal process temperature, the influence of the temperature on the reaction rate of enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis of CMC is presented in With temperature increasing in the range between 25 Temperature dependency of reactions is often described with the Arrhenius equation. Therefore Arrhenius plots ( The activity of on aerogel immobilized cellulase increased with increase in temperature in the range between 25 The immobilization of enzyme causes an increase in enzyme rigidity, which is commonly reflected by an increase in stability towards denaturation by raising the temperature. It is often found that immobilized enzyme has a higher thermal stability than free enzyme. The reason for this is in reduction of conformational flexibility in immobilized enzyme The initial reaction rates were lower, when the reaction was catalyzed by on aerogel immobilized cellulase. The reason for lower initial reaction rates could be the limitation of internal mass transfer, which could occur because of high molecular weight of substrate. At the use of most immobilized enzymes limitation of external mass transfer is presented, as well. In this case, initial reaction rates are affected if the transport of substrate molecules from bulk reaction mixture to the outer surface of the catalyst is limited Thermodynamic properties ( The constant of enzyme deactivation which is described as a ratio between inactive and active form of enzyme was lower, when the hydrolysis of CMC was catalyzed by immobilized cellulase. Therefore the preparation of immobilized enzyme “contained” more active form of enzyme. When the enzyme was encapsulated in sol–gel matrix, its structure was more protected from influence of temperature and consecutively more protected from denaturation as by non-immobilized enzyme. Other thermodynamic parameters such as enthalpy, Gibbs free energy and entropy were calculated for process of enzyme deactivation. The Gibbs free energy (Δ No significant difference in entropies of enzyme deactivation for both forms of enzyme was perceived. Thermal deactivation of biocatalyst is one of the major causes for decrease in biocatalysts activity. For the effective characterization of a bioconversion system the evaluation of thermal stability of the biocatalyst should be done. To determine the thermal stability of cellulase from Stability data for crude and immobilized cellulase from It can be clearly seen that activity of immobilized cellulase at atmospheric pressure was already higher than the activity of non-immobilized cellulase. With incubation of immobilized cellulase in SC CO The residual activities of exposed crude and immobilized enzyme preparations in SC CO The activity of immobilized enzyme preparation slightly decreased with the pressure increase from 10 The operational stability of an immobilized enzyme, i.e. the ability to reuse it, is an important parameter determining the economic viability of a biocatalytic process. For that purpose, the immobilized cellulase reusability studies were performed at atmospheric pressure and 40  As can be seen from Despite of the low solubility of CMC in CO When the reaction was carried out at high pressure, the concentration of glucose was slightly increasing between the 1st and 11th reaction cycle and with further increasing in number of reaction cycles till 15th cycle the significant increase in glucose concentration was observed. This could probably happen due to changes in aerogel structure. High pressure could cause progressively enlargement of aerogel pores during the successive reaction cycles, and therefore the mass-transfer limitations would be minimized. The diffusion of the CMC molecules in an aerogel towards the active site of the enzyme and produced glucose from the aerogel would be faster, and consecutively the measured glucose concentration higher. After 15th reaction cycle, the glucose concentration decreased for approximately 5% in 5 reaction cycles. This could be due to some enzyme inactivation. On the other hand, if the aerogel pores were getting more open during the tests, the enzyme molecules could be evacuated from the gel. Wu et al. immobilized cellulase in nanofibrous PVA membranes by electrospinning and reused it for six reaction cycles at atmospheric pressure. They discovered that the relative activity of the immobilized cellulase compared to its initial value in percentage decreased along with the reusing times. The cellulase, immobilized in nanofibrous PVA membranes retained around 36% of its initial activity at 6th reaction cycle The presented technique for immobilization of cellulase in silica aerogel matrix has shown to be very efficient as it has improved the biocatalytic properties of cellulase such as activity, stability and its repeatedly application for hydrolysis of CMC. Optimum temperature for hydrolysis reaction performed at atmospheric pressure was found to be 40 And finally, the immobilized cellulase could be well reused without any significant loss of activity for at least 15 reaction cycles at atmospheric pressure and at least 20 reaction cycles when high-pressure system CO Authors are grateful to the Slovenian Ministry of high education, science and technology for the financial support of this work and Novo Nordisk AS (Copenhagen, Denmark), for the generous gift of enzymes.