Olecranon fractures are common in elderly patients, causing significant morbidity and functional impairment. Traditional surgical treatments are often complicated by hardware failure and prominence, frequently requiring reoperation. These difficulties often arise secondary to the marked comminution and osteoporotic nature of these patients’ bones. To address these concerns, a suture anchor fixation technique was developed and clinically evaluated. A consecutive series of elderly patients treated with this technique from January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2013 at a single institution was studied. All cases were surgically repaired using biocomposite fully threaded suture anchors in a double row fashion. Each patient was evaluated with a physical examination, radiographs, and the following clinical outcome measures: the Quick Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (QuickDASH) score; the Oxford Elbow Score (OES); and the Short-Form Health Survey (SF-12). Nine female patients with Mayo IIA or IIB fractures were identified. The mean patient age at time of operation was 73.6 ± 10.0 years (range 59.3 – 88.8 years). The average time from injury to operation was 5.2 days ± 3.4 days. The average time from operation to long-term follow-up was 5.1 years ± 2.5 years (range: 0.8 – 7.4 years). Six patients were available for long-term follow-up. One patient had deceased, and two patients were unable to be contacted despite multiple attempts. There were no intraoperative complications or reoperations. Eight of nine patients healed uneventfully in acceptable position without displacement. Postoperatively, the average Oxford Elbow Score (OES) was 47.17 ± 2.04; the average QuickDASH score was 6.43 ± 9.47; and the average Short-Form Health Survey (SF-12) scores were 49.02 ± 16.59 and 55.38 ± 4.05 for the physical and mental component scales, respectively. Suture anchor fixation of olecranon fractures in the elderly population provides excellent long-term radiographic and clinical outcomes. Importantly, this technique reduces complications and reoperations for symptomatic hardware, as compared with traditional surgical treatments.