Among the gas dispersion properties affecting flotation column behavior, the bubble size distribution (BSD) is one of the most important. Its control could positively contribute to optimize the metallurgical performance. Experimental tests are carried out in a laboratory flotation column working with air and water. The objective is to regulate the BSD to a desired distribution set-point. BSD is measured in real-time using an image analysis method and a dynamic non-linear model (Wiener) for BSD, based on a log-normal distribution, is identified. Finally, a constrained model predictive controller is designed to control the BSD. The proposed approach leads to good control results, thus confirming the possibility to use this strategy to optimize the valuable mineral recovery by adequately selecting the BSD for a given particle size distribution.Flotation is a mineral processing method that separates minerals based on the difference of hydrophobicity. In the case of a flotation column, the process consists in injecting air bubbles into a column vessel (typically 12–14 Performance in flotation is determined by the grade and recovery of the valuable mineral. Grade is usually measured by an X-ray on stream analyzer. Recovery can be estimated by a steady state material balance which means that it cannot be used for dynamic control purposes. Moreover on stream analyzers are designed to sample from different points of the flotation circuits, causing a significant measurement delay ( The three main objectives when operating a flotation column are ( The interaction between rising bubbles and particles is at the heart of the flotation process. One way to improve the flotation process performance would certainly be to adjust the bubble size distribution with respect to the particle size distribution ( Wishing to control a distribution instead of an average value occurs in many processes such as the flocculent control in paper machines ( Classical linear stochastic control does not solve the problem of controlling the shape of the distribution instead of their moments (  output probability density function control using input–output models; minimum entropy control for non-Gaussian stochastic systems; output probability density function control using neural networks. The choice of one of these methods depends principally on how the PDF (probability density function) is modelled. Parametric and semi-parametric methods are considered when the control of the PDF is desired.  Another strategy consists in dealing with the probability potential. This concept is driven by Fokker–Planck–Kolmorov (FPK) equations, where a partial differential equation describes the PDF time evolution (   One alternative to the PDF parametric modelling is investigated by  In a previous work ( The objective of this research project is to evaluate the influence of BSD on the flotation performance indices (concentrate grade and recovery). Obviously, to do so, it must be possible to keep the bubble size distribution to a desired constant value. Thus, its control (described in this paper) is required and will allow various experiments to answer questions such as: All other parameters being constant, what are the relationships between flotation performance indices and BSD? Are the flotation performance indices significantly improved if BSD is optimally selected according to the particle size distribution? It is not claimed that the proposed control strategy and instrumentation are directly suitable for industrial applications. However, it is certainly a successful step in that direction. The article is organized as follows. Section A schematic representation of the experimental set-up is presented in Air bubbles are generated with a stainless-steel frit-and-sleeve sparger located at the bottom of the column. The frit-and-sleeve sparger ( Bubble images are taken with a modified version of the McGill bubble viewer ( The first two steps to control the BSD are its measurement and the identification of a model to explain its dynamic behavior. As proposed in previous works on flotation processes, bubble size distributions can be reasonably well fitted with log-normal distributions ( The size and number of bubbles in each image taken by the camera are determined by a bubble detection technique based on circular Hough transform (CHT) ( A dynamic model linking the estimated log-normal parameters, A non-linear relationship has been observed between the superficial velocity set-points and the log-normal parameters. A Wiener model is one of the simplest approaches for modelling this type of non-linear processes. It consists of a serial arrangement of a linear time-invariant dynamic system with unitary gains and static (memory-less) non-linear elements. Usually the non-linear elements are selected to be invertible functions for control design purposes.  Applying the natural logarithm to Eq. The resulting linear model is depicted in The control strategy is a constrained 2 At each sampling time, the decision variables,     The MPC parameters were selected with the objective of having closed-loop dynamics similar to the process dynamics. This usually leads to a robust controller. The control period is 2 The state observer is a Kalman filter. This observer estimates the states required to calculate the output predictions at each control interval. In order to properly reject a constant output disturbance, the overall process model is first augmented by a disturbance model consisting of an integrator driven by a white noise for each output. The constraints are:  Since One goal of this research would be to control at the same time the BSD and the bubble surface area flux (BSAF). BSAF is defined as the ratio between the superficial air rate It was shown that the frit-and-sleeve sparger allows the control of the BSD. However, it was observed that it is not possible to generate a wide range of means and standard deviations. Having more than one frit-and-sleeve spargers working at the same time in the column, each of them with different characteristics, would help generating various BSD. This would introduce a new challenge in the identification of the log-normal parameters of a mixture model as well detecting the contribution of each sparger in the total BSD. During the experimental tests, the frother concentration was kept constant, although this variable has a significant impact on bubble size. This paper describes the design of a constrained 2