The adsorption behavior of activated carbon fibers (ACFs) modified by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method on methylene blue (MB) was investigated in details. The Brunauer–Emmet–Teller (BET) surface area analysis, scanning electron microscope (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis were employed to characterize the samples. The results showed that the pore size of the ACFs had a significant change after CVD modification. In addition, it was found that carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were well distributed on the surface of ACFs. FTIR analysis for modified ACFs after adsorption showed intensity changes of absorption peaks, in comparison to that before adsorption. The adsorption capacity at equilibrium increased with the increase of pH. Moreover, attempts were made to fit the isothermal data using Langmuir and Freundlich equations. The results manifested that the experimental data were well fitted by Freundlich equation. Furthermore, the adsorption kinetics was analyzed by pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order and intra-particle diffusion models. The results demonstrated that the kinetic data were well described by pseudo-second-order kinetic model. The adsorption rate was controlled by intra-particle diffusion and film diffusion and thermodynamic parameters including ΔG, ΔH and ΔS were also determined. This showed that the adsorption process was a spontaneous, endothermic and increasing randomness process. The calculated E
                     a was 28.33kJ/mol, indicating that the adsorption could be a physisorption process.Dyes as an important organic material, are widely used in paper, textile, leather, dye synthesis, printing, foods and plastics industries. However, it has been found that many organic dyes are harmful to human beings, so the removal of dyes from wastewater has received considerable attention over the past decades. In recent years, a great deal of technologies for treating wastewater such as adsorption In this paper, ACFs were modified using CVD method. CNTs were grown onto ACFs surface and some related experiments were conducted in details, in order to strengthen the adsorption ability of ACFs for dyes and improve segregation property. Viscose-based ACFs mat was adopted in this experiment. Nitrogen, hydrogen and acetylene were used in our experiment with purity of 99.99%, 99.99% and 99.9%, respectively. Absolute ethyl alcohol and 65–68% HNO Ni(NO The specific surface area was determined by automatic specific surface analyzer (QUANTACHROME AUTOSORB-1), and pore size distribution was gained by automated pore size analyzer (QUDRASORB SI). FEI Nova Nano SEM230 was used to characterize the morphology of samples. The internal structure was observed by TEM (JEM-3010). Zeta potentials were measured with dynamic potential and particle size analyzer (Coulter Delsa440sx) by adjusting pH. MB concentrations were determined by spectrometry at the wavelength of maximum absorbance at 665 Batch adsorption experiments were performed using 150 The specific surface area of modified ACFs was high and reached 435.78  The infrared spectrums of samples are depicted in It was found by many studies Adsorption mechanism of modified ACFs mainly included as follows: the first was cation exchange, the second was π–π interactions between bulk π systems on CNTs surfaces and benzene rings of dye molecules and the third was electrostatic force between modified ACFs and MB molecules. When pH The adsorption isotherms of MB on modified ACFs at 298, 308, 318, 328 and 338 Adsorption isotherm models are commonly used for the description of adsorption behavior and Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption models were widely applied The Freundlich isotherm model postulates that the surface of adsorbent is heterogenous and adsorption belongs to polymolecular layer adsorption. The linear form of the Freundlich equation is The derived Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models based on the experimental data in The values of Freundlich adsorption isotherm is shown in The adsorption rate is an important parameter in the adsorption process. Therefore, adsorption kinetics was investigated in this paper. The effect of contact time on the adsorption capacity is presented in In order to make adsorption mechanism more clear, the adsorption data were fitted using the pseudo-first kinetic, second-order kinetic and the intra-particle diffusion models. The pseudo-first-order kinetic model presumes the rate of adsorbate occupying activate sites is proportion to the unoccupied activate sites. The pseudo-first-order kinetic model is represented by: The pseudo-second-order kinetic model is as follows: Normally, the adsorption process of porous media is very complex and one step or a few steps may decide the adsorption rate and adsorption capacity. The adsorption experimental data were treated by the intra-particle diffusion model to elucidate the diffusion mechanism, which is expressed as: Thermodynamic studies are used to illustrate whether the adsorption process was spontaneous or not. Thermodynamic parameters include Δ The changed Arrhenius equation was used to depict the relation between the rate constants In the present paper, it could be observed that pore size distribution of the modified ACFs had a significant change and the CNTs were well-distributed on the surface of ACFs. Cation exchange was considered to be one of the adsorption mechanisms. Results showed the adsorption capacity of modified ACFs at equilibrium increased with the increase of pH. Langmuir and Freundlich model well fitted experimental data. The adsorption process well fitted pseudo-second order kinetic and was controlled by intra-particle diffusion to some extent. Moreover, the negative values of Δ This project was financially supported by the