The design of pressure vessels for critical high-pressure applications has to consider two failure modes. The first mode of failure can occur when deformation becomes excessive and permanent deformation might occur. The second type of failure occurs at higher magnitudes of pressure resulting in bursting of tubes and catastrophic failure. Hence predicting the bursting pressure of thrust chambers is an important consideration in their design and gives a more realistic indication of the factor of safety than the value that can be provided based on the yield pressure value. The burst pressure gives an indication of the margin of safety available over the maximum expected operating pressure (MEOP). The assessment of burst pressure is very important for pressure vessels which are used for critical applications. In this paper an attempt has been made to study the suitability of the burst pressure prediction formula available in literature and its modification for thin-walled high strength pressure vessels manufactured by a flow forming technique.inner radius outer radius base of natural logarithm radius actual wall ratio strain hardening exponent strength coefficient radial deformation maximum internal pressure nominal stress at ultimate load true stress at ultimate load nominal yield stress wall ratio at the bulging point acceleration due to gravity, m/s specific impulse of propellant or fuel, s mass ratio mass of propellant, kg mass of structure, kg mass of payload, kg Prediction of the bursting pressure of a pressure vessel used in a critical application is an important consideration in its design for safety and reliability. It is very important to know the value of maximum pressure since a more realistic indication of the factor of safety can be provided compared to the factor of safety (FS) based upon the yield pressure value. The design of pressure vessels requires consideration of two failure modes. The first mode of failure can occur when the deformation becomes excessive and permanent deformation may possibly occur. The second type of failure normally occurs at a higher magnitude of pressure resulting in bursting of the pressure vessel. The burst pressure gives an indication of the margin of safety available over the maximum expected operating pressure (MEOP). In this work, pressure vessels manufactured by flow forming are tested in burst pressure studies. The purpose of the present work was to study the suitability of available theoretical expressions for predicting the bursting pressure of thin-walled high strength flow formed pressure vessels used as thrust chambers for rocket propulsion. The predicted burst pressure values shall be compared with the experimentally determined values, and if found necessary, suitable modification shall be incorporated in the available formula to make the burst pressure prediction more accurate. The primary function of a motor case is its performance as a pressure vessel. In addition to its importance as a structural member, it needs a minimum structural weight so as to achieve maximum velocity gain for the rocket, resulting in the enhancement of its range. The projectile velocity The flow forming technique has emerged as the latest metal forming technique which can meet the challenging requirements of manufacturing high strength, precision, thin-walled thrust chambers with excellent surface finish and minimum material waste in an echo-friendly way. Flow forming is based on the principle of constant volume and the deformation takes place by the mechanism of slip. In flow forming a metal blank or preform is formed over a rotating mandrel. While the blank metal and mandrel (which are locked together) rotate, the rotating forming rollers follow the mandrel contour at a preset gap as programmed by a CNC flow forming machine. To enhance accuracy, a four-axis flow forming machine with a three roller configuration on an A-frame using axial staggering of rollers can be used. The gap between the rotating mandrel and rollers acts as an orifice through which the metal is flowed (extruded). The preform is plastically deformed by the localised application of heavy compressive forces exerted by the rollers and the deformed metal takes the shape of mandrel contour whose outer diameter is equal to the internal diameter of the pressure vessel, producing the final desired wall thickness following the principle of equal volume. For a more detailed understanding of the various flow forming techniques the reader is referred to the large number of excellent papers available in the literature The application of the flow forming technique ranges from the manufacture of rocket motor casing Flow forming offers several advantages over conventional methods of tube forming like extrusion and drawing. By flow forming one can achieve excellent specific strength, good surface finish, close dimensional accuracy, minimum material waste, low tooling cost, considerable design freedom, formability of hard-to-work materials and the possibility of using low strength materials to achieve high strength by the mechanism of strain hardening. In this experimental study a reverse flow forming technique was employed. Tubes longer than the mandrel can be flow formed by this method with very good accuracy. A reverse flow forming technique is schematically shown in A flow chart showing the manufacturing sequences and critical inspection stages involved in the processing of preforms and flow formed tubes is given in Most flow forming operations are done under cold working conditions in order to enhance the mechanical properties. The yield strength and ultimate tensile strength can increase by as much as 100% and the ductility of the spun part decreases correspondingly Due to the susceptibility of flow formed tubes to stress–corrosion cracking and premature failure due to the presence of micro-cracks and residual stress, it is mandatory to qualify hundred percent of tubes by subjecting them to hydraulic proof pressure testing. The spun tubes are typically subjected to a proof pressure value which is 10% higher than the MEOP. The proof pressure is reached in several steps and at each step the pressure is held constant for a few minutes for checking and monitoring parameters like strains at all critical locations, dilation of the tube in the radial direction which is very important from the point of view of the structural joint sealing and its integrity. No permanent set on the thrust chamber diameter is acceptable at this stage. After ensuring that the thrust chambers (100%) can withstand the proof pressure without permanent set, the tubes are cleared for further tests. The rational design of pressure vessels subjected to internal pressure requires the study of two failure modes. The first mode failure occurs when the magnitude of deformation becomes excessive and there is a possibility of permanent deformation. The second mode of failure occurs at a much higher pressure beyond which it is not possible to maintain uniformity of deformation. In the case of pressure vessels, this instability takes the form of the development of a localised bulge which grows until cracks formed and pressure vessel ultimately bursts. The pressure at which the pressure vessel bursts is called the burst pressure. The burst pressure test confirms the margin of safety available for a particular tube beyond its MEOP. Predicting the bursting pressure of tubes used in critical applications is an important consideration in its design for safety and reliability. During the initial stages of development program, one or more motor tubes are subjected to burst pressure test after successfully completing the proof pressure test. However, where critical applications are involved, like thrust chambers for aerospace applications, for every batch of tubes manufactured from a new heat of raw materials, at least one burst test is desirable. The physical parameters of the pressure vessel used for the present study are: internal diameter=202 The experimental studies are carried out on hardened and tempered AISI 4130 steel preforms to Electro Slag Refined (ESR) grade. The microstructure of the preform is tempered martensite as shown in The experimental set up consisted of a suitable pressure vessel holding fixture bolted to a rigid foundation with two clamps and end covers screwed on to either ends of the pressure vessel with proper end sealing. The pressure vessel was pressurised using a hydraulic pump. The flow of fluid was regulated through a non-return valve. The hydraulic pump and pressure gauge were separated from the pressure vessel under testing by a very thick concrete wall. The experimental set up used for burst pressure testing is schematically shown in It is very important to know the magnitude of burst pressure for pressure vessels since a more realistic assessment of factor of safety can be obtained compared to the factor of safety based upon yield pressure alone. The burst pressure indicates the margin of safety available over the MEOP. This information is often necessary to provide a realistic assessment of the structural integrity of any system in which the pressure vessel is a critical component. Various theories and procedures for evaluating the burst pressures in thick cylinders have been summarised in There have been a multitude of formulae proposed for establishing bursting strength of thick-walled pressure vessels The bursting pressure of a thin-walled cylinder can be predicted using the expression derived by Svensson The bursting pressure formula proposed by Svensson It can be seen from The most likely failure mode for a thin wall pressure vessel is in the hoop direction as the hoop stress developed is two times that of the longitudinal stress. This aspect is illustrated in The modified empirical formula proposed by the authors is given by As the longitudinal–transverse stress developed in a thin-walled pressure vessel is of the order 1:2, the most likely failure mode is in hoop direction. This is true for cold worked thin-walled tubes as well which is illustrated by the failure modes of the flow formed tubes in burst pressure testing. For a realistic assessment of the bursting pressure, it is necessary to take into account the anisotropic properties of the flow formed pressure vessel. The Svensson model for thin tubes ( A new model for burst pressure prediction of thin-walled pressure vessel is proposed which accounts for the anisotropy in the flow formed pressure vessel. The new model gives much improved predictions with errors less than 2.85% in most of the cases.