Background
                  Double-tiered subchondral support (DSS) procedures with optimal distal dorsal cortical distance (DDD) have been reported to be effective in treating distal radius fractures, but there have been no studies of osteoporotic distal radius fractures in elderly patients. In this study, we demonstrated the efficacy of the DSS procedure with optimal DDD using a variable-angle volar locking-plate system for the treatment of osteoporotic distal radius fractures in elderly patients.
               
                  Methods
                  One hundred and twenty-two patients (mean age, 73.3 years; age range, 65–88 years) with distal radius fracture were treated using a variable-angle volar locking-plate system with DSS. Patients were divided into DSS and non-DSS groups based on postoperative and 12-month follow-up radiographs, and radiological and clinical assessment was performed. Finally, we divided all 122 patients into two groups based on volar tilt of 6° on 12-month follow-up radiographs, and postoperative DDD values were compared.
               
                  Results
                  Volar tilt decreased (p
                     =0.02), and ulnar variance increased (p
                     =0.01) more in the non-DSS group. The non-DSS group showed a significant correlation between postoperative DDD value and change in DDD value (p
                     =0.00). The mean postoperative DDDs in the group with final volar tilt<6° and in the group with final volar tilt≥6° were 6.4mm (SD±1.7mm) and 4.6mm (SD±1.4mm) respectively (p
                     =0.02). At 4-month follow-up, pronation (p
                     =0.05) and supination (p
                     =0.04) were improved, and at 12-month follow-up, supination (p
                     =0.05) was improved in the DSS group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The use of the DSS procedure and reduction of DDD to 4.6mm or less using a variable-angle volar locking-plate system was effective in maintaining anatomical reduction for the treatment of osteoporotic distal radius fractures in elderly patients.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III Therapeutic study.Distal radius fractures are the most common of all upper-limb fractures in individuals aged In recent years, a variable-angle locking screw technology has been developed. This technology allows the surgeon rather than the plate to determine the direction of the screw, and results in fewer complications than conventional fixed-angle plate fixation Our institutional review board approved this study, and all patients who had been treated using the procedure during the study period were available for review. The study was performed between July 2012 and February 2016. A total of 168 patients aged Inclusion criteria comprised: distal radius fracture with: bone mineral density score unilateral fracture; ≥ normal wrist function before injury. Exclusion criteria comprised: medical contraindications ( concomitant injury making clinical outcome difficult to evaluate ( previous injury or disease in the fractured wrist ( open fracture ( On these criteria, 122 patients (40 men and 82 women), with a mean age of 73.3 years (range, 65–88 years), were included in the study. Patient characteristics are summarized in The plates were made of titanium alloy or stainless steel. Over the years, we used three plate designs to find the most suitable plate for the patient. The implants used for volar plating were the Variable-Angle LCP Two-Column Volar Distal Radius Plate (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) in 39 wrists, the VariAx (Stryker Leibinger GmbH & Co. KG, Freiburg, Germany) in 42 wrists, and the DVR (Biomet, Indiana, USA) in 53 wrists. All of these plates possess multidirectional distal locking holes with 2 head rows that allow up to 15° angulations in all directions while maintaining the ability of the screws to lock into the plate. A single hand surgeon performed all surgical procedures in a consistent manner. A longitudinal incision was made, and dissection was carried out between the radial artery and flexor carpi radialis tendon. If the fracture site was not visible or the muscle interfered with the reduction, the pronator quadratus muscle was detached. The fracture site was exposed and reduced under direct visualization and fluoroscopic assistance. Subsequently, traction was applied under fluoroscopic guidance to obtain the correct radial length. The plate was applied so as to avoid crossing the watershed line and prevent flexor tendon injury, and the contour was matched carefully. The cortical screw was inserted into the proximal hole of the plate shaft. The angle was adjusted and the screws were placed to target specific bone fragments. Screws were inserted into all the locking holes in the plate, to maximize biomechanical stability The screws were inserted into the distal row of the variable locking holes; the insertion was made as distally as possible, to support the central subchondral bone ( All distal screws were inserted with care to avoid penetration of the joint space. Intraoperatively, a 20°–30° elevated anatomic lateral fluoroscopic view allowed visualization of the articular surfaces, evaluation of volar tilt, and confirmation of proper screw placement not penetrating the joint ( All patients underwent radiological examinations immediately after surgery and at each follow-up. Radiographic fracture healing was defined as any evidence of bridging calluses across the fracture sites or the obliteration of fracture lines on the anteroposterior, lateral (including fluoroscopic 20° anatomic lateral view) and oblique radiographs of the wrist. Radiographs were also assessed for screw penetration into the radiocarpal or distal radioulnar joint. Radiological assessment included measurement of volar tilt, radial length, radial inclination, ulnar variance and DDD on postoperative and 12-month follow-up radiographs Postoperative radiographs were classified into two groups according to the location of the screws inserted in the variable locking holes ( DDD was measured from the tip of the most distal screw in the construct to the edge of the dorsal rim of the distal radius in the two groups (DDS group vs. non-DDS group) on 20° anatomic lateral fluoroscopic view. This view allows visualization of the most distal screw and the dorsal rim of the radius ( Generally, the minimum reference value for volar tilt in anatomical reduction of distal radius fracture is about 6° ROM, grip power (compared with the contralateral side), Quick Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (QuickDASH) and Gartland and Werley scores were measured at 4-months after surgery, to take account of mean bone union time. The parameters were re-measured at 12-months after the surgery. Patient-rated outcomes were assessed on QuickDASH. In addition, results were rated using the demerit-point system developed by Gartland and Werley Three examiners performed all clinical and radiographic assessments. To reduce measurement errors, measurements were made twice by each examiner, and mean values were calculated. Intraobserver reliability was assessed on Winer's criteria Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS version 20.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY). Independent-sample Student All fractures showed union at a mean 15.8 weeks (range, 10–28 weeks), assessed on clinical examination and anteroposterior, lateral and oblique radiographs obtained at 4 weeks and at 4–8 week intervals thereafter. Union time was not significantly different between the DSS (average: 15.6 Radiographic results detailed in In the DSS group, postoperative DDD values (average, 3.65 The 122 patients were divided into two groups based on the anatomical reduction of the volar tilt of 6° (normal range of volar tilt Clinical results are detailed in In the non-DSS group, one patient with an open fracture had a superficial infection, which was resolved after oral antibiotic administration. Carpal tunnel syndrome occurred in three cases (DSS group, 1 case; non-DSS group, 2 cases); carpal tunnel release was performed 6 months after distal radius fracture surgery, because no improvement was noted with conservative treatment. Complex regional pain syndrome occurred in 1 patient in each group; symptoms improved after combination therapy (IV 20% mannitol and steroid with oral gabapentin) In this study, we demonstrated that good results are achievable using the DSS procedure with a variable-angle volar locking-plate system for the treatment of distal radius fractures in elderly patients. The incidence of comminuted distal radius fractures in elderly patients has increased as a result of the rising number of patients with osteoporosis. Deterioration of cortical and trabecular bone with aging and osteoporosis is associated with considerable reduction in the fixation strength of osteosynthesis materials The distal radius volar locking-plate was developed for the treatment of these fractures. Among the different plate concepts, the so-called “variable axis” design provides the surgeon some flexibility in the trajectory of the ‘locked’ screws, facilitating the fixation of variable fracture patterns and anatomies In the present study, to fix both the central and dorsal subchondral bones while maintaining the anatomical position of the plate, the central subchondral bone was fixed by the distal row screws, and the dorsal subchondral bone by the proximal row screws using the variable-angle fixation method. In addition, as in a previous study, where cross positioning provided greater stability than parallel positioning in screw or pin fixation in distal radius fracture A previous study reported that patients with AO type C3 distal radius fracture showed less change in volar tilt during follow-up in the DSS procedure group In a previous study comparing change in DDD and loss of volar tilt on DDD measurement in distal radius fracture, using the tip-apex distance concept, which determines the optimal distance between subchondral screws and articular surfaces in the treatment of hip fracture, concluded that postoperative DDD should be The present study included patients aged over 65 years with osteoporotic extra- and intra-articular distal radius fractures who underwent surgery with variable-angle volar locking-plates ( A variable-angle volar locking-plate was used to attempt screw fixation to the subchondral bone as close to the articular surface as possible, without penetrating the dorsal cortex or articular surface. Postoperative DDD correlated change in DDD at 12-month follow-up ( To determine the minimum postoperative DDD value needed to maintain anatomical reduction, we measured postoperative DDD by dividing volar tilt at 12-months by the minimum 6° volar tilt reference value for anatomical reduction (normal range of volar tilt Pronation and supination at 4-month follow-up and supination at 12-month follow-up were better in the DSS group than in the non-DSS group. Even in elderly patients with osteoporosis, firm fixation was possible in the DSS group, and ROM improves, probably because early splint removal and resumed motion is possible. This study has several limitations. Firstly, the design was retrospective, which may have introduced selection bias. The worst fractures may have been selected for variable-angle locking-plate treatment, and outcomes may have been skewed as a result. However, we believe that selection bias was in fact minimal, because the demographic profile of patients included was similar to the overall demographic profile of patients with fractures of the distal radius in our unit. Secondly, in this study, we did not compare surgical versus non-surgical groups, because we wanted to measure differences according to surgical method when in treating osteoporotic distal radius fracture in elderly patients. Thirdly, all procedures were performed by a single surgeon, which may have favorably biased the results, because proficiency with the implant tends to improve over time. Fourthly, clinical and radiographic assessment was not blinded; however, we used the mean of three repeated measurements and were able to confirm excellent intraobserver reliability (0.94), this form of bias was minimal in the final analysis. Fifthly, among the 122 patients, 12 patients with large metaphyseal defects underwent bone auto- or allo-graft, which was performed in the early phase of the study. Handoll et al. The DSS procedure and DDD with a variable-angle volar locking-plate system is useful for the management of osteoporotic distal radius fractures in elderly patients. The DSS procedure with reduction of DDD value to The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. Sang Ki Lee: conception and design, writing the manuscript. Young Sub Chun: data collection, writing the manuscript. Hyun Min Shin: conception and design, Statistical expertise. Min Kim: analysis and interpretation, writing the manuscript. Won Sik Choy: conception and design, supervision.