In this study, polyurethane foam type thermoset polymerizing, due to chemical reaction between its liquid ingredients, was tested as binder after solidifying and then a rock-like material mixing with a sandy silt type soil was prepared. The uniaxial compressive strengths (UCSs) of polyurethane foam reinforced soil specimens were determined for different polyurethane ratios in the mixture. Additionally, a series of tests on slake durability, impact value, freezing–thawing resistance, and abrasion resistance of polyurethane reinforced soil (PRS) mixture was conducted. The UCS values over 3 MPa were measured from the PRS specimens. The testing results showed that treated soil can economically become a desirable rock-like material in terms of slake durability and resistances against freezing–thawing, impact effect and abrasion. As another characteristic of the rock-like material made with polyurethane foam, unit volume weight was found to be quite lower than those of natural rock materials.Polyurethane was firstly synthesized by Otto Bayer in 1937 as an alternative of rubber ( Polyurethane polymerizes owing to the chemical reaction between the liquid ingredients of polyol and isocyanate. The liquid phase time of mixture can be chosen according to the type of product. The polyurethane foam material used in this study is activated within a minute after the ingredients are mixed. As a result of polymerization, the foam can swell in three dimensions with a good expansiveness ( There are three stages of polyurethane foam polymerization. The first one is cream time; at this stage, polymerization does not start to work, and the mixture is liquid. Typical cream time for polyurethane foams changes from 5 s to 240 s. By the end of this time, the gel time and polymerization start. At the third stage called tack free time, the material solidifies completely and the polymerization ends. Therefore, the maximum mechanical strength is reached at the end of the tack free time varying between 18 h and 24 h for most of the polyurethane foams ( Freezing–thawing resistance, slake durability, ductility, crack resistivity against the thermal changes of polyurethane are more convenient in comparison with those of the natural rock materials ( In this study, a sandy silt soil material was mixed with the polyurethane foam having different volumetric ratios in the mixture. To prepare the rock-like specimens, dry form of the soil material was used due to the factor that water affects the polymerization performance. The aim of this study is to define the strength of polyurethane reinforced soil (PRS) material and to understand its properties of resistivity against some environmental effect. To assess the PRS as an alternative of the natural rocks, the experimental results were discussed in comparison with the suggestions in relevant standards. In this study, uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of the PRS specimens was determined. In addition, a series of tests on slake durability, freezing–thawing resistance, impact value, and abrasion resistance was carried out. The polyurethane foam used in this study has density of 65 kg/m Soil used in this study was classified as sandy silt and inorganic silt with ML code in the Casagrande plasticity chart ( To prepare for dry soil mixed with the polyurethane foam, soil material used in this study was put in the stove at 105 °C for 6 h before mixing with polyurethane. The soil mass was kept constant at 160 g for all specimens used in uniaxial compression test. Different weights of the liquid ingredients were mixed with soil with varying polyurethane/soil ratios of 1/7, 1/8 and 1/9 by weight. To prepare the PRS specimens, polyol and isocyanate were mixed with the same ratios by weight first. Then, the dry soil was added on frothing material step by step as polymerization started. Because the air in the fluid foam was removed, expansion of the froth stopped when mixing with a metal spoon during the early time of the gel ( As around half hour elapsed, i.e. the last stage of polymerization, the tack free time for full solidifying started. In the tack free time, there was no visual change of the PRS specimens except some small surface swelling in the first hour. In the early stage of tack free time, specimens were sometimes compressed to make the surface flat. The mechanical properties of specimens were significantly improved by curing reactions during the tack free time. All the PRS specimens were waited at least 1 d to be sure that polymerization reactions ended. Abrasion test specimens with regular shape were sampled by using cutter head circular molds with 6.25 cm in diameter and 2 cm in height. Specimens were taken from soft polyurethane and soil mixture in the gel time using the core sampler. The specimens were compressed to form a flat surface during the gel time and early tack free time in common with the specimens for uniaxial compression test. Abrasion test specimens were prepared to investigate the performances of PRS material with the ratio of polyurethane to soil of 1/8 by weight. Soil and polyurethane were mixed in a vessel bigger than the specimen molds for uniaxial compression test, following the same procedure of specimens for uniaxial compression test. PRS specimens prepared for slake durability, impact value and freezing–thawing tests had irregular shapes like rock aggregate. Polyurethane was mixed with ratio of polyurethane to soil of 1/8, following the same procedure of specimens prepared for uniaxial compression test. However, the surface of PRS mixed in the molds of uniaxial compression test was not compressed, and the mixture was allowed to rise as shown in Unit volume weights of PRS specimens with different ratios of polyurethane to soil were determined considering the weight and volume of the cylindrical specimens for uniaxial compression test. PRS specimens were weighed using a digital scale with the sensitivity of 0.01 g to determine their unit volume weights. Totally, 15 specimens consisting of 3 groups of different polyurethane to soil ratios (1/7, 1/8, 1/9) were tested to determine the UCS and unit volume weight values of PRS materials. The uniaxial compression tests ( Slake durability test was used to determine the weakening and disintegration of PRS specimens in contact with water. According to the ISRM suggested method, slake durability test was applied on totally 200 cm Freezing–thawing resistance of PRS specimens and 9 different types of rocks were compared by measuring the mass loss after the test cycles of cooling-heating in the cabin which were applied according to Turkish standard for aggregate freezing–thawing test Aggregate impact value test was applied before and after freezing–thawing cycles, following Turkish standard for aggregate impact value test Abrasion resistance of PRS was tested with Bohme abrasion test which is a widely applied method for rock specimens. Tests were carried out according to Turkish standard As the volume of a mold with diameter of NX size and height to diameter ratio of 2 is known to be 248 cm The slake durability indexes ( As seen in Mass loss index ( As seen from the test results, PRS has higher impact resistance in comparison with many of rock specimens before freezing–thawing. Even though decrease in impact resistance of PRS was higher than those of many of the rocks tested after freezing–thawing, PRS was competitive with rock materials with high impact values. According to the classification in the Turkish standard TS EN 1097–2 ( The ratio of volume loss to friction surface area was calculated as the Bohme surface abrasion value. Test data obtained from the abrasion test are listed in Polyurethane usage amount was 0.08 g/cm In this study, polyurethane foam was found to be a convenient binder to make a material with light density and rock-class strength mixing with the silt type soil. However, it should be noted herein that the PRS material was assessed to be in the class of low-strength rock materials. According to the experimental analyses, the PRS material has good slake durability and resistivity against impact effect. Especially, impact resistance of PRS was better than those of many other rocks assessed to be in desirable classes. The abrasion resistance and freezing–thawing resistance of the PRS material were confirmed to reach a good rock class level. In contrast to the other properties, an important difference between the natural rocks and the PRS was found in unit volume weight which is quite low for the PRS. The authors confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.