The mechanical properties and fracturing mechanism of shale containing beddings are critically important in shale gas exploitation and wellbore stability. To investigate the effects of shale bedding on crack behavior and fracturing mechanism, scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a loading system was employed to carry out three-point bending tests on Longmaxi outcrop shale. The crack initiation and propagation of Longmaxi shale were observed and recorded by taking photos during loading. The cracking paths were extracted to calculate the crack length through a MATLAB program. The peak load, fracture toughness and fracture energy all increase with the bedding angle from 0° to 90°. The crack length and energy were also found to increase with the bedding angle in the range of 0°–60° and then drop slightly. The fracturing mechanism of shale includes the main crack affected by the bedding angle and disturbed by randomly distributed particles. The main cracking path was accompanied by several microcrack branches which could form an interconnected crack system. When the main crack encounters larger sedimentary particles, it will deflect around the particles and then restore to the initial direction. A numerical technique using extended finite element method (XFEM) coupled with anisotropic cohesive damage criteria was developed, which is able to capture the dependence of crack propagations on bedding angle and sedimentary particles. This study sheds light on understanding and predicting mesoscale fracture behavior of shale with different bedding angles.High-quality, eco-friendly economic development in China puts huge demands on shale gas. The large-scale commercial development for shale gas in China was initiated in 2009. Following the USA and Canada, China has become the third country that has realized the industrial shale gas production ( Hydraulic fracturing is a key technology widely applied in shale gas exploitation and production. A fully developed fracture network caused by hydraulic fracturing provides a guarantee for increasing shale gas production. However, the formation mechanism of fracture network has not been well understood. The failure mechanism of shale is intricate, because the preexisting bedding acting as weak plane exerts complex impacts on mechanical properties of shale. It has been proved that Young's modulus ( To investigate the effects of bedding on crack propagation, a number of laboratory tests have been conducted, considering different bedding angles. By performing semicircular bend tests on Marcellus shale containing calcite-filled veins, In this paper, three-point bending tests have been carried out on the Longmaxi outcrop shale, considering different angles between bedding plane and loading direction. The process of crack initiation and propagation was observed using SEM with a loading system. Mechanical properties, such as peak load, fracture toughness and fracture energy, were analyzed, with respect to the bedding angle. To model the cracking process of Longmaxi shale within different bedding angles, the extended finite element method (XFEM) coupled with an anisotropic cohesive zone model (CZM) was utilized in this study, which agreed well with the experimental observations. Besides, the effects of particle inclusion on crack behaviors were discussed through simulations of a single edge notch tension model. Longmaxi shale gas field in Sichuan Basin, China has been successfully explored in recent years. The Longmaxi outcrop shale specimens used in this research are sampled from Pengshui County in Chongqing, China ( The outcrop shale block is ash black in color and its sizes are about 300 mm × 300 mm × 300 mm, as shown in The experiments were conducted using SEM with a loading system, as shown in   Taking the load–displacement curve of the specimen with the median peak load in each test group, we plotted 5 load–displacement curves in  Stress intensity factor Fracture toughness When loading was completed, the cracking path was recorded by taking several overlapped SEM images at a magnification of ×100. The crack is black on SEM images, as shown in  The total energy  The finite element models of single edge notch bending (SENB) specimens were created in the commercial software ABAQUS. For computational efficiency, the two-dimensional (2D) plane stress elements (CPS4) were used in the finite element model with displacement-controlled boundary conditions. A 4 mm pre-crack was inserted to the mid-bottom long edge of the 25 mm × 10 mm (length × width) full-size model. The beam span was 20 mm long. Five bedding orientation fracture models with regard to the crack propagation direction were studied, including the vertically bedding, horizontally bedding, and obliquely bedding SENB models ( The XFEM technique adopts the partition-of-unity method and expands the piecewise polynomial function space from conventional finite element method into extra “enrichment functions” to model crack propagation, which has been implemented within ABAQUS. It is capable of resolving arbitrary displacement discontinuities due to cracking, without knowing a priori cracking path in the context of bedding orientations. The method also permits a crack to be located inside a finite element. As a result, it can readily handle an evolving crack plane and solution-dependent crack propagation direction without remeshing during simulations. The material behaviors are assumed isotropic linear elastic before fracture, with the elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio given in The anisotropic CZM was developed to capture the effects of bedding angles. Specifically, two damage initiation criteria were implemented through the user subroutine UDMGINI in ABAQUS ( Failure criterion 1 (for the weak plane): Failure criterion 2 (for MAXPS): In this study, for simplicity, all the maximum strengths ( Determination of material parameters is important for accurate model predictions. The CZM parameters for the cohesive law were calibrated from experimental data at different bedding angles, which are summarized in   The differences between macro-fracture parameters of Longmaxi shale reflected the diversity of fracturing mechanism. The fracturing mechanism of Longmaxi shale with different bedding angles was analyzed. The peak load, fracture toughness and fracture energy generally increased with the increase in bedding angle The orientation of the main crack varied with the bedding angle, resulting in changes in crack length ( To investigate the effect of large sedimentary particles on crack behaviors, a single edge notch tension model with single-particle inclusion was created in ABAQUS. No bedding plane was considered in the numerical model since it merely focused on the influence of particle. The 2D plane stress elements (CPS4) were used for computational efficiency and only the MAXPS criterion was used. The mechanical and fracture properties of shale (matrix) and particle (inclusion), as well as their interfaces, are listed in The cracking process was illustrated in PHILSM contour plots at different simulation stages and compared with the SEM image, as shown in This paper experimentally and numerically studied fracture characteristics of the outcrop shale sampled from Longmaxi, Chongqing, China. The cracking process of Longmaxi shale was observed using SEM with a loading system, and variations of the mechanical parameters of Longmaxi shale were analyzed with respect to the bedding angle. The XFEM coupled with anisotropic CZM was developed to simulate the cracking process, which agreed well with the experimental results. Besides, the effect of particle inclusion on crack behavior was studied numerically using a single edge notch tension model. The findings are summarized as follows: As the anisotropy of shale and the number of weak bedding planes within specimen varied, the experimental results of shale with different bedding angles are scattered, while the general tendency could be observed through the average values. The peak load, fracture toughness and fracture energy of shale gradually increased with the bedding angle until the crack length and the energy reached a maximum at an angle of 60°, after which they slightly decreased. The main cracking path accompanied by several microcrack branches could form an interconnected crack system. The bedding plane had a significant effect on the fracture pattern of Longmaxi shale. Cracks propagated along weak cementation positions and bedding planes. When the crack encountered large sedimentary grain, it tended to propagate around the grain and branch at the weak bedding plane. Therefore, the effects of bedding should be considered in the design of hydraulic fracturing in shale gas extraction. An anisotropic CZM coupled with XFEM was developed and validated to capture cracking of shale with different bedding angles and large sedimentary particles. A feature of the model was that both the anisotropic damage along bedding directions (weak planes) and the MAXPS failure were considered to determine the crack propagation. The effect of sedimentary particles was also studied numerically and it showed a good consistency with experimental findings. Both the peak load and fracture toughness increased due to the crack deflections around sedimentary particles. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This study was financially supported by