Purpose
                  The effects of cerclage wiring in the open reduction and internal fixation of displaced associated anterior column and posterior hemi-transverse acetabular fractures were evaluated.
               
                  Methods
                  This is a retrospectively clinical study of such cases where the main surgical strategy was open reduction and internal fixation with cerclage wire and reconstruction plates. Data on 12 cases treated between 1992 and 2011 were collected. The mean follow-up period was 32 (12–132) months.
               
                  Results
                  Reduction with a fracture gap of less than 2mm without articular stepping and solid union was achieved in all 12 cases. Postoperative complication developed in one case of symptomatic arthritis. Excluding the case with symptomatic arthritis, the other cases had good to excellent final D’Aubigne and Postel functional results.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Cerclage wiring is very useful and effective in the reduction and fixation of displaced associated anterior column and posterior hemi-transverse acetabular fractures, and supplemental fixation with reconstruction plates and screws is necessary.Classified by Letournel classification, From 1992 to 2011, 12 consecutive cases of displaced associated anterior column and posterior hemi-transverse acetabular fractures were managed with open reduction and internal fixation with cerclage wiring and with reconstruction plates and screws in our institution. Eight of 12 patients were referred from other hospitals. The follow-up period was 32 (12–132) months. All the cases were followed, with complete data for final evaluation. They were 51 (20–84) years old at injury, eight males and four females, and five right-side and seven left-side injuries. All these cases were managed within 3 weeks of their injuries and were evaluated preoperatively with plain anteroposterior radiography, two Judet views and two- or three-dimensional computed tomography (CT). There is no open fracture or fractures with major vascular injury. No gross neural injury was noted before operation. All the associated injuries were managed as needed. Associated injury was noted in five patients (42%) including one head injury, two other skeletal injuries without surgical intervention and two Morel–Lavalle lesions. Morel–Lavalle skin lesions were managed with debridement and drainage during open reduction and internal fixation for the fracture. The indication for surgical intervention was displaced associated anterior column and posterior hemi-transverse acetabular fractures (>3 No postoperative radiotherapy was done. Capsulotomy and C-arm fluoroscopy were used to check the reduction and to avoid screw penetration in all cases. The stability of fixation was tested against free motion of the hip joint without any displacement after completion of the fixation. All the operations were done by the same surgeons (FY Chiu and YP Su). In 12 procedures performed, the mean intra-operative blood loss was 1400 (800–2500) No iatrogenic neural injury developed in this series. There was no subcutaneous haematoma, superficial wound infection or heterotopic ossifications. There was one (1/12, 8.4%) postoperative complication of symptomatic hip arthritis during the follow-up with the lowest D’Aubigne and Postel score (12). Thus far, no further surgical intervention was needed for the treatment of arthritis. Although the minimal follow-up period in this series is relatively short with small case number, our results show that open reduction and internal fixation with cerclage wiring and reconstruction plate and screws could be a very effective treatment for displaced associated anterior column and posterior hemi-transverse acetabular fractures without secondary congruity, and congruent reduction correlated well with good functional results. The classic ilioinguinal approach has advantages of low incidence of heterotopic ossification, infection, nerve injury or vascular complications in managing acetabular fractures. The disadvantage of cerclage wiring may include easy-broken, difficult to handle and kinking of the wire. The use of cerclage wiring in the reduction and fixation of both-column fractures of the acetabulum was emphasised in our institution with another study. Symptomatic arthritis occurred in one of 12 cases in our series. It is the only complication reported in this series. The patient still tolerates daily ambulation during follow-up but has fair functional result. There is no iatrogenic neural injury and wound complication, which should be resulted from meticulous soft tissue protection and management. Limitations of this study include a small case number and retrospective series. A longer follow-up and larger series are necessary. In this study, we report our experience treating 12 displaced associated anterior column and posterior hemi-transverse acetabular fractures with cerclage wiring and reconstruction plates. This technique can provide good results and is a good reference for orthopaedic surgeons. The most important prognostic factor in surgical treatment is the quality of reduction. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.