In flotation, bubbles are responsible for carrying the hydrophobic particles to the concentrate and bubble size is one of the most effective parameters in this process. The usual method to estimate the bubble size is measuring the diameter of rising bubbles, which requires special equipment and it is time consuming. In some cases, the bubble size can be estimated by mathematical methods. In this regard, parameters such as gas holdup, superficial gas velocity, superficial liquid velocity, and fluid density are required. A new model to estimate the bubble size in flotation was proposed in this paper. It was shown that the estimated values for bubble sizes obtained from this model have higher accuracy than those obtained using previously published models.Bubble size is one of the most important parameters of gas distribution in flotation process with a significant effect on the flotation efficiency [ The bubble diameter has a significant impact on the collision and attachment efficiency so that the collision efficiency decreases with increasing bubble diameter. However, other factors, such as particle diameter, turbulent dissipation rate, also affect the collision efficiency [ Various factors can affect the bubble diameter. For example decreasing the superficial gas velocity [ Considering the importance of bubble size in froth flotation, it has been the subject of research for a long time [ Bubble size can be also indirectly calculated by mathematical methods using a number of operating parameters [ In froth flotation, if the size of different bubbles are assumed to be uniform, the relative velocity of the gas and liquid slip in the opposite flow system (upstream and downstream liquid flow), U The limit velocity (U where ‘m’ is the function of the Reynolds number which can be calculated from Eqs. Reynolds number is a dimensionless quantity that shows the ratio of the inertial force to the viscous force in a fluid. The important application of this number is to determine the slow flow or fluctuation. The amount of Reynolds number for a single bubble is calculated from Eq. 5 [ If the bubble density is known, then the Reynolds number for a bubble swarm (Re As stated, different models have been developed by the researchers to determine the bubble diameter as outlined below: Dobby et al. [ In this method, a value is initially estimated for ‘m’. U Yianatos et al. [ In this method, an initial value for the bubble diameter is considered. Then a value for ‘m’ is considered and ‘U Xu & Finch [ In this model, the value of ‘m’ is initially considered as 2, and a value for the bubble diameter is assumed. Then ‘U Banisi & Finch [ The structures of the above mentioned models are different, but they have an acceptable error for calculation of the bubble diameter. In these models, the authors have assumed the bubble are uniformly distributed in the flotation cell. This assumption is not always valid in the practice, and therefore, the experimental error could increase. The aim of the current paper is proposing a new model with rather simpler and less complex calculation to obtain less error in the bubble diameter measurements. In the proposed model, an initial value for the bubble diameter and ‘m’ is assumed, and the limit velocity is estimated using Eq. One of the parameters in the proposed model is ‘m’ which is the function of the Reynolds number, as explained. The best value for ‘m’ needs to be identified to obtain the optimum results from the proposed model. Therefore, the bubble diameter for 23 different test conditions was calculated using the proposed model, and the data were compared to the experimental diameters as reported by Yianatos et al. [ Considering the above discussion, the structure of the proposed model is as follows: assuming an initial bubble diameter, calculating U calculating U calculating the bubble diameter using U The above method requires fewer calculations than previous methods and the bubble diameter can be obtained faster. In  For all the tests, ranging up to a bubble diameter of 1.5 mm,  Using the proposed model in this paper, the bubble diameter was calculated for various values of fluid density, cell diameter, gas stagnation, gas and liquid superficial velocity. It was found that increasing the superficial gas velocity causes an increase in the bubble diameter. Researchers have shown that bubble size increases upon increasing the aeration rate [ In this paper, a new model to calculate bubble size in froth flotation was proposed. The bubble diameter for 23 different test conditions was calculated by the proposed model. While the difference between the obtained coefficient of determination (R It should be highlighted that based on the current and previously published data, the current model is valid for column flotation. It needs to be further validated for other types of flotation cells.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: