A process for the recovery of magnesium (Mg) and potassium (K) from biotite was developed using sulfuric acid leaching and precipitation with ammonia. The optimum conditions for dissolution of biotite were found to be sulfuric acid solution of 2.5mol/L, sulfuric acid/biotite ratio of 4mL/g, leaching temperature of 90°C and leaching time of 2h. Under these conditions, the leaching efficiency of Mg and K was found to be 95.8% and 94.9% respectively. By using the solubility differences of corresponding elements, a two-step precipitation process was applied to remove Fe and Al and recovery of Mg. Subsequently, magnesium hydroxide was prepared by precipitation from the leach solution with ammonia as the precipitant. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) analyses showed that the high purity Mg(OH)2 existed in the form of flower-like spherical aggregation. Furthermore, the final solution of ammonium–potassium sulfate can be used for agricultural compound fertilizer.Magnesium hydroxide is a popular inorganic compound because of its wide range of applications. It plays an important role in many fields, such as flame retardant in polymers, special ceramics, fillers in bleaching agent and a raw material for preparation of magnesium oxide ( In many studies, magnesium could be recovered from tailings and waste residues. Potassium (K) is an essential element for plant nutrition and potassium salts are mainly produced by water soluble potassium resources. However, China only possesses 210 million tons of the global potash reserves which is totally 6 billion tons around the world ( In this context, some efforts have been made to recover potassium for obtaining soluble K from K-feldspar and biotite. Earlier in 1997, Varadachari developed a process for the production of potassium chloride from biotite. The kinetics of reaction of biotite with HCl was revealed that leaching of K Biotite (K(Mg,Fe) In this paper, an innovative process to recover magnesium and potassium from the Qinghai biotite is proposed, which is suitable to deal with magnesium-rich biotite. It aims to optimize the conditions for magnesium and potassium recovery from biotite by leaching with sulfuric acid solution and to determine factors affecting its leaching efficiency. Various process parameters like the concentration of sulfuric acid, leaching time and temperature are investigated in terms of metal leaching efficiency. Then, a two-step precipitation process was applied to prepare Mg(OH) The biotite mineral sample, which was produced from a beneficiation of phosphate ore, was from Shangzhuang county of Qinghai province (China). Sulfuric acid and ammonia used were of analytical reagent grade and all the solutions with specified concentrations were prepared with distilled water. A planetary ball mill with a rotation speed of 200 The flowchart for Mg and K recovery from biotite by acid leaching and alkali precipitation is shown in X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the biotite powder and leached residues were recorded with a Rigaku D diffractometer operating in Bragg–Brentano geometry with CuKα radiation (40 XRD pattern of biotite mineral powder is given in According to the results ( The mole fraction of the end-member components in the biotite powder was: phlogopite (phl), 0.611; annite (ann), 0.133; eastonite (east), 0.095; Ti-biotite (tbi), 0.067; Fe The leaching experiments were investigated to determine the optimum leaching efficiency from the biotite. Theoretically, the leaching reactions of biotite with H  The effect of acid concentrations on the leaching of Mg and K from the biotite was examined using sulfuric acid-to-biotite ratio of 4  It can be seen in The chemical reactions for metal ions with ammonia are as follows: The concentrations of metal ions (Mg where C  Mg(OH) After Mg(OH) An innovative process for recovery of magnesium hydroxide as well as ammonium–potassium sulfate from a magnesium-rich biotite was developed by sulfuric acid leaching and alkali precipitation with ammonia. The experimental results showed that the H The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of