The flotation of coarse in particular partially liberated particles has attracted both industry and research interests in recent years as it can bring several benefits to existing operations, including the decrease in grinding energy and media consumption, the increase in plant throughput, and environmental benefits. The bubble-particle detachment is critical to this flotation process. Here, we have investigated the physics underlying the bubble-particle detachment and discovered a new paradigm, i.e., the bubble and particle do not detach at the three-phase gas-liquid-solid contact (TPC) line between the bubble and the particle, which contradicts the conventional consideration in the available theories. Our high-speed video movies show that the bubble-particle detachment does take place at a capillary neck of the air-water interface near the solid surface. The detachment always leaves a tiny residual volume of gas on the solid surface. Our experiments also show that the detachment interaction does not simply follow the slip mode of the TPC motion but rather a combined slip-stick mode of the TPC line relaxation. We rationalize our observations by considering the contact angle hysteresis, which always exists on the real particle surfaces having morphological roughness and chemical heterogeneity. The new evidence challenges the existing theories about the bubble-particle detachment interaction in flotation and urges further investigations to overcome the inconsistent predictions.Flotation is a key separation process that has been used in the mining industry for over a century and continues to be an essential technology for maintaining production efficiencies as ore quality declines ( Generally, only those particles that adhere strongly to air bubbles are lifted to the froth surface and become floated. The bubble-particle adhesion and detachment can be analysed based on a classical geometry of the bubble-particle aggregate as depicted in The bubble-particle aggregation is supported by many forces including the capillary force, which is of paramount importance. The force is proportional to the water-air surface tension, A fuller analysis by considering the bubble radius, Eq. The function The contact angle must be independent of α, i.e., the TPC position on the particle surface. Meeting these two key conditions in practice can be a big challenge as the physics of the wetting and dewetting processes and the relaxation of the TPC lines on real solid surfaces significantly deviates from the mathematics. The contact angle is known to be a multiple-value variable, ranging from the receding contact angle (the minimum value) to the advancing contact angle (the maximum value) on morphologically and chemically heterogeneous solid surfaces ( Here, we have conducted special experiments and provide experimental results and evidence obtained by high-speed video microscopy to address the key fundamental question about the actual bubble-particle detachment. A new paradigm has emerged, showing that the bubble-particle detachment does not occur at bubble-particle contact points as traditionally theorised. The detachment happens at the capillary neck of the air-water interface near the solid surface. We argue that the available models while being mathematically valid, appear to be deficient for capturing the physics of the bubble-particle detachment interaction. Further investigations to overcome the deficiencies are urgently needed.  Bubble-surface detachment experiments ( Bubble-particle detachment experiments ( High-speed videos were processed using a built-in function in the camera software to generate sequential images. Then, we used a MATLAB code developed by us to analyse these images for quantitative analysis. The code read the sequential images as inputs and produced numerical data as outputs. The program digitalised the images and detected the interfaces thereby constructing bubble profiles. Thousands of time-dependent bubble profiles were constructed for a single experiment. Since bubble volumes were accurately known, we used the axisymmetry of the bubble at the beginning (   Based on the numerical data, we calculated the radius of TPC line (R In this section, we study the detachment of an air bubble from a spherical particle (hydrophobized silica bead with a diameter of 0.53 mm). As shown in In the Introduction, we have raised two fundamental questions. The first question is whether the supporting force, The second question is concerned with what can be an alternative modelling approach if the conventional models become invalidated. We have shown experimentally that the bubble-particle (or bubble-solid surface) detachment does not happen at the TPC line on the solid surface. Rather, the detachment happens through rupturing a capillary neck of the air-water interface near the solid surface ( A further point worth discussing is that the existence of a residual (new) bubble left-over on the solid surface can have broad implications. For example, after detaching from a bubble, a particle with a residual air volume left-over on its surface can have different properties for its collision and attachment interactions with another bubble. The subsequent attachment between this particle and another bubble would differ from the attachment of a pristine particle due to the effects of the pre-existing small bubble on its surface: The residual air can directly interact with the big bubble and facilitates the attachment by the strong van der Waals attraction between two gas phases. Likewise, considering cavitation flotation as another example, the presence of the residual bubble on the particle would not need the nucleation stage for the bubble formation by nucleation. This residual particle would grow steadily into a mature bubble without requiring the nucleation stage. Ultimately, our present findings indicate that the available models, while being mathematically valid, might not correctly capture the real physical mechanism of bubble-particle detachment interaction. Therefore, further investigations and reconsiderations of bubble-particle detachment interaction are needed to resolve the deficiencies. We have shown a new paradigm of bubble-particle detachment interaction. Three novel findings have been presented in this paper. Firstly, the motion of the three-phase contact (TPC) line during bubble-particle detachment interaction does not simply follow a continuous slip mode as conventionally assumed. Instead, it follows a combined slip-stick mode. Secondly, the bubble detaching the solid surface (or the particle) through forming and subsequently rupturing a capillary neck at the air-water interface. Therefore, thirdly, bubble-particle detachment does not take place at the particle surface as widely considered, rather at a capillary neck at air-water interface near the particle surface. In the light of present findings, we challenge the available theories of bubble-particle detachment interaction by pointing out their critical shortcomings. Finally, we urge further investigations and reconsiderations of bubble-particle detachment interaction theories to overcome those inconsistent predictions. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the