The motion of a red blood cell suspended in blood plasma in a two-beam plane interference field was studied experimentally. A cw Argon Ion laser was used. A model is proposed to describe the observed motion. The model is based on a balance between the optical gradient force and the drag force, and yields the location of the cell as a function of time, starting from a stationary position at an arbitrary distance from a dark fringe until becoming trapped at the center of the closest bright fringe. It is suggested that the discrepancy between the predictions of the model and the observed motion is attributable to the influence of the wall close to which the cell flows.Manipulation and trapping of microscopic dielectric particles in a non-uniform light field is now a common tool with applications in physics, chemistry and biology In the present work we studied disaggregated human red blood cells (RBCs) moving in blood plasma under the influence of the optical forces produced by a static sinusoidal light intensity field. RBCs have been the subject of active investigation by means of optical tweezers The proposed model assumes that the RBC behaves as an oblate spheroid subject to the scattering force due to photon momentum transfer and to the gradient force that arises from the electrical dipole induced on the cell. By neglecting inertial forces, the motive force was equated to the viscous drag force. Since in a plane interference field the scattering force is relatively weak and acts along the direction perpendicular to the gradient force, the model considers only the component of motion along the direction of the latter, thus leading to an expression for the position of the RBC as a function of time in terms of the interference fringe separation and of a characteristic speed that depends on the various optical parameters, on the fluid’s viscosity, and on the geometry of the particle. The experimental setup is depicted in Sample solutions were prepared in accordance with the procedure in The sample holder consisted of a glass plate to which two stripes of adhesive tape were attached. A drop of solution was placed in between the stripes and it was covered by a thin mica sheet that was held in place by interfacial tension. The mica and glass surfaces were vertical, and the gap between them was about 40 When the interfering laser beams were first shined on the sample (from the side of the mica) it was observed that the RBCs were oriented at random directions. After a few seconds, they became trapped at the centers of the bright fringes. One of the cells trapped at the brightest (central) fringe was then selected for analysis ( The centers of the (fixed) dark fringes, and thus their separation, were obtained by calculating their “gravity centers” in terms of pixel gray levels. To establish the RBC’s position relative to its nearest dark fringe, the pixels corresponding to the center of the cell in each image of the sequence were determined manually by means of crosshairs. Distance in pixels was converted to actual distance by dividing through a scale factor The intensity corresponding to any pixel in the sequence of images was determined in the following manner: (1) one of the beams was blocked and the power of the remaining beam was measured by means of a calibrated meter inserted just before lens L The optical forces acting on the particle comprise the scattering force due to photon momentum transfer and the gradient force due to the electrical dipole induced on the particle The general expression for the gradient force is RBCs are flexible biconcave circular disks flattened and depressed at the center. However, reasonable results were obtained elsewhere The position of the selected cell was recorded starting from the moment it was stationary near a dark fringe, close to the glass substrate onto which it had been pushed by the scattering force ( Motion of the particle is resisted by viscosity. At low Reynolds number, the drag force on an oblate spheroid of major radius If the particle is very small, inertial forces can be ignored. Its motion normal to the fringes can then be modeled by equating the gradient and drag forces. With For the cell’s major radius we used The polarizability The literature does not give the viscosity of plasma at 19.5 Inserting these values in Eq. The disagreement may be attributed to hydrodynamic effects due to the surface proximity. According to An experimental setup was designed to study the motion of a red blood cell in a two-beam plane interference field. If the sinusoidal intensity pattern thus established is strong enough, the cell is set in motion toward the closest bright fringe, where it becomes trapped. A simple analytical model was proposed to account for the observed motion. The model is based on ignoring the scattering force and on equating the gradient force to the drag force. It assumes that the cell behaves as a spheroidal particle and leads to a characteristic speed that depends on the various optical and geometrical parameters and on the fluid’s viscosity. It was found that the predicted value of the characteristic speed does not accord with the observed motion of the cell. The discrepancy may be attributed to the influence of the wall close to which the cell flows. The referee’s comments were helpful to improve on the clarity of the original manuscript. The authors would like to thank Dr. Howard Stone (Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences) for kindly answering our queries, Dr. Philippine Bronkhorst (University of Amsterdam) for sending us her Thesis, Dr. Diego Mezzano and Mr. Guillermo Jerez (Blood Bank of Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile) for assistance in preparing the samples, and Ms. Patricia Valdivia (Radiomedicine Laboratory of the Comisión Chilena de Energía Nuclear) for collaboration during the experiments. Finally, the supports of Research Grant 1060752 Fondecyt, Chile, and of Project ACT 26 Programa Bicentenario en Ciencia y Tecnología, Chile, are gratefully acknowledged.