The functional resins containing guanylthiourea, 1-methylimidazole, 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole, dipropylamine, 1,2-dimethylimidazole and 1-(3-aminopropyl)imidazole ligands were highly selective for the gold(I) and silver(I) from ammonia solution and they did not sorb ammine complexes of copper(II). The kinetics of gold(I) sorption on these resins was improved by immobilization of N,N-dimethylethanolamine ligands, which were responsible for increasing the hydrophilicity of the polymeric material. 1-Methylimidazole resins retained their capacity towards gold in five consecutive sorption/desorption cycles. All resins in cyanide form displayed high affinity towards gold(I) from ammoniacal solution (100g/L NH3·H2O, 5.00g/L (NH4)2SO4). The sorption degrees of gold were 99.5%.Gold is very rare and scattered precious metal, recovered from poor grade raw materials on an industrial scale by using hydrometallurgical methods, which are the only guarantee of the effective extraction of this metal. Hydrometallurgy of gold is mainly based on cyanide leaching of easily leachable ores in the presence of oxygen or air ( For the gold recovery from leaching solutions sorption on activated carbon (CIP method, called “carbon in pulp”) and sorption on polymeric resins (RIP method, called “resin in pulp”) are applied. Gold-selective resins have some distinct advantages over activated carbon for the recovery of gold. Resins have potentially higher loading capacities and higher loading rates are less likely to be poisoned by organics, and do not require thermal regeneration. The main disadvantage of polymeric resins is that they are more expensive than activated carbon ( Polymeric materials, ion-exchange resins, containing selective functional groups, and chelating resins are widely used in hydrometallurgy, especially for the separation of noble metal ions from various solutions ( The gold-selective resins (MINIX and AURIX) were developed by Mintek and were used for the recovery of gold from cyanide leaching solutions. MINIX is a strong-base resin, which contains tributylamine as the functional group, while AURIX is a medium-base resin. They are reported to be styrene-divinylbenzene resin beads functionalized with guanidine functional group ( The recent research on the selective metal ion removal has been widely carried out by using specific ligands in modified polymers in order to pre-concentrate the precious metal ions. Noble metals, especially gold, were loaded and recovered using: poly[4-vinylbenzyl(2-hydroxyethyl)sulfide] resin ( Our group had obtained novel resins containing different ligands: carboxyphosphonate, 1-methylpiperazine, ethylenediamine, dipropylamine, 1-methylimidazole, 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole, 1,2-dimethylimidazole, 1-(3-aminopropyl)imidazole and different amino ligands, which were used for the gold recovery from ammonium buffer solutions ( The aim of this work was to present the possibility of the gold sorption from a single and the multicomponent solutions on the vinylbenzyl chloride-divinylbenzyl copolymer functionalized with the aliphatic and aromatic amine. This paper was a continuation of our research that was focusing on preparing the new resins in order to improve gold sorption kinetics and increase the efficiency and selectivity of Au recovery. The chemicals were Sigma-Aldrich products. The solution of gold in ammonium buffer was prepared by dissolving metallic gold in aqua regia. The solution of [AuCl The initial gold concentrations were 398.0 and 431.4 The solutions of Au(NH The solutions of gold(I), silver(I) and copper(II) were prepared by dissolving a known amount of copper sulfate and silver nitrate in ammonium solution of gold. The polymeric resins used in this work were prepared from the starting material: vinylbenzyl chloride/divinylbenzene (VBC/DVB) copolymer. The polymeric support was obtained by typical suspension polymerization. The chloromethyl groups present in its structure served as a reactive place for the immobilization of a ligand. In an attempt to prepare resin with optimal properties, three staring materials with different morphologies ( Water regain was measured using centrifugation method in which about 1 Nitrogen content was determined using the Kjeldahl method after mineralization of the sample of resin (about 200 The chlorine content was measured by burning about 20 The sulfur content was measured by burning about 20 Quaternary ammonium group content was determined using Leikin method. Resin sample in chloride form was placed in chromatographic column. The resin bed was washed with 200 The sorption capacity of resins towards gold, silver and copper from ammonium buffer solutions was determined by contacting the resin samples with 10 For the kinetics of sorption, the identical samples of resin were shaken with 10 The distribution coefficient (K The selectivity coefficient (α FTIR spectra of resins in KBr pellets were recorded on a Perkin-Elmer System 2000 spectrophotometer. The 1-methylimidazole resins and 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole resins were prepared from the same three starting materials: vinylbenzyl chloride/divinylbenzene copolymers, which are characterized in experimental part ( In the case of resins with 1-methylimidazole groups, the results of immobilization of functional groups on polymeric material characterized by expanded gel, gel and a porous structure were comparable ( For 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole resin, the best result of the introduction of functional groups in the polymer matrix was obtained using as a carrier copolymer VBC/DVB (I), expanded gel type, containing 2% of crosslinking agent. Elemental analysis gave 7.35 Influence of the structure of the polymer carrier on the efficiency of gold(I) sorption from solution containing 21.57 For 1-methylimidazole resin of the expanded gel, gel and a porous structure, sorption of gold(I) was 15.5, 11.25 and 4.62 In the case of 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole resin with expanded gel, gel and a porous structure, gold sorption equaled 1.07, 4.67 and 3.78 For further research presented in this paper, polymeric resins with expanded gel structure were used. VBC/DVB (2% of DVB) copolymer was characterized by a low degree of crosslinking, which had a large influence on its swelling (swelling is a function of crosslinking density) and increased segmental mobility. These factors determined the easier access to the chloromethyl group as reactive sites for the immobilization of ligands. Moreover, this polymer allowed diffusion of ions in the polymer network, such as: gold(I) during the sorption of this metal on the resin. Synthesis and basic characteristics of these resins are presented in our work ( The kinetics of gold uptake is presented in Resins In the case of resin It seemed probable that during the sorption of Au(NH In relation to activated carbon, adsorption rate of gold complexes on this material was relatively fast during the initial stage (compared to the entire adsorption period). The maximum gold adsorption (10 The kinetics of gold(I) sorption on resin was improved by immobilization of two types of functional groups on polymeric carrier (VBC/DVB expanded gel type, containing 2% w/w of the crosslinker). One group was causing increase of material's hydrophilicity and made possible diffusion of ions inside polymeric matrix. The second group was responsible for efficiency and selectivity of sorption of selected ions. In order to improve sorption kinetics we synthesised resins with 1-methylimidazole and N,N-dimethylethanolamine ligands (resins The maximum gold sorption (8.23 and 9.66 Data from the kinetics of the gold(I) were recalculated as − In order to check the resin's stability, 5 In order to explain better gold sorption on resin In spectrum 1b, appearance of the two strong valence bands at 2143 and 2028 The dicyanoaurate(I) ion, Au(CN) For further study three new resins: dipropylamine resin ( It could be concluded from these studies that a selective sorption of gold(I) and silver(I) on resins from solution containing copper(II), made these polymeric materials potentially useful in the recovery of Au(I) and Ag(I) from various sources such as sulfidic and carbonaceous ores and jewellery scraps. So far, the gold sorption from ammoniacal solutions by polymeric materials in the cyanide form has not yet been used or described in the open literature. The polymeric resins ( To check if the presence of cyanide anions, CN The results of sorption from multicomponent solutions (Au    The values of stability constants of complexes of gold, silver and copper confirmed the formation of cyanide complexes of these metals, which were more stable than ammine complexes. Guanylthiourea resin (  The best results of the introduction of functional groups into the polymer matrix were obtained using vinylbenzyl chloride/divinylbenzene (VBC/DVB) copolymer, expanded gel type, containing 2% of crosslinking agent. The kinetics of gold(I) sorption from ammonium buffer on 1-methylimidazole resin was improved by immobilization of N,N-dimethylethanolamine ligands, which increased the hydrophilicity of the polymeric material. Resin with 1-methylimidazole ligands retained their capacity towards gold in five consecutive sorption/desorption cycles. Resins in chloride form were useful for sorption of Au(NH Polymeric resins in cyanide form displayed high affinity towards gold(I) from ammoniacal solution (100 For 1,2-dimethylimidazole resin and 1-(3-aminopropyl)imidazole resin in cyanide form, selective in relation to gold uptake over silver and copper was extremely high. The work was financed by a statutory activity subsidy from the