Pentlandite [(Ni,Fe)9S8] ore is the largest source of nickel as sulfide in the world. As-mined nickel sulfide ores typically contain 3%-8% pentlandite (1%-3% Ni), remainder being chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite Fe8S9, and gangue rock. These ores are too dilute in nickel for direct smelting. They would require too much energy and furnace capacity. They are, therefore, always made into nickel-enriched (12%-20% Ni) concentrate, mainly by froth flotation, which is described in Chapter 15. Efficient isolation of the pentlandite in the ore into nickel-enriched concentrate requires that the pentlandite grains be liberated, that is, separated from pyrrhotite and rock grains. This is accomplished by crushing and grinding the ore to a particle size of approximately 50-100 μm. The pentlandite in this ground ore is then concentrated using froth flotation. Gyratory crushers and rotating grinding mills are used, usually with an automatic particle size control system. The first step in extracting nickel and cobalt from sulfide ores is crushing and grinding. As shown in The objective of this chapter is to describe the crushing and grinding of sulfide ores. Nickel sulfide ores are always ground and concentrated, as shown in smelting 1%–3% Ni ore is expensive, because it requires excessive amounts of energy and furnace capacity per tonne of product nickel; and, technology for the production of sulfide concentrates, particularly flotation technology, is inexpensive and relatively efficient. Crushing and grinding (or comminution) prepares ores for concentrate production by liberating the pentlandite grains from the surrounding rock and pyrrhotite grains. A schematic diagram of the process flowsheet is shown Industrial crushing and grinding data are given in The size of pieces of blasted ore is mostly smaller than 0.5 There is an optimum particle size for flotation. The effect of grind size on loss of pentlandite to the flotation tailings for a particular ore is shown in There are two reasons for this optimum: too large a grind size leaves some pentlandite grains combined with or hidden in pyrrhotite and rock grains, preventing them from floating; and, too fine a grind size causes rising bubbles to push very tiny particles aside, avoiding contact. In addition, very fine pyrrhotite and rock particles may agglomerate with pentlandite particles, preventing them from floating. Comminution is performed in the following three sequential steps: breaking of crushing of the broken ore by compression in eccentric crushers (refer to wet grinding of the crushed ore in rotating mills where abrasion, impact and compression all contribute to breaking the ore (refer to Separate crushing and grinding steps are necessary because it is not possible to break ore that is as large as 0.5 Blasting entails drilling holes in mine walls or benches, filling the holes with chemical explosive and exploding out fragments of rock. The explosions cause cracks to propagate through the rock, releasing multiple fragments of rock. Primary crushing can be done in the mine. This permits easy hoisting of ore out of underground mines. It also permits belt conveying of ore out of open pit mines and shallow underground mines. The crushed ore is stored in a small coarse-ore stockpile. It is transferred from the stockpile by conveyor to the grinding mills. The stockpile permits steady, controlled flow of ore into the concentrator. The ore from the crushing circuit is fed to the grinding circuit. The purpose of grinding is to produce particles that are ‘liberated’, that is, small enough to consist mostly of one mineral, for example, pentlandite, pyrrhotite or gangue rock. The liberated particles can then be separated by flotation into two streams: a nickel-rich concentrate consisting of pentlandite; and, a nickel-lean waste stream, consisting of pyrrhotite and gangue rock. Grinding is done wet. The ore slurry is composed of about 70% solids and 30% water. The most common grinding mills are either (a) semi-autogenous and autogenous mills; or, (b) ball mills. A semi-autogenous mill is shown in Semi-autogenous and autogenous mills have the advantage that they accept a wide range of feed sizes. Ball mills have the advantage that they deliver finely ground product to flotation. The objective of grinding is to produce ore particles that are small enough for efficient pentlandite flotation, but not excessively small. Size control is universally done with hydrocyclones ( The hydrocyclone makes use of the principle that, under a force field, large particles in an ore–water slurry tend to move faster than small particles. This principle is put into practice by pumping product slurry from the grinding mill into hydrocyclones at high speed, for example, at 5–10 The centrifugal force in the hydrocyclone is such that (i) large particles move to the wall, where they are dragged out by water flow along the wall and through the apex and (ii) the path of small particles is hindered by larger particles so that they are forced out through the vortex finder. The principal parameter for the control of particle size is the water content of the incoming slurry, which is approximately 50% H Grinding circuits are extensively instrumented and closely controlled. The objectives of the controls are to (i) produce ore particles that are correctly sized for efficient pentlandite flotation; and, (ii) produce these particles with minimum energy consumption. The most common strategy is to (i) measure the cyclone overflow using an on-stream particle size analyzer to ensure that the product is always correctly A typical control system is shown in The particle size loop, shown in The second loop shown in If, for example, slurry level sensor (L) detects that the slurry level is rising (due to tougher If, the level in the sump falls, the control system automatically increases feed rate of ore until the sump level is maintained at its set point. The primary development in recent years in the comminution of pentlandite ores has been almost universal adoption of semi-autogenous grinding. This technique has proven to be an economic, efficient method of primary grinding. Other developments have been adoption of high-pressure grinding rolls, stirred grinding mills and ceramic media grinding, which are used in platinum-group metal concentrators. High-pressure grinding rolls increase crushing An important new tool for maximizing pentlandite recovery is quantitative scanning electron microscopy. This technique indicates the makeup of every particle in a sample. It shows liberated, partially liberated and un-liberated pentlandite grains for any assemblage of ground ore. The metallurgist can then determine whether more or less grinding will improve pentlandite recovery. Quantitative scanning electron microscopy is used extensively in the platinum extraction industry and is finding increasing use in nickel extraction ( Pentlandite [(Ni,Fe) As-mined nickel sulfide ores typically contain 3%–8% pentlandite (1%–3% Ni), remainder being chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite Fe Efficient isolation of the pentlandite in the ore into nickel-enriched concentrate requires that the pentlandite grains be liberated, that is, separated from pyrrhotite and rock grains. This is accomplished by crushing and grinding the ore to a particle size of approximately 50–100