Ion exchange resins have found increasing application in the metallurgical sector over the last few decades through resin-in-column (RIC) technology. These processes are usually simulated by using some form of resistance model. Furthermore, of these, a dual resistance approach incorporating both film and pore-wall diffusion is the most popular and widely used technique for simulations involving ion exchange and adsorption processes. Film mass transfer is influenced by external factors including liquid turbulence and liquid viscosity that could result in a change in this parameter when evaluated in batch and column configurations. In this study it is postulated that, provided the resin particles are in complete suspension or fully fluidized, it will be at its terminal settling velocity relative to the fluid. Under these conditions film mass transport should be similar in batch and RIC operations. It has been shown that this is indeed the case with mass transport parameters evaluated in batch configuration applied with success to fluidized RIC operations.concentration (mg/l) pore-wall diffusivity (m exchanger diameter (m) film transfer parameter (m/s) mass (kg) loading (mg/ml) time (s) solution volume (m density (kg/m macropore solid/liquid interface The most popular simulation technique for sorption processes is resistance modelling, incorporating both film mass transfer and intraparticle diffusion. By making the relevant assumptions coupled to the notion that pore liquid diffusion is negligible and incorporating a quadratic driving force for pore-wall diffusion the following is obtained ( Film mass transfer parameters in column configurations are usually estimated from one of a number of semi-empirical correlations with The design phase for RIC operations involves batch experimentation to identify suitable exchangers, followed by extensive pilot plant testing before a final design is considered. This pilot plant phase is time consuming and adds substantially to the overall cost. Hence, a method whereby mass transfer parameters can be accurately estimated from inexpensive batch experimentation will not only contribute to the timeous completion of the initial design phase but will also reduce the cost of the initial investigation. This study investigates the use of mass and equilibrium parameters as obtained in batch configuration in fluidized RIC operations. Assumptions Ion exchange kinetics is film transport controlled as a result of the macro porous structure of the resin used. Equilibrium conditions for species for which the resin is selective may be described by a single component isotherm. Equilibrium conditions for species for which the resin is not selective may be described by a two-component isotherm, where the competing effect of the selective species is included. Reversible ion exchange is fully described by equilibrium conditions at the solid/liquid interface. Film transport kinetics in a fluidized column is similar to that experienced in a batch configuration, provided the resin particles are in complete suspension, resulting in the resin particles moving at their terminal settling velocity relative to the fluid. The notion that equilibrium conditions for the species for which the resin is selective may be described by a single component isotherm is not novel and has been reported previously ( Ion exchange kinetics is directly affected by the mass transfer coefficient ( In order to estimate mass transfer and equilibrium parameters, an Excel “Solver” approach was followed. Kinetics and equilibrium is evaluated over the entire sorption profile so as to obtain the best possible description of the system. As a result of an entire profile evaluation, only one batch experiment is required in order to obtain meaningful mass and equilibrium parameters. “Solver”, applying a Newtonian search algorithm with tangential estimates and forward derivatives, coupled to a sum of square of errors criteria was used to obtain the mass transfer and equilibrium parameters required to describe the sorption system. The simulation proceeds by assuming equilibrium conditions at the solid/liquid interface as described by a single component The column simulation involves the segmentation of the RIC operation into 100 stages. These stages are assumed to operate as perfectly mixed batch reactors, hence similar to a plug flow reactor. The large number of stages selected insures a small liquid retention time per stage and eliminates the need for using a numerical technique. Duolite C467, an industrial copper selective chelating macroporous resin with a diameter of approximately 0.7 mm, was used in all the experiments conducted. The resin was treated with a 7% NaOH solution to convert the resin to the sodium form so as to minimize the effect of pH changes during experimentation. Cu and Co sulphate of an analytical grade was used in all experiments. The batch experiment was conducted in a 1 l unbaffled reactor, agitation provided by a flat blade impeller at 200 rpm. The stirring speed was sufficient to keep the 10 ml resin particles in suspension without causing excessive breakage. RIC experimentation was conducted in a laboratory scale column of diameter 31 mm using an up-flow configuration. The dry packing height was 364 mm. The flow rate was between 107 and 143 ml/min which was sufficient for the bed to be fully fluidized. Sorption kinetics was determined by monitoring the solution decay by an atomic absorption spectrophotometer, the loading on the resin being determined by mass balance. The simulated result for the batch experiment is shown in From the data obtained it is clear that profound reversibility is present. Initially, Co shows positive mass transfer in the direction of the surface of the resin when a sufficient number of Na sites are available on the resin surface. However, as the number of available Na exchange sites decreases, Cu replaces Co on the resin surface at a faster rate than Co sorption takes place. Of importance is the fact that equilibrium conditions at the solid/liquid interface describes this phenomenon accurately. Hence, it is not required to add competitive mass transfer parameters to the simulation. Also, the assumption of film transport controlled mass transfer is realistic for this macroporous resin. The following mass transfer and equilibrium parameters were obtained using the search algorithm described above: The parameters obtained from the batch experiment were used directly for the RIC simulation. The results are graphically represented in A remarkable correlation between the actual and simulated data is obtained. Apart from The data points illustrated in It has been shown that a simple diffusion model where film mass transport control is the rate limiting factor, can be used to describe sorption kinetics when a macroporous resin is contacted with an electrolyte solution. Furthermore, reversible ion exchange can be explained by an equilibrium isotherm and it is not required to include competing mass transfer parameters. Finally, it has been shown that mass transfer kinetics for fluidized columns can be obtained from a batch experiment. It is speculated that this is the result of the resin particles being in complete suspension, resulting in the exchanger moving at its terminal settling velocity relative to the fluid. The authors would like to thank the NRF of South Africa for their financial contribution to the project and staff at MINTEK for their valuable technical input.