This paper describes a novel hydrothermal method for preparing potassium sulfate and zeolite NaA from K-feldspar ore. The 3-step process involves the hydrothermal decomposition of K-feldspar, the preparation of potassium sulfate from kalsilite, and the synthesis of zeolite NaA from alumina-silica residue. K-feldspar transformed into kalsilite in a KOH solution at 280°C. K2O was extracted from kalsilite at a rate of 95.73% by using H2SO4 (5.5wt.%) and kalsilite at a mass ratio of 6.26 and a temperature of 60°C for 4h. Subsequently, agricultural-grade potassium sulfate was crystallized by direct evaporation of the resulting K2SO4 solution. The CEC value of zeolite NaA produced from the alumina-silica residue was 168mgCaO/g, making it a suitable substitute for conventional phosphatic washing builders. The method is a simple, clean and energy-efficient method for the utilization of K-feldspar ores.Potassium sulfate is a type of high-quality potash fertilizer, especially suitable for tobacco, tea, citrus, watermelon, grapes and other economic crops which are sensitive to chlorine. Nowadays, most of the world's K In the early 20th century, scientists began to explore the preparation of potassium from K-feldspar. Techniques of preparing potassium sulfate from K-feldspar are important today, and are used in processes such as gypsum-limestone sintering ( Zeolite NaA is a porous aluminosilicate compound with numerous excellent properties, such as non-toxicity, high porosity, good thermal stability, high Ca In this study, a novel method of comprehensive utilization of K-feldspar is proposed. It is comprised of three processes: 1) hydrothermal decomposition of K-feldspar, 2) preparation of potassium sulfate from kalsilite, 3) synthesis zeolite NaA from alumina-silica residue. The effects of reaction conditions on these three processes are investigated, and the overall approach is evaluated. The K-feldspar ore (LN-09) used in this work was collected from Luonan, the Qingling Mountain, China. The ore was crushed and ground to powder with most particles smaller than 75 K-feldspar powder was dissolved in KOH solution via hydrothermal treatment ( The K In acidic media, kalsilite is easily soluble, allowing potassium and aluminum ions to dissolve, whereas silica exists as cloud-shaped silica gels ( The alumina-silica residue was reacted with NaOH solution to synthesize zeolite NaA according to Eq. The processing flowchart for preparation of potassium sulfate and zeolite NaA from K-feldspar powder by hydrothermal process is shown in The chemical compositions of the solid samples were determined by wet chemical analysis. The solid samples were first digested. Approximately 0.5 According to Eq. The dissolution rate of SiO The XRD patterns of solid products obtained at various temperatures are shown in The chemical analysis result of the kalsilite (KA-01) obtained at 280 The H The extraction rates of K The XRD patterns of alumina-silica residue at different H/K are shown in The extraction rates of K The extraction rates of K The above experiments led to the following optimum reaction conditions for extracting K The main components of the alumina-silica residue (AS-01) were silica and alumina, with small amounts of other oxides including Fe In order to improve the whiteness of zeolite NaA product, iron in the alumina-silica residue needed to be removed before synthesis experiment. The alumina-silica residue was pretreated first with a NaClO solution and then with a Na Generally, for synthesizing zeolite NaA, the SiO  Four samples of 5 Morphological analysis of zeolite NaA samples (synthesized in 3 The calcium exchange capacity (CEC) of zeolite NaA is indicative of its water softening ability, where the sodium ions are replaced by the calcium ions ( In the gypsum-limestone sintering process, the mole ratio of K-feldspar, gypsum and limestone was 1:1:20 ~ 14, and the reactants were calcined at 1050 The preparation of potassium sulfate and zeolite NaA from K-feldspar by a hydrothermal process was explored. K-feldspar powder was transformed into kalsilite by dislodging 2/3 SiO This work was supported by the