Our planet faces formidable sustainability challenges with on the one side the frightening climatic consequences of global warming from the combustion of fossil fuels and on the other side the world's need for energy which will at least double within the next 20 Present LiBs are using Li-based inorganic compounds (e.g., LiCoO Such evolutions can occasionally trigger severe concerns about the global reserve of lithium as dramatically expressed in several newspapers a few years ago. Although some fears regarding Li-shortage were too alarmist, they had the advantage to raise the community's awareness of the need for setting studies toward the development of models to forecast the worldwide Li reserves under various scenarios, questioning once for The field of LiB being a lucrative domain because of their foreseen applications in large-volume markets, venture capitalists like to paint a frightening scenario in which Li could become as precious as gold for the years to come, with the Andean South American countries becoming soon the “new Middle East.” Aside from these business objectives, what is really the truth? Are the Li reserves both limited and geographically concentrated in a few risky countries? Such questions will find an answer in Recycling strategies being dependent upon whether Li is part of the electrode material or of the electrolyte, it is important to recall the fundamentals of LiBs so that the reader can grab the scientific background, including physicochemical and electrochemical aspects. This is nicely done in this book as the Venture capitalists should not be totally blamed since painting catastrophic situations frequently raises the awareness of scientists and push them to find alternative solutions. Let us simply recall that it was the 1972 oil crisis which pushed scientists to deviate from high-temperature synthesis processes and to discover the alternative and less-consuming “Chimie douce” approach, which is now used worldwide. Equally, five years ago due to fears of Li-shortage, chemists/electrochemists searched for alternative solutions to LIB systems. New technologies have emerged such as the use of organic The importance of sustainable development has rekindled interests for LCA studies. While LCA is becoming very fashionable these days, most people do not really appreciate the complexity of such analysis which considers all the steps pertaining to the full-chain process involved in going from material production to its consumption and its recycling. LCA analyses for batteries are worrisome as they indicate, for instance, that 380 Wandering through these 8 chapters, the reader will learn and realize that by combining future brine exploitation with an efficient Li-recycling process involving the collect of battery elements as urban mines and the development of novel sustainable chemical recovery processes, the wide deployment of EVs will not put the Li reserves at risk for many centuries. In conclusion, we should acknowledge the authors to bring forward all the aspects dealing with the Li recovery chemistry, the sustainability of Li-based batteries, and their recycling via diverse chemical processes in a single and well-written book, which is timely, as recycling has become a burning hot topic nowadays. No doubt that this book will benefit the battery community, but also the battery users and more so numerous students and scientists who want to launch and/or switch their research endeavors toward the recycling aspects of energy-related materials for the years to come. Let us hope that it will also help, by showing the multifaceted aspects of the chemical recovery processes, to revitalize the image of “recycling chemistry,” too frequently associated with an old and boring chemistry. Lastly, owing to the foreseen importance of recycling linked to today's energetic transition, it has become imperative for our university/engineering institutions to launch masters devoted to the recycling problematic. This book written in a concise manner could serve as a bible to support such new courses.