In this work, the effect of chain length of xanthate on the flotation performance of Jinchuan nickel ore was studied by different pre-flotation conditioning methods. Results showed that the presence of serpentine minerals in the ore interferes with the flotation performance of pentlandite. Two methods were used to eliminate the adverse effect of serpentine slimes and improve pentlandite flotation performance. Compared with the addition of Calgon, High Intensity Conditioning (HIC) could increase pentlandite flotation recovery significantly. Three kinds of xanthate with different chain length were used as collectors. When HIC is used at the conditioning stage, the longer the hydrocarbon chain of xanthate, the lower the Ni recovery, while when Calgon is used at the conditioning stage, the longer the hydrocarbon chain of xanthate, the better the pentlandite flotation performance.Jinchuan Mining Corporation first began producing nickel at Jinchuan in Gansu province in 1964. Today the Jinchuan division consists of three mines, four concentrators, a smelter and a refinery all located within Jinchuan city. These concentrators all process sulphide ores using froth flotation to produce a concentrate averaging 8.8% Ni, 4.8% Cu, and 7.8% MgO. This concentrate is then further upgraded at the Nickel Smelter by burning off excess sulphur and removing the iron and MgO as a slag phase to produce a nickel sulphide rich matte. It is critical that MgO levels in concentrate are controlled to less than 7% MgO to avoid processing problems occurring in the flash furnace due to the adverse impact MgO has on the melt chemistry ( Pentlandite flotation in Jinchuan has historically been difficult due to the presence of large amounts of serpentine minerals. Serpentine may report to flotation concentration via composite particles or through attachment to the valuable minerals as “slime coatings” ( Xanthate is one of the most commonly used collectors for the flotation of sulphide minerals. The length of the hydrocarbon chain of xanthate will influence its effect on mineral flotation ( The ore sample used in this study is of high nickel grade (1.35%). Approximately 96% of the nickel in the ore is in the form of pentlandite and may be recovered by true flotation. The remaining 4% of nickel is distributed in non-sulphide minerals, which may only be recovered by the entrainment mechanism or as composites with pentlandite. The ore contains 37% w/w MgO, distributed mainly in serpentine (46% w/w) and olivine (19% w/w), as determined by X-ray diffraction. Three kinds of xanthate, potassium butyl xanthate (PBX); potassium hexyl xanthate (PHX); potassium octyl xanthate (POX), were used as collector and MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol) was used as frother. Other inorganic chemicals such as Calgon and sodium carbonate were AR grade. Ore samples were crushed to −2 The standard flotation tests were performed in a XFD-63 flotation cell (self aeration) whose volume for flotation was 1.5 The HIC studies were carried out similarly to the STD, with the exception that the stage of the conditioning of the pulp with the reagents (collectors and frother), was substituted for a highly turbulent stage. The HIC was carried out in the same flotation machine, with an impeller speed of 2800 Flotation results in Three kinds of xanthate with different hydrocarbon chain lengths were added during the conditioning stage as collector. The results in Conditioning, refers to the initial suspension and agitation stage (in preparation for the flotation process) for the finely-ground minerals in water with reagents. When conditioning speed exceeds some critical value, the separation forces will be bigger than the adhesion forces between pentlandite surfaces and slimes particles, thus the slimes will be removed from pentlandite surface ( Addition of a negatively charged reagent, such as Calgon, has been found to disperse fine serpentine particles from the pentlandite surface and therefore improve Ni recovery. In the presence of Calgon, the zeta potential of serpentine changed as a function of the dissolution of magnesium from the surface of serpentine by Calgon ( The nickel grade versus recovery curves are shown in In Jinchuan nickel ore, the fine serpentine particles interfere with the flotation performance of sulphide. The current study indicates that both methods, the addition of Calgon and HIC, can improve pentlandite flotation performance. However, xanthates with different hydrocarbon chain lengths have a different effect on pentlandite flotation when different conditioning methods were used to eliminate the adverse effect of serpentine on pentlandite flotation. HIC cannot remove fine serpentine completely and the xanthate with shortest hydrocarbon chain is more suitable in this case. However, the addition of Calgon can disperse the pulp and xanthate with longest hydrocarbon chain produces the best flotation performance. The authors acknowledge the support of the National Basic Research Program of China (2007CB613602) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51174229).