The aim of this investigation was to examine the effect of a jet-mill and spray-drying process on the physicochemical and aerodynamic dispersion properties of amiloride HCl particles. Micro-fine particles were prepared by a spiral air jet-mill Hosokawa 50 AS and Mini Spray-Dryer B-191. A 23-1 fractional factorial experimental design was implemented to screen three jet-mill process parameters. Possible changes in the physicochemical properties of the material due to spiral jet-milling were examined by the determination of the particle size distribution (PSD), powder true density, powder flowability, diffuse reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (DRIFTS) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The effect of different jet-milling parameters and the spray-drying process on the aerosol dispersion characteristics was examined with a cascade impactor with a preseparator using the Aerolizer® dry powder inhaler device (Novartis, Switzerland). The results show that small changes in the particle size within the 1 to 5μm range had an impact on the physicochemical and aerosol dispersion properties of jet-milled and spray-dried particles.angle of repose (°) 50th percentile geometric particle size (μm) particle tap density (g/cm particle bulk density (g/cm ratio of the aerodynamic particle size at the 84th percentile (μm) ratio of the aerodynamic particle size at the 16th percentile (μm) Inhalation of aerosols as a means of pulmonary drug delivery has been used for many years to deliver xenobiotics to the lungs for both systemic and local effects. The ability to deliver active substances directly to the site of action enables lower doses compared to other routes of administration with an equivalent therapeutic response and a lower systemic exposure When using a DPI, a failure to inhale deeply and forcibly at the start of the inhalation means that the drug particles generated are not sufficiently de-aggregated to enter the lungs and are simply deposited in the mouth and oro-pharynx where they have no clinical efficacy Particles with aerodynamic diameters of 1 to 5 The advantages of jet-milling include the absence of contamination due to an autogenous grinding mechanism, low wear rate, and small footprint, which leads to a reduction in the space requirements, low noise and the ability of grinding heat-sensitive materials The present study uses amiloride HCl as a model compound for drug-only powder formulations. Aerosolised amiloride has been shown to improve mucociliary clearance in patients with cystic fibrosis Amiloride hydrochloride (batches no. 3100/02/10), used as the model drug, was supplied by Sifavitor srl (Milano, Italy). Amiloride HCl is physically stable under normal storage conditions only in the dihydrate phase, and this is the commercially available form. To investigate pulmonary deposition of the jet-milled samples, amiloride HCl was jet-milled with a spiral air jet-mill Hosokawa 50 AS (Hosokawa Micron Ltd., Cheshire, England). The resulting particle size distributions were adjusted by varying the diameter of the injector nozzle for injectable air (0.8–0.9 Spray-dried particles were prepared from aqueous feed solutions using a Mini Spray-dryer B-191 (Buichi, Flawil, Switzerland). The atomising gas rate at which the spray-dryer was operated was set to 800 Particle size distributions were determined by a laser diffraction-based Malvern Mastersizer 2000 particle size analyser (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK). Particles were dispersed using a Scirocco feeder instrument (Scirocco 2000 dry powder feeder, Malvern Instruments) with 1 The d The true density of all jet-milled samples was measured using helium pycnometry (Quantachrome ultrapycnometer 1000, USA). The reported values are the average of three measurements. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were used to investigate any possible changes in the jet-milled amiloride HCl samples that may have occurred at the molecular level during the jet-milling processes. These spectra were recorded using a Shimadzu IR Prestige-21 Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan). The spectrophotometer was coupled with a horizontal Golden-Gate MKII single reflection ATR system (Specac, Kent, UK). The samples were analysed directly in the bulk form. The scanning range was 650–4000 The static powder flow was characterised using the angle of repose, apparent density, Carr's compressibility index (CI) and the Hausner ratio (HR), determined from the tapped (ρ The angle of repose was determined by measuring the height of the cone of powder and calculating the angle of repose (α) from the following equation: The apparent density was measured in a 100-ml glass graduated cylinder (ISOLAB Laborgeräte GmbH, Wertheim, Germany) using an automatic tapper (Erweka SVM, Erweka GmbH, Germany). The apparent volume was determined after 10, 500 and 1250 taps. The apparent density was reported after 1250 taps. The tapped and bulk densities were measured in a 100-ml glass graduated cylinder (ISOLAB Laborgeräte GmbH, Wertheim, Germany) using an automatic tapper (Erweka SVM, Erweka GmbH, Germany). The tapped density was determined after 400 taps. Low CI and HR values are an indication of better flow behaviour. Carr's index values of less than 25% and Hausner ratio values less than 1.25 indicate acceptable flow properties. Amiloride HCl was quantified by ultraviolet (UV) absorbance measured at a wavelength of 362 The aerodynamic particle size distribution was measured by a Spraytec® in line with an ACI (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK) non-viable cascade impactor consisting of eight stages together with a final filter operating at an airflow rate of 28.3 For the three measurements of each of the five samples, the statistical significance of the differences between the emitted dose, FPF, MMAD and GSD of amiloride HCl at the various stages of the ACI was determined by analysis of variance, using SPSS for Windows (Statistical Products and Service Solutions Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA). The absence of differences was chosen as the H The surface morphology was examined by a scanning electron microscope (Jeol JSM-6390LV, Jeol, Peabody, USA). The particles were covered with gold to perform these measurements. A 2 After the application of the 2 The results of the examined responses from the samples obtained according to the 2 Lower diameters of the injector nozzle for injectable air, lower diameters of the ring nozzle for grinding air, and lower air pressure for grinding all resulted in higher d Regarding the factor effects on the emitted dose of the aerosol dispersion as the response, which are shown in Jet-milled and spray-dried particles were produced with the d The true densities of unmilled and jet-milled amiloride HCl are presented in The main regions for identifying the amiloride HCl infrared spectrum were at 3250 and 3150 The angle of repose, apparent density, bulk and tapped densities, Carr's compressibility index and Hausner ratio values of the jet-milled amiloride HCl samples are listed in The cumulative particle volume (Cv) profiles as a measure of the cloud particle mass, as well as particle sizing information as a function of time, are shown in The obtained emitted doses express the drug mass exiting the device after inhalation. Significant differences were observed due to the d The results indicate that the emitted dose, as well as the geometric particle diameter, is influenced by the air pressure of grinding. The emitted dose was higher for a lower air pressure of grinding (4 Jet-milled particles (d The EDs of jet-milled samples (d The obtained fine-particle fraction corresponds to the percentage of the mass of drug particles that have an aerodynamic diameter of less than 5 The obtained mass median aerodynamic diameter of an aerosol presents the particle diameter that has 50% of the aerosol mass residing above and 50% of its mass below it. Significant differences were observed using the Aerolizer® (p This was not true for the larger MMADs, which ranged between 5 and 7 Significant differences (p To investigate the effect of the jet-mill and spray-drying process on the particle surface morphology, scanning electron microscopy was performed. The particle size distributions of the obtained samples were suitable for respiratory drug delivery. The d This work was supported by Project