Geological modeling is a useful tool for host rock reconstruction in volcanogenic massive sulfide (VMS) deposits. In this paper, we have proposed two rock type models for Nohkouhi copper deposit, which is a siliciclastic felsic volcanogenic massive sulfide in Central Iran zone. In the deposit, copper mineralization is hosted by different copper grade rocks consisting of Black shale and Rhyodacite. Moreover, in the Black shale, the copper grade distribution directly corresponds to the Rhyodacite. Geochemical factors of the rock types distinguished using ICA. Scores of the IC1 via Scores of the IC2 indicated the best discrimination between the Black shale and Rhyodacite. Our manually constructed class boundary provided a bivariate discriminant line that can be used to determine the rock types. Scores of the ICs are simulated using sequential Gaussian simulation (SGS). The discriminant line is used to classify each node of the grid to the rock type for each pair realization. Also, sequential indicator simulation (SIS) is applied to the Black shale and Rhyodacite on account of their wide range of geometries and assumed deterministic geological model.
                  In order to model the deposit, we have compared two methods comprising direct simulation of rock type (using sequential indicator simulation) and indirect simulation of rock type (using independent component analysis). The experimental results indicated that direct simulation, could be employed for both resource evaluation and knowledge of the geological model. Besides, the indirect simulation produces a model which cannot be used for resource evaluation stage; however, it is helpful with respect to the basic understanding of the geology of the deposit. Our two models showed 96% agreement with each other. Also, ICA chemically presented a key relations between Black shale and Rhyodacite.Geological modeling is an integrated multidisciplinary set of approaches typically identified by geology and statistics ( The most popular object-based algorithm is Boolean simulation ( Sequential indicator simulation (SIS) is in essence the same as the sequential Gaussian simulation (SGS), except that instead of simulating a Gaussian variable, an indicator variable or an indicator transform of a continuous variable is simulated ( Independent component analysis (ICA) is a type of analysis in the process of source signal separation introduced by ICA has been used in many different fields such as face recognition (   Geological modeling is a useful tool for reconstructing volcanogenic massive sulfide (VMS) deposits hosted in submarine volcanic settings ( The main aim of this paper is to apply independent component analysis to identifying and indirect simulating of rock types which can be very useful in geometallurgical issues in the Nohkouhi copper ore deposit, Kerman province, Iran. ICA is used for the drillhole data set in order to extract independent components to characterize various lithological units (Black shale and Rhyodacite). The two ICs obtained from the ICA indicate the best discrimination between the Black shale and Rhyodacite. Each independent component is simulated 100 times using sequential Gaussian simulation (SGS). 100 indirect rock type model obtained based on applying linear discriminant to 100 pair IC1 and IC2. Finally, indirect rock type model is calculated by most frequent occurrence. Also, sequential indicator simulation is applied to produce the model of rock types. The geological model is constructed by calculating the most frequent occurrence of each rock unit over the 30 realizations and used for validation of indirect model. Nohkouhi copper deposit is located in Central Iran zone and 40   The main host rock of Nohkouhi is Black shale. The volcanic host rock of Nohkouhi with porphyry fabric and composition of Rhyodacite that cuts sedimentary units at various times with carbonate and sericitization alteration. The non-mineralized unit is Sandstone in underlying Black shale ( In this study, we used 17 vertical and oriented exploration drill holes ( A summary of descriptive statistics is given in Based on descriptive statistics analysis of drill hole data, characteristic indexes were determined and are shown in In this section, algorithms of methods are explained. Independent component analysis introduced as a multivariate method and used to distinguish geochemical signature related to rock types in next section. Also, sequential Gaussian simulation is applied to independent component score. Linear discrimination transformed each pair realizations of IC1 and IC2 to indirect rock types. Sequential indicator simulation is applied to indicator variable and direct rock type modeling. Finally, models are compared to one another. Variogram model is an input for geostatistical simulation such as sequential Gaussian simulation and sequential indicator simulation to produce a 3D model. Consequently, variogram modeling plays an important role and the details often have a crucial impact on prediction. Also, the variogram is very important in the formation and behavior of the resulting 3D models. Independent component analysis (ICA) is applied to multivariate datasets to transform a set of mixed random signals into independent components ( where Give a set of observations of random variables Assume that they are generated as a linear mixture of independent components: Fast ICA defines a weight vector w. Using the learning rule, this vector is updated such that the projection 1. Choose an initial weight vector w (from random). 2. Use the formula 3. Normalize the resulting vector using 4. Repeat 2 and 3 until the algorithm is converged. Sequential Gaussian simulation is a widespread algorithm for the stochastic modeling of feature from different earth science disciplines ( 1. Define a stationary domain. 2. Declustering if data are in erratic grid and then draw the univariate Cumulative Distribution Function (cdf) of the domain. Indicator kriging can be used for declustering purposes and build a global cdf of the domain 3. Standard normalization of 4. Determine a random path containing all nodes of grid. At each node (u): a. Find adjacent data and previously simulated values using search ellipsoid, b. Determine the mean and variance of the conditional cdf of the random function c. Draw a simulated value from the estimated distribution based on Monte Carlo procedure 5. Add the simulated value to the data set. 6. Proceed to the next node, and loop until all nodes are simulated. 7. Back-transform the simulated normal values into the original unit ( In the case of SGS algorithm, the statistics (histogram/semi variogram model) reproduced over a number of realizations should be, on average, equal to the sample statistics ( Sequential indicator simulation is worthwhile tool for providing spatial models such as geologic models ( There is a vector of Also, every Based on K variogram models, the weights {λ In total, 559 samples taken into Black shale and Rhyodacite are available with the 11 variables. The results of loadings on ICs obtained by ICA and applied to transformed values are shown in Therefore, scatterplot is applied to identify intrinsic characteristics for samples in different regions of the IC1 versus IC2. Between 11 independent components IC1 via IC2 shows best discrimination between Black shale and Rhyodacite. One can see a few samples are within the shale domain ( So we consider a supervised linear classifier in every point as: Note that seven members of Rhyodacite are located on shale side and nine members of Black shale are located on Rhyodacite side. So, 98% and 95% of the samples are put into true group for Black shale and Rhyodacite, respectively. SIS is applied to modeling rock type since in the rifted volcanic-arc setting, volcanic and volcanoclastic rock types (Black shale and Rhyodacite) exhibit a wide range of geometries ( As mentioned before, the principal rock is divided into three parts. As can be seen from  Note that in Geostatistical studies and visualizations were done with SGeMS. Each rock type was simulated 30 times and E-type average value of each one was calculated in all grid nodes. Deterministic model of rock type was specified based on the most frequent occurrence ( Sequential Gaussian simulation was used for conditional stochastic simulation of the IC1 and IC2. Simulation is performed using the simple kriging estimator (with zero mean), and the semi-variogram model of ICs locations ( In the section 4.1, we considered a linear classifier between Black shale and Rhyodacite. Thus, all grid nodes simulated as Sandstone were removed, and only then Black shale and Rhyodacite domains for ICs simulation were used. First, the ICs have been transformed by using a normal score transformation. Correctness of the transformation was checked by the statistics of transformed data (i.e. the mean value close to 0 and the variance of about 1). An experimental semi-variogram and a spherical model fitted to the normal transformed data are presented in The horizontal and vertical variogram of IC1 has geometric anisotropy. However, the first structure of horizontal variogram is similar to that in the vertical variogram with spherical structure and 34 The nugget-to-sill ratio C Based on SGS modeling, 100 realizations of IC1 and IC2 are generated on a 2 Eq.  Geological modeling is an efficient tool for understanding volcanic and sedimentary host rocks that control mineralization of the VMS ore deposit. We have used direct and indirect methods for geological modeling of the Nohkouhi copper deposit located in Central Iran zone. SIS realizations for each rock type were used to provide 30 realizations of each rock type and the deterministic geological model based on the most frequent occurrence. It revealed that Rhyodacite had intruded to sequences of Black shale and sandstone correctly. The direct rock type model was more continues than the indirect one and had a clearer border in contact; therefore, it could be employed for resource evaluation and presenting the knowledge of the geological model. ICA was also applied as a determination tool for geochemical factors of the rock type, which is interesting for its geometallurgical characterizations. The IC scores were classified with a supervised method to different rock types. The scores were simulated in 3D space and transformed to rock types using linear discrimination. The indirect model obtained by ICA was less continuous with unclear borders, and thus it cannot be useful for the resource evaluation stage; however, it is helpful in giving a basic understanding of the geology of the deposit. Finally, it has to be mentioned that our two models showed 96% agreement with each other. This research was funded by