Drinking water treatment using UV/H2O2 advanced oxidation typically results in residual H2O2 that requires quenching to minimize its interference with downstream processes. Chemical quenching using chlorine or bisulfite are options, but there is some uncertainty in the literature about the kinetics of the bisulfite reaction, with some reports quoting the reaction as fast, and others as slow. Part of the contradictory information may be due to interference in H2O2 analysis by bisulfite. An analytical method was developed to avoid this interference, in which monochloramine first selectively quenched bisulfite, and then H2O2 was measured spectrometrically using titanium(IV) oxysulfate for color development. The confirmatory experiments suggested that the bisulfite reaction with H2O2 is actually relatively slow, with a half-life in the order of hours to days depending on the pH and the reagent concentrations. As a result, within the typical pH range of drinking water treatment (e.g., 6–9), chlorine is preferred over bisulfite as the H2O2 quenching agent on the basis of reaction kinetics. However, a decrease in pH will lead to an increase in the bisulfite-H2O2 reaction rate along with a decrease in the Cl2–H2O2 reaction rate, such that at pH < 5.7 bisulfite is the faster reagent. Both bisulfite and chlorine were observed to react with H2O2 following a stoichiometric ratio of 1:1 in the natural water matrix tested.Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are gaining popularity in water treatment due to their ability to degrade recalcitrant pollutants, with ultraviolet light combined with hydrogen peroxide (UV/H Several methods have been tested to quench H The kinetics of the reaction between H In contrast, the reaction between chlorine and H The water used for these experiments was obtained from the R.C. Harris Water Treatment Plant in Toronto and was collected post-filtration. The plant draws water from Lake Ontario. The pH of the water was 7.6 ± 0.2. As the raw water had been pre-chlorinated for zebra mussel control, the chlorine demand of the post-filtration water was minimal (10 min demand <0.1 mg/L), but no chlorine residual was present. NSF certified chlorine gas (99.5% w/w) was purchased from Praxair, ACS grade sodium bisulfite (63.7% w/w as SO To avoid interference from SBS on H A 250 mL Erlenmeyer glass flask was used as the batch reactor, to which 100 mL of the R.C. Harris post-filtration water with a range of H Both quenching reactions were assumed to be second-order. The rate constants for the SBS-H The reaction between H The reaction between H A comparison of the apparent second-order rate constants of the quenching reactions reproduced from SBS was observed to be very stable in the R.C. Harris water in the absence of H The rate of the H The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was funded by the