Low concentrations of Th4+ were recovered using the hydrolysis products of poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride) (PSMA) to form an amorphous thorium(IV) macromolecular complex. The adsorption behavior and mechanism of the as-prepared PSMA toward Th4+ were investigated. At the optimum pH value and adsorption dosage, the adsorption percentage of Th4+ was 97.93%, and the maximum adsorption capacity of Th4+ was 360.14mgg
                        −1 at 40°C within 1.5h. The adsorption isotherm data were consistent with the Langmuir model, which confirmed the monolayer coverage mechanism of Th4+ onto the PSMA surface. The kinetic data followed a pseudo-second-order model, which suggested a chemisorption process. Through variation of pH values, Th4+ was efficiently enriched and separated from a simulated acid leaching solution of bastnaesite containing La3+ or Mg2+, and these selectivity coefficients were above 103. Inorganic acid decomposes the Th–PSMA complex easily and the regenerated PSMA resin can be utilized repeatedly.Thorium is a radioactive element with very high mobility. Its radiation in a living system causes ailments such as lung diseases and liver, pancreas, and bone cancer ( Some separation techniques have been applied to the recovery of thorium, including alkaline leaching methods ( Polymeric adsorbents are widely used in modern adsorption separation technology because of their favorable physicochemical stability, large adsorption capacity, excellent selectivity and structural diversity ( In this study, we describe the removal of Th Styrene (Sigma-Aldrich, Shanghai, China) was washed with 10% aqueous sodium hydroxide repeatedly to remove the inhibitor followed by distilled water washes to neutrality. Other chemicals were of analytical reagent grade and were purchased from Alfa Aesar (Beijing, China). These were used without further purification. The Th FTIR spectra were recorded on a Thermo Nicolect Mattson 2110 spectrometer from 4000 to 400 The PSMA resin was prepared according to our previous work ( 1.0 Desorption experiments were treated by adding 10 The impurities include La The elemental analysis of the PSMA resin and Th–PSMA are shown in  The characteristic bands of the PSMA resin, Na–PSMA complex and Th–PSMA complex are listed in  The surface morphology of PSMA and Th–PSMA is shown in The pH value of the solution is an important factor in the adsorption procedure. As shown in The adsorbent dosage is another important parameter. A large number of vacant surface adsorptive sites are available for adsorption during the initial stage. As time passes, the remaining vacant surface adsorptive sites are hard to fill with Th Adsorption kinetics represents the adsorption mechanism and rate-controlling processes. The kinetics of thorium adsorption on PSMA was carried out at three different initial concentrations of Th pseudo-first-order pseudo-second-order intraparticle diffusion The resulting kinetic parameters (  Langmuir Freundlich The relative parameters calculated from the Langmuir and Freundlich models at three different temperatures are listed in In general, adsorption tends to be favorable when the value of the Freundlich isotherm parameter 1/ Some metal ions such as La For desorption studies, batch tests were conducted with 0.1–0.5 We show that the PSMA resin can be employed as a chelating adsorbent to recover radioactive thorium. The maximum adsorption capacity of Th This project is supported by the