Hot dip aluminizing (HDA) of low carbon steel in aluminum bath containing various amounts of silicon and manganese was studied in this work. The effect of bath alloying elements on the morphology and growth kinetics of intermetallic layer during the reaction of steel substrate and aluminum bath was investigated by scanning electron microscope equipped with EDS. Results showed that Fe2Al5 (η) and FeAl3 (θ) layers are detectable when pure aluminum bath is used. In contrast, when the bath contains 6 and 12 wt% silicon, new intermetallic layer Fe2Al7Si (τ5) has appeared adjacent to the topcoat aluminum layer. Moreover, dispersed Fe2Al7Si particles were observed in the topcoat. Presence of silicon in the compound layer had a significant effect on the growth kinetics and intermetallic layer thickness. The inhibiting effect of silicon on the growth of compound layer is possibly due to silicon placement inside the compound layer which retards the diffusion. However, in the bath with 3 wt% manganese, no changes were observed in the composition of the intermetallic layers. Phases of Fe2Al5 (η) and FeAl3 (θ) were the dominant intermetallic layers with no traces of manganese. Although, dispersed intermetallic particles of the topcoat revealed amounts of manganese. Existence of manganese in the bath indicated no significant effect on the growth rate of the layer and its morphology. Furthermore, a method for evaluating roughness intensity of the compound layer has been developed in this work. Investigations on the tongue-like morphology and roughness of the intermetallic layer revealed that the interface roughness increases linearly with the thickness of the layer. Presence of 3 wt% manganese in the aluminum bath indicated a negligible effect on the thickness and roughness of the layer. However, silicon eliminated the tongue-like morphology of the interface by retarding the rate of the growth.Aluminum coating of the steel sheets via hot dip aluminizing (HDA) process provides efficient mechanical properties, good corrosion, oxidation and sulfidation resistance and also excellent electrical conductivity [ Immersing steel in aluminum bath results in formation of aluminide coating on the steel substrate surface. Some studies unanimously show that this coating consists of separated layers [ There are several factors that strongly affect the growth and morphology of the layers. By increasing the bath temperature, diffusion coefficient increases and consequently raises the growth rate [ It is reported that the Fe-Al intermetallic layer grows in a tongue-like shape in the low carbon steels. However, increasing the carbon concentration and the cementite phase makes the interface smoother and decreases the thickness of the intermetallic layer [ On the other hand, it is known that the major propose of surface coating, usually is increasing the corrosion and oxidation resistance. According to Zamin [ In this work, low carbon steel specimens are hot-dipped into the molten commercial aluminum alloys with different amounts of silicon and manganese. The layer thickness and morphology were investigated in various dipping times to study the kinetics of the layer growth as a function of the bath alloying elements. Moreover, the intermetallic phases formed during dipping were characterized by investigation of their morphology and compositions. In the researches that have dealt with interfaces, the vacancy of a method that attributes a numerical value to roughness of the layer is sensible. In this work, a method for quantifying the roughness intensity has been developed as an effort to investigate the interfaces between coating layers and the substrate. Low carbon steel strip sheets (SAE 1013, DIN ST37) were cut to the dimensions of 12 cm × 2 cm × 1 mm and then were ground by SiC papers until 800 grit. The strip specimens dipped into the different aluminum alloy melts. The bath compositions which were used for the coating process includes pure aluminum, Al-7 wt% Si, Al-12 wt% Si, Al-3 wt% Mn alloys. Chemical compositions of the employed alloys and their grade of designation based on Aluminum Association are indicated in An optical microscope and scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with EDS were used to characterize the thickness, composition and morphology of the intermetallic layers formed at the interface of steel and aluminum.  Optical microscopy images of cross sectioned samples which were dipped in the pure aluminum melt bath at 750 °C are depicted in SEM image of aluminized steel which was dipped in pure aluminum bath is shown in It is believed that the formation of these intermetallic layers consists of two stages [ By immersion of the steel strips into the molten aluminum, initially FeAl    The EDS analysis showed that the blade intermetallics in the topcoat (   Bouayad et al. [  Cracks may be explained by the poor castability and fluidity of Mn-containing aluminum melt in comparison to near eutectic aluminum silicon alloy. Thus, more voids and porosities are expected to form and be trapped during specimen pulling out and topcoat solidification. The porosities in the topcoat and intermetallic layer are observable in the microscopic investigations ( SEM micrographs and results of EDS analysis are shown in The topcoat phases, which are dispersed in the aluminum matrix, are observable in Thickness of intermetallic layer was measured for all specimens after hot dipping into the pure aluminum, Al-7 wt% Si, Al-12 wt% Si and Al-3 wt% Mn baths at 750 °C by using optical microscopy imaging and image analyzing software. According to these results, increasing silicon content of the bath (to 12 wt%) does not have any significant effect on the intermetallic layer thickness. It is well known that layer thickening is attributed to interdiffusion between aluminum and iron across the intermetallic layer and consequently formation of compound phases. When Al-Si alloy bath is used for dipping, silicon atoms diffuse to occupy the vacancies of Fe As illustrated in It is believed that roughness of intermetallic-substrate interface can decrease the mechanical properties of the coat. So, it is important to develop an appropriate quantitative measurement method for interface roughness. Thus, it will be possible to compare different dipping conditions in terms of layer roughness. For this purpose, the intermetallic phase percentage was measured in lines parallel to the solid-liquid interface. It is obvious that percentage of the intermetallic phase decreases from the topcoat layer to the steel substrate. When the intermetallic layer is smooth and flat, the intermetallic percentage drops suddenly from 100 to zero at the intermetallic-substrate interface (  Results of dipping samples in baths containing silicon showed a completely smooth and flat layer. Since the roughness of these layers was negligible, the corresponding graphs of intermetallic percentage across the layer revealed vertical straight lines. However, as shown in Based on the mentioned concept, in order to have a criterion for layer roughness, RV (roughness value) is defined in which higher RV means higher roughness of the layer interface. For this purpose, the absolute value of slope of the curve of phase percentage at the inflection point is considered. High absolute slope values mean that the phase percentage sharply varies across the layer and consequently, interface roughness is low. Therefore, the absolute slope value of each curve at the inflection point is inversely related to the layer roughness. Hence, reciprocal of the absolute inflection slope can be defined as a criterion for the interface roughness:  Hot dip aluminizing of low carbon steel was conducted by immersing the steel strip sheets into the aluminum bath. In this study, the effect of bath alloying elements of silicon and manganese on the growth and morphology of the aluminized layer was investigated. Results indicated that a multilayer coat forms during the aluminizing, which consists of an intermetallic compound layer and an alloy topcoat. The former has revealed to be composed of laminar intermetallic phases Fe Measurements of the thickness of the compound layer formed in the pure aluminum and manganese containing baths showed a parabolic behavior which implies a diffusion-controlled growth. Although, when silicon containing bath were utilized, the layer thickness reached to around 10 μm at initial seconds of dipping and then stayed almost constant during immersion. According to EDS analyses, the retarding effect of silicon on the decrement of the layer growth kinetics can be attributed to silicon diffusion to the compound layer which may occupy lattice vacancies and consequently restrains aluminum diffusion passages across the layer. SEM micrographs showed a tongue-like interface between the substrate and the compound layer when pure aluminum and manganese containing baths were used. However, aluminum baths with 7 and 12 wt% silicon revealed flat interfaces. A new approach to quantify the roughness of the interface of the compound layer has been developed in this work. The measurements showed that interface roughness increases linearly with the layer thickness increase. Presence of 3 wt% manganese in the aluminum bath indicated a negligible effect on the thickness and roughness of the layer. However, silicon content of the bath showed a considerable influence on retarding the layer growth which has resulted in a flat interface with the substrate.