Classical galactosemia is an autosomal recessively inherited disorder of galactose metabolism. Treatment consists of life-long dietary restriction of galactose. Despite treatment, long-term complications occur such as a decreased bone mineral density (BMD). A decreased BMD might be the result of either dietary deficiencies secondary to the galactose-restricted diet or unknown intrinsic factors. In this study, 40 children with classical galactosemia (13 males and 27 females, aged 3–17 years) on dietary treatment were included to gain insight in the bone metabolism of galactosemics. We found weight and height Z scores significantly decreased in galactosemics. Mean areal BMD Z scores of lumbar spine and of femoral neck as measured by Dual energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DXA) were −0.6 (P < 0.001) and −0.3 (P = 0.066), respectively. Mean volumetric BMD of the femoral neck was significant lower in galactosemics (P < 0.001). The recommended dietary allowances (RDA) for calcium, magnesium, zinc, vitamin D, and protein were met in all patients. Mean serum levels of calcium, phosphate, magnesium, zinc, 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (1,25OHD), parathormone (PTH), 17-beta estradiol, bone alkaline phosphatase (BAP), and under-carboxylated osteocalcin (ucOC) were normal. Serum levels of IGF-1 Z score, carboxylated osteocalcin (cOC), N-terminal telopeptide (NTX), and C-terminal telopeptide (CTX) were significantly lower in galactosemics than in control subjects. The different bone markers were strongly correlated. The low levels of IGF-1 Z score, formation marker cOC, and resorption markers NTX and CTX suggest a decreased bone metabolism in galactosemics.Galactosemia is an autosomal recessively inherited disorder of galactose metabolism. Classical galactosemia is caused by deficiency of galactose-1-phosphate-uridyltransferase (GALT), the enzyme that converts galactose-1-phosphate to uridine-diphosphate (UDP)-galactose. Classical galactosemia occurs in approximately 1 per 33,000 newborns in the Caucasian population Bone metabolism is a complex process involving bone modeling and bone remodeling. During bone remodeling, bone resorption by osteoclasts is followed by bone formation by osteoblasts. Bone remodeling does not result in changes of bone shape and serves to repair microdamage. Modeling is the formation of new bone by osteoblasts at locations different from the sites of bone resorption by osteoclasts and results in bone growth The pathophysiological mechanism leading to a diminished BMD in patients with galactosemia has not yet been extensively studied. A normal BMD is the result of genetic, environmental, and endocrine factors. Patients with galactosemia might be at risk for a decreased BMD because of either dietary deficiencies secondary to the galactose restricted diet or unknown intrinsic factors. BMD can be measured using different techniques. BMD assessed using QCT is the golden standard as it assesses volumetric bone mass The objective of this study was to gain insight in bone metabolism in galactosemia. Dutch children with galactosemia, aged between 3 and 18 years, were approached by the Dutch Society for Galactosemia to participate in the study. Forty pediatric patients (70% of the Dutch pediatric population) with classical galactosemia following a galactose-restricted diet were included in this study. The mean age was 8.9 years (range 3.0–17.3 years). The diagnosis had been established by GALT enzymatic studies in erythrocytes or by mutation analysis of the GALT gene. All patients were diagnosed in the neonatal period and had good dietary control. They had an adequate physical activity pattern and none of them had a concomitant disease that could affect bone density. Pubertal status was determined by physical examination and classified according to the method of Tanner and Whitehouse BMD was assessed using the dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) technique (Hologic QDR-4500A; Waltham, USA). The apparatus was calibrated using phantoms according to the manufacturer's recommendations. All scans were acquired and analyzed by the same technician. BMDs of the lumbar (L1–L4) vertebrae and femoral neck were measured using the fan beam technique and were analyzed by special dedicated automatic pediatric software (Discovery, windows XP version 12). The results were expressed as bone mineral content (BMC) (in g) and as an areal BMD (in g/cm Dietary intake of calcium, vitamins, and minerals was assessed with a food frequency questionnaire adapted for galactosemia and a 3-day food diary Blood was taken on the same day the DXA was performed. Calcium, phosphate, magnesium, zinc, 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (1,25OHD), parathormone (PTH), 17-beta estradiol, and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) were determined according to standard methods and compared to reference ranges. IGF-1 was expressed as the number of standard deviations from the mean matched for age and gender ( Whenever metric data were approximately normally distributed, means and standard deviations were used, when this was not the case, medians and ranges were used. Classifications (nominally and ordinally scaled data) were given by numbers and percentages. When metric variables were normally distributed, independent groups Student's BMD of the lumbar spine was measured in all 40 patients. BMD of the femoral neck was available for 38 children. Two patients were too young to lie still during the complete DXA measurement. Patient characteristics and BMD measurements of the study population are listed in The recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) for calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, zinc, vitamin D, and protein were met in all patients (data not shown). They all routinely used vitamin- and mineral-enriched soy products. Serum concentrations of minerals, vitamins, hormones, and bone metabolism markers are listed in The low BMD found in this group of galactosemics is in agreement with previous smaller studies using QCT, which is considered the golden standard, and DXA, respectively Because of their diet, galactosemics are at risk for nutritional deficiencies such as calcium and zinc. Calcium is essential for bone mineralization. Milk products are considered to be the best source of dietary calcium because they are rich in casein-bound calcium showing good bioavailability. A galactose-restricted diet is a cow-milk-restricted diet and may result in calcium deficiency Bone metabolism is a complex process involving bone remodeling and bone modeling. It is strictly controlled by hormones and growth factors. Growth hormone and IGF-1 play important roles in the regulation of growth and bone metabolism It has also been suggested that the diminished BMD found in galactosemics might be the result of an intrinsic defect in collagen, leading to a diminished mineralization In conclusion, BMD and length We especially acknowledge all patients with galactosemia and their parents for their participation. We thank the Dutch Society for Galactosemia for their excellent support. We also thank Lou Donselaar, Lia van Iersel, and Liesbeth van der Ploeg for their practical assistance. This study was financially supported by a grant from the “Profileringsfonds” of the University Hospital Maastricht and by the Dutch Society for Galactosemia.