Although rhyolitic lavas and lava domes are characterised by evenly porphyritic textures, not all the phenocrysts are whole euhedra. We undertook image analysis of 46 rhyolitic lava and lava dome samples to determine the abundance and shape of quartz and feldspar phenocryst fragments. Phenocryst fragments were identified in nearly all samples. On average, fragments amount to ∼5% of the total phenocryst population, or ∼0.5 modal%. The abundance of fragments in lavas and lava domes is not related to the groundmass texture (whether vesicular, flow banded, massive, glassy or crystalline), nor to distance from source. Fragments are, however, more abundant in samples with higher phenocryst contents. The phenocryst fragments in rhyolitic lavas and lava domes are mainly medium to large (0.5–3.5 mm), almost euhedral crystals with only a small portion removed, or chunky, equant, subhedral fragments, and occur in near-jigsaw-fit or clast-rotated pairs or groups. The fragments probably formed in response to decompression of large melt inclusions. Shear during laminar flow then dismembered the phenocrysts; continued laminar shear separated and rotated the fragments. Fractures probably formed preferentially along weaknesses in the phenocrysts, such as zones of melt inclusions, cleavage planes and twin composition planes. Rare splintery fragments are also present, especially within devitrified domains. Splinters are attributed to comminution of solid lava adjacent to fractures that were later healed. For comparison, we measured crystal abundance in a further 12 rhyolite samples that include block and ash flow deposits and ignimbrite. Phenocryst fragments within clasts in the block and ash flow samples showed similar shapes and abundances to those fragments within the lava and lava domes. Crystal fragments are much more abundant in ignimbrite (exceeding 67% of the crystal population) however, and dominated by small, equant, anhedral chunks or splinters. The larger crystals in the ignimbrite are subrounded. The phenocrysts within ignimbrite pumice lapilli are also more intensely fractured than those in lavas and lava domes. Thus, in deformed and altered volcanic successions, data on crystal fragment abundance and shape can help discriminate lavas from pyroclastic facies.Most compositionally homogeneous lavas and lava domes are evenly porphyritic, and contain phenocrysts that are euhedral, and uniform in size, mineralogy and proportion throughout. A texture comprising evenly distributed, euhedral phenocrysts in a massive or flow-banded groundmass is considered typical of the products of effusive and very weakly explosive eruptions. In comparison, broken crystals and uneven crystal distributions, together with vitroclastic matrix textures, are typical of the products of explosive eruptions (e.g. Use of the crystal population to distinguish a volcanic unit as pyroclastic or effusive requires knowledge of the usual abundance of phenocryst fragments in lavas and lava domes. Phenocryst fragments have been observed in lavas and lava domes, particularly in silicic examples (e.g. Crystals in porphyritic lavas and lava domes have a number of origins. The simplest origin of phenocrysts involves crystallisation from the melt prior to eruption (i.e. intratelluric crystals). Some phenocrysts may be derived from disintegration of crystalline wall rock (xenocrysts). In addition, phenocrysts may also be inherited from a crystal-rich ‘mush’ remaining from preceding eruptive episodes (e.g. In this paper, we present new data on the size and shape of feldspar and quartz phenocrysts within young, fresh rhyolitic lavas and lava domes, with the specific aim of quantifying the type and abundance of feldspar and quartz fragments. Rhyolites have been selected for this study as they show a marked distinction between the mm- to cm-size phenocrysts and the groundmass. Rhyolitic groundmass is mainly glassy, with or without microlites, or finely crystalline (<500 μm). Feldspar and quartz phenocrysts were measured as they are both the largest and the most abundant phenocryst phases in the rhyolites. These phases are also relatively durable, and can be recognised even in strongly altered and deformed rocks. The flow regime of rhyolitic lavas is laminar, reflecting their high viscosities ( The rhyolitic lava and lava dome samples are predominantly from the Taupo Volcanic Zone (TVZ), New Zealand, with a few samples from Yali, Nisyros and Milos in the Hellenic arc (Greece). The majority of these lavas and lava domes are among the most recent products of their respective centres, and all are well preserved. Lavas are distinguished from lava domes according to their morphology: lava domes have The TVZ is a complex volcano-tectonic depression ca 300 km long and up to 60 km wide in the central North Island of New Zealand. It has been a focus of extensive and voluminous rhyolitic volcanism for the past ca 1.6 Ma ( The lava dome samples of the Maroa volcanic centre come from the northwestern dome complex, the western dome complex and the Maroa volcano central dome, all of which post-date caldera formation ( During the ca AD 1305 Kaharoa eruptive episode at Tarawera, three summit lava domes were extruded and accompanied by voluminous block and ash flows ( The rhyolitic lavas and lava domes in the TVZ typically contain phenocrysts of plagioclase (oligoclase–labradorite), quartz, hypersthene, titanomagnetite, ilmenite, calcic hornblende, and in some cases biotite ( Volcanism in the Hellenic arc began about 13 Ma ago in response to the complex collision between the African plate and the Eurasian plate ( The rhyolitic lavas and lava domes from the TVZ and Hellenic arc resemble the silicic lavas described by In addition to the lava, lava dome and block and ash flow samples, one ignimbrite (Ongatiti ignimbrite) from the TVZ was also selected for comparison. The 1.21 Ma rhyolitic Ongatiti ignimbrite was erupted from the Mangakino volcanic centre ( Forty-six different rhyolitic lavas and lava domes were sampled and analysed. In addition, we analysed a further 12 samples, including rhyolitic block and ash flow deposits from the Kaharoa eruptive episode, and pumice clasts and matrix from the Ongatiti ignimbrite. The authors collected 38 samples from the TVZ and four samples from domes in Greece. Ian Nairn (IGNS, New Zealand) contributed a further 16 samples from the Kapenga volcanic centre in the TVZ. Where possible, different parts of each lava or lava dome were sampled, including the pumiceous carapace, non-vesicular obsidian upper part and crystalline interior. Samples were also collected from the proximal (up to a few hundred metres from the vent), medial (within ∼1–2 km from the vent) and distal parts (at the margin) of single lavas and lava domes. A total of 76 thin sections were made of the lavas and lava domes ( The thin sections were routinely magnified 6.3 or 10 times and photographed. Areas requiring greater detail were magnified up to 20 times. At least three and up to seven photomicrographs were taken to cover the area exposed on each thin section. Image analysis was undertaken on the photomicrographs to determine the size and abundance of feldspar and quartz phenocrysts. Size (perimeter) and length were determined for each phenocryst and averaged for each thin section. The length measure used is the maximum intersection length of the two-dimensional areas occupied by the phenocrysts. The image analysis data for a two-dimensional section of a porphyritic sample dominated by triclinic (plagioclase) and trigonal (quartz) phenocrysts show a relatively clear correlation between length and perimeter ( Phenocryst contents of pumiceous samples (lavas, lava domes, breadcrust clasts from block and ash flow deposits, ignimbrite pumice) were recalculated for dense rock equivalents. The densities of pumiceous samples were determined by measuring their dry weight and volumes displaced in water (Archimedes Principle). The void space (vesicularity) was then calculated from the density difference between the pumiceous sample and the dense sample of the same lava or lava dome (where available). Phenocryst contents were then re-calculated by eliminating the void space ( Feldspar and quartz fragments were identified by abrupt changes in zoning, splintery form, curviplanar or ragged outline, or occurrence in clusters with jigsaw-fit texture. Comparisons are made between the total percentage of quartz and feldspar phenocrysts within a sample ( Feldspar phenocrysts are present both as simply twinned crystals, multiply twinned crystals and as crystal clusters. Most of the feldspars are plagioclase and exhibit polysynthetic twinning, but a small number are simply twinned sanidine. Single feldspar phenocrysts range in length from 0.2–0.8 mm (small) to more than 3.5 mm (large), but most are 0.8–2 mm (medium). Multiply twinned feldspar phenocrysts generally comprise two medium-sized intergrown parts, each of which is polysynthetically twinned, and occur together with several separate, small, tabular, interlocking crystals on the margin. Most crystal clusters comprise three or more intergrown, medium or small, anhedral, polysynthetically twinned crystals. The feldspar phenocrysts show characteristic oscillatory zoning ( Simply twinned phenocrysts generally have exterior faces that are euhedral. Multiply twinned phenocrysts are also euhedral except for the parts intergrown with small, tabular crystals at the margins. The composition planes of the simply twinned phenocrysts and medium intergrown parts of the multiply twinned phenocrysts have abruptly terminated oscillatory zoning or are irregular. The medium or large, simply twinned, sieve-textured feldspars, in particular, have irregular composition planes ( The exterior margins of crystals in the crystal clusters are regular crystal faces whereas their interior margins have irregular (intergrown) outlines and zoning that is abruptly terminated ( Five types of feldspar phenocryst fragments have been identified ( The third fragment type is small to medium (0.5 mm), equant or triangular, with abruptly terminated oscillatory zoning. Only parts of the original crystal faces are intact and the broken surfaces are either straight, jagged ( The fourth fragment type is small and anhedral. These fragments can be isolated or in groups relatively close to a crystal cluster ( In some cases, the grouped or conjugate fragments are separated by only a thin selvage of the glassy (or formerly glassy) groundmass and remain in a jigsaw-fit arrangement ( Most samples contain quartz phenocrysts. These phenocrysts are medium to large (1.5–3.5 mm) and internally fractured. They include large melt inclusions (up to 0.2 mm) and are slightly to strongly embayed ( Quartz fragments are also present. In comparison to the feldspar fragments, all the quartz fragments are angular and have sharply defined margins, which are either concave or convex ( Feldspar and quartz phenocrysts in juvenile clasts from the Kaharoa block and ash flow deposits are similar to those found within the lava and lava dome samples. Both simply twinned and multiply twinned feldspar phenocrysts are present, as are internally fractured quartz phenocrysts ( Phenocrysts within pumice clasts of the Ongatiti Ignimbrite are noticeably different from those in the lava, lava dome and block and ash flow samples. The feldspar and quartz phenocrysts are intensely fractured and fragments are separated by void spaces that range from a few microns to hundreds of microns across ( Crystals within the matrix of the ignimbrite are dominantly fragments that show a wide range in size (from large to small) and shape, from partly euhedral to anhedral, and from subrounded to equant ( Although not studied in detail, pyroxene phenocrysts are apparently much less prone to fracturing than quartz and feldspar phenocrysts in all samples (lavas, lava domes, block and ash flow clasts, ignimbrite pumice). These phenocrysts are mostly euhedral. The abundance of quartz and feldspar phenocrysts in the lava and lava dome samples ranges between 1 and 28 modal%. Nearly all the lava and lava dome samples include phenocryst fragments; the average abundance of fragments ( Although the modal percentage of phenocryst fragments ( The abundance of phenocryst fragments in the block and ash flow clasts is similar to that within lavas and lava domes, although at the higher end of the range, particularly for the breadcrusted vesicular samples ( The percentage of fragments in the total phenocryst population ( The crystal clusters, embayed quartz, large sieve-textured feldspar and clear feldspar indicate mixed origins for the phenocrysts in the rhyolitic lavas and lava domes sampled. The clear, euhedral feldspars with regular oscillatory zoning were probably in equilibrium with the melt, and hence, intratelluric. The small and medium feldspars in the crystal clusters are also clear and subhedral to anhedral, suggesting that they too are intratelluric. The large, sieve-textured feldspar phenocrysts, however, have a more complex history, and many of the quartz phenocrysts have embayed external margins that indicate resorption. Nevertheless, these phenocrysts also appear to have crystallised from melt and to have been suspended in melt, though not necessarily the melt represented by the presently surrounding groundmass. Hence, we infer that any fragmentation of the crystals occurred during magma withdrawal, eruption and/or outflow. Although there are five types of feldspar fragments, most occur in pairs or groups derived from a single, complete parent phenocryst. At least half of the feldspar fragments are nearly complete, medium or large, single, untwinned or twinned, dominantly euhedral phenocrysts with only a small part of one face or corner that is re-entrant (type 1). In many cases, a conjugate, small to medium, generally equant or triangular fragment (type 3) resides in close proximity to a larger type 1 fragment. These fragments fit together as in a jigsaw puzzle. Similarly, the subhedral (type 2) crystal chunks commonly occur together in conjugate pairs, and the splintery (type 5), and anhedral (type 4) fragments also occur in groups. These conjugate paired and grouped fragments form either jigsaw-fit, or clast-rotated arrangements. Some are separated by groundmass domains up to three times the size of the fragment. Hence, some of the apparently isolated fragments may also be part of a conjugate pair or a jigsaw-fit group, but the matching part(s) lies outside the area sampled by the thin section. Hence, most fragments were probably derived from nearby, single, larger parent phenocryst or crystal clusters. The isolated quartz fragments are exceptional in their lack of association with an obvious nearby parent phenocryst. Many of the phenocryst fragments appear to have broken along zones of internal weakness. For example, many quartz fragments have a broken margin that is concave and that can be matched with internal conchoidal fractures or interconnecting embayments. Similarly, the anhedral feldspar fragments (type 4) appear to have been anhedral crystals in crystal clusters that separated along the intergrown internal faces. In addition, the separation of some of the small fragments (type 3) from nearly whole phenocrysts, and of the crystal chunks (type 2), appears to have occurred either along the composition planes of twinned phenocrysts, or where the margin is jagged, along cleavage planes. Some small phenocrysts concentrated within flow bands are derived from disintegration of fine-grained crystal aggregates nearby. Small fragments and chunks with very irregular broken margins may have separated from feldspar phenocrysts with large melt inclusions or from sieve-textured feldspars, and many of the fractures within the quartz phenocrysts are centred on melt inclusions, suggesting that inclusions were relatively weak and promoted internal failure. Melt inclusions will contribute to cracking of the host phenocryst during magma ascent because they have relatively large elastic moduli and produce local stress that can exceed the tensile strength of the phenocryst ( As many of the phenocryst fragments are separated by groundmass or have been rotated, fragmentation must have occurred while the melt phase was still molten and moving, during withdrawal, eruption and/or outflow. However, the close proximity of many of the feldspar fragments to their parent phenocryst, and the overall even distribution of phenocrysts and phenocryst fragments, suggest that separation occurred relatively late in the outflow, but while the lava flows were still ductile. Most of the quartz fragments are isolated and not related to jigsaw-fit groups. Hence, fragmentation of the quartz phenocrysts may have begun earlier than fragmentation of the feldspars, allowing greater separation of the fragments. The lavas and lava domes display flow banding, flow folds, distortion of foliations around rotated solid bodies, and lineations on foliation or flow-band surfaces, all of which indicate that flow involved laminar shear. With continuing laminar shear, prepared fractures in the phenocrysts will progressively open and dilate, causing the fragments to separate and rotate from the parent phenocryst. Laminar shear may also be an important in causing disintegration of crystal aggregates. Many aggregates have disintegrated, generating type 4 fragments, and the fragments are strung out in flow bands. In this case, single crystals within the aggregates may have separated along the structurally weak boundaries between the crystals. The phenocryst splinters are small, sharply angular and occur in groups close to an intensely fractured phenocryst. The parent phenocryst appears to have disintegrated in a brittle fashion, regardless of any zones of weakness. Similar splintery phenocryst fragments have been found in the Ngongotaha lava dome, New Zealand ( We propose a similar origin for phenocryst splinters in the lava and lava dome samples studied. The phenocryst splinters are most abundant within devitrified, formerly glassy domains in otherwise glassy but fractured groundmass (e.g. Most of the rhyolitic lavas and lava domes we sampled have less than 19% of their phenocryst population as fragments. In addition, the phenocryst fragments in the lava and lava dome samples are dominantly large (up to 3.5 mm) parts of euhedral parent phenocrysts with only a small part missing (type 1), medium (0.8–2 mm), subhedral, equant chunks (type 2), and small to medium (0.5 mm), equant or triangular fragments (type 3). Phenocryst splinters are volumetrically minor (<0.1%). In comparison, most crystals in ignimbrites are fragments (e.g. 67–96% of the crystal population in the Ongatiti ignimbrite). In addition, the fragment types in ignimbrites differ from those in lavas and lava domes. Phenocrysts in the ignimbrite pumice are intensely fractured into numerous small type 3 and type 5 fragments and very few of the larger type 1 and type 2 fragments, similar to the ‘phenoclasts’ found by Crystal breakage in ignimbrites has been attributed to rapid decompression during explosive eruption and impact during eruption and transport within a pyroclastic flow ( Most porphyritic small-volume, rhyolitic lavas and lava domes with relatively high viscosities (in the range of 10 The rhyolitic lavas and lava domes include sieve-textured and clear, simply and multiply twinned feldspar, single quartz phenocrysts and feldspar crystal clusters. The phenocryst fragments are dominantly medium to large (>0.5 mm), and derived from euhedral crystals from which only a small part has been removed, or are subhedral with only one irregular margin, or anhedral and equant. Most of the phenocryst fragments occur in conjugate pairs or groups that together form a complete crystal. In many cases, a small to medium fragment resides in a jigsaw-fit or clast-rotated arrangement near the medium or large parent fragment. Many of the phenocryst fragments appear to have broken along zones of internal weakness. Quartz fragments have separated along embayments and conchoidal fractures. Feldspar phenocrysts have broken along structural weaknesses such as zones of melt inclusions, cleavage surfaces and composition planes of twins. Some anhedral feldspar fragments are derived from disintegration of crystal clusters composed of anhedral crystals. Separation and rotation of the fragments occurred in response to shear during laminar flow. With continuing shear, the fractures progressively opened and fragments separated. Fractures may have formed in response to decompression during magma ascent, especially in phenocrysts with abundant and/or large melt inclusions. Small phenocryst splinters (<0.2 mm) are relatively rare (≪0.1%) and are attributed to comminution of near-solid parts of lavas and lava domes. In comparison with ignimbrites, rhyolitic lavas and lava domes contain significantly fewer phenocryst fragments. Phenocryst fragments generally occur in jigsaw-fit or clast-rotated pairs or groups, and the proportion phenocryst splinters is only minor (<0.1%). In ancient deformed, altered and/or poorly exposed silicic volcanic successions, data on crystal fragment abundance and shape can assist distinction of lava and lava dome facies from pyroclastic facies. This research was funded by the Australian Research Council through the Special Research Centres programme and by a Postdoctoral Fellowship held by S.A. Critical reviews of an earlier manuscript by Michael Higgins, Kathy Cashman and Bruce Marsh are greatly appreciated. This paper also benefited from discussions with Vadim Kamenetsky. The authors wish to thank Ian Nairn for help with selecting suitable sample sites, logistical advice and providing samples from the Kapenga volcanic centre. J.McP received support from the Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences, Wairakei Research Centre, during manuscript preparation. XRF analyses were performed at the University of Tasmania by Analyst, P. Robinson.