The equilibrium behaviour in n-heptane of ZnSO4/di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), the reactive test system of the European Federation of Chemical Engineering has been investigated in this study at changing loading conditions. The existence of two competitive zinc-complex species ZnR2RH and ZnR2 in the organic phase has been identified using Fourier transformed infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy method. Analysis of FT-IR spectra of the organic phase indicates the complex ZnR2RH predominates at low loading conditions while both complexes ZnR2RH and ZnR2 co-exist at intermediate and high loading conditions.The extraction of zinc sulphate with di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) was recently adopted as a reactive liquid–liquid test system by the European Federation of Chemical Engineering for validating liquid–liquid extraction equipment design procedures when both mass transfer and chemical reaction rates are significant (for details, see D2EHPA is a well-known extractant commercially used for the extraction of metal ions D2EHPA molecules predominate as monomers in aromatic diluents and as dimers when dissolved in aliphatic ones According to A negligible amount of water from the aqueous phase is transferred to the organic phase during extraction of zinc from sulphuric acid media with D2EHPA The solubility of D2EHPA in water is very low, so the reaction between D2EHPA and metal ions takes place at the liquid–liquid interface Therefore the overall heterogeneous reaction for zinc ions with D2EHPA dissolved in aliphatic diluents is commonly described in the literature as:  Recently, an equilibrium model assuming the existence of two competitive complexes in the organic phase with activity coefficients of 1.0 has been proposed by According to this reaction scheme, In this context, the scope of this work is to characterise the ZnSO High purity solvents were used in all extraction and analytical procedures in this study. The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving ZnSO Extraction experiments were performed in order to load the organic phase by 10 successive contacts in crosscurrent manner with fresh aqueous phases. Tests were carried out in shaking funnels at vigorous manual shaking for 1 h and samples were withdrawn after 1-day settling. The temperature of liquids was kept constant at 25±1 °C. The zinc content in the aqueous phase has been determined by atomic absorption and mass balance has been done to calculate the amount of zinc in the organic phase. The loaded organic phase was then analysed by FT-IR spectroscopy in order to characterise the zinc-complex species. The operational conditions of loading experiments (aqueous/organic phase ratio and initial concentration of zinc in the aqueous phase) were defined previously by simulating the equilibrium of zinc extraction with D2EHPA The concentration of zinc in the aqueous phase was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy with a CG AA7000 Spectrometer at a wavelength of 213.9 nm (error <3.0%). The purity grade of D2EHPA was determined by the titrimetric method proposed by The investigation of zinc-complexes present in the organic phase was performed using a Perkin Elmer FT-IR Spectrometer (Spectrum 100 model) in a KBr demountable cell. The FT-IR spectra were recorded at 2 cm Equilibrium extraction experiments have been carried out in order to investigate the effect of the loading of D2EHPA in Two limiting conditions can be drawn. At low loading conditions, i.e., in experiments with very diluted concentration of Zn The equilibrium behaviour of metallic systems is commonly determined in the literature using equilibrium extraction data obtained at very low loading conditions ( The presence of monomer-D2EHPA species in aliphatic diluents still requires further consideration because Firstly, the FT-IR spectra of pure liquid D2EHPA have been analysed and results are quite similar to those found by Secondly, the effect of D2EHPA dissolved in Finally, the effect of zinc–D2EHPA complexes in The relative intensity of the band at 1034 cm The Zn–O stretching frequency seems to be assigned at 1103 cm Similar behaviour as observed by The reactive liquid–liquid test system recently adopted by the European Federation of Chemical Engineering, ZnSO aqueous/organic phase ratio (–) concentration (mol/m apparent equilibrium constant of the homogeneous reaction defined by apparent equilibrium constant of the heterogeneous reaction defined by stoichiometric constant of the heterogeneous reaction (–) zinc ion aqueous phase dimer-D2EHPA total complex zinc-complex ZnR zinc-complex ZnR hydrogen ion organic phase initial value The authors would like to thank Dr. Hélio Anderson Duarte (Depto. Quı́mica, UFMG), Dr. Wander Luiz Vasconcelos and Dr. Rúbia Francisca Silva Lenza (Depto. Engenharia Metalúrgica e de Materiais, UFMG) for collaboration with the FT-IR experiments. The authors are grateful to CDTN (Centro de Desenvolvimento da Tecnologia Nuclear) for kindly supplying D2EHPA and FAPEMIG (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais) for supporting this research.