Objective
                  To evaluate the release of calcium and hydroxide ions from the pulp-capping materials Hydro C, NuCap, Life, and Ultrablend Plus.
               
                  Study design
                  The materials were manipulated and inserted into tubes measuring 1 cm in length and 1 mm in diameter. The filled tubes were individually immersed in flasks containing 10 mL deionized water. The tubes were removed from the flasks after 3, 24, 72, and 168 hours, and the release of hydroxide and calcium ions was measured with a pH-meter and an atomic absorption spectrophotometer, respectively. The data were compared by analysis of variance and Tukey test.
               
                  Results
                  The results showed that Ultrablend Plus provided the greatest release of calcium ions, with a significant difference observed between Life and Ultrablend after 3 hours. Evaluation after 24, 72, and 168 hours showed a significant difference between Ultrablend and the other materials. No hydroxide release was observed from the Ultrablend cement at any time period. After 3 hours, significant differences were observed between Hydro C and the Life and Ultrablend materials and between NuCap and the Life and Ultrablend materials. After 24 hours, significant differences were observed between the NuCap agent and the other materials. After 72 hours, a significant difference was noted only between NuCap and Ultrablend, whereas after 168 hours a significant difference was observed between NuCap and the Hydro C and Ultrablend materials.
               
                  Conclusion
                  All materials released calcium and hydroxide ions, except Ultrablend Plus which did not show any release of hydroxide ions.A pulp-capping material should: 1) protect the pulp against thermal shocks; 2) isolate against galvanic action inherent to all amalgam restorations; 3) impair the penetration of mercury from the amalgam restorations into underlying dentin, thus preventing color changes of the tooth; 4) exert an anodyne effect on the pulp; 5) have some antibacterial activity to sterilize underlying dentin and residual caries in deep caries lesions; and 6) reduce marginal infiltration around restorations, thus limiting the diffusion of bacterial toxins and soluble molecules into underlying dentin and pulp. Products containing calcium hydroxide are currently widely used owing to their proven properties of stimulating mineralization, Calcium hydroxide is effective in stimulating mineralization and is the material of choice for use in very deep cavities, particularly in situations in which microexposures may not be detected clinically. Calcium hydroxide materials as pulp-capping agents have replaced zinc phosphate, polycarboxylate, and zinc/eugenol cements, with practical advantages especially in terms of their biologic effects. The best-known examples of these products are Dycal, Hydro C, Life, Renew, and Ultrablend Plus. The mechanical properties of these cements, especially their resistance to compression after 7 minutes of spatulation and to shearing after 10 minutes, permit their sole use as pulp-capping materials in the case of indirect capping. From a biologic point of view, these cements permit the formation of mineralization when applied to dentin as capping materials, and evidence of pulp repair has been reported when they are applied to accidental pulp exposures. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the release of calcium and hydroxide ions from different pulp-capping materials 3, 24, 72, and 168 hours after insertion into the cavity. The following calcium hydroxide–containing pulp-capping materials were used in the present study: NuCap (Coe Co., Chicago, IL), Hydro C (Dentsply Indústria e Comércio, Petrópolis, Brazil), Life (Kerr Corporation, Romulus, MI), and Ultrablend Plus (Ultradent Products, South Jordan, UT). The materials were manipulated and inserted into plastic tubes measuring 1 cm in length and 1 mm in diameter. The tubes were then weighed to obtain an average of 42 mg material. Each tube was immersed in glass flasks containing 10 mL deionized water, and the flasks were hermetically sealed. The pH of the water in which the tubes were immersed was measured with a pH-meter after 3, 24, 72, and 168 hours after spatulation. The water was replaced at each observation period. The water removed at each time period was analyzed. Five samples were used for each cement. The specimens were prepared as described for pH analysis, i.e., tubes (1 cm length × 1 mm of diameter) filled with the material were immersed in 10 mL deionized water and analyzed after 3, 24, 72, and 168 hours, with the tubes being changed to another solution after each period. Calcium release was analyzed with an atomic absorption spectrophotometer equipped with a hollow calcium cathode lamp under the following settings: lamp current 3 mA, fuel gas nitrous oxide, support gas oxygen, stoichiometry reducing, wavelength 422.7 nm, and slit width 0.2 nm. A standard stock solution of 10 mg% calcium was diluted in deionized water to obtain the following concentrations: 0.025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 mg%. The samples were diluted as necessary. The apparatus was set to zero absorbance using deionized water as blank. A calibration curve was constructed by plotting the concentrations of the standard solutions against absorbances to determine the reliability of the apparatus. After calibration of the apparatus, the water samples in which the materials were immersed were read. The data were analyzed statistically by 1-way analysis of variance for overall comparison between groups for each period evaluated. When a significant difference was observed, individual comparisons were made using the Tukey test.   The release of calcium and hydroxide ions from the material permits the participation of these ions in the repair process, stimulating mineralization. Calcium reacts with tissue carbonic gas, forming calcium carbonate, In addition to their biologic action, calcium and hydroxide ions exert an antimicrobial action, with the former reacting with carbonic gas to remove the source of respiration of anaerobic bacteria and the latter inhibiting the bacterial enzymatic system. In the present study, the material that provided the greatest calcium release after all periods analyzed was Ultrablend; however, availability of hydroxide ions from this material was low, indicating the existence of some substance in its composition that may prevent the release of hydroxide ions. Probably, the high calcium release by Ultrablend can be attributed the presence of hydroxyapatite. Granules of this substance could be released into water and the spectrophotometer that detects both ionized and nonionized calcium detected the calcium present in the hydroxyapatite molecule. Scarano et al. High release of calcium after 3 hours was observed for Nu-Cap, which declined thereafter. Analyzing the same material, Tamburic et al. The Life cement presented a low release of hydroxyl ions during the initial periods, increasing during the remaining periods; however, the pH remained below 9. In a study of Ida et al., The highest release of hydroxide ions was observed for Hydro C after 3 hours, declining after 24 hours and increasing during the remaining periods. Calcium release by Hydro C always increased. It should be noted that the water in which the tubes were immersed was changed and the higher hydroxide ion release after 72 and 168 hours was probably due to the longer period of immersion in water. The method used to measure the release of calcium ions, i.e., atomic absorption spectrophotometry with a calcium cathode lamp, presented good reliability. Whereas other studies