The management of open tibial fractures is a challenge to all orthopaedic trauma surgeons. The major goals are fracture union, uncomplicated soft tissue healing and return to pre-injury level of function. The geographical isolation and vastness of the Northern Territory of Australia complicates the management of these injuries by adding a significant delay to treatment. Forty-five patients sustained 48 open tibial fractures over the 30-month period of the study. Twelve received primary surgical treatment within 6h of injury but 33 were treated more than 6h after injury. The mean time to treatment in this latter group was 12h 15min (median 9h 45min, range 6–37h). The majority of injuries were high energy, with 23 patients having multiple injuries and 29 fractures (60%) being classified as AO C3 with 35 (73%) having Gustilo III soft tissue injuries. There was a mean time to union of 7.5 months and an overall complication rate of 42.2%. Thirteen patients (29%) required additional (late) surgical procedures subsequent to definitive fracture and soft tissue management. The zone of injury infection rate was 12.5%. The high incidence of open tibial fractures places a large financial burden on the state. However, despite the absence of a plastic surgical service and delays in presentation, satisfactory outcomes can be obtained by the application of the established surgical principles of thorough debridement, soft tissue management and fracture stabilisation.Open tibial fractures represent a challenge to orthopaedic trauma surgeons. The goal of open tibial fracture management is to obtain an anatomic, functional limb enabling return to the pre-injury level of function as quickly as possible. Forty-five patients with 48 open tibial fractures were treated between 1 June 1994 and 31 December 1996. The mean age of patients was 33.9 years (range 16–64 years). The injury was three times more common in males (33 males versus 12 females). The median follow up was 16 months (range 9–28 months). The patient notes and radiographs were examined retrospectively. Six patients (13%) were lost to follow up. This was because of the transitory/migratory nature of the population. In 22 patients the tibial fracture was an isolated injury, and in the remaining 23 it was part of multi-system trauma. The standard orthopaedic management for a patient with an open tibial fracture admitted to the Royal Darwin Hospital is in keeping with current practice. Surgical debridement as soon as possible after admission with deliverance of the bone ends (for Gustilo Tetanus prophylaxis and 48 A wound inspection and further debridement are undertaken at 48 The mechanism of injury in almost half (47.9%) the patients (21 patients, 23 fractures) was a motor vehicle crash. In the medical notes/ambulance service records of the 21 motor vehicle crashes the speed was only documented in 11 crashes. The speed was more than 60 Of the 45 patients, 28 sustained their injury in the Darwin urban area. Seventeen patients injured themselves in a more rural setting (the outback) and all of these patients had some delay in getting to the Royal Darwin Hospital, for reasons outlined later. Twenty-three patients’ injuries occurred within 20 The injuries were assessed and classified retrospectively according to soft tissue injury, fracture configuration and Mangled Extremity Severity Score (MESS). The fractures were classified according to the Müller AO classification. Two patients had significantly severe open tibial fractures with neurovascular injury along with massive soft tissue crushing and significant comminution at the fracture site. Salvage of the limb was deemed impossible and both these patients were managed with a below knee amputation. The MESS in both cases was 7, which is suggestive of non-viability. Forty-four patients were operated upon within 12 The fractures were treated by a variety of standard techniques ( The definitive soft tissue procedures varied from primary closure to free flaps ( Given the distances and delays involved, only 12 of our 48 fractures underwent primary surgical operation in less than 6 The range of length of inpatient stay varied from 3 to 198 days. Thirteen were inpatients for less than 1 month and 15 for 1–2 months. At the other extreme two were inpatients for over 6 months (both for problems related to their injuries but not directly due to their tibial fracture. Both however underwent bone grafting for delayed union towards the end of their inpatient stay). The mean time to bony union for fractures in those patients whose limbs were successfully salvaged was 7.5 months (range 3–21 months). Eight patients went on to require further surgery for delayed union. Seven of these eight had been initially treated by external fixation. Surgical procedures on these patients subsequently required bone grafting. This was not commenced until re-epithelialisation of the soft tissue was complete, and there was no evidence of infection elsewhere. Complications were noted in 19 patients (42.2%). Dermatofasciotomy was required by one patient for established compartment syndrome. This is in addition to two other patients where it was performed prophylactically. Eleven patients (23%) had superficial wound infections or colonisation with bacteria. Eight patients were infected with One patient with bilateral tibial fractures developed adult respiratory distress syndrome and multi-organ failure, leading to death. One patient had a pulmonary embolus and two patients sustained re-fractures of the tibia. One re-fracture occurred at four months, the other at five months following the initial injury, the first due to the patient removing their cast despite the fracture being un-united, the other due to a second accident. The management of open tibial fractures has been debated extensively. From those fractures sustained by Ambroise Paré and Percival Pott in the 16th and 18th centuries respectively, to the modern day multidisciplinary experiences with vascularised free flaps and the unreamed tibial nail, the emphasis has always been on wound management. Both Paré and Pott successfully had their limbs salvaged, The geographical isolation and vastness of the Australian Outback provides additional challenges besides the usual ones associated with open tibial fractures. The vast area often precludes an early transfer of patients from the remote outback to the trauma centre within the requisite 6–8 The management at the trauma centre was in keeping with fundamental surgical principles. Following a complete assessment of the whole patient, resuscitation and treatment of life threatening injuries, where appropriate, was performed. Attention was then given to the injured limb. Neurovascular status and the open wound were assessed. The fundamental steps were: Prevention of further contamination. It has long been shown that repeated removal of the dressing in the Emergency Department increases the risk of infection when compared with a sterile dressing being applied at the accident and remaining in situ until the patient arrives in the operating theatre. Aggressive debridement and washout of the wound, excising all devitalised and contaminated tissue since living tissue is the best defence against infection. Obtaining adequate soft tissue cover at the earliest stage. Early broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics. There is widespread acceptance of these management guidelines. The principle of O’Brien and Morrison that “the simplest procedure that will provide adequate aesthetic cover of the defect is the wisest approach” The infection rate of 31%, is at the higher end of previous other studies, although not excessive. The high incidence of open tibial fractures, for a relatively small population, places a large financial burden on the state. The total patient-days in hospital of the 45 patients in this study was 2233. Over the 2.5-year period we studied, this works out as 2.4 beds occupied for the whole duration of the study, by patients with open tibial fractures. This study is perhaps unique in the present time and age. The study population was managed along the guidelines that are followed in any developed country. The only discrepancy being the delay in transfer to the trauma centre because of the geographical logistics. However the meticulous application of fundamental surgical rules (outlined previously) enabled a satisfactory outcome in most cases. The observations of this study would be applicable in the war setting, in mineral or oil field exploration, or other explorations in remote areas. All these situations pose a potential in delay of definitive management of open fracture management. Open tibial fractures should be managed on an emergency basis as early as possible. Where delay in treatment is inevitable the following principles become increasingly relevant. These are minimal pre operative handling of the wound, meticulous debridement, stabilisation of the fracture, provision of soft tissue cover and appropriate antibiotic administration. A satisfactory outcome principally rests on these basic tenets. The authors wish to thank the following Orthopaedic Surgeons, whose patients were reviewed in this study, Ross Kennedy, Michael Fleming, Robert Pozzi and Steve Baddeley, for their help and encouragement. This paper was presented as an oral presentation at the 59th Australian Orthopaedic Association Annual Scientific Meeting in Brisbane 1999 by Robert Ashford, supported by a travel grant from Stryker Howmedica (UK).