Olive stone is a by-product of the olive grove especially suitable for thermal purpose in industrial, residential and home. To avoid maintenance problems in boilers and to increase the combustion efficiency, olive stone needs to be dried to moisture equilibrium, about 8% (wet basis). The thin layer drying kinetics was investigated in a drying tunnel. Isothermal drying tests were performed with different drying air temperatures: 100, 150, 200 and 250 °C for each sample thickness: 10, 20 and 30 mm. Drying curves were analyzed from the different mathematical models studied by the researchers to date. A new mathematical model is proposed in this work, Two Term Gaussian, which presents the best results of fit. The drying rate is calculated and analyzed. The effective diffusivity values range from 3.98·10−9 to 5.97·10−8 m2/s. Furthermore, the activation energies values were 14,208, 15,356 and 16,270 J/mol for each sample thickness: 10, 20 and 30 mm, respectively.coefficients of the mathematical models constants of the mathematical models (s effective diffusivity (m pre-exponential factor of the Arrhenius equation (m activation energy (kJ/mol) thickness of the slab (m) universal gas constant (kJ·mol coefficient of determination root mean square error time (s) temperature (°C, K) velocity (m s equilibrium moisture content (kg moisture/kg dry matter) initial moisture content (kg moisture/kg dry matter) moisture content at time t (kg moisture/kg dry matter) dimensionless moisture ratio drying rate (kg moisture/(kg dry matter·s)) Olive grove is the main source of biomass residues in Andalusia (Spain). There are more than 1.4 million hectares for the olive grove cultivation in Andalusia which produce an average total of 4,700,000 tons of olives per year The average annual production of olive stone ranges from 360,000 tons per year This biomass product highlighted by low percentages of nitrogen and sulfur minimizing emission of NO Drying of the olive stone is necessary for two fundamental reasons. First, olive stone is accompanied by the olive pulp when is separated from the alpeorujo. The olive pulp contains some content of olive oil that needs to be extracted. To do so, it is essential the drying until equilibrium moisture content, where the solvent is more effective. On the other hand, high moisture content in the olive stone decreases the combustion yield So far, there are no works in the drying of olive stone in the literature. All researches in the drying of by-products of the olive grove focus on the drying of olive cake (40–50% moisture content, three-phase system) This work presents a study about the drying kinetics of the olive stone (with olive pulp) in a drying tunnel, although the results can serve as starting point in other drying systems like: fluidized bed dryers, solar dryers and rotary dryers. First, drying curves were fitted with the main mathematical model in the drying of agricultural products. A new mathematical model, which obtains the best results of fit, is proposed, Two Term Gaussian. Second, the drying rate was calculated and analyzed. Third, the effective diffusivity values were obtained for each test. Finally, the activation energies were found for each sample thickness. Olive stone samples with olive pulp were kindly donated by an olive oil mill and a company of drying of the olive stone in the province of Jaen (Spain). The weight of the olive pulp was estimated at approximately 30% of the total weight. The olive stone size ranges from 1 to 3 mm of diameter. To find out the initial moisture content, the samples were dried in an oven (Memmert GmbH + Co.KG, SNB 167 Model 100, Germany) at 105 °C for 24 h. Drying samples were performed in triplicate. An average moisture content of 23 ± 0.5% (wet basis) was found. The same procedure was applied to obtain the equilibrium moisture content which was estimated at 8 ± 0.5% (wet basis). Drying tests were carried out in a drying tunnel ( Twelve experiments were performed. For each sample thickness: 10, 20, 30 mm, four tests with constant drying air temperatures at 100, 150, 200 and 250 °C were carried out. The drying air velocity was established in 1 ± 0.1 m/s. Drying curves represent the moisture ratio function versus drying time. The moisture ratio can be expressed as (Eq.  Drying is a complex physic process which depends on diffusion and convection phenomena. Drying curves were fitted with the main mathematical models in the drying of products. Thirteen mathematical models were used to approximate the drying curves by non-linear regression analysis. To verify the quality of fit, the coefficient of determination, The drying rate is a variable very important to optimize and control the drying process. This value indicates the moisture content variation with respect to time, in other word, the amount of evaporated water per time unit. The drying rate of the olive stone can be expressed as (Eq. The drying rate curves can be fitted from the derivate with respect to time of the models of  The drying rate curves show the dependency with the moisture ratio. The variation of the drying rate with respect to the moisture ratio can be explained from the stages proposed in the drying of the alpeorujo In the warming-up period, the entire sample surface is totally wet, and the test starts at room temperature. As the test proceeds, the solid begins to heat and the drying rate increases rapidly (higher vapor pressures) until a maximum value is reached. From this value, the drying rate begins to decrease. In the tests performed at 100 °C, this period is appreciated when the sample thickness is 10 mm, can hardly be differentiated when the sample thickness is 20 mm (it appears that there is a constant drying rate) and does not exist when the sample thickness is 30 mm. This can be explained taking into account the concept of specific surface (sample surface in contact with the drying air divided by sample volume). This value is greater as the sample thickness is lower. For remaining temperatures and sample thicknesses, this period can be clearly identified. In fact, warming-up period grows as the drying temperature increases, regardless of the sample thickness. This means that the maximum value of drying rate moves in downward direction of the moisture ratio. The first falling rate period appears at low temperatures mainly by two reasons. First, the sample surface still has moisture content in contact with the drying air. And second, there is continuous movement of moisture content from within the porous medium to the surface When the second falling rate period is manifested, the sample surface is totally dry. The diffusion is the predominant phenomenon in this stage. The vapor and liquid migration is produce from inside the sample to the surface. In this stage, the drying rate drops rapidly as the sample thickness grows. The effective diffusivity values can be obtained for each of the twelve tests carried out in the drying of the olive stone. For that, the partial differential equation, Fick's second law of diffusion (Eq. This equation can be represented graphically applying the logarithm on both sides. From the slope of the curves  Effective diffusivity depends on the temperature and can be calculated from an Arrhenius type relationship (Eq. With respect to the activation energy, similar values can be found for olive cake. Akgun and Doymaz Drying kinetics of olive stone with olive pulp was studied from different conditions of temperature and sample thickness. Thirteen mathematical models were analyzed to fit the drying curves. The drying rate curves were fitted with the derivate of the models which obtained the best results of fit in the drying curves. Two term Gaussian model presented the best results. The effective diffusivity values were calculated for each test between 3.98·10 This work has been conducted with the financial support of the Spanish