The article reviews the cathodic process of gallium ion reduction in alkaline solutions. The solution composition influence on the gallium anion reduction kinetics was analyzed by measuring the polarization curves on a dropping mercury electrode. It was found that the cathodic process rate is proportional to the specific adsorption of background cations in the sequence Na+
                     <K+
                     <Li+
                     <Cs+
                     <La3+. A higher rate of reduction of gallium anion present in alkaline solution of lithium cation is a result of participation of the water molecules from the hydration shell of Li+ as a proton donor. In the presence of polyvalent lanthanum cations in alkaline solution, the gallium anion reduction rate increases sharply. This is related to a shift in the ψ1-potential and participation of hydrated cations La(H2O)3+n. The presence of surface-active agents, which have no proton–donor properties, in the solution, complicates the reduction reaction. Certain patterns of the mechanism of the gallium ion discharge reaction in alkaline solutions allow qualifying it as the second group of anions, and the slow stage of the reduction reaction comes down to simultaneous transfer of an electron and proton to the discharging anion. The estimated charge of the discharging gallium anion, which is equal to −0.24 in the transition state of the reaction, is indicative of formation of associates with background electrolyte cations [Me+
                     …GaO2
                     −], [Me+
                     …GaO(OH)2
                     −] by gallate anions in alkaline solutions (рН12).The analysis of the world market tendencies of nonferrous and rare metals indicates a rapid growth in demand for gallium, up until 2020. For this reason there is a need for substantial increase of its output ( Reduction of gallium ions from alkaline solutions is one of the complex reactions, in which the metal is in the form of hydrated tetrahydroxy gallate anions Ga(OH) This paper provides analyses of the mechanism of gallium ion discharge in the alkaline solution from the point of view of the anion reduction theory. According to this theory, the process of electrochemical reduction of anions, like any electrochemical reaction, has a number of successive steps, and the total reaction rate is determined by the rate of the most hindered step ( According to the mechanism of reduction reactions anions are divided into two groups. In the first group are the anions; the reduction rate of which is determined by the slowness of electron transfer to the discharging anion: Kinetic equations are provided for the discharge reaction rate of the first group anions: Due to the fact that standard equilibrium potential of the analyzed reaction is generally not realized, the measured potential is read off the reference electrode. The measured value differs from the equilibrium standard potential of the analyzed reaction for the constant value Е It has been established that for a large number of anions with different structures and compositions (S In the slow stage of anion reduction in the second group (NO For the second group anion reduction rate following equations were established ( Kinetics of electrical reduction of the second group anions significantly depends on the nature of proton donor. If any neutral solvent particles, such as water, adsorbed on the electrode participate in the reaction as PD, then the equation will look as under: It follows from Eq. If ammonium cations act as proton donor, then the equation will look as follows: The Eqs. Strong influence of the double electric layer on the anion discharge rate is due to the fact that influence of ψ Deviation from the linear dependence of lgi on Е is also connected with the influence of ψ It follows from Eq. The curves of these coordinates were called the adjusted Tafel dependencies (ATD-1). ATD-1 for different background concentrations on one electrode must correspond to the whole range of application of the Eqs. For the second group anions, if proton donors in the reaction are water molecules, which adsorption significantly depends on the electrode potential ( For the second group anions apparent values of transfer coefficient α are calculated, being determined from the linear part of ATD-1 dependence. The electrochemical studies of kinetics of gallium anion reduction were performed by establishment of polarization curves in the electrochemical cell with a dropping mercury electrode using a Potentiostat Autolab PGSTAT12 (Distrilab). Sodium tetrahydroxygallate NaGa(OH) The obtained white caked substance of sodium gallate was dissolved in bidistillate: Hydration was conducted using a small amount of bidistillate, and the substance obtained was dried at 110 Since the anion reduction reaction is sensitive to traces of organic and inorganic impurities to a greater extent than other electrochemical reactions we paid special attention to cleaning the mercury, the salts and water, paying particular attention to the experimentation conduct. Mercury used in the work was purified from metal additives by oxidation using oxygen, which was streamed through a layer of mercury, under a layer of 0.5% solution of Hg(NO Water used for the preparation of test solutions was thoroughly cleaned. Tap water was distilled in redistillation Appliance Re-5, and the bidistilled water was processed in special glass equipment. For the oxidation of surface-active organic substances (SAOS) 0.8 Alkali (“e.p.” extra pure type NaOH) used in the testing was purified using cathodic polarization method on a mercury cathode for 24 The obtained polarization curves of reducing NaGa(OH) This conclusion results from the fact that the reduction reaction rate of gallium ions is growing with the increase of background cation concentration. The anion reduction theory ( In case of cation reduction, an increase in the background electrolyte concentration would have caused a decrease in the reduction rate, as the influence of ψ The polarization curves indicate that gallium anion is reduced in the conditions of high charge of the electrode surface, which causes exponential dependence of the rate of its reduction reaction on the potential. In order to identify the nature of the limiting current obtained on the polarization curves dependence of the limiting current magnitude on the mercury column height — H and mercury dropping time — τ. According to the experimental data the magnitude of the tested limiting current is growing in proportion to Н In water solutions the reduction reaction of the second group, anions can proceed with water molecules or hydronium ions acting as proton donors in the elementary discharge act ( As it appears for gallium anion ( In solutions with рН Such dependence of the reaction rate of gallium anion reduction on the solution рН can be explained by participation in the reaction at 10 To test the hypothesis that the reaction of gallium anion reduction proceeds with the simultaneous participation of the electron and proton of the proton donor in an elementary discharge act, we have investigated the kinetics of gallate — ion electrochemical reduction in solutions with various proton donors. Investigations were conducted at the pH level of the solution equal to 12, when the half-wave potential of the gallium anion discharge reaction is independent on the solution pH, namely we assume that in this case only water molecules act as proton donor. According to the theories of the first and second group anion reductions, the influence of background cations is associated with the displacement of ψ In the frame work of the theory of the second group anion reduction this can be explained by the fact that in conditions of equality of background electrolyte cation charges (Li With LaCI Ammonium cations also have greater proton–donor properties than water molecules; therefore there is an increase of the reaction rate in the second group anion reduction (  The obtained I, E — curves indicate that with ammonium cation at a potential of − Half-wave potential of discharge of the tested gallium anion is displaced by 100 We have studied the influence of aprotic organic substances on the gallium anion reduction rate ( It follows from the data obtained ( Thus, in all the studies undertaken in alkaline solution the presence of substances with proton–donor properties, other than water molecules, accelerates the gallium anion reduction reaction. Conversely, addition of aprotic organic substances slows it down. Therefore, we can conclude that gallium anion in alkaline solution can be recovered on the mechanism of the second group anion reduction. On this basis it may be concluded that gallium anion in the alkaline solution is reduced by the mechanism of the second group anion reduction and the reduction reaction kinetics is determined by Eqs. The experimental value of the limiting current ( This can be explained by participation in the electrochemical step of the reduction reaction of such a gallium anion, concentration of which is much lower than bulk concentration. According to Discharge of gallate ions with water molecules acting as proton donors is represented in the following equations: When ammonium cation participates as a proton donor in the elementary discharge act of gallium anion the Eqs. Using the Frumkin method ( This difference of the charge value from the theoretical value z As the theory of the second group anion reduction implies, when kinetic current and potential are changed for the value of ψ It was determined that in the case of solutions with low (curve1, concentration of KCI, mol/dm Weak deviation from CTD-1 linearity in this case can be explained by the fact that the value of g Thus, the data on dependence of the reaction rate on the solution composition, in the presence of aprotic organic cations (TBA), and on the nature of proton donor on the kinetics of gallium anion reduction indicate that the rate of gallate anion reduction reaction is determined by slowness of the stage of simultaneous transfer of an electron and a proton from proton donor to their acting particle, that is, according to the discharge reaction mechanism gallium anions belong to the second group of anions. Low limiting current related to the gallium anion discharge reaction is indicative of the need for its electrochemical reduction on a developed cathode surface, moreover the reaction sensitivity to the presence of aprotic organic substances requires constant renewal of the cathode surface.  It was found that the rate of the cathodic process of gallium anion reduction in alkaline solution on a dropping mercury electrode is described by an exponential curve. It is based on the fact that reduction begins at high negative values of the potential (Е The rate of the cathodic process of gallium anion reduction is proportional to the value of specific adsorption of background electrolyte cations in the sequence Na The gallium anion reduction reaction proceeds with participation in the slow discharge stage of an electron and proton from proton donor. Aprotic organic cations (TBA) hinder the gallium anion reduction reaction. Calculated from the dependence of gallium anion reduction reaction rate in alkaline solution (рН Low limiting current related to the reaction of gallium anion discharge is indicative of the necessity of its electrochemical reduction on a developed cathode surface, moreover the reaction sensitivity to the presence of aprotic organic substances requires constant renewal of the cathode surface.