Dissolved air flotation (DAF) is often used after a primary gravity separator to enhance the quality of wastewater, so it can be released to streams, rivers or the sea. The main aim of the DAF experiments reported here was to measure the oil droplet removal efficiency (η) mostly in the range 15–80μm from oil-in-water mixtures. The DAF tank used in this investigation was a scale model of real DAF unit. Two kinds of oil, vegetable and mineral and two types of water, fresh and salty were used, and four other operating parameters were varied. A droplet counting and oil-in-water measuring methods were used to estimate the η. Dimensional analysis concluded that the η in this experiment is a function of eight other dimensionless groups and the experimental data has been subjected to multivariable linear regression. The resulting correlation was found to have a root mean square error of 6.0%, but predict η outside the range zero and one. An alternative mathematical formulation was devised that cannot predict η outside the range. Regression of the data by this formulation, which had the same number of adjustable parameters as the linear regression, was successful with a lower root mean square error of 5.5%.Dissolved air flotation (DAF) is a separation technique used to treat water polluted with particles, droplets or microorganisms in a range of 10–100 The water is saturated with air in a saturator packed column under a pressure of between 1 and 4 barg. Several researchers have suggested different ranges of saturator pressure, which are 4–5 barg ( The flotation method is divided into three different flow schemes, which are, full-flow pressure flotation, split-flow pressure flotation, and recycled-flow pressure flotation ( The air bubbles and the oil droplets attach together to form agglomerates. The agglomerate-in-water has a higher average density difference than the oil droplet-in-water. This characteristic enhances the buoyant force and thereby the rise velocity of the oil. The flotation is successful once the oil droplets create a layer on the surface of DAF tank and the water sufficiently clarified. Contact of the air bubble with an oil droplet does not guarantee the successful rise of the oil droplet to the surface. The oil droplet needs to spread over the air bubble to form an agglomerate that is able to tolerate the drag and gravitational forces without breaking up as it moves. The spreading interaction between the air bubble and oil droplet is governed by the spreading coefficient ( There are several scientific studies that have discussed the performance of DAF units by measuring the oil droplet removal efficiency in terms of change in chemical oxygen demand (COD), biological oxygen demand (BOD), and total dissolved solids (TDS) ( The liquids used in the experimental study were Guildford, Surrey tap water, salty water, which was made by adding about 3.5% by concentration of NaCl (supplied by British Salt Limited) to mimic the average salinity of seawater and some produced waters, Vegetable oil (triglycerides) that was supplied by Tesco Supermarket, since it is relevant to the food industry and lamp oil, a mineral oil similar to that on an oil production platform. The lamp oil was supplied by Lamplight Farms was the safest in terms of vapour pressure among other mineral oils considered. The vegetable oil has a clear pale yellow appearance, with density The DAF unit built in the University of Surrey is illustrated in The oil was pumped through P-01 at different flow rates to mix with the tap water from TK-02. Experiments with salty water required V-06 to be fully closed and V-08 fully opened. The flow rates of tap water or salty water were controlled using V-06. They were set at 45 or 30 The water stream used to produce micro-bubbles in the flotation tank was pumped from TK-04 using P-03 into C-01 that operated at a pressure between 1 and 4 barg. The water ran over packing in C-01 and became saturated with air. The air-saturated water was subsequently flowed through F-01 before being routed to injection valves V-04 a/b/c at the bottom of the contact zone. Sample points were placed in both the inlet and outlet pipelines to the flotation tank. Samples were collected at these points after steady state was achieved and were analysed using methods discussed in Sections Ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometry (UV–vis) was used to analyse the samples of influent and effluent from the DAF tank by measuring the intensity of fluorescent light (absorbance) that is generated by a known concentration of oil. The absorbance values were used to create a calibration curve, which was then applied to calculate the concentration of oils. This method is known as the FastHEX method and was used for oil-in-water measurement in the Alba Field ( 100 A Coulter Counter was used for the droplet counting method. It was used by Finally, the oil droplet removal efficiency from the droplet counting method The surface/interfacial tensions were measured using Du Nouy Ring method ( The effects of the inlet oil concentration entering the flotation tank were measured by varying the oil flow rates into the static mixer, while the other variables were kept constant. Three different inlet oil concentrations were used for each set of conditions. The The increase in Due to the pressure limit of the laboratory air supply, which was 4 barg, only pressures of 3, 4, and 0 barg (No DAF) were applied to saturator in the flotation process. It has been identified that the bubble size stays the same when the pressure is increased above 3.5 barg (  The bubbles produced at any pressure in the DAF tank resulted in better  The temperature of the continuous phase taken from the TK-02 and TK-06 was either at the room temperature or 35 For the similar set of experiments but at the room temperature, Experiments conducted at the higher temperature obtained slightly better The investigation was carried out using two different types of continuous phase: Guilford, Surrey tap water and salty water (water with NaCl added to mimic sea water or produced water). For the experiment of 4 barg, lamp oil Possible reasons for this behaviour are salt alters the surface charges of the oil droplets, which encourages the attachment of the air bubbles to the oil droplets ( Based on the terminal rise velocity, the However, the experiments conducted showed contrasting results. The experiments with vegetable oil presented higher Oil-in-water (FastHEX) and droplet counting (Coulter Counter) methods were used to measure the oil droplet removal efficiencies for the same or very similar conditions. Then both methods were compared to explore the agreement between them. The oil droplet removal efficiencies of the experiments with No DAF, lamp oil and tap water that analysed with FastHEX were found to be 25.0% and 21.1%, and the analysis with the Coulter Counter were found to be 24.8% and 21.9% for C The experiment involved 4 barg, lamp oil and tap water analysed with FastHEX were found to be 34.4% and 27.1%, and the analyses with Coulter Counter obtained oil droplet removal efficiencies of 31.4% and 30% for C Experiments with the saturator pressure set at 3 barg using lamp oil and tap water gave removal efficiencies obtained from FastHEX analysis of 28.0% and 21.9%. The oil droplet removal efficiencies measured by the Coulter Counter were found to be 28.6% and 21.8 for C Experiments with the saturator pressure set at 3 barg using vegetable oil and tap water gave removal efficiencies obtained from Coulter Counter analysis of 53.5% and 37.1% while the analyses with FastHEX were found to be 56.9% and 37.3% for C The last comparison involved the experiments with the saturator pressure set 4 barg using vegetable oil and tap water. The oil droplet removal efficiencies obtained from Coulter Counter analysis were found to be 62.2% and 45.9% while the analysis with FastHEX gave 64.7% and 54.3% for C A parity plot shown in It is concluded that (1) when adjusted by a factor of 1.05, the Coulter Counter method values of removal efficiencies agree with the FastHex method and (2) the Coulter Counter method is a reasonable method to explore the behaviour of DAF with respect to the effect on oil droplets of different sizes. The flow rates of the mixture into the DAF tank were varied between 10 Then, they were plotted against the flow rate of the mixture in A worse Each of the experiments was conducted twice to explore reproducibility, which was acceptable and the average values are those reported elsewhere in the paper. The lamp oil droplet size distributions of the inlet and the outlet of the DAF tank are shown in The average oil droplet removal efficiencies obtained from the Coulter Counter (  These experiments were conducted twice to confirm reproducibility and the average of No obvious coalescence was noticed in the vegetable oil experiments, as can be seen in The apparatus used in the experiment is a scale model of an industrial DAF tank. Therefore, dimensional analysis offers efficient consolidation of the data prior to correlation and was undertaken using Buckingham’s Pi (π) method. This involved the identification of the relevant experimental parameters, which are two dimensionless parameters which are, oil droplet removal efficiency The analysis concluded that the oil droplet removal efficiency, Not all the experimental data were included in the multiple regression. Those not used were the experimental data of vegetable oil at 25 A linear correlation for overall oil droplet removal efficiencies was obtained by multi variable regression, using Analysis ToolPak option in Microsoft Excel The value of each coefficient calculated from the multiple variable regression was found to be All the lines based on Eq. In order to force the correlation to always predict efficiency within the range zero to one, a mathematical transformation of a shifted inverse hyperbolic tangent (IHT) was applied to the efficiency data and the resulting data set subject to linear regression. This regression involved the same number of undetermined coefficients as the previous correlation. The new coefficients were calculated and found to be  To obtain the hopefully better prediction of the removal efficiency, the transformation was inverted leading to Eq. Parity plots (see Several operational parameters were investigated to determine their effect on the oil droplet removal efficiency from an oil-in-water mixture by using DAF. All the parameters tested were demonstrated that DAF could provide a significant intensification to the separation performance of oil droplets from the oil-in-water mixtures. The experiments have revealed that a better oil droplet removal efficiency ( At a low inlet oil concentration At an optimum air saturator pressure (4 barg), which produced bubbles of the similar size as the oil droplets. At a higher temperature to decrease the viscosity of the mixture. With oil in salty water mixture; salty water encourages the attachment of oil droplets to air bubbles. With vegetable oil that has a higher and positive spreading coefficient than lamp oil, in which greatly influenced the oil droplet removal efficiency. A dimensional analysis was conducted using Buckingham’s Pi (π) method with the oil droplet removal efficiencies is a function of  Dissolved air flotation Vegetable oil Ultraviolet visible spectroscopy  Saturator pressure column Flow indicator Filter Flexible vane pump Air driven pump Static mixer Oil feed tank Water feed tank Dissolved air flotation tank Water sump tank Effluent tank Salty water tank Valves Pressure regulator Air saturated water inlet nozzles  Absorbance value Absorbance value for inlet oil as measured by UV spectrometer Absorbance value for outlet oil as measured by UV spectrometer Concentration of lamp oil (volume fraction) Oil concentration (volume fraction) Ratio of inlet oil and continuous phase flow rates Concentration of vegetable oil (volume fraction) Surface area of oil droplet (m Volume of oil droplet (m Sauter mean diameter (defined in Eq. Oil droplet diameter (m) Froude number of the mixture in the DAF tank (defined in Eq. Gravity acceleration (m Cuvette height (m) Constant value for oil–hexane calibration Length (m) Number of oil droplets obtained from Coulter Counter Saturator gauge pressure (Pa) Ratio of saturator and atmospheric pressure Volumetric flow rate (m Reynolds number of the mixture in the DAF tank (defined in Eq. Spreading coefficient (defined in Eq. Spreading coefficient ratio of oil and continuous phase Weight of salt to mix with 1 Time taken for oil droplet to be on the surface of the cuvette (s) Horizontal velocity of the fluid (m Terminal rise velocity (defined in Eq. Kinematic viscosity (m Volume fraction of oil droplet in the mixture Weight fraction of salt in water continuous phase  Surface tension (N Oil–air surface tension (N Oil–water interfacial tension (N Water–air surface tension (N Dynamic viscosity of water (N Density (kg Oil density (kg Continuous phase density (kg Oil droplet removal efficiency from oil-in-water measuring method Oil droplet removal efficiency by FastHEX method We would like to acknowledge Professor Spencer Taylor and Miss Hiu Tung Chu from the BP Centre for Petroleum and Surface Chemistry for the spreading coefficient measurements. M.R. Aliff Radzuan acknowledges his PhD scholarship from Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA). The terminal rise velocity for both types of oil was calculated using Eq. Here, It took approximately two and a half minutes to carry out the analysis for all range of sizes. Based on Eqs. 