A pyritic refractory gold ore was oxidized in short and tall isothermal columns at different temperatures (22, 45 and 65 °C) with consortia of mesophiles, moderate and extreme thermophiles under a variety of experimental conditions. These experiments were performed as part of a heap leach model validation program. Severe air channeling and bed compaction occurred in columns as short as 2 m packed with non-agglomerated ore particles. Similar problems were encountered in columns loaded with 9 mm agglomerates prepared with smaller particles (<3.3 mm). Although aeration was key to maintaining high potentials, neither the irrigation flow rate, nor the inoculation procedure, nor CO2 enrichment had any significant effect on the oxidation kinetics at ambient temperature. Elemental sulfur oxidation was more rapid at elevated temperatures. Reasons why sulfide oxidation kinetics in the 65 °C column were comparable to the 45 °C test, and thus slower than predicted by the intrinsic Arrhenius activation energy of pyrite, are discussed.Our review of the literature on the state of the art of heap biooxidation of refractory gold ores has revealed that most column leaching experiments and heap pilot tests have determined primarily the improvement in gold recovery. Certainly, easily controllable operating parameters, including particle size ( Careful testing and comprehensive process modeling is crucial in order to demystify the multiple phenomena operating simultaneously, yet consecutively, and to provide sound engineering principles for all heap leaching operations. To this end, our research group is currently developing a computerized code representing all important chemical, biological, and physical steps, from the microscale of the individual sulfide mineral grain to the macroscale of the entire heap and its surroundings. This paper reports on a series of short and tall column tests performed with a pyritic refractory gold ore to elucidate the effects of solution flow rate, ore agglomeration, particle size, aeration, carbon dioxide enrichment, mode of inoculation, and temperature. These findings will ultimately guide model development, help to formulate recommendations for future column testwork, and most importantly, supply leach data to the model for tuning, validation and simulation purposes. All factors at ambient temperature were studied in eight columns of 25.4 cm internal diameter and ≈1.7 m tall. Each column was comprised of two 1.52-m long sections, each equipped with a perforated plate resting on top of a drainage plate. Two columns were operated at ambient temperature under the standard conditions ( Two banks of four identical columns of 10 cm internal diameter and 0.53 m tall were built and assembled each within a 100-L water bath to evaluate the effects of increasing the temperature to 45 °C and 65 °C. All four columns were replicates of each other, and were dismantled at different time intervals. Aside from temperature, both banks of four columns were operated under identical conditions ( Pure cultures of ATCC 29047 Approximately 5000 kg of pyritic refractory gold ore were crushed to less than 12.7 mm ( The content of a drum was then added batchwise together with the agglomerating medium ( To study the influence of ore particle size prior to agglomeration, the content of one drum was fed through a rotary crusher to produce a homogeneous sample with particles smaller than 3.35 mm ( Moist agglomerates (or dry ore particles for column F) were loaded gently into the columns to prevent their breakup upon discharge. The top surface of the agglomerate bed was covered with a thin layer of glass wool and polyethylene balls to improve solution distribution. A few weeks after start-up, the beds in columns A–E and H had slumped to about 84% of their initial height, while the bed of column G had slumped even lower to 78%. On the other hand, column F loaded with non-agglomerated particles experienced a 1.1% slump only. Dry ore and stagnant liquid occupied about 56% and 15%, respectively, of the total column volume. Columns loaded with non-agglomerated particles (column F) or with agglomerated fine particles (column G) retained even more solution (22.8–24.1 vol%). From the 4-L reservoir refilled every 3rd day with fresh medium, the solution was pumped to the top of the 45 and 65 °C columns where it dripped in the middle and trickled through the bed before draining through the bottom port into the leachate container. The configuration of the large columns was practically the same, except for (1) the 75 L feed reservoir, (2) the pump redirecting the leachate from the bottom of the upper section to the top of the lower section, and (3) the tube carrying the air from the lower to the upper sections. Solids-free mesophilic inoculum was pumped at the preset rate ( Liquid samples were collected weekly from the reservoir and from the drainage port of the upper and lower sections to measure the pH, potential, metal concentrations, suspended cell numbers, density, and leachate mass. About 1000 g of moist agglomerates were collected from the surface of the ore bed of each section periodically to assay for attached cell numbers, 31 elements by ICP, sulfur suite, and moisture content. The leftover sterile solution used for agglomeration was pumped into column B during the first week. At the end of the 7th day, the same procedure was followed to make up the total volume to 75 L, except that the inoculum was replaced with the same H During the first week of operation, columns H, I, and J were irrigated with their regular feed solution ( The leached residue in the tall columns was scooped out in 8–10 strata, whose thicknesses were measured precisely. Agglomerates in small columns were dropped into a pre-weighed container after unscrewing the bolts holding the drainage plate to the bottom flange. The weight of each batch of wet agglomerates was noted immediately to calculate the moisture content. One or two 15-g samples were collected after having mixed thoroughly the whole content of each batch until of uniform consistency and color. All solids adhering to the column walls, tubes, and tools were washed into the containers, which were then placed in a 45 °C oven until dry. After recording the dry weight, each batch of residue was fed through a rotary crusher, followed by ring-disk grinding. After riffling each pulverized sample three times, one of the halves was discarded. The same series of steps was repeated with the second half to yield a representative sample to be assayed for 31 elements and the sulfur suite. Compilation of experimental data, including (1) solid, iron and sulfur mass balances, (2) depth- and time-dependent profiles of pH, potential, sulfate concentration, iron concentration, attached and suspended cell numbers, and (3) attached cell numbers, sulfur grade, and iron grade depth profiles at the time of shutdown, generated over 100 plots and tables. In the interest of brevity, only the most relevant plots ( It was originally proposed to determine the extent of oxidation in columns A–G by measuring the sulfide grade from a small sample of partially leached residue collected periodically. Grade inconsistencies were quickly attributed to poor sample representativeness. This problem was surmounted in column H by collecting fewer, larger samples of 15–20 kg. Setting up four replicates of columns I and J alleviated any sampling problems. A rough oxidation estimate (open symbols in The pH dropped from 3.5 to 2.0 everywhere in the column after only 20 days and continued its descent to 1.5 for the next 130 days ( Ore surfaces were rapidly colonized by 2–3×10 The first column was dismantled after 222 days and displayed uniform sulfate (0.53 wt.%), elemental sulfur (0.20%), iron (1.67%) and sulfide (1.01%) depth profiles ( Alongside the seven minerals originally detected in the bulk ore, illite, a potassium-deficient muscovite ((1− The mode of solution irrigation, whether single pass (column H) or in recirculation (column A), had no significant influence on the pH, potential (>700 mV) and attached cell number time- and depth-dependent profiles. These observations are also consistent with the findings of Following a rapid drop in pH from 2.4 to 1.5 during the first week ( While moderate thermophiles rapidly colonized the ore surfaces to reach the same maximum level as the mesophiles, the number of suspended cells dropped progressively to 10 Columns controlled to 65 °C also saw their pH drop rapidly to a lower, constant level of 1.45 ( It was anticipated that, due to cell inhibition, the high initial potential of 650 mV would drop and remain low during the first phase of the test during which no H For the remaining 293 days, the potential (700 mV) and the attached cell numbers (≈3×10 The only mode of air ingress to column C was through the open top of the column. Definite indicators, including: potentials permanently less than 500 mV ( unusually large iron (≈3 wt.%) and sulfide (≈2.5%) levels in the residues ( 6.1 wt.% jarosite precipitates found only in the upper 20% of the column, in contrast to an average 1.97 wt.% everywhere else; time-independent pH of 1.9±0.1 ( steep depth/concentration gradient of attached cells (e.g. from 2×10 The performance of column C is very poor in comparison to columns A and H ( As with columns A and E, the potential at both sampling points in column D points rose rapidly to 700 mV. It plateaued around 670 mV midway and fluctuated repeatedly between 500 and 700 mV at the bottom. The pH was constant at 1.55 throughout the column for the first 60 days, but later dropped to 1.3. After 252 days, the eight residues contained 0.21 wt.% elemental sulfur, 0.52% sulfate, 1.56% iron, 1.65% jarosite and 0.84% sulfide ( The suspended cell population dropped to 10 The carbon dioxide calculation, the extent of oxidation, and the trends of the leach indicators suggest that column D was another replicate of column A. Neither the pH, the potential nor even the soluble iron and sulfate concentrations were affected by the lower flow rate. As with columns A and D, the pH dropped to 1.5 everywhere in the column within about 150 days, and thereafter remained constant. The number of suspended cells also decreased from 10 To determine the true influence of agglomeration, it would have been preferable to load column F batchwise with dry, non-agglomerated ore particles, and to spray the ore with inoculum in between. However, in less than a day the volume of inoculum needed to yield the same initial moisture content had already been delivered to the column. Given the very long timescale of leaching, ore preinoculation can absolutely be ruled out as a rate-limiting step at this scale. Although less severe than in column G, air bypassing, and possibly channeling, could explain the jagged potential profile reaching sporadically 700 mV, but more often around 550 mV ( By the end of the test, the dense non-agglomerated ore bed was 2.0 m tall and contained 172 kg of dry ore and 23.4 kg of leaching solution. The ore and solution therefore occupied 71 and 20 vol% of the column volume, respectively, confining the air to the remaining 9% (vs 17% in agglomerated beds). This could certainly have affected the air distribution, explaining the vertical gradient of potential, sulfide and iron grades. Accumulation of fines at the bottom of the lower section created soon after start-up such a large overpressure that air was escaping through the drainage tube. Increasing the air pressure and flow rate temporarily and partially dislodged the fines. Solution ponding and air channeling along the walls were signs that the lower bed had become totally impermeable only four months after start-up. The lower bed was dismantled into five sections of equal thickness to reveal yellow and gray zones at the edges and in the core of the bottom fifth section, respectively. Tenfold more cells were attached at the periphery (  In the 22 and 45 °C experiments, the sulfur grade increased and leveled off around 0.15–0.20 wt.%, varying slightly with experimental conditions. Comparable grades of elemental sulfur were detected early on in the 65 °C column, but progressively dropped to 0.11 wt.% and finally 0.03 wt.% after 220 days. This data was interpreted to highlight the influence of sulfur-oxidizing mesophiles, moderate and extreme thermophiles. Abiotic stirred-tank ferric sulfate leaching tests performed in our laboratory using a pyrite concentrate prepared by flotation from the same ore loaded in the columns indicate that each unit of sulfide sulfur generates approximately 0.4 unit of elemental sulfur, the balance sulfate. The objective is to calculate the total mass of elemental sulfur oxidized at different times. This quantity is then compared to the theoretical mass of elemental sulfur produced if 100% of the sulfide sulfur were oxidized to yield 40% elemental sulfur. The former quantity obviously increases with time as cells grow and oxidize sulfur, whereas the theoretical mass is simply a constant. Sulfide oxidation data points, elemental sulfur grade, and the residue weight are essential pieces of information in calculating the elemental sulfur oxidized. The ratio of the two quantities is expressed as a percentage in The only true indicator of the extent of oxidation of iron-based sulfide minerals (pyrite, arsenopyrite) containing no other soluble marker (e.g. Zn, Cu) is the sulfide grade in the residues. Iron and sulfate species in solution were unreliable leach indicators as they precipitated to form jarosite. The latter was the sole precipitate formed under all temperature and solution conditions, even when the solution was not recirculated. Oxidation occurred very slowly beyond the first 100 days in all columns operated at ambient temperature (except columns C and G), and eventually achieved 70% after one year. The remaining 30% most likely occurred as large pyrite grains in the coarser size fractions. Oxidation rates at 45 and 65 °C were practically identical. Ten percent more sulfide sulfur (80% vs 70%) was oxidized from this same pyritic refractory gold ore in only 200 days at higher temperatures. The pH rose above 2 during the first week or so because of neutralization by unidentified acid-consuming minerals, but soon dropped to a more-or-less steady-state level of 1.4–1.5 at all temperatures tested. The potential rose quickly to 700 mV following inoculation in well aerated agglomerated ore beds containing a balanced proportion of fine and coarse particles, and operated at ambient temperature or 45 °C. Only the test at 65 °C showed an almost linear increase in solution potential during the first 60 days, followed by a plateau near 700 mV. Cell growth followed closely the rise in potential. Neither irrigating at smaller flow rates, nor enriching the air with carbon dioxide, nor changing the composition of the feed solution had any notable influence on sulfide oxidation kinetics. The column height did not affect the pH, potential, cell numbers and oxidation kinetics in an aerated, agglomerated ore bed. Aeration indeed proved essential to successful leaching. Simple calculations have shown that a column 1.7 m or taller would face a CO In agreement with the findings of Non-agglomerated ore beds or those loaded with very small particles (<3.3 mm) experienced severe air channeling and compaction. Unless binders and/or other agents are used to strengthen the agglomerate structure, decreasing the particle size must be very carefully weighed against proper solution and air distribution. Elemental sulfur was always detected in amounts considerably smaller that what would have been produced in an abiotic stirred-tank ferric sulfate leach of the same pyrite ore. Sulfur production from pyrite oxidation was always more rapid than its disappearance through microbial action. The sulfur-oxidizing capabilities of moderate and extreme thermophiles were superior to that of the mesophiles. A rigorous model of the heap leaching process should provide definite answers to critical questions (e.g. lagging potential at 65 °C, pH plateau vs temperature, sulfide kinetics at higher temperatures) raised in this experimental study. The work was supported by Placer Dome Technical Services Ltd., the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (CRD Grant 233710), the British Columbia Science Council through a GREAT scholarship, the Killam Foundation, and the International Precious Metals Institute. The authors are truly indebted to Mr. Masoud Aftaita, Mr. Shawn Crego, Mr. Scott Ramsay, Mr. Markus Tschopp, Dr. Elisabetta Pani and Ms. Amy Chan for their invaluable technical assistance.