Gasification slag is a by-product of the coal gasification process. To achieve “zero emissions” from coal gasification technology, the environmentally safe utilization of slag by-products from gasifiers must be addressed and developed. In this study, work has been carried out to characterize residual carbon in slag together the morphological study on vitreous material present in slag. The compositions of particles in coal, char and slag were determined by using SEM/EDX. An elemental analyzer (Flash EA 1112) was adopted to analyze CHNS on bulk coal, char and slag. The size distribution of carbon in slag was obtained by analyzing slag sample blocks using an image analysis program developed in this study.
                  It was found that the coarse and fine slags both have a relatively high content of unburnt carbon which hinders their utilization as additives in cement and concrete. There was no evidence that coarse slag is the final destination for coarse char particles since large unburnt chars were found in both the coarse slag and the fine slag. The morphology of the residual carbon in the coarse slag is similar to that found in the fine slag, and is also comparable to partially combusted char produced in a drop tube furnace (DTF) operating at 1300°C, 600ms and 2% oxygen. It is also found that the vitreous particles in fine slag tends to be below 150μm and the majority of residual carbon (75.6wt%) in fine slag tends to be greater than 150μm, which implies that, a simple screening operation might make the slag usable in concrete industries.Gasification slag is a by-product from entrained-bed gasification when molten ash flows from the bottom of a gasifier and is quenched in a water bath. Before 2001, the majority of gasification slag was landfilled in USA Due to the increasing demand for more benign methods of generating low cost energy, coal gasification will continue to increase globally in the next decades There is extensive literature on the characterisation The objective of the present work is to characterise coarse and fine gasification slag sampled from a commercial entrained-bed gasifier using a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) combined with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDX), Flash EA 1112 elemental analyser, Pyris 1 thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and generic oil immersion microscopy. The morphology of residual carbon in the slag was compared with char obtained from a DTF using the same coal. Coarse slag and fine slag together with original coal were obtained from an entrained-bed gasification unit in commercial operation in China. The feedstock was a low rank Chinese coal. A schematic process configuration of Texaco coal gasification is shown in In order to compare the difference in morphology between the residual carbon from CWS gasification and chars produced in pf combustion, the original coal was also ground to −106 Elemental analysis was carried out using a Flash EA 1112 Elemental Analyser manufactured by Thermo Electron. The analyser is able to determine CHNS on dried samples. Oxygen content is obtained by the subtracting the ash % plus the total for carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur. For oil immersion microscopy, the coal was ground into fine powder, mounted in dental resin and polished to meet the requirements of reflected-light microscopic observation A liquid resin (Estratil 2195, provided by Cray Valley Ltd, Spain) mixed with methyl-ethyl-ketone (50% w/w) was employed in mounting char samples. An oil immersion microscope with an automated stage and a high resolution digital camera was used to assess the maceral analysis of the coal was carried out using an automated coal image analysis program For analysis using SEM, loose coarse slag, fine slag, milled coal and DTF char samples were mounted on adhesive carbon discs (Agar Scientific, UK). A mineral liberation analyser (MLA), a Quanta 600 scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis system combined with a software to analyze the images to give mineralogical results of particles detected, was used to investigate the morphology of unburnt carbon and the nature of the composition of the slag on the polished surface of the mounted coal/char blocks. The morphological and elemental data of char, unburnt carbon and some glassy particles in slag were collected using both an optical microscope and an MLA. Proximate analysis was carried out using a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA). Details on proximate analysis can be found in British Standards A non-isothermal technique The proximate analysis results for the coarse slag and the fine slag are shown in In China the carbon content in both fine and coarse slag can reach 60% and 30–35%, respectively, when the entrained-bed gasifier is operated during summer if the gasifier is kept at maximum output. The reason is that, in summer time, the ambient temperature for the relevant part of China is above 35 It should be noted however, that the ash content of the original coal is only 4.8 The calorific value (dry basis) of original coal is 29.32 The intrinsic reactivity of the original coal, the char material found in the gasification slags and the DTF char was measuring using a non-isothermal TGA method Elemental analysis was carried out on the parent coal, coarse slag, fine slag and the DTF char. Results of the analyses are shown in Typical two-dimensional surface images of original coal, coarse slag and fine slag are shown in Basically, there are two types of particulates exist in gasification slag, unburnt carbon particles and glassy grains. Under an oil-immersion microscope, unburnt carbon is bright, whereas glassy material presents as very even dark grey. It was evident during analysis that coarse slag contained significantly higher levels of vitreous particles than fine slag.   Loose coarse slag and fine slag were also subject to SEM observation ( Whilst large quantities of unburnt carbon exist in both the fine and coarse gasification slag (see Poor milling is the most likely explanation for the large unburnt char particles in The chars in The vitreous material appears to be present as three types of shape; spherical, rod like, and “tadpole”-type. The morphology of vitreous materials in coarse and fine slag obviously reflects the stages they experienced in the gasification process. In coarse slag, there are relatively large amount of broken large pieces derived from larger particles of molten slag quenched in the water bath. These larger lumps would have been crushed into smaller size particles by the slag crusher in the lockhopper prior to discharge. Smaller vitreous particles in both coarse slag and fine slag appear to be present as spheres. The size distributions of the residual carbon particles in coarse slag and fine slag are shown in   The size distribution of vitreous particles in the coarse and fine slag samples is shown in It is clear from Based on the characterisation of coarse slag, fine slag, the original coal and its derivation char, following conclusions can be made: The coarse and fine slags both have a relatively high residual carbon content which would hinder their utilization as an additive in cement and concrete. If gasification slag is to be used to improve certain properties of concrete or cement, a beneficiation operation is needed to separate out this residual carbon. The morphology of the residual carbon in the coarse slag is similar to that found in the fine slag, as well as that produced in the DTF. However, the unburnt char in slag is less porous than that produced in the DTF which can be explained by the longer residence times experienced by the slag in the gasifier. The higher reactivity of the gasification chars, as compared to the DTF char, can probably be explained by the larger particle sizes and wider particle size distribution in the gasification feed. In this study, the residual carbon in the fine slag is associated with a higher ash content than the coarse slag, which is also less reactive than the carbon in the coarse slag. There is no evidence that coarse slag concentrates coarse char particles since large size unburnt chars were found in both the coarse slag and the fine slag. There is no obvious evidence from electron microscopy that large particles are agglomerated smaller particles and it is more likely that larger chars result from poor grinding and the high swelling index of the coal. All the vitreous particles in fine slag were found to be smaller than 150 The authors wish to acknowledge Dave Clift for technical support.