Sintered dicalcium pyrophosphate (SDCP) is biocompatible to bone tissue both in the in vivo and in vitro model. However, the molecular mechanisms that mediated these processes have yet to be identified. In this study, we investigated the influence of SDCP ions on in vitro osteoblasts behavior.The powder of sintered β-dicalcium pyrophosphate (SDCP) was dissolved by HCl and then diluted into different concentration of solutions by culture medium used in the osteoblast cell culture. The effects of various concentration of SDCP on bone cell activities were evaluated by using MTT assay. For the differentiation of osteoblasts, alkaline phosphatase (AP) staining, von Kossa stain for mineralized nodules and bone markers messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) isolation and identification were performed at 3h, days 1, 3, 7 and 14.
                  In the presence of 10−8
                     
                     m SDCP for 14 days, the osteoblasts population was still significantly higher than that of control. In the qualitative analysis for the formation of AP staining colonies and mineralization nodules formation were not affected by SDCP ions. When osteoblasts cultured in the presence of 10−8
                     
                     m SDCP ions, the osteocalcin mRNA expression was up-regulated; while the collagen, osteonectin and osteopontin mRNA expression were down-regulated.
                  In this study, we demonstrated that the elevated concentration of calcium and pyrophosphate ions can activate genes of the bone cells. This study will contribute to a better understanding of cell/biomaterial interactions and mechanisms that SDCP affect the bone cells.Recent advancement in orthopedic surgery can be attributed to the revolution in biomaterials. Initially, the choice of biomedical materials for use in the body was dependent on those already available off the shelf. Later, many of the materials selected proved to be either pathogenic or toxic. Whereas second-generation biomaterials were designed to be either resorbable or bioactive, the next generation of biomaterials is combining these two properties. Third-generation bioactive glasses and macroporous foams are being designed to activate genes that stimulate regeneration of living tissues Sintered dicalcium pyrophosphate (SDCP) appear to be biocompatible to bone tissue in the in vivo animal model In the in vitro model, SDCP has been proved to be more biocompatible than hydroxyapatite Collagen Type I is synthesized from procollagens that are secreted in the extracellular space. Type I collagen is the most abundant collagen in vertebrates, forms 90% of the organic mass of bone, and is produced in large quantities by osteoblasts In this study, we investigated the influence of SDCP ions on in vitro osteoblasts behavior. This paper reports the evaluation of the bioactivity and biocompatibility of SDCP prepared at different concentrations (10 The powder of sintered Sequential digestion of newborn Wistar-rat calvaria was performed by using a modification of the methods described by Wong and Cohn The mitochondria activity of the bone cells after exposure to various concentrations of SDCP was determined by colorimetric assay which detects the conversion of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT, Sigma catalog no. M2128, Sigma Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) to formazan. For the assay, 2.5×10 Osteoblasts cultured in the media in the presence of dexamethasone have been shown to be capable of synthesizing and mineralizing an extracellular matrix and to form AP in vitro After fixing the cells, the dishes were incubated for 30 Since the calcium usually co-precipitate with the phosphate ion in the in vitro culture condition, mineralization of the nodules in the cultures was assessed using von-Kossa stain. The matrix was washed with PBS, and cultures were treated with 5% silver nitrate solution 100 After a predeterrmined time, the RNA was isolated from osteoblast cells by an acid guanidine method using RTIzol Reagent (Gibco BRL, Rockville, MD, USA) and reverse transcribed to cDNA. For the quantitification of mRNA, the method developed by Nakajima et al. was used All data are expressed as mean±standard deviation and were analyzed by analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA). Statistical significance was determined by Bonferroni's MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] is a pale yellow substrate that produces a dark blue formazan product when incubated with living cells. MTT ring is cleaved in active mitochondria, and the reaction occurs only in living cells When cultured in the medium containing 5 In this model, osteoblasts have been known to express type I collagen, osteonectin and osteopontin mRNA at the 3 Continuous advances in the field of implantable calcium phosphate bioceramics have produced impressive progress with respect to their biocompatibility and have shown an ability to promote tissue formation. Biodegradable biomaterials have found a wide variety of applications in clinical medicine. Certain biodegradable calcium phosphates have been used as bone substitutes to avoid the complications associated with bone grafts, such as the shortage of supply, the immunogenicity, and the transfer of disease with the graft From MTT assay of this study, we observed cells proliferation was significantly ( The differentiation of osteoblastic cells in culture involves a programmed developmental sequence To assess the influence of surface composition on bone cell specific markers, AP staining, von-Kossa staining on mineralized nodules formation, collagen Type I, osteocalcin, and osteonectin production were measured. Osteoblast differentiation is a multistep series of events modulated by an integrated cascade of gene expression that initially supports proliferation and the sequential expression of genes associated with the matrix maturation, and mineralization of the bone extracellular matrix Recent research shows that there is genetic control of the cellular response of osteoblasts to bioactive glasses. Several families of genes are up-regulated within 48 When osteoblasts cultured in the presence of 10 Despite encouraging preliminary in vivo reports about improvement with the use of SDCP in treatment of osteoporosis after ovariectomy, basic-science and controlled study reported to date still have not established yet. In this study, we demonstrated that elevated concentration of calcium and pyrophosphate ions can activate genes of the bone cells. This study will contribute to a better understanding of cell/biomaterial interactions and mechanisms that SDCP ions affect the bone cells. Although our study had limitations and our findings are preliminary, continued and advanced study on the alterations in gene expression of bone cells by SDCP will provide a basis for understanding the observed the bone cells responses to various biomedical and pharmacological interventions. The authors sincerely thank the National Science Council, R.O.C. for their financial support of this research.