Pressure alkaline leaching of a Ni–Mo ore for selective extraction of Mo was investigated. Thermodynamic analysis of Mo–S–H2O and Ni–S–H2O indicated that pressure alkaline leaching of Ni–Mo ore is technically feasible for selective extraction of Mo. The effects of NaOH concentration, temperature, leaching duration, liquid/solid ratio and particle size on the leaching of Mo and Ni were studied. The results showed that Mo extraction was improved significantly by NaOH concentration, temperature or leaching duration, but not by liquid/solid ratio or particle size. The optimum parameters were: NaOH concentration of 100g/L, temperature of 120°C, leaching duration of 5h, liquid/solid ratio of 3mL/g and particle size of 74–98μm. Under these conditions, about 95.7% of Mo and 1.3% of Ni could be extracted.High-grade molybdenum ores are increasingly becoming depleted due to extensive exploitation. Therefore, more molybdenum needs to be extracted from low-grade, small and complex deposits as well as spent catalysts ( Since 1960s, a belt of Ni–Mo ore over 1600 Several combined pyro-hydrometallurgical methods such as oxidizing roasting-NaOH/Na Thus, pressure alkaline leaching was adopted to selectively extract molybdenum from Ni–Mo ore in this work. Different experiments were done to determine the effect of various factors affecting the optimum extraction. The parameters considered were NaOH concentration, temperature, leaching duration, liquid/solid ratio and particle size. The Ni–Mo ore used in this study was collected from Guizhou Province, China. The chemical composition of this ore is listed in In To investigate the effect of particle size on the extraction of Mo and Ni, the Ni–Mo ore was sieved and divided into five size fractions using Tyler standard sieve. Chemical analysis of each size fraction is listed in Pressure leaching experiments were conducted in a 1-L stainless steel autoclave, manufactured by Weihai Chemical Machinery Co., Ltd of Shandong province, China. 100 The leaching of Ni–Mo ore deals with the oxidation and dissolution of Ni and Mo, mainly present in the form of sulfides in the raw material. The leaching behavior of Mo and Ni phases under alkaline leaching conditions can be predicted from thermodynamic diagrams. As shown in   On the other hand, the oxidation of NiS during pressure alkaline leaching is difficult and complicated due to the multilevel transformation (NiS Nickel oxide is expected to solubilize at high temperature via the following reaction ( In order to study the effect of NaOH concentration on Mo and Ni extraction, NaOH concentration was varied from 50 to 150 The effect of temperature on the extraction of molybdenum and nickel was studied under the conditions of NaOH 100 The release of hydrogen ion in Eq. The influence of leaching duration on Mo and Ni extraction was studied at NaOH of 100 Effects of liquid/solid ratio on the leaching of Mo and Ni were investigated by fixing the NaOH at 100 The effect of particle size on extraction of Mo and Ni was studied using different size fractions (147–247 According to the above results, the optimum conditions for selective extraction of Mo from Ni–Mo ore are listed as follows: NaOH concentration of 100 The chemical composition of leach residue determined by ICP-AES is given in The XRD pattern shown in Pressure alkaline leaching is an effective technique for selective extraction of Mo from Ni–Mo ore. The results suggest that Mo extraction was increased evidently by increasing NaOH concentration, temperature or leaching duration, but not by liquid/solid ratio or particle size. The optimum parameters obtained were NaOH concentration of 100 The authors acknowledge the