Thermal decomposition kinetics and mechanism of magnesium bicarbonate in aqueous solution were investigated. Decomposition rate function, f(η)=1−2/3η
                     −(1−
                     η)2/3, was found to fit well with Ginstling–Brounshtein's diffusion model. The good linearity relationship of rate equation 1−2/3η
                     −(1−
                     η)2/3 against time further validated that decomposition process of magnesium bicarbonate was partially controlled by the mode of diffusion. The apparent activation energy was calculated to be 47.05 kJ/mol, indicating that the overall decomposition process was also controlled by chemical reactions. The kinetic model was in good agreement with the experimental results. The effect of stirring speed, system temperature and the concentration of Mg2+ in Mg(HCO3)2 aqueous solution on decomposition ratio was analyzed. The decomposition ratio reached 88% at 50 °C. The formed basic magnesium carbonate was of microsphere structure. The mechanism of thermal decomposition of Mg(HCO3)2 was proposed in this paper.Magnesium oxide (MgO) or magnesia, one of the most important raw materials in the refractory industry, is of high refractoriness (melting point of 2800 °C), corrosion resistance and fire retardant. The presence of this oxide in refractory materials increases the performance of pre-shaped linings for steel production ( The raw material employed in the experiment was light calcined magnesia, a calcined magnesite residue generated by Shandong Hengxin Magnesite Industry Co. Ltd (Shandong, China) with an average MgO content of 85%, the remainder being CaO, Fe The crystal structure of the product was examined using the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns recorded by a Philips X'Pert diffractometer with Cu-Ka radiation. The morphology of MgO microspheres was characterized by Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, JSM-6301F). The major chemical reactions involved during the thermal decomposition process of magnesium bicarbonate are as follow, Ionization of Mg(HCO Reaction of Mg Formation of basic magnesium carbonate According to above chemical reactions, reactions The overall chemical reaction rate constant was defined as The thermal decomposition process of Mg(HCO For the current chemical reaction system, At any time Integration of Eq. Mole quantity of Mg in the precipitate and in the Mg(HCO Rearrange of Eq. Integration above Eq.  Substitute Eq. Rearrange Eq. Substitute Eq. By rearranging Eq. Let Due to precipitation of basic magnesium carbonate and formation of CO Maintaining stirring speed at 600 rpm and the system temperature at 80 °C, the effect of Mg Fixing stirring speed at 600 rpm and Mg Base on above analysis, thermal decomposition kinetics process of magnesium bicarbonate can be verified by the relationship of Define With Mg According to chemical reaction Eqs.   The decomposition rate function The decomposition mechanism is that the ionization of Mg(HCO The optimal thermal decomposition conditions of Mg(HCO Decomposition ratio of Mg(HCO  Molar quantity of reacted Mg(HCO The surface of (MgCO The diffuse coefficient, m Concentration of Mg Original concentration of Mg Final concentration of Mg Precipitation nucleus radius, m Precipitation particle radius, m Molar quantity of the precipitated particles, mol Density of the precipitated particles, kg m Molar weight of the precipitated particles, kg mol Decomposition ratio Apparent activation energy, kJ mol Overall reaction rate constant, m Slope of Universal gas constant, J mol Time, min Pre-exponential factor System temperature, K