The electroflotation behaviour of ultrafine chalcopyrite particles was investigated using a mechanically agitated cell. The use of sodium oleate as collector proved effective in the flotation of particles of average size of 5 µm. The results showed that chalcopyrite recovery increases with increasing pulp pH, and current density, but decreases with increasing pulp density. The successful flotation of chalcopyrite with oleate might be attributed to its electrochemical surface oxidation, resulting in the formation of cupric and ferric oxide species. Chemisorption of oleate ions onto oxidized chalcopyrite surface is suggested to be the main cause for the increase in chalcopyrite recovery.Particle size of 10 µm is considered as the critical size below which both flotation selectivity and recovery decline sharply ( Several flotation techniques that make use of fine bubbles have been developed to increase the bubble–particle collision efficiency. These include dissolved air flotation ( Electroflotation is particularly applicable in fine and ultrafine particle flotation because bubble sizes and gas volumes can be controlled by varying the current density, pulp pH and/or electrode materials ( Electroflotation has been used for the recovery of fine and ultrafine mineral particles such as chalcopyrite ( The purity of chalcopyrite was 95% as confirmed using XRD. The 80% passing size for the electroflotation feed used was 5.2 µm. The feed sample was considered to be in the ultrafine size range because about 90% of the particles are <20 µm in diameter. Sodium oleate (Sigma-Aldrich Pty Ltd) was used as collector, Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol (MIBC) from Orica Australia was used as frother, sodium hydroxide (Rowe Scientific Pty Ltd) and hydrochloric acid (Chem-Supply Pty Ltd) were used to adjust the pH of the pulp. To enhance the conductivity of the pulp, 0.5% w/v sodium sulfate (Chem-Supply Pty Ltd) concentration was maintained. All reagents were of analytical grade. Double distilled water with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ was used for preparation of all solutions and pulp. A bench top 600 ml acrylic electroflotation cell with a stainless steel plate cathode and a lead plate anode were used; the distance between the electrodes was 1 cm and the surface area of the electrodes was 5.7 × 10 Sulfhydryl collectors such as xanthates were found to be unsuitable in rendering chalcopyrite surfaces hydrophobic in electroflotation system used in this study. The flotation recovery of chalcopyrite was less than 5% when sodium ethyl xanthate was used as a collector. This is probably due to the fact that the anodic potential applied for bubble generation leads to the oxidation of chemisorbed copper (I) xanthate through the following reaction ( At anodic potentials, chalcopyrite is expected to undergo oxidation, forming iron oxides on its surface. Given that sodium oleate collector is effective in the recovery of iron oxides ( The effect of pulp pH on chalcopyrite electroflotation recovery was investigated in a pulp of pH 5–12. As can be seen from The effect of pulp density (% solid) on chalcopyrite recovery was investigated at various current densities. As shown in The zeta potential of chalcopyrite was investigated in water and in 0.5% w/v Na During electroflotation, chalcopyrite is electrochemically oxidized into a number of species in alkaline conditions (Eqs. Ferric ions produced by Eq. The chemical reaction between iron hydroxide on the chalcopyrite mineral surface and oleate results in the formation of stable ferric oleate (Eq. Similar findings were observed for the hematite–oleate flotation system at pH 5–9 ( Further studies using XPS are required to confirm the role of ferric and cupric oxide/hydroxide species in electroflotation of chalcopyrite with sodium oleate. The electroflotation behaviour of ultrafine chalcopyrite with sodium oleate collector in various pulp pH, pulp densities and current densities was investigated. The increase in current density leads to an increase in the recovery of ultrafine chalcopyrite. The chalcopyrite recovery was higher at lower pulp densities. The electroflotation of chalcopyrite with sodium oleate collector involves the chemisorption of oleate species on copper oxide and iron oxide layers. The financial assistance of the Department of Mining Engineering and Metallurgical Engineering, Western Australian School of Mines, Curtin University is gratefully acknowledged.