In this study for the first time, a magnetic Fe3O4/MgAl-layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanocomposite was used as an adsorbent for recovery of gold and iridium from soils around the mining area. The morphological and structural properties of the obtained Fe3O4/MgAl-LDH was characterized by transmission electron microscopy, Brunauer-Emmett-Teller, scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction. The adsorption performance of the magnetic adsorbent was evaluated using isotherm and kinetic models. The equilibrium data best fitted to Langmuir, Sips and pseudo-second order kinetic models. The maximum adsorption capacities of gold(III) and iridium(IV) were found to be 124 mg g−1 and 115 mg g−1, respectively. The selectivity of the nanoadsorbent in the presence of diverse common ions and other platinum group metals (PGMs) were investigated. The adsorbent demonstrated relatively high selectivity towards Au(III) and Ir(IV) ions. The recovery of Au(III) and Ir(IV) ions from the adsorbent was achieved using 2.0 mol L−1 H2SO4 solution. Recoveries ranging from 80% to 109% were obtained and the adsorbent was found to be reusable up to ten cycles of adsorption/ desorption processes. The repeatability of the method expressed as relative standard deviation (%RSD) ranged from 2.5–4.9%. The nanocomposite was successfully applied for the recovery of Au(III) and Ir(IV) in South African Reference material (SARM 186, platinum group metal (PGM) concentrate) soil samples collected from a gold mine.The recovery of precious noble metals such as silver, platinum, iridium, gold, palladium and platinum among others have received considerable attention ( Various separation techniques have been investigated for the recovery of precious metals. Such methods include adsorption ( At present, there are many researchers looking to adsorption of precious metals by different materials, and according to our best knowledge very limited studies uses layered double hydroxides (LDHs) as an adsorbent. The LDHs, have high selective adsorption for anion pollutants, such as inorganic anions and anionic dye due to ion exchange ability, the presence of positively charged layers, high surface area and high porosity ( Therefore, the main objectives of this study are: (1) to prepare and characterize of magnetic layered double hydroxide (Fe All reagents used were of analytical grade unless stated otherwise in the methods and ultra-pure (type 1 with 18 MΩ cm For magnetic iron oxide (Fe The sample pH was adjusted using H1 9811–5, pH meter ((HANNA Instruments, Smithfield, Rhode Island, USA). The surface area and the porosity of the Fe Before the optimization of the recovery process, the selection of the desorption solution was investigated using 2.0 mol L The extraction and recovery of Au(III) and Ir(IV) was carried placing different masses of the adsorbent (50–200 mg) in as sample bottles containing 50 mL of 500 μg L In order to understand the type of adsorption occurring in the removal of Au(III) and Ir(IV) ions, adsorption isotherm models were used. This was done by adding 124 mg of Fe To assess the adsorption behaviour of the adsorbent, 124 mg of Fe The regeneration and reusability of the material was investigated. After adsorption using 1.00 mg L Briefly, soil sample of 1000 mg was weighed and placed in 50-mL of polypropylene tube. Then, 10 mL of aqua regia (6 mL of HNO The IR spectrum of Fe  The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) pore volume and surface area were calculated and found to be 0.357 cm Zeta potential experiments were carried out in order to give more insight about the surface science of the prepared Fe Type of eluent used plays an important role in recovery of Au(III) and Ir(IV) ions. To choose the most suitable and effective eluent acid for stripping of the Au(III) and Ir(IV) ions from the magnetic materials, various stripping eluents were evaluated and the results are demonstrated in the form of bar graph in The RSM was used to determine the factors affecting the adsorption process based on central composite design (CCD). The design matrix was computed using Statistica software. The study of the significant parameters affecting the adsorption process was done using the (RSM) obtained from central composite design (CCD). A Pareto chart reproduced from the analysis of variance (ANOVA) has been used to assess the significance interactive ( Three-dimensional (3D) response surface methodology has been used to study the effect of independent variables and the interaction between two parameters to obtain maximum percentage recovery of Au(III) and Ir(IV) ions ( The pH For simultaneous optimization of independent variables, the desirability function was used. Desirability function is the optimization method which the predicted responses are converted into a dimensionless desirability value, D ( Adsorption isotherm models are used to define the relationship between adsorbate and adsorbent. The adsorption kinetic data was studied to predict the effectiveness of the whole adsorption process and provides theoretical understanding of the reaction pathways and sorption mechanism ( The experimental kinetic data for adsorption of Au(III) and Ir(IV) ions onto Fe The reusability and regeneration of the Fe The accuracy and feasibility of the proposed method was tested using South African Reference Materials (SARM 186). The SARM 186 portion was first digested using the manufacturer's recommended method. This was done in order to solubilize the analytes of interest. The obtained analytical results are shown in The applicability of Fe  The adsorption capacities of the Au(III) and Ir(IV) on the prepared material and the ones reported in literature are presented in A magnetic Fe N. Raphael Biata, Richard M. Moutloali and Philiswa N. Nomngongo: Conceptualization the research idea N Raphael Biata: Data curation, Investigation, Writing- Original draft preparation and Editing Silindokuhle Jakavula: Sampling and data analysis, Geaneth Pertunia Mashile: Data analysis (kinetics and isotherm), Azile Nqombolo: Data analysis (kinetics and isotherm) Richard M. Moutloali: Supervison Philiswa N. Nomngongo supervison, Sostware, Reviewing and Editing, The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at