Introduction
                  The treatment of fractures of the distal humerus is difficult and involves the risk of bad functional results, particularly with articular fractures or impaired bone quality. Anatomical reconstruction and stable fixation allowing early mobilisation of the elbow are the basic prerequisites for good clinical outcomes. The aim of our study was to evaluate whether the Distal Humerus Plate (DHP, Synthes), a novel, perpendicular, fixed-angle plate system, fulfils the requirements for this treatment goal.
               
                  Methods
                  From 2004 to 2007, 46 consecutive patients (19 men and 21 women; mean age of 60.5 years) underwent open reduction and internal fixation with the new DHP system. Six patients were lost to follow up. The remaining 40 patients were followed up for 11 months (range 4–24 months). Follow up involved assessment of functional outcome using the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and Liverpool Elbow Score (LES), reduction results and complication rates. Subgroup analyses involved comparisons of younger (<60 years) to elderly (≥60 years) patients and type C3 injuries versus other fracture patterns.
               
                  Results
                  Only six cases received primary internal fixation, whilst 31 patients were temporarily stabilised by either external fixation or cast before ORIF could be performed. Three patients were treated for implant failure (systems other than DHP) after surgery in other hospitals.
                  The mean time from injury to internal fixation was 7 days. Open fractures were present in 10 cases. Olecranon osteotomy was required for reduction in 35 cases. Mean operation time was 215min.
                  ‘Good’ or ‘excellent’ results were observed in 29/40 patients. Median MEPS and LES were 84 and 8.1 points, respectively. Mean ROM was 100°. We found no significant differences in the subgroup analyses; however, there was a tendency towards better functional results in younger patients and injuries without comminution of the articular surface. Complications comprised two superficial wound infections, two cases of heterotopic ossification, one case of delayed union and five cases of transient ulnar neuropathy. Implant failure was observed twice in one patient.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Open reduction and internal fixation with the DHP system provides reliable, stable fixation allowing early functional mobilisation of the elbow joint, even in complex fractures and impaired bone quality, resulting in good outcomes for the majority of patients. The complication rate reported here is comparable to that of other implants, but the low number of implant failures is promising and warrants further investigation.Fractures of the distal humerus are rare injuries in skeletally mature patients and account for approximately 2–6% of all fractures. Whilst non-operative treatment no longer meets standard-of-care expectations, a variety of osteosynthetic procedures and primary arthroplasty approaches have been described. Forty-six consecutive adult patients underwent open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with the DHP system for fractures of the distal humerus in our University hospital from April 2004 to December 2007. In the same period we treated only four more patients with type B fractures of the distal humerus using only lag screws. In the respective period 66 paediatric patients with distal humerus fractures were not treated with the DHP system but received open or closed reduction and Kirschner wire or lag screw fixation. Six of the forty-six adult patients were lost to follow up, three of them died for reasons not associated with the elbow injury, the other three patients disclaimed participation to this study or left the country. The remaining 40 patients could be included in the present study. The radiological protocol of the study included conventional two-plane radiography of the injured elbow preoperatively, with additional CT scans performed in all patients. Repeat imaging was performed 6 and 12 weeks and finally 6 months after surgery. Patients were followed up for 11 months on average (range 4–24 months). Functional outcome was assessed using the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS), Patients were grouped according to age (≤60 versus >60 years of age at the date of injury) and according to AO classification (C3 versus B and C1 and C2 type fractures), and compared for functional scores and ROM. Subgroup analyses were performed using Student's The operation was performed under general anaesthesia. The patient was placed in a prone position and the affected arm supported on an arm rest. Using a standard dorsal approach, an olecranon osteotomy is performed in our institution for articular fractures. Only in B type and some C1 type fractures is this step omitted. Localisation and mobilisation of the ulnar nerve is usually performed with the nerve protected under retractors during the entire procedure. After reduction and preliminary stabilisation with Kirschner wires (K wires) the joint block is stabilised with one or two lag screws. Then, the extra-articular fracture component is reduced and stabilised with either K wire or reduction forceps. The two DHPs are then placed dorsolaterally and medially in perpendicular fashion. Bending or flexing of the anatomically preshaped implant is usually not necessary. The implant provides for between three and seven 3.5 There were 19 males and 21 females included in the study with a mean age of 60.5 years (range 14–84). Traffic and skiing accidents were the most common cause of injury in patients 60 years of age and younger (15), whereas falls were observed to be the most common aetiology in patients over 60 years of age. Three patients were polytraumatised. The mean age of these three patients was 43 years (range 25–57). Associated injuries were present in 10 cases and are summarised in The overwhelming majority (37/40) of fractures were C type according to AO classification, with C3 type fractures accounting for 24 of cases. Fracture distribution is displayed in An open fracture was present in 10 cases. According to Gustilo and Anderson's classification (1976), Osteosynthetic stabilisation was performed with the patient in the prone position under general anaesthesia. A single shot intravenous antibiotic prophylaxis (cefuroxime 1.5 In two cases the extent of fracture comminution extended substantially along the distal humeral shaft and could not be sufficiently stabilised due to the limited length of the ulnar plate. In these cases, a radial DHP was combined with a 3.5 More than two thirds of patients (29/40) showed ‘good’ or ‘excellent’ functional results in terms of the MEPS after a mean follow up of 11 months. Seven patients had a ‘moderate’ and four patients an ‘unsatisfactory’ functional outcome. Similar results were found for the LES. Two out of the four patients with ‘unsatisfactory’ functional scores had sustained severe head injury and both developed periarticular, heterotopic ossifications. Mean ROM was 100° (range 20–140). Median values were 120° for flexion, −15° for extension and 82.5° for both pronation and supination. We found ‘good’ and ‘very good’ functional results in 80% of patients aged 60 years or younger at the date of injury but in only 65% of patients above 60 years of age. However, these differences were not statistically significant, even after exclusion of the patients with severe head injuries (Mayo Two patients required surgical revision and antibiotic treatment with cefuroxime for superficial soft tissue infections. Early removal of tension band wiring was performed in one patient for local soft tissue irritation 12 weeks after surgery. Loosened lag screws had to be removed 4 weeks after surgery in another patient. The fracture had already healed at that point of time in this case. Broken fixed-angle screws were observed in two patients. Whilst the fracture healed in one of these cases without further intervention the other patient required replacement of the radial plate. Six weeks after replacement of the radial plate the patient underwent another revision for loosening of the ulnar plate. The fracture achieved union after this plate had also been replaced ( Postoperative numbness as a result of a lesion of the ulnar nerve was present in six patients. However, spontaneous complete return to normal nerve function was found in all of these patients within the first 6 weeks. No lesions of the motor branch of the ulnar nerve occurred and subsequently no loss of motor function was observed. The complications noted are summarised in The median MEPS was 85 in the present study with most patients reaching either ‘good’ or ‘excellent’ results. Despite the lack of significant differences in functional outcome when comparing elderly to younger patients, or complex to more simple fractures, there was a tendency towards better results in younger patients and patients with fractures other than C3 type. The failure to achieve statistical significance may be due to the small sample size. The results of conventional reconstruction or one third tubular plates for stabilisation of distal humeral fractures have been reported by different authors. With regard to the elderly patients (>60 years of age) included in the present study, similar functional results were reported for a patient sample with comparable age distribution by Srinivasan et al. Mean ROM was 100° in the present study. Greiner et al. reported the same result in a smaller series using the same implant. Implant failure in terms of screw breakage was observed in only two patients in our study. A clinically relevant loosening of the plate was not observed; however, screw breakage without relevant secondary dislocation occurred in two patients. This is consistent with a previous study on the DHP system, Soedergard et al. In double-plate osteosynthesis there is still controversy as to the preferred positioning of the two plates. In the present study, both cases of implant failure occurred in younger patients with increased levels of activity. No occurrence of implant failure was observed in the elderly patient subgroup. With regard to the failure rates stated in the literature, the implant seems to be advantageous in these patients. The authors of recent studies favour primary or secondary total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) as the treatment of choice for complex fractures of the distal humerus. All but one C type fracture was approached via a dorsal incision, including a V-shaped olecranon osteotomy, providing for optimal exposure of these complex fractures. Whilst this approach has been reported to be unfavourable for reasons of an increased complication rate (namely secondary dislocation, non-union and implant loosening) With two superficial wound infections, the infection rate achieved here was in the range of that found by other authors Ulnar neuropathies resulting in transient hypo-aesthesia occurred in 6 patients. This rate is consistent with results reported by Jupiter et al. The median operation time was 215 There are several limitations to the results of the present study. First of all, the results should be verified in a larger patient sample. We hypothesise that the tendency towards better results in younger patients and those without joint surface comminution may prove statistically significant in larger cohorts. Secondly, the results are limited by the fact that data were not only collected in a semi-prospective fashion. Whilst radiographs were obtained at definitive time points the clinical follow up assessments ranged from 4 to 24 months postoperatively related to organisational difficulties which may have biased the results. However, we believe that major sources of a structural bias are eliminated by the consecutive manner of data collection and the fact that no adult patients with distal humeral fractures were treated with different implants in the respective time period. Future studies should compare the feasibility of the DHP system in elderly patients to paralleled positioned interlocking plate systems and primary TEA. The present study provides evidence to suggest that the DHP system leads to ‘good’ and ‘excellent’ clinical results, even in more complex fractures of the distal humerus, in the majority of patients. The rate of implant failure is remarkably low despite the high portion of C3 type fractures included in the study cohort. Even though our results require validation in larger patient samples, we conclude that the DHP system is a feasible and promising implant for stabilisation of these challenging fractures—particularly in elderly patients and fractures with severe joint comminution. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.