Traumatic dislocations of the first metatarsophalangeal joint were first described by Mouchet in 1931. The anatomical complexity of the first metatarsophalangeal joint makes this injury one of a kind. There have been only been a limited number of case reports of this injury, but none in combination with open fractures of both sesamoids. We would like to report 1 case of an open traumatic dislocation of the first metatarsophalangeal joint with open fracture of the fibular and tibial sesamoid. Open reduction and internal fixation of the injury led to a successful outcome.In 1980, Jahss described the traumatic dislocation of the first metatarsophalangeal joint with 3 patterns of disruption of the sesamoid complex A 46-year-old woman presented to the university hospital emergency department with a chief complaint of a painful right great toe with an open wound to the plantar aspect of the hallux after a motor vehicle accident 2 hours before arrival at the emergency department. The patient said her foot slipped off the brake pedal of her vehicle when she slammed on the brakes; immediately, she had severe pain at the right great toe. The patient was wearing flip flops at the time of the injury. Her past medical history was unremarkable, and she denied taking any medications. The patient was allergic to penicillin, and denied tobacco, alcohol, or drug use. The physical examination displayed a neurovascular status that was intact. Dermatologic findings present on examination were a 3-cm × .4-cm wound to the plantar sulcus of the right hallux with dry hemorrhagic drainage in the base of the wound ( Three hours after the injury, the patient was taken to the operating room, where the plantar wound was extended approximately 6 cm in length from the base of the hallux to the first metatarsal neck. The flexor tendons were identified and noted to be intact. The intersesamoid ligament was torn, and the capsule of the first metatarsophalangeal joint was ruptured linearly with proximal translation of the sesamoid bones. The fibular sesamoid was comminuted in the first intermetatarsal space, and the tibial sesamoid was fractured in 2 pieces. The proximal phalanx was found to be dorsally dislocated on the metatarsal head. The metatarsal head was protruding through the intersesamoid ligament, which was also ruptured ( Traumatic dislocations of the first metatarsophalangeal joint were first described by Mouchet in 1931 ( The anatomy of the first metatarsophalangeal joint is a complex one ( The mechanism of injury is forced hyperextension ( Attempt to close reduction has been advocated as the initial treatment for this injury ( A case report has been published that involved an open dislocation of the first metatarsophalangeal joint, not a fracture, which was treated with closed reduction and irrigation of the wound ( In the patient we describe in this case, there was an irreducible dorsal dislocation of the proximal phalanx on the first metatarsal head. We recommend that a third addition should be incorporated to include the findings in this case report. The fibular and tibial sesamoid fractures, disruption of the intersesamoid ligament, and dorsal dislocation of the hallux, and the treatment described in this case report should be considered. The treatment included closed reduction of the dislocation, excision of the sesamoid fracture fragments, and repair of the sesamoid plate, as well as leaving the tibial sesamoid intact.