We modified an atmospheric pressure glow discharge proposed by Okazaki et al. (J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 26 (1993) 889) into an atmospheric air mesh plasma system and successfully verified a possibility to ignite and maintain an atmospheric pressure discharge in ambient air. Atmospheric pressure glow plasma was used for generating ozone with higher efficiency (J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 26 (1993) 889). We applied reactive oxygen radicals to cleaning process during the ozone generation process. In this study, the use of atmospheric air mesh plasma as a method of cleaning blind vias of printed circuit boards and ball grid array is being investigated as an alternative to a conventional wet process prior to electro-plating process and soldering. This is a first attempt to use atmospheric pressure plasma for electro-packaging in our knowledge. After atmospheric air mesh plasma treatment, scanning electron microscope images show clear blind vias compared with those of untreated samples. The contact angle measurement also shows a significant decrease in the contact angle. In conclusion, we can effectively remove the organic impurity and improve the surface cleanliness. Also these results may bring about the enhanced wire bondability and molding compound/solder mask adhesion.The fabrication of micro-vias is one of the critical processes in manufacturing compact and high-density printed circuit boards (PCBs). Conventionally, via holes are produced using CNC mechanical drilling machines. These machines are reliable, economical and productive in drilling through-holes that have diameters above 200 μm. For smaller vias, the mechanical drilling method becomes expensive due to frequent breakage of the drill bits and machine downtime. In order to overcome these drawbacks, the laser drilling of micro-vias has been investigated and seen limited production worldwide During drilling, drill bits become heated resulting in the melting and smearing of the epoxy-resin base material across the inner-layer copper surfaces within the hole barrel to which subsequent through-hole plating must connect. If not corrected, the smear would constitute a dielectric layer between the inner-layer copper surfaces and the plated copper, and the circuit would be defective. The most widely used chemistry is sodium or potassium permanganate in order to remove the smear and organic impurity. Another important application is a cleaning of soldering and bonding pads. Parts, which have to be wire bonded, are often contaminated with bled out epoxy glue and other low molecular organic impurity from the whole production step. Until recently, plasma cleaning was developed as a ‘dry’ and ‘clean’ method for isotropic removal of materials In this study, the use of atmospheric plasma as a method of cleaning a blind via of PCBs and ball grid array (BGA) is investigated as an alternative method to the conventional wet process prior to electro-plating process and soldering. We report a result of cleaning a blind vias of PCBs and BGA and the increased surface free energy by scanning electron microscope (SEM) and contact angle measurements. We prepared two types of PCBs, made of a CNC drilling and CO The atmospheric air mesh plasma is schematically illustrated in In order to investigate the cleanliness, we used the SEM (JSM-5200, JEOL). On differently treated PCBs surfaces, the contact angles with three different liquids, water (DI), glycerol-Aldrich and methylene iodide-Aldrich are measured using goniometer (SEO-300A, Korea). The measured contact angles are the average value of six drops on different surfaces by the sessile drop technique We used water (polar) and methylene iodide (non-polar) as contact liquids, whose surface energy and polarity values are shown in Ref. In this study, we changed the frequency (500 and 800 Hz), plasma exposure time (1 and 3 min) and applied voltage (18, 27 kV). After the atmospheric air mesh plasma treatment, no appreciable change was observed in the appearance of the samples. It is not clear why the sidewall of blind vias was collapsed with higher applied voltage or extended treatment time. More applied voltage or exposure may induce the thermal damage in the plasma treatment. These behaviors coincide with the trends of the samples prepared by CO By SEM images, we verified that the reactive oxygen radicals during the process of ozone generation are enough to decompose the residual organic impurity to water or carbon dioxide. The contact angle method is widely used for characterizing surface cleanliness and interfacial adhesion studies in electronic packaging The atmospheric air mesh plasma treated samples have a significant decrease in contact angles compared with the untreated samples shown in Longer the treatment time, higher the applied voltage and frequency gave lower contact angles than those of the shorter treatment time, lower applied voltage and frequency. We also calculated the dispersion and polar components of the surface free energy in order to investigate the surface cleanliness of the samples as shown in Surface energy for each sample was calculated by the contact angle measurement. The plasma treated sample has the maximum surface energy (∼76.67 mJ/m From the analysis of contact angles and surface free energy, we concluded that the large decrease in contact angles could be explained by cleaning effect resulting from the atmospheric air mesh plasma treatment. We treated the PCBs and BGA using atmospheric air mesh plasma with ambient air. We also verified oxygen molecules existed in the ambient air are enough to decompose the residual organic impurity into water or carbon dioxide without discharge gases such as helium, argon or he based mixture gas. Our method showed the same results with those of the vacuum plasma treatment using etching gases such as F In conclusion, we can effectively remove the organic impurity and improve surface cleanliness. Also these results may bring about the enhanced wire bondability and molding compound/solder mask adhesion. Applications of atmospheric air mesh plasma concerned with cleaning blind vias of PCB and BGA for electro-plating process and activating surface energy for bonding process are very actually. There is a clear tendency to integrate this technology into existing lines for increasing yield and quality in electro-packaging industry. The authors would like to express many thanks to J.M. Bae, S.Y. Kim (Samsung Electro-Mechanics Co., Ltd) and Ph.D. J.M. Choi for valuable advice on the present study.