A coupled solar photo-Fenton (chemical) and biological treatment has been used to remove biorecalcitrant diuron (42mgl−1) and linuron (75mgl−1) herbicides from water at pilot plant scale. The chemical process has been carried out in a 82l solar pilot plant made up by four compound parabolic collector units, and it was followed by a biological treatment performed in a 40l sequencing batch reactor.
                  Two Fe(II) doses (2 and 5mgl−1) and sequential additions of H2O2 (20mgl−1) have been used to chemically degrade the initially polluted effluent. Next, biodegradability at different oxidation states has been assessed by means of BOD/COD ratio. A reagent dose of Fe=5mgl−1 and H2O2
                     =100mgl−1 has been required to obtain a biodegradable effluent after 100min of irradiation time. Finally, the organic content of the photo-treated solution has been completely assimilated by a biomass consortium in the sequencing batch reactor using a total suspended solids concentration of 0.2gl−1 and a hydraulic retention time of 24h. Comparison between the data obtained at pilot plant scale (specially the one corresponding to the chemical step) and previously published data from a similar system performing at laboratory scale, has been carried out.Water is an irreplaceable basic principle for the human beings as well as a fundamental element for social welfare. Regrettably, this natural resource is now threatened mainly due to non-biodegradable and toxic compounds of synthetic nature generated as a result of the material progress of modern society. Herbicides are an example of this type of anthropogenic compounds and the necessity of their removal from water is of essential concern. The present work deals with the degradation of two specific phenylurea herbicides dissolved in aqueous solution at pilot plant scale. These are diuron (3-[3,4-(dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea]) and linuron (3-[3,4-(dichlorophenyl)-1-methoxy-1-methylurea]) herbicides. Although biological treatment, based on the activity of a microbiological consortium, is the optimum wastewater treatment, both in economical as well as in ecological terms ( The biodegradability of diuron and linuron oxidation by-products generated by the photo-Fenton reaction has been previously determined by our research group and it has been possible the characterization of an optimum chemical–biological coupled process at laboratory scale under artificial UVA radiation and in presence of humic acid as interfering natural dissolved organic carbon ( Diuron (98%, technical grade) and linuron (92.6%, technical grade) were kindly provided by Makhteshim Agan España, SA and were used as received (see FeSO All measurements were performed from samples filtered through 0.2 The measure of BOD was performed by means of a mercury-free WTW 2000 Oxytop thermostated at 20 Solar experiments were executed in a solar pilot plant installed at the PSA (latitude 37°05′N, longitude 2°21′W). Temperature was controlled at 25 The preparation of the photo-Fenton experiments was as follows; first the solar collectors were filled with distilled water. Next, the herbicide solution (previously prepared in a mixing tank) was placed into the pilot plant (with the CPC covered to prevent any photo-chemical reaction) and it was re-circulated until perfect homogenisation was achieved. After pH adjustment and ferrous sulphate addition the solution was again re-circulated. Finally, the required amount of H A 40 Prior to feed the SBR with the photo-treated effluents, a start-up process was carried out in order to determine residual TOC concentration produced by the bacteria own metabolism. This start-up process was performed by feeding the SBR with a glucose solution of 45 H Oxidation of diuron and linuron aqueous solution by the photo-Fenton reaction either as a single degradation process or as a pre-treatment of an aerobic biological treatment was previously investigated at laboratory scale under artificial radiation ( When coupling chemical and biological processes at laboratory scale, a 1.5 On the other hand, when studying the degradation process at pilot plant scale, solar CPCs were used in the chemical step while the biological treatment was performed in a pilot plant SBR. There are some fundamental differences between the laboratory set-up and the pilot plant configuration that should be discussed to better understand the different results obtained with both studies. As mentioned in the introduction, the photo-Fenton process is based on the absorption of light by Fe(III) aqueous species present in solution (at pH below 3 this species is mainly [Fe(H Prior photo-Fenton experiments, the possibility of direct herbicide photolysis in absence of Fenton reagents was tested but not degradation was detected, thus discharging any possible photo-chemical effect associated to the herbicides alone. Due to the higher performance of diuron and linuron degradation expected at the pilot plant, lower reagent doses were used in that case to carry out the degradation of the pesticide mixed solution. Such a reagent saving can be considered an improvement from the environmental and economical point of views. Moreover, the utilization of a low Fe(II) concentration is also interesting from an applied point of view, since a low iron concentration would avoid the separation step – based on Fe(OH) As a starting point, the photo-Fenton reaction was evaluated as a single degradation process by using different reagent doses. Two iron doses (i.e., 2 and 5 Along the mineralization process, TOC, COD and BOD measurements were performed to determine the optimum H Since the coupling of the photo-Fenton process with a biological treatment to remove diuron and linuron from water was the final goal, ready biodegradability of the generated by-products was assessed. Recently, a number of alternative tests have been applied for a rapid evaluation of ready biodegradability ( The SBR was repeatedly fed with the photo-treated solution up to eight complete cycles with 24 As a summary, As explained above the experiments performed at laboratory scale needed a higher reagent concentration (i.e., [Fe(II)] The degradation of diuron and linuron herbicides by photo-Fenton reaction at pilot plant scale reproduces previous laboratory artificial light results with minor reagent dose requirements. At pilot plant, 87% mineralization of a 42 When using photo-Fenton process as biological pre-treatment, 5 The authors want to thank the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia (MEC project CTQ 2005-02808) and the “Programa de Acceso y Mejora de Grandes Instalaciones Científicas Españolas” (Plataforma Solar de Almería, GIC-05-17) for financial support. The authors also want to thank Makhteshim Agan España, SA for providing diuron and linuron herbicides.