The paper reports about the comminution of cementitious composites in a laboratory jaw breaker. Six different concrete types, two mixtures of hardened cement paste, and one mortar sample are investigated. The efficiency of the breaking process is calculated based on a non-linear fracture approach. The efficiency η is the ratio between net energy delivered by the crusher and the fracture energy dissipated in the materials during the fragmentation process. Typical efficiency values between 0.03<η<0.19 are estimated. However, efficiency increases as the fracture energy of the material increases and brittleness decreases. Jaw breakers are efficient for low-brittle materials. It is suggested to use the approach developed in the paper for estimating the efficiency of rock comminution processes.grain sample surface specific grain sample surface brittleness regression parameters RRSB-distribution parameter fragment diameter maximum aggregate size elastic strain energy density crusher net energy material Young’s modulus fracture energy characteristic length specimen weight RRSB-distribution parameter measured crusher power sieve residue net exposure time displacement grain shape parameter specific surface energy comminution efficiency material density stress compressive strength tensile strength In the countries of the European community, about 2 billion tons of aggregates are consumed each year, mainly for concrete manufacturing Although the comminution and grinding of minerals, rock and ore is a research issue since decades, not much is known about the behavior of cementitious materials. A review about recent work is given in The materials discussed in this paper are characterised by a ‘fracture process zone’ (FPZ). The FPZ is a zone characterised by progressive softening, for which the stress decreases at increasing deformation. This is illustrated in A typical FPZ for a brittle, tension-softening material is shown in The fictitious crack model The crack-band model The two-parameter model The effective crack model Detailed information about these models is available in the original papers. In this paper, the fictitious crack model will be considered. The fracture energy, The efficiency of mechanical size reduction devices can be estimated as follows Eight different mixtures were manufactured for this investigation: five concrete mixtures, one mortar mixture, and two hardened cement paste samples. The cement was a general purpose cement. As fine aggregate quartz sand was used, and as coarse aggregate broken basalt was used. The maximum sand grain size was 2.8 mm, and the coarse aggregate grain size was between 5 and 20 mm. The grading curves of the aggregate materials followed the grading curves recommended by the ASTM Standard C 33. Basically, water–cement-ratio and aggregate content were varied. The mix compositions are listed in The comminution tests were performed in a laboratory jaw breaker Type ‘N.V. Tema’. This breaker is illustrated in The results of the calculations are listed in However, fracture energy alone can not distinguish ductility from brittleness. Additional parameters are required to make this distinction. The brittleness as the inverse of the characteristic length as suggested in As far as process efficiency is considered, a jaw breaker is efficient for breaking concrete with a high fracture energy and a low brittlenes. If this type of breaker is used for more brittle behaving cementitious materials, such as mortar or hardened cement paste, the efficiency is one order of magnitude lower. For materials with equal maximum aggregate sizes, compressive strength determines the efficiency. The efficiency for porous concrete is rather low. As many rocks exhibit tension-softening behaviour if exposed to load, it may be interesting to perform a similar study with rock materials. Among many rocks basalt has the highest bond-index This investigation was funded by the German Research Association, Bonn, Germany. The author is also thankful to the Industrial Research Institute Swinburne (IRIS), and the Department of Chemical Engineering of the Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia, for technical and administrative support. Thanks is also addressed to WOMA Apparatebau GmbH, Duisburg, Germany.