Based on the laboratory work, poly-metallic nodules pilot plant of 500 kg per day processing capacity was designed and set up at Hindustan Zinc Limited, Udaipur (India). The process is based on the reductive pressure leaching of nodules using sulfur dioxide as reducing agent in the presence of ammonia. The experiments conducted in the pilot plant show an average recovery for copper, nickel and cobalt as 85%, 90% and 80% respectively. The paper presents the highlights of the process along with the pilot plant description. Some of the selected results are also discussed.Poly-metallic nodules (PMN) are discoidal or ellipsoidal balls of 0.5–25 cm in diameter, found amidst sediment on the deep-sea bed at depths of about 4000–6000 m. Chemically, the nodules consist of metal oxides and benthic clays. The nodules normally contain about 30% of uncombined water owing to their high porosity. Manganese is the major metallic component and its content ranges from 24% to 30%. The precise chemical composition of the nodules varies depending upon their location in the ocean. A great deal of recent attention has been directed to the harvesting of ocean floor nodules and extraction of their principal metal values viz., manganese, copper, nickel and cobalt. Poly-metallic nodules are commonly referred as manganese nodules, ocean nodules or simply nodules. The Department of Ocean Development (DOD), Government of India is the nodal agency responsible for the poly-metallic nodule programme in India. On 17th August 1987, India was registered as “Pioneer Investor” by Preparatory Commission of the International Seabed Authority (PREPCOM) and was allocated a mine site of 150,000 sq km pioneer area in the Central Indian Ocean Basin, known to be rich in poly-metallic nodules. DOD has set up a 500 kg per day poly-metallic nodules processing plant at Hindustan Zinc Limited, Udaipur (India). The plant is based on the hydrometallurgical process route for extraction of three metals viz., copper, nickel and cobalt and has been developed by Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar and Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai. Engineers India Limited has done the scale-up, basic design and engineering of the pilot plant. The pilot plant was successfully commissioned in March 2002. The preliminary data generated in the pilot plant has been very encouraging. The Indian programme is aimed at development of engineering flow sheet for a commercial PMN plant. The process chosen is based on hydrometallurgical treatment of nodules and is described by The process has several advantages and compares well with other alternative hydrometallurgical processes for extraction of metals from poly-metallic nodules. Manganese cake containing 55% manganese can directly be used for the production of high-grade ferro-manganese. The pilot plant can handle nodules with wide ranging compositions and has been set up at Hindustan Zinc Limited, Udaipur (India). Its main sections are crushing and grinding, leaching, demanganisation and solid–liquid separation, ammonia stripper, copper solvent extraction and electro-winning, bulk sulfide precipitation and dissolution, cobalt and nickel solvent extraction and electro-winning. The pilot plant is highly instrumented. The on-line monitoring and recording of process parameters are available with high degree of accuracy. Autoclaves for leaching and demanganisation are designed with an aspect ratio of 1.8. The material of construction for all the autoclaves is SS316Ti. Specially designed spargers are used for sparging oxygen in demanganisation and bulk sulfide dissolution autoclaves. These spargers generate very fine bubbles, which lead to substantial improvement in the autoclave hydrodynamics. Cobalt loss of 7% observed during laboratory trials in the demanganisation step has been reduced to 3% in the pilot plant due to improved design of the sparger. Proprietary Structured packing, PARLPAK, has been used in the ammonia stripper. Utilities like compressor, cooling tower, UPS etc. are an integral part of the pilot plant. The autoclaves are provided with the latest PLC based control system for complete control of heating, reaction and cooling cycle. The heating rate can be altered, if required, to study the effect of heating rate on leaching efficiency. The speed of agitator in the autoclaves can be varied over a wide range. Suitable safety precautions have been incorporated in the plant design by providing pressure safety valves (PSV) and breather valves, wherever necessary. During the development of a new chemical process, one of the problems that merits close attention is scale-up of a reactor. The starting point of the exercise consists of necessary laboratory data collection. This data was generated in Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar (India). The objective of PMN pilot plant autoclave scale-up was to reproduce the laboratory results without change in composition, yields etc. Specific scale-up strategies were adopted for batch/continuous operation of the different sections of the pilot plant for controlling temperature, pressure, concentration profiles, residence time etc. The manganese nodules for experimental campaigns in the pilot plant were collected from Central Indian Ocean Basin. The average chemical composition of valuable and recoverable components is presented in Leaching of ground nodules is carried out in a 5 m The pilot plant pre-commissioning activities were started in November 2001 and the plant was successfully commissioned in March 2002. The pilot plant operation involves a large number of chemical engineering unit operations. Operational flexibility has been provided to study the effect of various process parameters on an individual module in general and the overall plant as a whole. The effect of recycle streams on overall plant performance can be closely monitored. The pilot plant has the flexibility to test other hydrometallurgical process routes developed elsewhere for poly-metallic nodules. The pilot plant experimental results are quite encouraging and compares well with the laboratory data. The copper recovery is in the range of 85% while the average recovery for nickel and cobalt is 90% and 80% respectively. The comparative recovery performance for the three metals in the laboratory and pilot plant is shown in A number of studies have focused on the economics of development of poly-metallic nodules technology. These studies have led to alternative schemes for reduction in the capital and operating cost. The operating cost may vary not only from one process to another but also from one country to another due to variation in prices of various raw materials like labor, power, chemicals etc. The scale of operation is an important factor in arriving at the realistic techno-economics for a commercial plant. In any hydrometallurgical process a key economic factor will be the cost of reagent. The reagent must be cheap or it must be recyclable at low cost. In this process the major reagent is sulfur dioxide, which is comparatively cheap and can also be economically extracted from smelter off gases. Nodules contain as much or more nickel as many commercial laterite deposits and is a prime recovery target as brought out by the various studies on techno-economics. Ore supplies are short and the price has been steadily increasing. Although the nodule mining cost will be higher than land based ores, copper recovery can pay for mining and cobalt recovery contributes to additional profit. The solid residues generated (leach residue and manganese cake containing 20% and 55% manganese respectively) can be profitably further used for ferro-manganese production. The 500 kg per day PMN pilot plant has been successfully commissioned in India. The hydrometallurgical process route used in this plant compares well with the other processes for nodules in terms of metal recoveries and predicted process economics. Experiments are currently being carried out for validation of scale-up parameters and fine tuning the process parameters. The PMN pilot plant facility set up at Udaipur is a versatile facility aimed to generate sufficient information for development of an engineering flow sheet for a commercial plant. The facility can also be used for testing different process modules in isolation or as an integrated unit for various other studies. The authors would like to thank the management of Engineers India Limited for permission to publish this paper.