One of the common methods to determine commercial blocks productivity (CBP) in reserves of dimension stone is through the study of the discontinuities' network. However, this determination remains a difficult task due to geographical heterogeneity and lack of access to all reserves' formations. This study presents a new method based on various geomechanical tests performed on intact rocks that assessed the CBP of a dimension stones' rock mass. Assuming that a dimension stone's rock mass comprised a large block of an intact rock, due to tectonics, the geomechanical properties of this block had direct effects on the discontinuities created within it. Therefore, the geomechanical properties of the intact rock may be related to the CBP of a stone reserve. Based on this factor, this study explored the relationship among some geomechanical properties, including failure angle, uniaxial compressive strength, and modulus of elasticity, and CBP by using data acquired from 21 dimension stone quarries consisting of travertine, marble, and onyx groups. According to the results obtained from the analysis of the Isfahan province's Iranian quarries, failure angle was not highly related to the reserve's CBP. In marble quarries, CBP may decrease, if the compressive strength of an intact rock exceeds 60 MPa. Among the studied parameters, the saturated-to-dry ratio's modulus of elasticity had the greatest relationship to the CBP. Generally, the presented diagrams displayed that the correlation between geomechanical properties and the CBP were an appropriate guide in determining the potential cost-effectiveness of a accessing a particular rock reserve during the early exploration phase.Commercial block productivity (CBP) is a term used to identify dimension stone quarries from which blocks' extraction is beneficial. Cost-effectiveness in the extraction of blocks from rock reserves depends on several parameters, of which the discontinuities' network condition remains the most important ( Tectonic activity is the major factor that creates blocks within rock masses, and such tectonic activity also affects intact rock. On the other hand, the rate of damage from tectonic activity influence highly depends on the intrinsic parameters of an intact rock. Therefore, studying the relationship among different geomechanical parameters of intact rock and comparing them with similar cases in active quarries, may provide suitable indications of and solutions for assessing the CBP. This is the first study to examine the relationships between CBP and the following three parameters: failure angle, compressive strength, and modulus of elasticity under both saturated and dry conditions, using the data collected from 21 quarries: four travertine quarries, 13 marble quarries, and four onyx quarries. Data on the CBP and the geomechanical parameters of intact rock in different quarries were used to examine the relationships among CBP and various geomechanical parameters. The required information was obtained from data published by the Iran Minerals Production and Supply Company (IMPASCO, Tehran, Iran). The data examined three geomechanical parameters under both dry and saturated conditions (failure angle, compressive strength, and modulus of elasticity) and the qualitative CBP of quarry. The geomechanical parameters' was obtained by direct measurements in the laboratory according to American Society for Testing and Materials ASTM standards ( The studied travertine quarries were formed by the sedimentation processes of hot springs after volcanic eruption in the Orumiyeh-Dokhtar zone during the Quaternary period. These are among the youngest rocks registered in Iran. Marble quarries were formed by limestone recrystallization. These marbles originated primarily during the Cretaceous (the Mesozoic era) period, and they can be found spread over the Isfahan province. The published data by IMPASCO discussed the CBP, or qualitative efficiency. To establish the relationship between geomechanical parameters and CBP, the data of each rock group was studied individually. The major cause of revising the CBP for a stone reserve concerns both the rate of tectonic activities and the creation discontinuities, such as faults, joints, and cracks. The geomechanical properties of intact rock are very important for a rock mass affected by tectonic activity. Therefore, the influence of geomechanical parameters under dry and saturated conditions may indicate an intact rock affected by tectonic activity. For this reason, the parameters were studied under three conditions: dry, saturated, and a dry-to-saturated ratio, which indicates the rate of the variability of modulus of elasticity under saturated and dry conditions. Geomechanical parameters are among rock's physical and mechanical properties. If a rock mass is considered as a monoblock, which is an acceptable logical assumption for dimension stones, because the rock mass primarily contains intact rock and discontinuities, it can be concluded that various geomechanical parameters of intact rock affect the creation of rock mass discontinuities. Therefore, it was necessary to examine the relationships among the geomechanical parameters and the CBP. To perform this analysis, the relationship between failure angle, compressive strength, and the modulus of elasticity of both the intact rock and the CBP were studied. The creation of fractures and discontinuities in any rock mass occurs due to tectonic stress. Tectonic stress inhomogeneities may be responsible for the extension of cracks ( The failure angle was also of the parameters examined. . The failure angle is the angle along which a specific sample rock breaks under compressive strength. This property is measured according to the ASTM  Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) is the bearing capacity of a rock against direct compressive forces. The procedure to measure USC has been standardized by both the ASTM ( As shown in Modulus of elasticity or Young's Modulus is the stress-to-strain ratio of linear solid materials lower than the yield strength (  As shown in Due to lack of access to the whole rock mass, it is difficult to determine the CBP of a dimension stone reserve prior to the extraction stage. Block determination typically contain errors, which are due to the errors in surveying the discontinuities network, which is the main control for extracting commercial blocks. This study presented a new method for assessing the CBP of travertine, marble, and onyx quarries with respect to intact rock specifications and the data acquired from 21 dimension stone quarries. Analyzing the data presented in this paper, the CBP of a rock mass can be predicted through measuring the UCS and the modulus of elasticity under both dry and saturated conditions. The study proved that the failure angle under dry and saturated conditions does not have appropriate significant correlation with the CBP. However UCS may indicate whether or not a travertine or a marble rock mass can produce commercial rock blocks. The modulus of elasticity under dry condition was also a positive sign for travertine rock masses. According to results this parameter may has an inverse relationship with the CBP, if the dry elasticity modulus for a travertine intact rock exceeds 40 GPa, its CBP may diminish. The results for marbles showed that for a saturated-to-dry elasticity modulus between 0 and 0.5, the CBP was low, and for values above 0.75, the CBP was high. Among the studied parameters, the saturated-to-dry ratios’ elasticity modulus had the greatest correlation with the CBP. Generally, the presented data can be used as a guide for determining the potential cost-effectiveness of quarrying a rock reserve during the exploration phase. The relationship between CBP and rock brittleness, study of local stresses and degrees of fracturing are suggested for future studies. We would like to thank the reviewers for their helpful comments that improved this paper.