The paper tackles the problem of characterizing the particulates that derive from the comminution of ores or two-component materials in terms of fraction of particles within a narrow volumetric composition. It reports some refinements to the procedures of regularized-inversion for the solution of the kernel-based stereological model applied to the conversion of areal grade distributions (readable from polished sections by image analysis) into distributions of volumetric grades. These solutions are further exploited to infer the efficiency of separation/concentration systems treating particulates, an important information rarely obtained due to the complex experimental work required with traditional heavy liquid fractionating. The use of synthetic kernels is also discussed. Finally, one practical application with computer generated data demonstrates the resolution of the efficiency coefficients of a separation process. These are recovered solving a stereologically posed mass balance around the separator with an original regularizing strategy that allows including a priori information.grade size areal volumetric weight feed concentrate tails kernel matrix data weighting matrix: solution weighting matrix unity matrix density distribution of the areal grade volumetric grade density distribution density distribution of the grade (weight fractions) baricenters of the grade of the intervals used for discretization unity column vector unity row vector mean density of intervals used for the discretization separation efficiency reference stochastic solution: inverse transposed average grade diagonalization of a vector into a square matrix  absolute value fraction of composite particles (middlings) flotation time at sampling overall recovery recovery in a narrow size class phase recovery density damping factor size grade flotation rate constant In nature, valuable minerals occur together with non-valuable species. Hence the ores are crushed and ground—i.e., comminuted down to fine sizes—to produce near single-mineral particles of the two phases, thus liberating the valuable phase from the gangue. In industrial practice there is always a proportion of two-phase particles of variable composition remaining in these fine products: economic reasons and technical problems do not allow complete liberation of the two phases. Once partially liberated, these systems of particles undergo concentration. A ‘cut composition’ is selected and particles with an higher content in valuable phase are recovered. The reject is a low grade particulate made up of particles with a lower content in valuable phase. The separation techniques available are not very selective with respect the separation property and there are always particles that are ‘misplaced’ in both the products. The particles with composition close to the ‘cut composition’ are more likely to be misplaced. The (distributed) efficiency of separation is the probability of one particle to be reported to the concentrate as a function of its composition (grade). The efficiency function is an ‘S’ shaped curve bent to the right, the lower left (upper right) tail of the bent ‘S’ indicates that particles poor (rich) in valuable phase have low (high) probability of being reported to the concentrate product.  By and large, the knowledge of the fraction of particles with a given composition in a particulate—i.e., its characterization—is important in mineral and material processing and extractive metallurgy. It can serve for the estimation of the liberation of phases that occurs in energy-intensive size reduction processes, the evaluation of the separation efficiency of single separation units and complex concentration circuits, the calculation of the kinetics of recovery in separation/concentration processes such as flotation and leaching, etc. The content in valuable phase of a particle is designated with the particle (volumetric) grade. It is defined as the ratio between the weight (volume) of the valuable phase and that of the particle. Fully liberated particles of (non) valuable phase have grade equal to 1 (0), two-phase particles have grades lower than 1 and higher than 0. The full characterization of these particulates requires accurate knowledge of the size distribution and—within each narrow size—of the distribution of the particles in narrow classes of composition, that is, weight fractions in classes of grade. For a precise size characterization of a particulate, laboratory equipments are available. Also on-line instrumentation for plant applications capable of providing ‘spot’ size information exists. On the contrary, the distribution of the particles in classes of grade is very difficult to measure. Microscopy observation of the particle surface provides biased information because the fraction of phase exposed can be different from the volumetric composition. Traditionally, fractionation by heavy liquids in classes of density has been used for the characterization of systems of particles. This method is suitable only for systems of particles composed of two phases, for which there is a linear relationship between the average density and the composition of a particle. The laboratory procedures are tedious and use hazardous chemicals as heavy liquids; the limitations of these techniques are well known and such that they are infrequently used in practice. Also, it will be a few years for the high resolution X-ray tomography to be used for the volumetric reconstruction of fine particles made up of heavy phases. For the time being we can exploit measurements on particle transects. Low dimensional measurements of grade—i.e., linear or areal ratios—can be easily made on digital images acquired with scanning electronic microscope (SEM) techniques observing a polished section made up of particles classified in narrow sizes and embodied in epoxy resin. The automated processing of these digital data with specialized image analysis techniques allows the calculation of the areal grade distribution of particles ( The areal grade—i.e., ratio of area of the valuable phase to the area of the particle transect—distribution is a heavily distorted representation of the more meaningful volumetric grade distribution. Basically, this distortion is related to the high probability of seeing one sole phase when sectioning particles that are not fully liberated (these are also referred to as middling or composite particles). The sketch in Thus there is a high probability of measuring extreme values of grade (0 and 1) on the particle transect, and the distribution of these measurements of grade in low dimension (1 This is due to the dramatic loss of information associated with measures in lower dimensions. Moreover, the yet distorted information collected from a single particle transect is further complicated due to the presence of particles with a variety of volumetric grades exposed on the polished section prepared for SEM observation. Stereology offers a collection of tools for inferring stochastic information about the volumetric composition of a system of particles from the measurements collected in a lower dimension (2 In this paper the application of one of these tools, namely the regularized-inversion method, is reviewed and the kernel-based stereological model applied to infer the full ‘S’ shaped efficiency curve of a separation system, When particles are unevenly distributed over a wide size range and the separation efficiency is size dependent The recovery is a lumped index of efficiency and does not provide any information about the selectivity of the separation that is given by Given that one can read the same areal grade from transects of particles that have different volumetric grades, the probability of an areal measure can be expressed as a sum of the conditional probabilities of reading that (areal) grade from particles with a different volumetric grade weighted by the probability of these volumetric grades. The problem can be set out as a linear system of equations Owing to the ill-conditioned nature of the problem and the fact that no reliable information about the data errors is available, the direct matrix inversion (DMI) method There is an important property of the inversion problem in the continuous domain that should guide one to discretize the grade intervals keeping the volumetric fraction values (i.e., 0 and 1) that compete to fully liberated particles of valuable and gangue phase apart from those of the middling classes. Indeed, the volumetric density distribution function is continuous and derivable in ]0,1[ and is singular in 0 and 1. This singularity is a delta function, as there is a finite fraction of liberated particles (with grade values 0 and 1). In principle one could have used more areal grade intervals than volumetric grade intervals and have set out an over-determined system of equations to be solved with least squares (LS) method. The LS solution minimizes (in the norm L2) the deviation between the observed and estimated (by back-calculation) distributions of areal grade The LS method does not allow one implementing any constraint of regularity of the solution nor any information on the accuracy of the measurements nor the deterministic constraint of non-negativity (NN) of the solution (volumetric fractions cannot be negative—i.e., The accuracy of the measured data can be easily incorporated in the LS method—as a weight inversely proportional to the variance of the data—using the weighted least squares (WLS) method. This weight is expressed as a diagonal matrix The diagonal matrix The regularity of the solution can be incorporated by imposing to minimize a measure of the solution such as the roughness or the flatness The minimum amount of solution regularization compatible with the A further improvement of the solution can be incorporated via a reference solution (RS) Methods have been proposed for estimating the amount of liberated particles These estimators allow approximating the middling section of the distribution curve with an incomplete Beta distribution function, as originally suggested by Barbery and reviewed by These methods of regularized inversion are stochastic in nature and do not allow for deterministic constraints. The sum to 1—i.e., The projection onto convex sects (POCS) techniques are useful tools for imposing deterministic constraints on the solution in the ‘hard sense’. Thus, the projection (of the stochastic solution provided by the WDLS methods) on the hyperplane of the constraint (in a space of dimension equal the number of intervals used to discretize the volumetric grade—i.e., The calculation of the distribution of the volumetric grade of a particulate is an important achievement Based on areal grade measurements on samples of the products of a separation and the feed, the distributions of volumetric grade of the two exiting flows can be recovered ( Three additional deterministic constraints on the average grades, Since Also, The set The reference solution for the particulates of the two separation products was calculated assuming that all the free valuable particles are recovered in the concentrate ( The efficiency function of a separator is one of the most desirable information in plant practice. Indeed, the overall process weight- and metal-recoveries routinely calculated from the separation products do not contain much information about the behavior of the single size and composition classes that is referred to as distributed efficiency. In the next section, an improved method for seeking a regularized solution of The calculation of the mass balance around a separator for the recovery of the efficiency curve can be improved by further incorporating the nonlinear a priori information that requires the separation efficiency function This can be achieved with a minimizing function that penalizes solutions providing partition curves that locally decrease—i.e., where The volumetric fractions It is possible to check the validity of the values of efficiency versus grade, Also by sampling the products of a flotation experiment and applying the methods described in this paper to a narrow size class, The reconstruction method proposed requires knowledge of the kernel matrix to retrieve the volumetric composition. The experimental procedure for the determination of the conditional probability elements (of each column) of the kernel matrix (on particles of narrow volumetric composition) is very time consuming. It requires to isolate particles with a similar grade and their slicing to evaluate the conditional probability of reading any areal grade out of the given volumetric grade. It was investigated if kernels calculated on the assumption of simple particle–shapes and–textures could be a reliable substitute of the actual kernel of the computer generated particle. Work in this area also has been published by All these synthetic kernels are symmetrical Indeed, the elements on the diagonal crest dominate all the columns of the kernel matrix for there is a high probability of reading an areal grade similar to the volumetric particle grade. As a consequence, the kernel matrix can be inverted for it has a favorable low condition number. This grade correlation is still evident but not so pronounced in the kernel derived from slicing the convex low order—i.e., few vertices—polyhedral particles produced by RUIF fragmentation. Another observable feature in spherical particles is the limited growth of the diagonal crest (and the related limited lowering of the extreme areal grade bins) of the kernel derived weighting the grade occurrences with their transect area. This is shown in Other simple particle shapes—namely cubes and tetrahedrons bounded by four equilateral triangles—with the two phases allocated on the two opposite sides with respect to a random sectioning plane were studied. As expected, the kernels present a diminishing grade correlation with the decrease in order. This is shown in Thus, it was concluded that kernels derived under the assumption of spherical particle mineralized by a single inclusion are inadequate to substitute the actual kernel that refers to low-order—i.e., few vertices—convex polyhedral particles that form during fragmentation processes. By sampling, these low order convex polyhedral particles with a planar random isotropic process there is a high probability of small transects ( It may be noticed that the weighting of the occurrences with the transect area produces kernel matrices with lower—i.e., more favorable—condition numbers easing the inversion. The reconstruction capabilities of the WDLS method are demonstrated by recovering the volumetric grade distributions of the flows entering and exiting a separator and by estimating the related efficiency coefficients. This is achieved by solving the MB problem. The a priori information stating that the separation efficiency vs. grade cannot be decreasing was included in the solution procedure. The reconstruction model was tested on synthetic data; a virtual mineralized rock was generated using a Poisson flat process for the stochastic generation of the non-convex three-dimensional Poisson polyhedral (mosaic) textures. RUIF (no selective liberation due to grain detachment or to different fragility of the phases) was assumed for the system of fractures that give rise to convex fragments ( The kernel matrix was measured from areal grade measurements made on these synthetic particles; both the plain and the area weighted kernel matrices are reported in literature ( The particulate produced was separated into a concentrate and a tailing product using a normal cumulative distribution function (NCDF) to split the particles according to their composition. The imposed parameters of the NCDF are the sharpness of separation, In The paper shows that the simultaneous recovery of the distribution of grades of the two products of a separation and the mass balance around the separator unit allows a constrained inversion problem to be set up and the separation distributed efficiency coefficients to be obtained with high resolution. The method proposed solves a stereologically posed mass-balance problem around the separator with a modified WDLS method that allows including an a priori condition of separation efficiency not decreasing. The overall recovery in valuable phase that is routinely calculated in plant practice depends on both the performance of the separator and the characteristics of the particulate fed. Thus it is desirable to parcel out the contribution of the separator performance in terms of distributed efficiency from the influence of the feed characteristics. The inversion method proposed can be checked with lumped parameters—i.e., averaged over a narrow size—where they are available. The method was tested on synthetic data with exact kernels sampled from low order polyhedral particle produced by RUIF. Moreover, tests demonstrated that kernels calculated on simplified texture assumptions are inadequate for the use as substitutes of the actual kernel that competes to convex particle produced by comminution. Even if the method presented provides distributed efficiency values with a resolution suitable for the solution of industrial problems with data disturbed by the sampling, application of real mineralogical particulates are necessary to fully validate the procedures. The financial support of the Ministry of the University and the Scientific and Technological Research (MURST) is gratefully acknowledged.