The experimental and mechanistic approaches available for the study of the kinetics of in vitro biogenic silica dissolution are synthesised to provide rigorous guidance for future investigation. Batch and flow-through reactors are discussed, as are the four mechanisms which have been proposed previously within the marine domain. In recognition of success with similar problems in mineral weathering and hydro-metallurgy, the applicability of the Activated Complex Theory is also considered. Full mathematical derivations are presented for the mechanisms before they are evaluated according to contemporary needs. At each stage the problems inherent in fitting mathematical models to experimental data are highlighted. The decrease in reaction rate with time observed in batch reactors is discussed in terms of both the approach towards saturation and decrease in surface area of the dissolving frustules. In appreciating this distinction, optimum combinations of experimental design are suggested for mimicking silica dissolution in either the water column or sediment. The role of organic frustule components, micro-organisms and faecal pellets in the dissolution process are discussed.Silicon, as ortho-silicic acid, is a major nutrient in marine ecosystems. The uptake of silicic acid from surface waters by siliceous organisms (mainly diatoms) to form amorphous silica skeletons, and their post mortem dissolution are important biogeochemical processes. Dissolution begins in the water column when the silica skeleton is exposed to the undersaturated seawater, and can continue after deposition at the seafloor ( The chemical kinetics of biogenic silica dissolution is a relatively small but potentially important part of the overall investigation of silicon cycling. Its objective is to reduce the entire biogenic silica dissolution process to a simple physico-chemical mechanism from which can be derived mathematical equations linking the key variables such as surface area of frustules, dissolved silicic acid concentration, temperature, etc. In turn, it is envisaged that these would be used to predict the rate of production of dissolved silicic acid arising from biogenic silica in any water column or sediment interstitial water. Together with similar modelling of the production of silicic acid from terrigenous materials as well as the biological uptake of silicon this could eventually predict the behaviour of the whole marine silicon system. Our interest in this subject arose when we attempted to understand the role that freshwater diatom dissolution might play in affecting the silicic acid concentration of the upper reaches of estuaries. The inter-disciplinary nature of silicon cycling investigations was immediately obvious. Equally though, it was also clear that the subject as a whole is large and workers in one domain could easily lose track of developments in adjacent ones. For example, those making in situ measurements may not readily appreciate the way in vitro modelling has developed, and vice versa. To alleviate such problems here we review the chemical kinetics so far applied to in vitro (actually in plastico) study of biogenic silica dissolution. We describe the full gamut of approaches as even the most successful is still inadequate. Under these circumstances it seems important to focus as much on the steps by which models have developed as their current ranking, as the process has still to run further; features within even discarded models may be applicable later. Given the difficulty that we have experienced ourselves in understanding the mathematical derivation of some of the approaches, we also include comprehensive derivations. As the problem of biogenic silica dissolution has its parallels in the disciplines of mineral weathering ( A chemical kinetics approach to the in vitro study of biogenic silica presents both the practical problem of measuring the rate of reaction under various conditions, and the theoretical one of devising a mechanism that is consistent with the observations ( In describing the modelling of silica dissolution it is convenient to assume that the silica is homogenous, that any sample can be pre-cleaned to a reproducible condition, and that a method exists for measuring its surface area. These actually present considerable practical difficulty and a full discussion of them is beyond the scope of this paper. In the batch method silica is suspended in seawater and the progress of the reaction followed by either the loss of solid or the gain in dissolved silicic acid over time; the latter is generally used. Such concentration versus time information ( From a practical standpoint, the choice of when to measure the rate will reflect each worker's primary reason for studying silica dissolution. For example, where freshwater diatoms are dissolving in the upper saltwater reaches of an estuary initial rate measurements may be most appropriate. In contrast, a sediment system may be well on its way toward equilibrium, and a rate appropriate to this latter stage of dissolution would be more useful. The flow-through method is similar to the batch method except that solvent is continually added to the mixture with a compensatory amount overflowing ( The flow-through approach has been most successfully used in the study of biogenic silica dissolution found in sediment samples (e.g. Whatever the overall time scale, the dissolution mechanism for a solid can be conceived as a sequence of consecutive steps. Following This transport model ( Integration of The applicablity of the model can be tested by plotting the left hand term against time, This approach ( Note the similarity between this expression and the one derived previously for the transport-controlled model ( As with the diffusion model ( Early mineral study, also assuming a transport limited kinetic, modelled the dissolution of aluminosilicates in aqueous solutions with the simple rate law ( The model can be developed further. The amount, If the initial concentration of dissolved species in the bulk solution is zero, Substituting for Note that, by substituting in this way, change in the thickness of the protective layer, Recognising the standard form ( Now, applying the expansion ( As an approximation, this expansion is truncated after the third term to leave Note, that This surface chemistry model ( The total initial volume, The surface area, The moles of solid left at any time, By conventional use of the method of substitution ( Note that this somewhat fearsome equation expresses Using a spread sheet, with known values of  ACT was originally devised as a means of deriving the rate constant of a bimolecular gas phase collision from first principles. It was preceded by collision theory ( ACT assumes that a number of equilibria precede the production of a “high-energy” complex which, in turn, decomposes in an overall rate determining step which is first order with respect to the complex. Thus, for the simple case of a bimolecular reaction between species Thereafter, When applied to the mineral–water interface each equilibrium includes a surface silicate site separately with H Dependence of reaction rate on the concentration of various reactants can be treated seperately so, for example for the reactant H Above, the different models are presented in more or less chronological order. As can be seen from the precis of their evolution ( The Nernst diffusion approach was dropped when it was found that the boundary layers it requires are much too large to exist in practice. This assessment was made by including proper values for Fick's diffusion constant, The equations emanating from the Nernst diffusion approach ( The difference between the surface reaction and decreasing surface area models is that the latter allows for the disappearance of the solid phase. This seems to us to be the prime issue in modelling biogenic silica dissolution in the water column as such systems are generally greatly undersaturated with respect to silicic acid ( The major feature of the ACT approach as opposed to all the others is its ability to include the reactants in the rate equation. This, in turn, allows the role of hydrogen and hydroxyl ions, and possibly ligands, to be quantified. It is important to note that the rate equation ( Although not considered so far, in the context of frustule dissolution we believe it worthwhile to compare the decreasing surface area model with that of ACT. While ACT considers surface area as a reactant it assumes it to be held constant during experiments on mineral dissolution. In practice, by sieving minerals it is relatively easy to select a particle size which is uniform, and large enough for shrinkage during any experiment to be negligible. Data sets for individual experiments can therefore be corrected to a common particle size provided that the surface area of the particles in each experiment is known. However, with diatom frustules this approach will not work. If large amounts of frustule were used in an attempt to diminish shrinkage, as with minerals, the enormous surface area thereby introduced would push the rate of dissolution up far too high. Any attempt to use ACT with frustules therefore demands the inclusion of the same equations for the decrease of particle size, which are incorporated in the decreasing surface area model. As both approaches already assume that the rate of dissolution is first order with respect to dissolution site concentration, it will be appreciated that practically there would be little to distinguish them. However, we have found that initial rate data, taken over a dissolution period during which surface area does not decrease appreciably, can be interpreted via ACT theory; As stated, the parabolic law assumes reaction is limited by diffusion through a denuded surface layer left after various species have been stripped from the original chemical structure. Seemingly ( We note finally that caution needs to be exercised in the comparison of rate constants based on surface area (e.g. The dissolution of silica from the skeletons of various siliceous marine organisms (mainly diatoms) in seawater has been extensively studied. Some studies ( This investigation shows that the study of biogenic silica dissolution has accumulated a complex web of models and practical approaches. However, in cutting through this, two extreme situations can be identified; the dissolution of biogenic silica in the water column and in sediment pore waters. These differ according to the degree of saturation as well as the extent to which surface area changes during the period of dissolution. The degree of saturation determines the choice of experimental approach while the surface area change determines the choice of model. In a water column study, that is a system far from equilibrium, initial rate measurement in a batch or flow-through reactor should be used. Investigation of the change in reaction rate results solely from decreasing surface area can only be made using the flow-through approach when far-from-equilibrium rates can be obtained at progressive stages of solid disappearance. In this case a simplified version of the decreasing surface area model, that ignores any back reaction effect, may be applied. In general, allowance for a decrease in surface area must be incorporated into the modelling of such a water column system, while a back reaction term seems less important. The use of ACT is limited to the modelling of initial dissolution rate immediately following diatom death only since it is unable to deal with a decreasing surface. Nevertheless it may usefully reflect the influence of changing water chemistry on the initial reaction rate during, for example, freshwater-seawater mixing. It seems unlikely that the added complication of a back reaction would be encountered. So far, no such study seems to have been conducted with diatom frustules although experiments have shown that variation of pH, for example, affects their dissolution rate ( In a sediment study the focus will move onto the relative significance of a back reaction and can therefore either be conducted in batch reactors to produce complete curves, or in flow-through reactors with rates being measured over a range of increasing solution saturation. So far we have mainly conceived the dissolving solid as individual cell walls. However, as a proportion of the frustule silica within any natural system will be encased in faecal pellets it will be desirable to conduct in vitro kinetic experiments on pellets, too. Pelleting potentially provides a relatively small weight of sample adequate to saturate a dissolving solution before an appreciable loss of surface area has occurred. A simple, constant surface area, back reaction model may therefore be adequate for pellet dissolution. Also, the ACT approach would allow for an investigation of how rate may be affected by components in the seawater provided the decrease in surface area was expected to be negligible. If ACT were to be used for this purpose then either the rate measurements must be made far from equilibrium to reflect the water column condition, or the more complex treatment involving a back reaction term ( One of the most serious omissions in most existing modelling studies is that of adequately testing the applicability of models during their initial use. As can be seen in It is appropriate to consider the degree of accuracy with which any rate measurement needs to be made, remembering that the objectives of in vitro study may differ from that of in situ ones. This has not been considered so far, seemingly it being assumed that a perfect reaction curve will offer the best result overall. However, in estimating, for example, the flux of biogenic silica from surface to deep waters even a rough estimate of dissolution rate, perhaps from both intact diatom frustules and those encased in faecal pellets, may be adequate. The acquisition of highly accurate rate measurements needed for mechanistic studies may actually be unnecessary if the natural system to which the results are related is complex and subject to many uncertainties, as might well be the case in the upper reaches of an estuary. We have already stated that the pre-cleaning of silica samples presents practical difficulties. In fact, as there is no sure guidance available on this, it seems prudent to test both cleaned and uncleaned samples. The problem reduces to the influence that the organic component of the cell has on its dissolution. In a natural system the organic component of the frustule, which affords protection while the cell is living ( All of the models considered here assume that reaction occurs at a sharp interface between the surface and the solution, on the outside of regularly shaped particles of similar size. However, given the porous nature of naked frustules evident in any electron micrograph (e.g. Incorporation of silica debris in faecal material plays an important role both in reducing the water column dissolution path and in providing an organic substrate on which microbes are likely to thrive. The passage of diatom cell walls through the gut of a grazing copepod and the subsequent aggregation of large numbers of diatom frustules into faecal pellets introduces new chemical and physical aspects to the dissolution of biogenic silica. Rate enhancing effects, such as increase in surface area and chemical alteration of the silica structure that are likely to occur as a result of grazing may be partly compensated for by the transport of biogenic silica to deeper, cooler, higher silicate waters where dissolution will proceed more slowly (