The PDC (Polycrystalline Diamond Compact) bits are the most widely used bits in oil drilling engineering, in order to further improve their longevity and ROP (Rate of Penetration), single PDC cutter research is very important. However, previous work focused mostly on experiment and numerical simulation while analytical modelling still lacks progress. In this paper, a new analytical model of rock cutting force and failure surface is proposed based on the stress state calculation of each micro-unit inside the rock. The cutting force predicted by this model is well verified by experiments under different parameters like depth of cut, back rack angle, rock type, cutter size and confining pressure. It is also found that the shape of failure surface is a curved line rather than straight, and long and thin cuttings will be formed. Finally, on the basis of this model, the influence mechanism of each parameter on cutting force and the shape of failure surface are analyzed. The method and result of this study are expected to provide a better understanding of cutting force and rock breaking mechanism by PDC bits.PDC (Polycrystalline Diamond Compact) bits were first put into use in oil drilling in the 1970s ( In drilling engineering, the enhancement of ROP can help to reduce the drilling cost ( A large number of experiments, numerical simulation of rock cutting by a PDC cutter were carried out by former researchers. Single cutter test is a powerful tool to study the cutting process ( However, in order to predict the cutting force and the failure process of rock that cannot be achieved by experiment or numerical simulation, theoretical and empirical models have been established from different perspectives. Evans published an analytical model of rock breaking by the point-attack picks (a kind of commonly used cutter in mining engineering) in 1984 ( Though experiments showed that with the in situ stress and hydrostatic pressure increases, the cutting force and mechanical specific energy to break rocks would be significantly increased ( In general, to solve the cutting force, the shape of the failure surface is mostly assumed to be a straight line ( On the other hand, compressed by in situ stress and hydrostatic pressure, rocks underground become harder to be broken, and the results and analysis of the cutting process acquired by models which did not take confining pressure into consideration will deviate from the actual field engineering results, too. In this paper, a new approach to predict the cutting force with different parameters is proposed. With no assumption of the shape of the failure surface, the formation rock is supposed as a semi-infinite elastic-plastic planar body and the maximum shear stress of every micro-unit in it is calculated. The in situ stress, hydrostatic pressure and pore pressure are taken into account and the cutting force is solved by iteration. After that, cutting tests with a single PDC cutter are carried out on a modified milling machine to verify this model. Finally, a curved failure surface is plotted by connecting those biggest maximum shear stress points and the influence mechanism of each parameter on cutting force and the shape of failure surface are analyzed. During the process of rock cutting by a PDC cutter (as shown in According to geometric relation (as shown in N When a force P is applied on a wedge body with an apex angle of γ, and the angle between the center line of the wedge and P is β (as shown in The Michell's solution in elastic-plastic mechanics is expressed as follow: The sign provision of stress: the tensile stress is positive; the shear stress in clockwise is positive. The axes in Based on the relation of polar coordinates and Cartesian coordinates, equation. Similarly, when γ = π, β = π/2, a shear force S is applied, the stress state of the micro-unit (a) can be expressed as: Take the micro-unit (b) in Similarly, the normal stress on the plane with an inclination of (π/2-α)is: When the pore pressure is taken into consideration, the stress state of every micro-unit in the rock can be expressed as: According to the maximum shear stress criterion ( When the maximum shear stress According to Material Mechanics ( Plug equations. As shown in According to equation. According to It can be inferred from the above discussion that the biggest and smallest maximum shear stress are formed at the cutter tip point O and the free surface MN respectively. As a result, point O will reach the failure state (τ It can be concluded that a cutting process is completed if only a cutting force increases the biggest maximum shear stress at the free surface to the shear strength of the rock. Then this cutting force can be defined as the critical cutting force Sc. As demonstrated by Based on the failure criterion that the biggest maximum shear stress at the free surface equals to the shear strength of the rock, the cutting force was solved by iteration computation and then the failure surface was plotted by connecting those biggest maximum shear force points at different x In order to verify the results of this model, rock cutting tests were carried out on a modified milling machine (as shown in A Φ19 × 13 mm PDC cutter, which is often mounted in oil drilling PDC bit is used in this cutting test. Homogeneous and isotropic granite, sandstone and marble, with no obvious cracks, were selected and then processed into 150 × 100 × 30 mm rock blocks ( Physical and mechanical properties of these rocks are shown in The parameters such as depth of cut, back rake angle and types of rock were changed and repeated tests were carried out in this experiment. The parameter design for these tests is shown in In a cutting test, after the rock sample was fixed on the testbed, the cutter holder with a PDC cutter was rotated to a desired angle then fixed on the milling machine. The depth of cut was obtained by vertical movement of the testbed. As the milling machine was powered on, the rock sample moved horizontally with the testbed to the PDC cutter at a set cutting speed, and a linear cutting test started. The forces were measured in situ by the dynamic strain indicator until the end of a cutting. The experimental data of cutting and normal forces is shown in As we can see in After the tests, the experimental results were compared with the calculated results. The Normalized root-mean-square deviation (NRMSD) is applied in this paper to evaluate the fitness of prediction by model. And NRMSD is defined as: It is obvious to see the difference in cutting force required for breaking granite, sandstone and marble in The values of Since the PDC cutter is assumed to be completely sharp in the model, it is theoretically reasonable to ignore the frictional force caused by the worn surface ( Limited to the laboratory condition, the prediction of cutting force under confining pressure and pore pressure is compared with the experimental results by Akbari ( The cohesion strength of the Torrey Buff sandstone in Akbari's test was unknown to readers, and it was set as 20 MPa in calculation, which is based on other properties of Torrey Buff sandstone presented. Also, because the cell pressure set in Akbari's experiment was no more than 4 MPa, the cohesion strength was set constant while the cell pressure changed, which may contribute to the difference between model calculation and experiment. Although the result of first group (under differential pressure of −1.44 MPa) contributes to the total error a lot, the predicted results under confining pressure, with a The prediction of the failure surface is also a significant part of this model. Just like Instead of a straight line, it can be seen clearly that the predicted shape of the failure surface is curved, which is then confirmed according to the 3D surface topography of a granite cutting, as shown in The description of the shape of cuttings was investigated by some previous researchers ( The larger the CoS, the thicker the cuttings. The width of cuttings does not seem to monotonically increase or decrease with cutting depth or back rake angle. According to Furthermore, the shape of failure surface changes in different rocks: larger CoS is found in As shown in It is assumed that the in-situ stress It can be seen in equation. Although the pore pressure is taken into account in equation. It can be seen from The increasing cutting force with the increase of the depth of cut were observed by a large number of researchers. Some researchers attributed the decrease of Mechanical Specific Energy (MSE, the ratio between cutting force and area of cut) to relatively slower increase rate of cutting force when compared with the area of cut ( To make clear of this issue, the influence of the cutting depth is analyzed in the model. According to equation. When it comes to the influence of the back rake angle on cutting forces, Akbari believed that the increasing back rake angle is the major reason for the increasing cutter-rock friction force, which result in larger cutting force ( When N It is also interesting that the biggest maximum shear stress appears at about 10° but not 0°, which may denote a most effective back rake angle when cutting rocks and further validation is supposed to do. The influence of rock types on cutting force was studied by Che. He also found that the increase of rock's UCS leads to larger cutting force ( The influence of confining pressure and pore pressure are also discussed. Mostly, the in-situ stress is larger than the hydrostatic pressure at a certain well depth, so the difference between in-situ stress and hydrostatic pressure is always positive. When this difference increases, namely the in-situ stress increases or the hydrostatic pressure decreases in equation. However, the cohesion strength of rocks will change with the increase of the confining pressure underground actually, which results in hardened and tightened rocks. In order to make clear of the confining pressure effects on the stress distribution solely, the change of properties is not taken into consideration in this model. Compared with the cutting force underground, it may cause smaller cutting force predicted therefore. When comparing the evolution of cutting force and the Coefficient of Shape with different parameters, except the back rake angle, they show opposite trend with each other. It suggests that thinner cuttings with smaller CoS, just like larger cutting force, indicate poor drillability of rocks. When compared with previous models, there are two significant features of this models. Firstly, the predicted failure surface is curved, which is more practical and proved in real tests. Secondly, with CoS smaller than 0.11, the cutting is so thin and is more like a slice than a prismatic body. But in real tests, thicker cuttings with larger CoS are also observed, which seems to contradict to the predicted results. To explain it, cracks and weak planes, which are unevenly distributed in a rock, but neglected for simplification in this analytical model, play crucial roles. In a real test, there are usually some cracks and weak planes, or even macro pores exist in the rock actually. As shown in In summary, the shape of cuttings, whether thin or thick, is influenced by the defects in the rock. Although all the previous models and the model in this paper simplify the rock as no cracks or weak planes, this simplification will result in larger predicted cutting force and inaccurate failure surface. Therefore, defects in rocks are expected to be considered in future work. In this paper, an analytical model of rock cutting by single PDC cutter is established, which makes no assumption of the shape of the failure surface and takes both the confining pressure and pore pressure into consideration. The model predicted results show that the model can well predict the trend of cutting force in linear cutting tests in comparison with the experimental results: the cutting force increases with the depth of cut, the back rake angle, the cohesion strength of rock, cutter diameter, while decreases with the difference between in-situ stress and hydrostatic pressure. However, the mechanisms that how these parameters affect the cutting force are different. The increase of depth of cut and cutter diameter leads to larger width of cut, which decreases the normal force and shear force on unit width. The increasing back rake angle changes the combination of the normal force and shear force on unit width; and there is a most effective back rake angle, at which the combination of the normal force and shear force on unit width can induce the biggest shear stress in the rock. Larger cohesion strength of rock lifts the criterion value of rock breaking. The in-situ stress and hydrostatic pressure can directly influence the shear stress in the rock, positively and negatively. According to the shape analysis of failure surface in this model, a curved failure surface is predicted first. Then a long and thin cutting is obtained just as what were observed in the test. After that, to describe that whether the cutting is relatively thin or thick, the Coefficient of Shape is defined and it shows opposite trend compared with cutting force with different parameters except the bake rake angle. Finally, subsequent discussion finds that defects in the rock could have crucial impact on the formation of larger cuttings. Work in this paper was financially supported by