A tubular photocatalytic reactor of the immersion type for water purification from organic pollutants has been developed. Few important principles were used in the construction of the reactor, namely, a symmetrical and uniform light distribution with direct incidence of UV irradiation on the photocatalyst surface, a highly active mixing of contaminated water as a result of an air bubbling flux, that simultaneously supplying oxygen that is necessary for a photocatalytic reaction. The implemented highly active thin film photocatalyst was prepared by the Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) technology using titanium(isopropoxide) (TTIP) as a precursor. The factor K=Surface/Volume of this reactor is about 255m−1. Together with an effective mixing, it creates excellent contacts between the contaminants and the photocatalyst which is very favorable for water purification. The efficiency of this reactor was proven by the decomposition of some pharmaceutical drugs (Ibuprofen, Acetylsalicylic acid, Sulphanilamide, Paracetamol, Caffeine) and of some pesticides (Dimethoate, Azoxystrobin, Iprodione, Propizamid, Isoproturon, Fenarimol). The relation between the kinetic constants of photocatalysis and of photolysis is Kphotcat./Kphotolysis
                     =2÷18. These results demonstrate the feasibility of the developed photoreactor for the degradation of recalcitrant organic pollutants, such as pharmaceuticals and pesticides in water.Photocatalytic technology of water purification from organic pollutants produced by agricultural, textile and pharmaceutical industries has a great potential of application Following the classification given in The goal of this study is to develop an effective photocatalytic reactor and to test it for removing from water some frequently used pesticides and pharmaceutical drugs from water. Some general principles were used in the construction of this reactor, simultaneously. Firstly, a tubular configuration of the reactor with symmetric radial uniform light distribution to a surface area of photocatalyst and with direct incidence of UV radiation onto the photocatalyst surface was used. Secondly, an ultraviolet (UV) lamp was used without any transparent jackets so that the water was used to cool the UV lamp. Thirdly, highly active mixing of contaminated water was achieved by air bubbling that permitted better contact of the contaminants with the photocatalyst surface and the simultaneous oxygen supply that is necessary for the photocatalytic reaction. Forthly, the photocatalytic reactor design permits an easy connection of photoreactors in a successive or in a parallel way to increase the purification level or the increase productivity of cleaning. The TiO This setup was placed inside a standard vacuum apparatus with a turbo-molecular pump (ALCATEL TMP 5400 CP) producing vacuum down to 5 All tubes were cleaned carefully right before loading using the following procedure. The tubes were cleaned in water using a detergent and rinsed in distilled water. Then, the substrates were immersed in sulfuric acid (∼95%) for about 1 During the thin film deposition a Ar/O The thin films were studied by XRD (see The reactor has a tubular configuration with an UV source placed in the centre in order to achieve direct incidence of light on the surface of the photocatalyst and a maximum light utilization, as well, as an uniform illumination of the photocatalyst. The reactor consists of three glued quartz tubes with inner surface covered with TiO Quartz tubes and UV lamp were sealed by rubber rings. Two inlets for the air supply and the purified water exit were inserted in the bottom support (shown in The sequence of experiments was as follows. Initially, an amount of 320 Afterwards, the lamp was turned on and the solution was irradiated with UV light for a set time during which the progress of the photolytic and the photocatalytic kinetics were monitored for the following operating variables: different classes of the chemical indicator compounds, the pH of the solution, the chemical indicator compound concentration and the scavenger solvent. The temperature of the irradiated solution was also measured and a 12 For the regeneration of the TiO Dimethoate, Azoxystrobin, Iprodione, Isoproturon, Propyzamide and Fenarimol (all ⩾99.0% purity) were purchased from Riedel-de-Haen (Germany). Paracetamol, Ibuprofen and Caffeine (Technical grade) were ordered from Merck (Germany). Acetylsalicylic acid and Sulphanilamide were synthesized and purified at organic chemistry lab of DQF/FCT of Algarve University. HPLC isocratic grade acetonitrile and methanol, as well as, acetic and orthophosphoric acids were supplied from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ammonium acetate was purchased by Fluka Analytica. Triethylamine was supplied by Riedel-de-Haen (Sigma-Aldrich group). Pure water obtained from a Millipore Simplicity water purification system was used to prepare all the experimental solutions. Photolytic and photocatalytic kinetics was followed using a HPLC chromatographer (Agilent, 1220 LC System) equipped with a C18 reverse phase column (Lichrocart 125-4, Lichrosper Rp-18e (5 During the process, 10 Aqueous solutions of each chemical indicator were treated both photolytically and photocatalytically at an initial substrate concentration of 5 The photoreactor performance was also tested in the presence of drainage water provided from hydroponic cultures irrigation and supplied by a local farmer producer. Drainage water chemical composition in presented in In order to study the pH influence Acetylsalicylic acid and Sulphanilamide aqueous solutions, 10 For the study of the concentration effect, the pesticide Dimethoate was chosen considering its high water solubility (25 Each experiment was conducted at least two times under identical conditions. The data presented in the text and figures are the mean values. The total organic carbon (TOC) content for Paracetamol and Propyzamide solutions (10 This section evaluates the photocatalytic efficiency of the photoreactor with TiO Dark experiments performed for all chemical indicators showed adsorption values of the TiO  Most authors agree The linear regression determination coefficients (R  As it was mentioned above, each experiment was conducted at least two times showing repeatable results indicating that the obtained thin films were reusable after simple water washing under lamp irradiation with a relatively high repetition rate, despite the complexity of the various physical-chemical processes occurring during the whole process. In order to compare the obtained results with the results on the degradation of more frequently used compounds in other studies on the photocatalytic reactors, some data on the degradation of methylene blue were included in According to several authors In this work, because of its high water solubility, pesticide dimethoate was chosen for study the initial concentration effect. Five independent solutions with concentrations between 10 The observed adsorption values were higher for concentration over 80 The explanation of pH effects on the effectiveness of the photocatalytic process may depend on different reaction mechanisms such as hydroxyl radicals attack, oxidation by positive holes and reduction by the electrons influence on pollutant degradation Considering the widely reported zero charge point pH (pHzpc), of 6.25 for the TiO In this work, within the set of compounds chosen as chemical indicators, only acetylsalicylic acid and ibuprofen actually present acid-base equilibrium characteristics (pKa Actually, this result would be expected for sulphanilamide considering that at pH values between 3 and 9 the nonprotonated form of the very weak acid should be highly predominant. Therefore, the adsorption to the TiO HPLC chromatographic results also show that as the pH value of the sample solution increases, a second chromatographic peak with a higher retention time (tr Methanol being a selective HO In the present study, the methanol influence, at a concentration of 1% in water was followed for most of the studied compounds. Pseudo first order rate constants, K Additional comparative experiments were carried out using paracetamol and propizamide aqueous solutions (10 Since alcohols could effectively scavenge OH Photocatalytic process efficiency of Propizamide and Paracetamol was also tested in the presence of drainage water provided from hydroponic cultures irrigation. A drainage water inhibition effect is clearly achieved in the presence of HCO One of the problems in the immobilized photocatalysis process is the mass transport limitation since the catalyst is immobilized on a solid glass tube A mineralization of selected organic compounds was not monitored for the inorganic ions production such as Cl The HPLC limits of quantification (LOQ) for Paracetamol and Propyzamide, determined as the chromatographic peak 10 This photocatalytic behaviour was also performed by the other tested chemical indicators suggesting that the photoreactor mineralization efficiency is significant under tested experimental conditions. It was shown that the use of several general principles in the construction of the photocatalytic reactor, such as direct irradiation by UV light with symmetric radial uniform light distribution; the highly active mixing of the contaminated water that was achieved by air bubbling permitting better contacts of the contaminants with the surface of the photocatalyst with a simultaneous supply of oxygen, leads to a high efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction. The high surface area per unit volume of the reaction liquid (K factor This work was supported by Fundação para Ciência e Tecnologia (FCT), Portugal, Project PEST-OE/QUI/UI4023/2014 (CIQA 2014), and by