The separation properties of Nafion® and sulfonated polyimide (SP) membranes have been compared for the recovery of acids from effluents containing metallic salts. To improve the selectivity, we have deposited a polyethylene imine (PEI) anion-exchange layer on the membrane surface by using two different techniques, a conventional electrodeposition and the plasma polymerization technique involving an ethylene/ammonia monomers mixture. We have pointed out the efficiency of the latter technique since the transport number of multivalent cations has been decreased by 74 and 54% for the Nafion® and the SP membranes, respectively. Plasma modified sulfonated polyimides are therefore good candidates for electrodialysis processes and constitute an alternative to the Nafion® membrane.Faraday’s constant (96,500 current (A) current density (A molar flux of ion transport number of ion valency of ion Experimental research on ionic membranes has been devoted to the development of new types of cation-exchange membranes (CEMs) which can separate not only cations from anions (permselectivity) but also cations of different valencies (selectivity). One of the application fields of these CEMs is the recovery of acids from effluents containing metallic salts. These toxic effluents are generated by a number of industrial processes, such as steel treatment, metal refining (zinc and copper), pigment production (titanium), surface treatment (chromium and nickel), and chemical production (alkylation and catalysts) the first consists in manufacturing a suitable membrane by adjusting the fabrication parameters so that, in contact with a mixed solution of acid and metallic divalent cations, the flux of protons will be higher than that of metallic cations; the second one consists in depositing a thin anion-exchange layer at the surface of the CEM, creating positive charges and, therefore, introducing an electrical repulsion barrier which limits the penetration of divalent cations with respect to monovalent ones This study is devoted to the implementation of the second method. Our idea is to use membranes specially designed for PEMFCs and to deposit an anion-exchange polyethylene imine (PEI) layer onto their surface. Due to its high proton conductivity, its good chemical and mechanical stability, the perfluorinated ionomer, Nafion In this study, conventional or plasma PEI layers were deposited by electrodeposition or PECVD process on Nafion Two types of cation-exchange membranes were used: Nafion Sulfonated polyimide membrane CEMs were plasma modified in a 40 The system was composed of a bell-jar chamber (250 The experimental procedure for a plasma sequence was the following: the CEM was placed horizontally on one of the electrodes, the reactor chamber was evacuated down to 10 The PEI electrodeposition was realized directly in the electrodialysis cell (cf. In order to improve the PEI adhesion, we subjected CEMs to an etching procedure using the PECVD technique. It was performed on the CEM placed on the upper rf electrode using a 50% O The CEM was sputtered by O The plasma-modified CEMs morphology was determinated from SEM pictures of the materials surface using a field emission scanning electron microscope S-4500 (Hitachi). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy XPS (using a Cameca Ribber UHV device working with a MAC 2 electron spectrometer) was used to investigate the chemical structure of plasma-polymerized films deposited on silicon wafers. The laboratory cell was constituted of four distinct compartments, each containing 500 the dilute containing the solution to be treated (0.25 the concentrate (0.05 the catholyte and the anolyte (0.1 The transport of the different ions under the applied potential difference is illustrated in We considered When we combined For the flux of copper, the two last terms of At last, we took the value of the total transport number of proton as the average of the transport numbers calculated from ( The four electrodes cell used for measurement has been described elsewhere The high frequency resistance of the membranes was measured by ac impedance technique. Using a mercury cell (with a surface of 0.785  The non-modified membranes appear smooth and featureless. The surface of modified membranes are speckled with small granules and pock marks which are more perceptible for the Nafion According to the XPS analysis, the PEI-like plasma films contain 3% of oxygen, 85% of carbon and 12% of nitrogen atoms. The increase of the ammonia amount in the gaseous mixture and the decrease of the power applied in the plasma reactor do not induce a significant variation of the atoms proportion in the studied volume of the layer. The transport numbers of Cu As reported previously for non-modified membranes The transport numbers of Cu The PEI deposit acts as an anion-exchange layer which limits the penetration of multivalents cations. The surface modification allows to decrease the transport number of copper by 54% for the Nafion From the previous conclusion, we have envisaged a plasma pretreatment in order to improve the polyelectrolyte adhesion onto the membrane surface.   Depending on the PECVD conditions performed, By comparing the separation results of modified Nafion In comparing conditions (1) and (2) or (3) and (4), it appears that a decrease of the input power applied in the plasma reactor induces an improvement of the selectivity. Indeed, a decrease of this parameter allows a weaker fragmentation rate of molecules in the gaseous phase, in particular NH In comparing conditions (3) and (5), it results that an increase of the plasma exposure time from 60 to 120 However, an increase of ammonia amount in the gaseous mixture (conditions (3) and (5)) does not permit a real improvement of the performance of the deposit contrary to what we could expect These trends are lowered for modified SP membrane. In particular, we can not explain the feeble performance of the SP membrane modified with the PECVD conditions (3). Nevertheless, best separation results have been obtained for modification (5) as for the Nafion The PECVD technique seems to be more efficient than a plasma-etching pretreatment followed by a conventional PEI electrodeposition to create a layer against the transport of multivalent ions. Despite of its very weak thickness (less than 10 Typical current–voltage characteristics usually show a limiting current plateau due to a concentration polarization phenomenon. This comes from the existence of diffusion boundary layers in solution on both sides of the membrane where ion concentration gradients take places. The presence of an overlimiting current is due to several phenomena like gravitational convection, electroconvection or water-splitting. As it can be seen in This is not the case with modified membrane where the curves plotted for positive current and voltage ( In Besides the general assymmetrical voltammetric behavior of the modified membranes shows that membranes are themselves assymmetrical to ion transport. The conductivity values of the different membranes, calculated from the resistance measurements are given in the At first, we have checked that both non-modified membranes are good protonic conductors. Afterwards, we can notice that the conductivity of PECVD modified membranes is decreased (up to by 62 and 76% for the Nafion Surface modifications of high proton conducting membrane have been performed in order to improve significantly the selectivity H Authors are grateful to Dr. R. Mercier (LMOPS) for polymer synthesis, Dr. M. Pinéri (CEA Grenoble) and Dr. D. Marsacq (CEA Grenoble) for providing us SP membranes and R. Berjoan (IMP-CNRS Odeillo) for XPS analysis.