In order to clarify the effect of polar group modification on flotation performance of amine collector, flotation properties of quartz and hematite using bis(2-hydroxy-3-chloropropyl) dodecylamine (N23) as a collector were investigated. And the adsorption mechanism of N23 on quartz surface was established by zeta potential measurements, SEM/EDS measurements, and molecular structure analysis. Single mineral flotation results indicated that N23 showed stronger collecting ability on quartz and hematite than DDA-CH3COOH. However, starch could depress the flotation of hematite. Flotation recovery of 98.10% for quartz could be achieved, when N23 concentration was 43.33 mg/L and starch concentration was 16.67 mg/L at natural slurry pH. Separation of artificially mixed minerals of hematite and quartz was achieved effectively using N23 as the collector. The optimized separation result with 66.29% iron grade and 90.06% iron recovery in concentrate was obtained when slurry pH was 7.34 with 43.33 mg/L N23 and 23.33 mg/L starch. The interaction energies of N23 with mineral surface also showed well consistency with flotation results. SEM/EDS analyses and zeta potential measurements revealed that N23 could absorb on quartz surface in the forms of strong electrostatic and hydrogen bonding interaction. Compared with DDA, N23 had a higher HLB value and better water-solubility, which resulted in better dispersion in water and stronger adsorption on mineral surface.Flotation has been viewed as the most effective solution, both technologically and economically, to upgrade iron concentrates In the past few years, some scientists have indicated that introducing of polar groups, such as chlorine atom, in saturated fatty acid could improve the solubility of these reagents Hand-picked natural pure specimens of hematite and quartz were obtained from Qidashan plant, which located in Liaoning province of China. Hematite and quartz were crushed and then ground in a porcelain ball mill and wet-sieved to obtain the −100 + 37 µm fractions. Shaking table was used to elevate the purity of hematite for flotation studies. Quartz sample was leached with dilute hydrochloric acid for three times, once every 24 h. Chemical compositions of hematite and quartz were analyzed and shown in The new type amine collector, bis(2-hydroxy-3-chloropropyl) dodecylamine (N23), was synthesized in laboratory according to the procedure reported by Kim et al. Flotation tests of single minerals or artificially mixed samples were conducted in a 30 mL XFG flotation cell with an impeller speed of 1260 r/min. The suspension was agitated for 3 min before the desired pH value was obtained. After adding a certain amount of collector and starch orderly with a 3 min interval of stirring, flotation was conducted for 6 min. The floated and submerged fraction were separately weighted and assayed after filtration and drying, the recovery and grade were calculated based on weight and elemental contents of the products. Zeta potentials of quartz treated and untreated with collector were measured by a JS94H zeta potential analyzer. Finely ground samples (<5 µm) were added to 50 mL aqueous solution, agitated for 12 min. A series of pH values were acquired by adding 1% HCl or NaOH solution. The average value of at least ten individually measurements was accredited. The repeated tests showed a measurement error of ±5 mV Surface morphology and composition of quartz treated with collector were observed by field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) (JEOL JSM-6700F) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) Molecular dynamics simulation is an effective tool to study the interaction models, interaction mechanisms, and dynamic characteristics of the adsorption process Flotation performances of hematite and quartz when N23 and DDA-CH Results displayed in For good flotation ability of N23 on quartz and hematite, to achieve good separation of quartz from hematite, suitable depressant for hematite must be added in the flotation process. Starch, which has been proved to be an efficient depressant for hematite The results displayed in Slurry pH had little effect on hematite flotation when N23 concentration was 43.33 mg/L and starch concentration was 16.67 mg/L ( As shown above, different floatability of hematite and quartz was exhibited when N23 was used as the collector and starch was used as the depressant. To investigate the separation efficiency of N23 on quartz and hematite, flotation separation of artificially mixed minerals was conducted and the results were shown in The results displayed in The interaction energies of N23 with the surfaces of quartz and hematite were calculated and showed in In order to characterize the surface morphology of quartz, a set of SEM/EDS probe analysis were concomitantly performed to find out the type and distribution of N23 on quartz surface. SEM image and microchemical maps of the selected area of quartz ( In order to better understand adsorption of N23 on quartz surface, the electrokinetic phenomenon of mineral suspensions was investigated. Compared with dodecylamine (DDA), N23 contains three kinds of hydrophilic groups (–N<, –Cl and –CHOH– groups) and two kinds of hydrophobic groups (the C12 and C3 carbon chains), and it is easy to form strong hydrophilic groups (–NH+<) in acid condition. Additionally, N23 has three electronegativity atoms (N According to SCIFinder database, the Several researches have indicated that chlorination modification of surfactant could improve its solubility According to literature, group numbers of per –CH Compared with DDA, which HLB was calculated as 5.83, N23 had a relatively higher HLB value, which was 8.61. This indicated that the insertion of polar group –CH One new type amine collector, bis(2-hydroxy-3-chloropropyl) dodecylamine (N23) has been proved to be an efficient collector with excellent collecting performance for quartz and hematite compared with DDA-CH This work was supported by the open fund of