Objective
                  The aim of this study was to analyze the clinical and functional results of hook plate fixation in Neer type 2 distal clavicle fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively analyzed 16 patients (11 males, 5 females) who were diagnosed with Neer type 2 distal clavicle fractures and treated with hook plate fixation between 2013 and 2014. Mean age was 38 (range: 27–61), and mean follow-up time was 14.3 (range: 12–18) months. Complications seen on radiographs were implant failure and subacromial osteolysis. The clinical results were evaluated with modified UCLA (University of California Los Angeles) scoring system.
               
                  Results
                  Bone union was achieved in all patients at the end of the first 4 months. Mean modified UCLA score was 32.75 (range 31–35). In 12 patients (68%), the implants had to be removed due to complications. After removal, the complaints regressed and shoulders' range of motion increased.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Clinical and radiological results on the fixation of Neer type 2 distal clavicle fractures with a hook plate are good in terms of fracture union and function. The major disadvantage of the method was the requirement of early implant removal due to the hardware related complications and good results can be achieved only after plate removal. Optimizing the length of hook plate may lower the rate of complications.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, Therapeutic study.Neer type 2 distal clavicle fractures are more likely to displace as the coraco-clavicular ligaments are ruptured. In the last decade, the clavicular hook plate has been used extensively in the treatment of displaced lateral clavicle fractures. Sixteen patients (11 males and 5 females) with Neer type 2 distal clavicle fractures, who underwent open reduction and hook plate (TST IND, Istanbul, Turkey) fixation between 2013 and 2014 were retrospectively studied. Titanium hook plates consisted of three types with 4, 6 and 8 holes. We used hook plates with 4 holes, 6 holes and 8 holes in 2, 11 and 3 patients, respectively. All operations were performed in the first 4 days after the trauma. Mean age was 38 (range: 27–61) and mean follow up was 14.3 (range: 12–18) months. Active motion exercises of the elbow, wrist, and hand were begun immediately after the operation, and circular shoulder movements were begun 1 week after surgery. The shoulder was protected with a sling only outside for rest. Patients' daily activities were not restricted during this period. The arm sling was removed after the 6th week and movements over 90° were allowed. After radiological fusion was observed, forceful movements were allowed. The patients were evaluated with physical examination on postoperative weeks of 2, 6, 12, and 16; and with both radiologic studies and physical examination on the postoperative months of 3, 4, and 12. In radiologic evaluation, the presence of a bridging callus in at least 3 cortices or the disappearance of the fracture line was accepted as union. Complications noted on radiology, including implant failure, acromial osteolysis, and acromioclavicular (AC) joint arthrosis were also recorded. The clinical results were assessed with modified UCLA (University of California Los Angeles) scoring system. There were no intraoperative complications. Radiographs showed union on the 3rd postoperative month in 13 patients, and on the 4th month in 3 patients. Three patients developed superficial skin infections after the operation, and they healed uneventfully with wound care. Radiological evaluation revealed a radiolucent area, located where the hook part touched the acromion, in 4 patients on the 3rd month, and in 6 patients on the 4th month. This was accepted as acromial osteolysis ( Hook plates provide a good union rate and enables early motion and rehabilitation in the surgical treatment of unstable distal clavicle fractures. Satisfactory good clinical results require early plate removal after the union is achieved because complications which are associated with the hardware are not rare. Subacromial osteolysis and implant failure are the most significant common complications. Various incidence rate of osteolysis was given in the literature. The average incidence rate (62%) of osteolysis in our study was high when compared to the other studies. In the study of Lin et al The optimal time to remove the hook plate still remains controversial. Regarding the higher rate of early major complications like acromial osteolysis, implant failure and refracture, surgical fixation of Neer type 2 clavicle fractures with a hook plate is controversial. The clavicle hook plates were developed to treat acromioclavicular ligament injury or distal clavicular fracture with comminution. The hook plate is a solid plate that withstands forces that are applied to the fracture fragments. The high mechanical stability provided by the plate results from the hook part which is inserted to the subacromial space. However studies have shown that the hook is also the cause for the most common complications, 5%–68% of the patients have complaints related with subacromial impingement, bursitis, and rotator cuff injury. The most significant advantage of hook plate fixation in the treatment of distal clavicular fractures is the possibility of initiating early physical therapy which is useful for the restoration of shoulder functions. However it is generally accepted that the mechanical effects of the plate on the anatomically close subacromial bursa and the AC joint results in potentially serious complications. These complications may be avoided to some extent with removal of the implants after fracture healing. Close and frequent follow up of the patients is therefore significant. The functional results of our study in the short term were satisfactory. Postoperatively, the arm was placed in a shoulder sling for resting after shoulder exercises. Patients' daily activities were not restricted during this 6-week period. Rehabilitation program was not aggressive. Arm exercises up to shoulder level were allowed. The patient was instructed to move his/her arm in over 90° of abduction or flexion until confirmation of union. Acromial osteolysis is related directly with location of the hook plate under the acromion rather than the rate of shoulder motion. Kim et al This study had some limitations. It was a retrospective study and not randomized. Also, we did not compare the different methods of treatment. The number of patients was also too small to allow statistical analysis to compare complications of patients with different number of plate holes. But the strength of the study was the uniformity of the included fractures and the number of patients for such a rare fracture. In conclusion our data shows that the clinical and radiological results on the fixation of Neer type 2 distal clavicle fractures with a hook plate are good in terms of fracture union and function. However, the major disadvantage of this method was the requirement of early implant removal due to the hardware related complications. Good clinical results may be achieved only after plate removal. The complications may be related with the morphology of the lower aspect of the acromion where the hook part is inserted and the length of the plate part. Optimizing the shape and the length of hook plate and using different sizes according to individuals' needs may lower these complications. Using a long hook plate with more than 6 holes can be a good option to reduce the incidence of acromial osteolysis. Future studies with large number of patients are needed to confirm these findings.