Ultra-fine Bi1−xYxFe0.8Mn0.2O3 (BYFMO) nanopowders with x = 0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25 were successfully synthesized using reverse co-precipitation method. XRD graphs indicate the formation of the secondary phases such as YFeO3 and YMnO3 in synthesized powders with 25% of yttrium doping. Furthermore, the lattice parameter declined as yttrium doping grew. FESEM micrographs showed that, the particle size fell from 130 to 15nm as yttrium doping rose from x = 0 to x = 0.25, respectively. Magnetic hysteresis loops illustrated a weak ferromagnetism for all samples at room temperature. Besides, Y and Mn co-doping improved magnetization from 0.298emu/g for pure BFO to 1.518emu/g for BYFM20 (x = 0.20) because by raising the amount of dopants the particle size dropped, leading to a high surface-to-volume ratio and therefore more uncompensated surface spins. Also, spin cycloid was destroyed by Y-doping, thereby releasing the latent magnetization locked within cycloid. Electrical properties measurement reveals that ε′ and tanδ values climbed by an increase in co-doping ions. This enhancement may be related to various factors such as the formation of large dipole moments by more structural distortion and a much more increase in grain boundaries by adding extra amounts of dopant ions.Multiferroic materials, which have at least two primary ferroic properties: ferroelectricity, ferromagneticity and ferroelasticity coupled to each other in the same phase The effects of Y and Mn-doping on electrical, optical and magnetic properties of BFO have been investigated separately. Among B-site ion substitutions, Mn doping improves BFO photoluminescent properties and exhibits a significantly reduced leakage current and an improved breakdown voltage, so that well-saturated ferroelectric hysteresis loops can be detected BYFMO nanoparticles were successfully synthesized by reverse chemical co-precipitation procedure. In a typical process, high-purity bismuth subnitrate Bi Calcination temperature was obtained via differential thermal analysis (DTA) at a heating rate of 5  Usually, a ferroelectric-to-paraelectric phase transition in BFO can be observed by the low-intensity peak in DTA without any weight loss. This situation in DTA curves has been observed at 810–830  Miller indices ( As it can be seen, by increasing the total amount of dopant ions, the ratio c/a decreases and subsequently extra distortion in crystal structure takes place. Furthermore, rhombohedral lattice angle α For characterization of fundamental absorption bands in BFO, BFMO and BYFMO systems, the FT-IR spectrums of precursor and crystalline powders derived from reverse co-precipitation calcined at 550 The transmission electron micrograph of the as-selected BYFMO15 specimen has been shown in EDX analysis of a selected BYFMO15 sample has been depicted in Magnetic hysteresis loops of the BFMO and BYFMO calcined nanoparticles synthesized by reverse co-precipitation with an applied magnetic field in range of ± 1.0 Particle size of as-prepared powders with the reverse method is in range of 9–56 Uncompensated spins from surface can improve BFO nanoparticle magnetization By increasing the total amount of dopant ions the BFO structure should be further destroyed, resulting in magnetization enhancement as shown in The variation of dielectric constant (ε′) and loss factor (tanδ) in frequency range of 1–1000 The ultra-fine nanopowders in system of Bi