This paper presents results of column flotation of silica sand (d80=190
                        μm
                     ) that show typical column heights may adversely affect the performance of the flotation, when relatively dense flotation slurries of floatable mineral are processed. For slurry densities above 20% of solids (w/w), floated under typical conditions (J
                           g
                        =1.46
                        cm/s
                     , J
                           t
                        =1
                        cm/s
                     , J
                           ww
                        =0.16
                        cm/s
                     , h
                           f
                        =0.3
                        m
                     ), the bubble–particle aggregate reaches density values close to one losing their buoyancy. Under these conditions, mineralized bubbles accumulate, coalesce (losing a fraction of the particles that transport) and may even be carried out to the tailings discharge, affecting both the recovery and the processing capacity of the column. By reducing the height of the collection zone of the column (h
                     c) this abnormal operation may be substantially mitigated. In this work, recovery increased from 55% to 78% by decreasing h
                     c from 4 to 1.5 m when processing a pulp with 30% of floatable minerals. The paper also discusses the effect of column height upon other important variables.Even though the flotation column is capable of producing better grades than the conventional mechanical cells, this machine is an industrial reactor that has not been yet fully understood. The superiority of the column is attributed principally to the bubbling regime and to the presence of a depth cleaning zone (froth). Generally, flotation in column cells has been simulated with models developed based on the mixing characteristics prevailing in the cell. For example, The effect of the column height on the flotation performance has been studied from an experimental approach ( To this respect and with the aim of demonstrating the presence of the gas bubbles in the tails, Recently, The experimental program was conducted in a laboratory column ( With the aim of measuring the gas hold up in the collection zone, the column is equipped with four electrical conductivity sensors, located at 0.60, 1.85, 3.04 and 4.24 m, from the bottom of the column ( Others accessories of the column rig are a froth depth controller, a pH meter (Omega 5T96), a conductivity meter (Orion model 162), a pulp temperature controller and a photographic camera. This camera was installed in front of the screen column section. This screen section has a cross-sectional area similar to that of the column with the aim of avoiding changes of slurry velocity. The conductivity measurements were collected with the help of a computerized data acquisition system. The mineral used to prepare the flotation pulp was silica sand with a size distribution between 50 and The experiments were performed in a closed circuit, made keeping constant the tailings flow rate ( After 40 min of steady-state operation, timed samples of feed, concentrate and tailings were collected during approximately 40 s. Samples were prepared to evaluate the solids content and the liquid and solids flow rates. Moreover, during the flotation tests photographic pictures were taken as a visual evidence of the presence of mineralized bubbles below the sparger. Once the experimental data were gathered (mass flow rates of solids and liquid, solids percentage (w/w) and particle size distribution), the numerical information was reconciled using a mass balance software (BILMAT, Version 8.1), assuming 5% of standard deviation. Regarding the collection zone height effect,  The results presented in A practical method for diagnosing the column operation is through the measurement of the axial gas holdup profile.   The explanation of the results obtained with the larger column when floating pulps of high floatable minerals, is based on the visual (and instrumental) observations of bubble accumulation into the column. In this case, the abnormal accumulation generates the friction that produces the detachment of the coarser particles. As a consequence, the concentrate is enriched with finer particles. Conventionally the bias rate ( To understand these results, let us consider that one form of expressing the bias is as the difference between the wash water rate and the water rate of the concentrate ( Collection zone height may adversely affect the recovery of solids when pulps with a high percent of floatable mineral are processed (e.g., >25% w/w). In these conditions, the viscosity of the pulp augment and the bubble–particle aggregate may be overloaded attaining high densities. As a consequence, a fraction of aggregates sinks instead of floating and is carried by the tailings stream. The increased friction force due to abnormal accumulation of mineralized bubbles promotes coarse particle detachment and loaded bubbles entrainment. This may also account for the drop in recovery observed. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of CONACYT. Also, the authors acknowledge the technical support of M.C. Antonio Gonzalez Anaya.