Background
                  In hip fracture surgery, the exact choice of implant often remains somewhat unclear for the individual surgeon, but the growing literature consensus has enabled publication of evidence-based surgical treatment pathways. The aim of this article was to review author pathways and national guidelines for hip fracture surgery and discuss a method for future pathway/guideline implementation and evaluation.
               
                  Methods
                  By a PubMed search in March 2015 six studies of surgical treatment pathways covering all types of proximal femoral fractures with publication after 1995 were identified. Also we searched the homepages of the national heath authorities and national orthopedic societies in West Europe and found 11 national or regional (in case of no national) guidelines including any type of proximal femoral fracture surgery.
               
                  Results
                  Pathway consensus is outspread (internal fixation for un-displaced femoral neck fractures and prosthesis for displaced among the elderly; and sliding hip screw for stabile- and intramedullary nails for unstable- and sub-trochanteric fractures) but they are based on a variety of criteria and definitions – and often leave wide space for the individual surgeons’ subjective judgement. Appearing neither exhaustive nor exclusive, most of the pathways seem difficult to evaluate scientifically, which might explain why only very few have been evaluated for compliance, reliability and complications after implementation in an actual clinical setting. We therefore introduce a model for step-wise pathway implementation including proper scientific evaluation.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Surgical treatment pathways for proximal femoral fractures are available in literature and nationally with somewhat evidence based treatment consensus, but the scientific evaluation of the pathways them selves needs to be optimised.The published evidence in the last decades has created some sort of consensus for surgical treatment of proximal femoral fractures. However, in everyday clinical practice, the exact choice of implant often remains somewhat unclear for the individual surgeon, and here easily used evidence-based surgical treatment pathways covering all types of proximal femoral fractures are warranted. Many articles recommend treatment for some aspects of surgery, but only a few authors have published definite more or less illustrated decision-tree algorithms for surgical treatment of proximal femoral fractures To the best of our knowledge a review of the present surgical treatment pathways for proximal femoral fractures has not been presented before. The aim of this article was therefore to present such a review and to discuss the possibilities for future pathway improvements and clinical evaluation. We hypothesised that the pathways would have recommendation similarities due to the emerging surgical consensus in literature, but also expected local assimilations and lack of proper scientific evaluation in an everyday clinical setting. We searched PubMed in March 2015 to identify all studies investigating surgical treatment pathways covering proximal femoral fractures. We used the search term: “Hip Fractures/surgery” [Mesh]) AND (Guideline OR Algorithm OR Pathway OR recommendation). All relevant references on the identified articles were also reviewed. 197 relevant studies were identified with publication after 1995. The most common pathway findings were multidisciplinary approach guides, with some recommendations also about the surgical treatment, but not covering all hip fractures. 191 studies were excluded, leaving 6 articles concerning a pathway for the surgical treatment of all types of proximal femoral fractures for further evaluation in this review ( For identifying the national guidelines in West Europe, we searched the homepages of the national heath authorities and national orthopedic societies in Norway, Sweden, Denmark, England, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, Holland, Belgium, Luxembourg, France, Switzerland, Austria, Italy, Spain and Portugal. Eleven identified national (two different societies in Spain) or regional guidelines (two regional as no national one in Italy) included recommendations for surgical choice of implant for any type of proximal femoral fractures and were included into this review In total, 6 articles of author pathways Pathway consensus is outspread for some overall surgical recommendations, which are, as expected, characterised by the same published evidence of clinical implant studies. When mentioned, the pathway goal is to reduce cost of social and economical burdens; this by optimise the choice of implant and thereby reduce the reoperation rate Among the intra-capsular fractures, all seem to recommend internal fixation (IF) in undisplaced femoral neck fractures (U-FNF), and to some extend prosthesis for displaced femoral neck fractures (D-FNF) in elderly patients. Here, some pathways divide by chronological age (varying from 60 to 80 years), while other underline the use of patients’ physiological/biological age or just divide into groups of old and young, in which some suggests open reduction Among the extra-capsular fractures, a sliding hip screw (SHS) is recommended for the stable fractures (often defined as AO/OTA type A1) Some pathways are illustrated with boxes connected by arrows, but the complexity is quite different sometimes with more than one decision per box Scientific evaluation of the pathways is quite seldom. In three studies of 100, 2000 and 800 patients, the algorithm by Palm et al. showed a high reliability and a compliance rate at around 90% with reduced reoperation rate after internal and external implementation To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to identify national and author surgical treatment pathways for proximal femoral fractures. Although profoundly and systematically seeking, we might still have missed some; this partly due to language barriers, which also lead us to only include countries in West Europe. Our finding confirmed that the growing literature consensus (IF for U-FNF and Prosthesis for D-FNF among the elderly; SHS for stabile- and IMN for unstable- and sub-TF) and diminishing controversies (predominantly patient age and characteristics for choosing a prosthesis, and if so which type) has enabled useful pathways for the surgical treatment of proximal femoral fractures Although hip fractures can be classified and then grouped into only a few categories; hip fracture patients are very heterogenic medically and a treatment pathway can hardly embrace all theoretical patient characteristics. We recommend keeping surgical pathways strict and simple like the one by Palm et al. When mentioned, the purpose of the found – especially nationally – pathways is to recommend evidence-based treatment Beyond the AGREE II (Appraisal of Guidelines, Research and Evaluation) recommendations for establishing guidelines A pathway should not be permanent but continuously evolved and re-evaluated. When the surgical complication rates following hip fracture surgery (hopefully) are reduced, future pathways can concentrate also on other short and long-term outcomes like ex pain, mobility (of cause with full weight-bearing), patient, relatives and maybe even staff satisfaction; and last but not least only include the cost of implants if calculated along the much higher cost for hospitalisation and community burdens. The growing literature consensus has enabled useful pathways for the surgical treatment of proximal femoral fractures, presented individually by a few authors All the authors declare no conflict of interest with regard to the content of this study.