Natural resources of platinum group metals (PGMs) are limited and their demand is increasing because of their extensive uses in industrial applications. The low rate of production of PGMs due to low concentration in the related natural ores and high cost of production have made the recovery of PGMs from previously discarded catalytic converters a viable proposition. The ceramic-honeycomb-type automobile catalytic converter contains appreciable amount of PGMs. These valuable substances, which are embedded in the catalyst layer and covered on the surface of the supporting matrix, were selectively recovered by attrition scrubbing. The attrition scrubbing was effective for the selective recovery of catalyst layer. The process was convinced as the comminution and separation process by physical impact and shearing action between particles in the scrubbing vessel. The catalyst layer was dislodged from the surface of the supporting matrix into fine particles by attrition scrubbing. The recovery of Al2O3 and total PGMs in the fraction less than 300μm increased with the residence time whereas their contents in the recovered materials slightly decreased. The interparticle scrubbing became favorable when the initial input size increased. However, the solid/liquid ratio in the mixing vessel was slightly affected by the low density of converter particles.Catalytic converters are installed in the engine exhaust system of an automobile. They have been used increasingly since the mid-1970s to meet emission limits enforced by international legislation. They contain platinum group metals (PGMs) as catalysts that reduce the level of undesired exhaust gases such as carbon monoxide (CO), unburned hydrocarbons (HC) and nitrogen oxides (NO Several million tons of spent automobile catalytic converters are annually disposed of worldwide. An automobile catalytic converter generally contains 1–2 The recovery technologies of PGMs from spent catalytic converters have been reviewed in the last few decades. Two types of process, namely, wet and dry methods, have been commercially operated. In a wet process, PGMs on the catalytic converters are dissolved mostly in the form of chloro-complex (MCl), by contacting them in aqueous solutions. Subsequently the resulting solutions are concentrated and then the precious metal ions are cemented by metals such as Al, Fe or Zn in the concentrated system Even though some technologies practiced for the commercial applications are sufficient to recover PGMs, the methods seem to be not cost-effective. Since the PGMs embedded in the catalyst layer of these types of automobile converters are present in very small quantities, it is, therefore, worth separating the catalyst layer from supporting matrix before they are processed. The separation and/or selective recovery of catalyst layer prior to any wet or dry recovery process can make a significant contribution to minimize the potential processing cost of these types of catalysts. Very little attempt, however, has been done yet. The main purpose of this work is to provide information on the separation of catalyst layer from automobile catalytic converter by attrition scrubbing, a physical impact/shearing action between particles themselves and either the liquid phase or the walls and impellers in the mixing vessel The spent catalytic converters used in this work were collected from a local auto junkyard. The size and shape of converters, along with their catalyst loading, may vary according to the size of a vehicle's engine. The catalyst supporting matrix, which is of honeycomb structure, is made of magnesium alumino-silicate (Mg The converter was crushed by a laboratory jaw crusher and a stamp mill to pass a standard sieve of 2 A laboratory mechanical overhead stirrer (Denver D-12) which was attached to a single axis with a two-bladed impeller was used for attrition scrubbing. The scrubbing vessel is made of acrylic resin with a total volume of 1.5 To characterize the converter sample, scanning electron microscope and energy dispersive spectroscope (SEM–EDS, SEM-4100, Jeol) and X-ray diffractometer (XRD, RINT-2000, Rigaku) were used. Chemical analysis of converter particles were determined by inductive coupled plasma spectroscope (ICP-AES, JY38 The attrition scrubbing was carried out with an aqueous suspension. In each scrubbing test, about 210 The main constituents of the sample are 32.9% SiO In this ceramic-honeycomb-type automobile catalytic converter, neither thermal shock nor chemical leaching is sufficient to recover the precious metal catalyst components from the supporting matrix. This is attributed to the fact that the catalyst layer has a quite strong bond with the supporting matrix  In the case of attrition scrubbing of contaminated soils or mineral particles, it has been generally accepted that the efficiency of scrubbing increases as the solid/liquid ratio (S/L ratio) in the mixing vessel increases owing to more effective scrubbing actions between particles  The catalytic converter sample is mainly composed of 32.9% SiO As the particle size of sample decreases, the content of SiO The attrition scrubbing as a comminution and separation process is determined to be a viable route to recover the catalyst layer. The physical impact and shearing action between particles in the scrubbing vessel causes the PGMs-containing catalyst layer to delaminate from the supporting matrix. The recovery of γ-alumina in the fraction less than 300 The interparticle scrubbing becomes favorable when the input size of the sample increases. The solid/liquid ratio in the mixing vessel was, however, little affected owing to low density of converter particles. This research was supported by the General Research Project of the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM) funded by the