A large database consisting of 832 axial compression tests results of fiber reinforced polymer (FRP)-confined concrete specimens was assembled. Using the test database, existing conventional and evolutionary algorithm models developed for FRP-confined concrete were then assessed. New genetic programming (GP) models for predicting the ultimate condition of FRP-confined concrete were developed. The predictions of the proposed models suggest that more accurate results can be achieved in explaining and formulating the ultimate condition of FRP-confined concretes by GP. The model assessment also illustrates the influences of the size of the databases and the selected parameters used in the GP models.It is now well understood that the confinement of concrete with fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composites can substantially enhance concrete strength and deformability. A large number of studies undertaken to date have produced over 3000 test results on FRP-confined concrete and resulted in the development of over 90 models. The conventional models that were developed using regression analysis can be classified into two broad categories namely the design-oriented models and the analysis-oriented models. In predictions of the ultimate condition of FRP-confined concrete, the design-oriented models use closed-form empirical expressions that were derived directly from database results. The analysis-oriented models, on the other hand, use a combination of empirical and theoretical expressions through an incremental procedure to consider the interaction mechanism between the external FRP jacket and the internal concrete core. The analysis-oriented models are built on the assumption of stress path independence, which assumes that the axial stress and axial strain of FRP-confined concrete at a given lateral strain are the same as those of the same concrete actively confined with a constant confining pressure equal to that supplied by the FRP shell. As indicated by the assessment results of these models using a comprehensive experimental database, the performances of a large proportion of the conventional models were compromised when they were assessed against a large database covering parametric ranges that are much wider than the original databases used to develop these models With proper treatments given to the aforementioned modeling issues, genetic programming (GP) can be a potential candidate to address these shortcomings. GP is an evolutionary algorithm attempting to find key variables for a problem in a given search space, and generates mathematical expressions to explain the relations between the variables. By using GP based on the principles of symbolic regression (SR) analysis, the relationships between the dependent and independent variables of a complex database involving uncertainties and variability can be solved. SR is a process of finding a mathematical expression by minimizing the errors between given finite data set as well as providing a method of function identification In the recent years, the use of GP for optimum solution and function identification of engineering problems have been gaining acceleration as the approach is capable of dealing with complex database that contains a large number of parameters. GP progressively improves solution while it maintains the versatility of the model in closed-form expressions (e.g. In the present study, the GP approach was used to establish models to predict the ultimate conditions of FRP-confined concrete columns under concentric compression. Based on a comprehensive experimental database that was carefully assembled using a set of selection criteria to ensure the reliability and consistency of the database, three closed-form expressions are proposed for the predictions of the compressive strength, ultimate axial strain and hoop rupture strain of FRP-confined concrete. This is the first study in the literature to establish expressions for the ultimate axial strain and hoop rupture strain of FRP-confined concrete on the basis of evolutionary algorithms. Details of the adopted approach are discussed in Section In this section, the GP paradigm is discussed and the essentials of GP are highlighted. Further concepts and terminology behind GP can be found from the inventor of this paradigm Genetic programming is an extension of the conventional genetic algorithm (GA), generating novel solutions to complex problems, developed by Koza As stated earlier, CP is composed of functions and terminals. The functions can be standard arithmetic operators, trigonometric logarithmic or power, e.g. Genetic operations used in GP are composed of;  In mutation operation, “a random node is selected from the parent tree and substituted by a new random tree created with the terminals and the functions available” as described by Silva The database of FRP-confined concrete was assembled through an extensive review of the literature that covered 3042 test results from 253 experimental studies published between 1991 and 2013. The suitability of the results was then assessed using a set of carefully established selection criteria to ensure the reliability and consistency of the database. Only monotonically loaded circular specimens with unidirectional fibers orientated in the hoop direction and an aspect ratio ( The GP analysis is based on three main stages. Firstly, the terminal sets are selected. The term In the second stage, a set of functions which are related to the nature of the problem or data set was determined. As can be seen from the In the third stage, a symbolic expression (S-expression), a list or an atom in LISP, was generated by GP in terms of the fitness function adopted. The S-expression is the only syntactic form of the LISP programming language. For example, (+(− 3 4) 5) is a LISP S-expression. In this S-expression the atoms or individuals (3 and 4) are subtracted first and the result (−1) is added to 5 yielding in value 4. S-expressions were chosen according to the lower fitness value. The lower the fitness value, the better the model is. According to the selected fitness ( Some of the mathematical functions included in the GP are protected against zero division or negative square root. In the division operation, if the denominator is equal to zero then the results returns to the numerator. In the power operation The ultimate condition of FRP-confined concrete is often characterized as the compressive strength and the corresponding axial strain of concrete and hoop strain recorded at the rupture of the FRP jacket. This makes the relationship between the ultimate axial stress ( As was discussed earlier, the majority of the conventional models are based on the expression forms proposed by Richart et al. To demonstrate an example of the GP formulation process,  Based on the GP formulation process discussed earlier, the expression for the prediction of the ultimate axial strain (  The hoop rupture strains ( To establish the relative performance of the proposed model, its prediction statistics were compared with those of the 10 best performing conventional models identified in a recent comprehensive review study reported in Ozbakkaloglu et al. As evident from A close examination of the assessment results has led to a number of important findings on factors influencing the performances of existing models including the size of database, parameters considered, ability to handle uncertainties, dependency on assumptions, and the architecture of their modeling frameworks. For the conventional models, only the statistics of the model performances are presented in A comprehensive experimental test database that consisted of 832 test results of FRP-confined concrete has been assembled from the published literature. Using the test database, the performances of a number of existing empirical, theoretical, and artificial intelligence models developed for FRP-confined concrete were then assessed. A close examination of the results from model assessments has led to a number of important findings on factors influencing the strengths and weaknesses of models in each category. These findings have been summarized and discussed in detail in the paper. On the basis of the experimental database, a new model for evaluating the ultimate condition of FRP-confined concrete was developed using genetic programming and has been presented in this paper. The model is the first to establish the ultimate axial strain and hoop rupture strain expressions for FRP-confined concrete on the basis of evolutionary algorithms. Comparisons with experimental test results show that the predictions from the proposed model are in good agreement with the test results of the database. The proposed models provide improved predictions compared to the existing artificial intelligence models. Genetic programming proved that more accurate results can be achieved in explaining and formulating the ultimate condition of FRP confined concretes. The model assessment presented in this study clearly illustrates the important influences of the size of the test databases and the selected test parameters used in the development of artificial intelligence models on their overall performances.