Purpose
                  The indication for operative treatment of displaced midshaft clavicle fractures remains controversial. However, if plate fixation is considered, implant prominence and skin irritation are the most common causes for re-operation. Low profile implants as well as closely contouring plates to the individual anatomy may reduce these complications. The aim of this study was to compare the fitting accuracy and implant prominence of 3.5mm pelvic reconstruction plates (PRP) with pre-contoured anatomical clavicle plates (PACP) for midshaft clavicle fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Three-dimensional data of the largest, median and smallest male and female clavicle of an existing database of 89 cadaveric clavicles were included for analysis. A three-dimensional model of a commercially available PACP was used for digitally positioning of the plate on the segmented clavicles. Three-dimensional printouts of each clavicle were produced and the 3.5mm reconstruction plates were manually bent and positioned by the senior author. Computed tomography scans and three-dimensional reconstructions were then obtained to digitally compare the fitting accuracy and implant prominence.
               
                  Results
                  Pelvic reconstruction plates offered superior fitting accuracy and lower implant prominence compared to PACP. The largest difference in implant prominence was observed in large sized female clavicles and measured 3.6mm.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Both, the less costly PRP plates and commercially available PACP for midshaft fractures of the clavicle demonstrated a clinically acceptable fitting accuracy. The manually bent pelvic-reconstruction plates demonstrated reduced implant prominence with superior fitting. Hypothetically this might contribute to a reduced rate of reoperation.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV cadaveric study.Clavicle fractures are common, accounting for 3–5% of fractures in adults and 10–15% of fractures in children and show a bimodal distribution peaking in young male patients of less than 30 years and elderly patients of over 70 years However, if operative treatment for midshaft fractures of the clavicle is considered, plate fixation provides immediate, rigid stabilization and is biomechanically favorable compared to intramedullary fixation with flexible devices The aim of this cadaveric study was to compare the fitting accuracy and implant prominence of commercially available pre-contoured 3.5 The data of six clavicles were obtained from an existing data set of full body computed tomographic (CT) scans of 89 cadavers provided by the Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Zurich, Switzerland. For final analysis we included the three-dimensional data of the largest, the median and the smallest male and female clavicle defined by length, volume and surface. Inclusion criteria were CT scans including the entire clavicle of both sides and the absence of radiographic signs of trauma or other pathology. Data were acquired with a Siemens Emotion 6 Three-dimensional data of the PACP with a profile height of 3 For positioning of the 3.5 Local ethics committee approval was obtained. Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS software (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 21.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). A two-tailed Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to evaluate the normality of distribution of continuous variables. Means of normally distributed variables were compared using Student's The average fitting accuracy of PRP and the PACP was 0.67 For the three male clavicles, the average fitting accuracy of the PACP for the smallest, median and largest clavicle were 0.99 The average bending time for the reconstruction plates was six minutes (range: 1–12 Plate fixation is regarded as the procedure of choice for ORIF of open or severely displaced midshaft fractures of the clavicle However, given the variation in anatomy and morphology of the clavicle, achieving an appropriate plate shape to yield to a decent fit for the bone is challenging. There are several reports evaluating the clinical outcome of different plate models and plating techniques Pre-contoured anatomical plates based on statistic standard models of the clavicle have been developed to avoid the need for excessive contouring and reduce implant prominence. As a result of the intra- and inter-individual variation of the clavicle in length, diameter, cross section and degree of bowing, many commercially available plating systems require a wide variety of plate options to accommodate for anatomic variations Whilst providing similar average fitting accuracy, in our study, the implant prominence of the PACP was larger compared to the manually contoured PRP in particular on the lateral aspect of larger female clavicles. This finding is supported in current literature where worse fit of PACP was observed in this patient group This study compared the fitting accuracy and implant prominence of a superiorly placed, commercially available pre-contoured 3.5 The main limitation of this study is the lack of comparison to other currently available plating systems. Therefore, the here presented results may only be applicable to the described implants. Further, the thickness of the subcutaneous fat layer, another important factor influencing the need for revision surgery as a result of implant prominence was not subject of the current analysis. In conclusion, low-profile PRP fitted closely to the patient's individual anatomy and may hypothetically reduce plate prominence and the risk of implant removal. The main advantages are the lower crude costs, simple handling of the stock and the universal applicability to a wide variety of anatomic variants. Commercially available PACP demonstrated a similar but slightly lower fitting accuracy and higher implant prominence for most clavicle sizes. Here, the main advantage of PACP is the theoretically shorter operation time, but at the price of higher implant cost and required amount of implants stocked. David Ephraim Bauer, Hingsammer A, Schenk P, Vlachopoulos L, Fürnstahl P, Meyer DC have nothing to disclose (generated with the ICMJE form for disclosure).