In recent years, thermal energy storage (TES) systems using phase change materials (PCM) have been widely studied and developed to be applied as solar energy storage units for residential heating and cooling. These systems performance is based on the latent heat due to PCM phase change, a high energy density that can be stored or released depending on the needs. PCM are normally encapsulated in containers, hence the compatibility of the container material with the PCM has to be considered in order to design a resistant container. Therefore, the main aim of this paper is to study the corrosion effects when putting in contact five selected metals (aluminium, copper, carbon steel, stainless steel 304 and stainless steel 316) with four different PCM (one inorganic mixture, one ester and two fatty acid eutectics) to be used in comfort building applications. Results showed corrosion on aluminium specimens. Hence caution must be taken when selecting it as an inorganic salt container. Despite copper has a corrosion rate range of 6–10 mg/cm2 yr in the two fatty acid formulations tested, it could be used as container. Stainless steel 316 and stainless steel 304 showed great corrosion resistance (0–1 mg/cm2 yr) and its use would totally be recommended with any of the studied PCM.Energy policies are nowadays focused on using solar energy and reusing the waste heat of the industry to use them as a primary energy source. This way, fossil fuel and electricity consumption can be reduced, and consequently, CO TES systems present phase change materials (PCM) as one of the possible solutions to improve energy efficiency and reduce electricity consumption. These materials can provide high energy density due to the latent heat produced during the phase change, energy that can be released or stored depending on the needs. Some researchers have studied the addition of PCM in different thermal energy storage units. In all the possible applications PCM are normally encapsulated in containers, therefore the main interest remains on designing a lightweight, non-corrosive, high conductive and low cost container Different type of chemicals such as inorganic salts, organic mixtures, paraffins and water are nowadays used as PCM for different heat storage applications. This study is focused on selecting a metal container material for comfort building applications, thus PCM were selected according to their melting points, which needed to be in the 20 °C–25 °C range. It is widely known that most inorganic salts are corrosive to metals but less information could be found about the effect organic materials or fatty acids have on metals; hence an accurate selection of the PCM containers must be carried out during the design stage of the TES system. The aim of the present paper is to study the corrosion experienced by five selected metals in contact with four different PCM (one inorganic mixture, one ester and two fatty acid eutectics) to be implemented as containers for thermal comfort systems in building applications. Stainless steel 316, stainless steel 304, carbon steel, copper and aluminium were the metals considered to be used as containers. Four PCM formulations were under study in this paper. Two of them are commercial PCM: SP21E commercialized by Rubitherm and PureTemp 23 produced by PureTemp The composition of each formulation is shown in The five metals under study are samples of stainless steel 316 (SS-316), stainless steel 304 (SS-304), copper, aluminium and carbon steel, as shown in All the metal specimens were polished and cleaned with acetone in order to remove all the oils and impurities from the cutting process. Afterwards, specimens were weighed in a Mettler Toledo precision balance (4 decimals) before starting the corrosion test. Once the specimens had been weighed, they were immersed in glass test tubes containing PCM to combine each metal specimen with the four different PCM formulations. All tubes were covered with a plastic lid to avoid contact with environmental agents and, as the phase change temperature of all the PCM was around 22 °C, they were kept in a stove at 38 °C, ensuring all PCM were always at liquid phase. The methodology implies analysing the combination metal–PCM after 1 week (7 days), 4 weeks (28 days) and 12 weeks (84 days) The specimen mass change (Δ The corrosion rate (CR) considers the mass loss (Δ As it has already been explained, the specimens were removed from the stove after 1, 4 and 12 weeks. The main qualitative observations are next exposed. The carbon steel specimens immersed in SP21E showed corrosion signs since week one. The test tubes containing the specimens presented yellow tonality after the first week of test, fact that was also observed after the 4th test week, with an evident increase on the colour intensity and bubbling in the test tubes. After the 12th week of test, the colouration had turned into orange (in the web version) and the test tubes also presented bubbling, as shown in The capric (75.2%)/palmitic (24.8%) eutectic test tubes where copper specimens were immersed presented blue colouration after the 1st week of test, colouration that gained in intensity and turned into a greener tonality as weeks passed by. Some brightness loss was also noticed since the 1st week removal, becoming more important with time. The copper specimens immersed in the capric (73.5%)/myristic (23.5%) eutectic experienced the same phenomena as the ones immersed in the other fatty acid formulation. Blue colouration was observed in the tests tubes since the 1st week, gaining intensity and green tonality with time. Brightness loss was also noticed, mainly in the specimen removed on the 12th week of experimentation, as shown in The test tubes containing aluminium specimens immersed in SP21E showed grey colouration and bubbling from the 4th week on. After 12 weeks, the grey colouration and bubbling were notorious, and there was partial solidification of the PCM and the corroded metal. Surface degradation and pitting were evident on the specimen's surface as displayed in Corrosion rates (CRs) of all specimens were calculated. The guide for corrosion weight loss used in industry ( The enclosed The data obtained for PureTemp 23 agrees with the lack of corrosion traces explained on the former paragraphs and do not show corrosion on any of the metals. The low positive values obtained, which are in the 0–1 mg/cm  The experimental data logged for the capric (73.5%)/myristic (23.5%) eutectic is presented in This study analyses the suitability of five different metals to contain four different PCM formulations, considering the corrosion degradation through time that specimens of these metals suffer when they are immersed in the PCM during 12 weeks. In addition, visual phenomena such as bubbling, colouration, surface degradation and pitting were also analysed. The first conclusion drawn from the displayed results is that the ester PureTemp 23 is the only PCM to which all the studied metals are resistant to. Therefore all of them can be used in long term service installations to contain this PCM. The inorganic salt SP21E has a non-despicable corrosive effect on aluminium, reason why caution is recommended on its application as this PCM container. However, its use should be avoided as better matches have been found. In addition, the corrosion rates obtained for carbon steel were not remarkably high, however corrosion signs could be observed on the carbon steel specimens, hence caution is recommended to be taken when applying it for long term service installations. The other three metals under study, stainless steel 304, stainless steel 316 and copper, showed great resistance to this salt's corrosive effects so its suitability to be used as this inorganic salt container is ensured. Copper was corroded following a very similar pattern by both own fatty acid formulations but, despite the corrosion rate values being quite low in both cases and due to the observations done during the whole experimentation, caution is recommended to be taken when applying this metal as a long term container of any of these two eutectic formulations. On the other hand, none of the other metals are considered to be corroded by any of the fatty acid eutectics, hence, its use would totally be recommended for long term services. The work is partially funded by the