This research investigates the wear performance of WC-12Co and electroless Ni/WC-Co deposits at high temperature. Dry sliding wear experiments were carried out for coated and uncoated steel substrate against alumina pin. The microstructure and wear performance of laser-cladded WC-Co and Ni/WC-Co were characterized by X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) techniques. The mass reduction, friction coefficient, and wear rate of Ni/WC-Co deposits were measured and found to be significantly lower than WC-Co coatings. Due to the presence of Ni coating around the particle of the Ni/WC-Co coating, it showed a lower microhardness, more homogeneous microstructure, and a higher wear performance compared to WC-Co coating. The results of this paper indicated that the dominant mechanisms in wearing distance were adhesive, abrasive, and pulling out from the particles.Addition of hard particles such as carbides or oxides can be applied for improving the wear performance of a surface. These materials are added to a metallic binder to form a metal matrix composite (MMC) coating in order to modify wear resistance and many mechanical properties. Tungsten carbide (WC) has numerous industrial applications in the form of bulk parts or coatings because of its superior mechanical properties for mining and drilling equipment, cutting tools, and other wear-resistant applications [ Laser cladding is a very accurate method and a special solution for expensive parts that can improve their mechanical and electrochemical properties [ Cadenas et al. [ The present investigation studies friction and wear performance of the laser clad WC-Co and Ni/WC-Co deposits on 321 stainless steel substrate at high temperature. To our searching, no report find about the wear behavior comparison of the laser cladded WC-Co and Ni/WC-Co that studied the effect of Nickel coating by electroless plating at high temperatures. The results of this study provide valuable scientific knowledge about wear performance of WC-Co and Ni/WC-Co deposits. In this research, the WC-12Co powder (Zhuzhou Boda Tungsten Industry Co., 15–45 μm) and the plate of AISI 321 stainless steel were chosen as the raw material and counterface, respectively. The WC-12Co powder was coated by Electroless Nickel SLOTONIP (BATH 18071-E [ The laser cladding system involved of an auto-feeder powder supply and a pulsed Nd:YAG laser system (700 W). The laser cladding parameters are shown in Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measured the mass change of deposits from 25 °C to 500 °C, with a heating rate of 5 °C/min in an air atmosphere. Phase identification and microstructure were characterized by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Ka radiation (XRD; Philips, Cu-Kα, 2θ = 20–90 Dry sliding friction and wear tests of coated and uncoated steel substrate were carried out using the ball-on-disc wear test according to ASTM-G99 standard at elevated temperature. Al where ΔV is the volume loss of wear (mm The profile of the friction coefficient was continuously recorded during the wear process. In order to gain the repeatability of tests, the average of two tests was considered as a friction coefficient and weight loss. The cross-sectional images of laser-cladded WC-Co and Ni/WC-Co deposits are displayed in The obtained microhardness variation from the surface to a depth of the Ni/WC-Co and WC-Co deposits are shown in The friction coefficients of the stainless steel substrate, WC-Co, and the Ni/WC-Co deposits at 500 °C and under a 3 kg loading are shown in As shown in The mass changes and wear rates of stainless steel substrate, WC-Co and Ni/WC-Co deposits at 500 °C, are shown in  The SEM micrographs and EDS analysis of abrasive particles are shown in  The EDS analysis of the worn surface of WC-Co coating ( According to pulling out (  SEM images of worn Ni/WC-Co coating at 500 °C are shown in The slight removal of Ni The EDS analysis results of worn Ni/WC-Co coating ( The SEM images of alumina pin worn by Ni/WC-Co coating at 500 °C are shown in  As shown in Comparing the profile of Ni/WC-Co samples before and after wear shows that the width and depth of wear track were not significantly changed. The obtained profiles are very similar to that before the wear, suggesting the high wear resistance of Ni/WC-Co coating at room and high temperatures. In addition, the Ni/WC-Co coating compared with WC-Co coating show that the abrasion resistance has increased significantly with increasing the amount of nickel phase; because of the stronger bonding of tungsten carbide particles to the metal matrix. In this research, dry sliding wear of laser-cladded Ni/WC-Co and WC-Co coatings and stainless steel substrate against alumina pin was carried out at 500 °C. Based on the obtained results, the following conclusions can be drawn: The Ni/WC-Co coating indicated a homogeneous and finer microstructure and lower microhardness compared to WC-Co coating. The laser cladding process of WC-Co and Ni/WC-Co deposits reduced the average values of the friction coefficient and its fluctuations. The weight loss results showed that the Ni/WC-Co had the lowest weight loss and wear rate at room and high temperatures and wear rate increased with temperature increasing. The observed worn surfaces suggest that hard abrasive and adhesive wear was the dominant wear mechanism for the 321 stainless steel, while the mechanism was changed to soft abrasive and adhesive wear by laser cladding of WC-Co and Ni/WC-Co coating on a stainless steel substrate. The wear results demonstrated that Ni/WC-Co coating has higher wear resistance compared to WC-Co coating.