An understanding of matter transport is vital to the successful study of processing of materials. This book is aimed squarely at undergraduate (and early postgraduate) students looking for a firm grounding in the fundamentals of matter transportation processes. The book is split up into four parts; Part A (Chapter 1) an overview, Part B (Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6) solid state diffusion in dilute alloys, Part C (Chapters 7, 8 and 9) mass transport in concentrated alloys and fluids and Part D (Chapter 10) alternative driving forces for diffusion. The book also includes useful appendices containing details of mathematical methods, selected data and how to solve problems by developing fundamental conceptual models. The overview contains an introduction to mass transport mechanisms. It includes straightforward coverage of diffusion mechanisms in a variety of situations. Fick’s first law is also clearly presented. A useful addition to the chapter is several worked examples that serve to develop the reader’s understanding. The section concludes with recommendations for further reading and several further problems. It is a shame, however, that the author did not include (at least) the numerical answers to the questions to enable students to check their working. Part B is restricted to diffusion in the solid state involving dilute binary alloys. As in Part A, this section is liberally scattered with excellent worked examples with emphasis on ‘real’ engineering applications. These examples have clearly been thought though and have not been added as an afterthought. Without a doubt, they enhance the understanding of a reader. Part C is concerned with mass transport in concentrated alloys and fluids. This section considers what happens when large concentration differences exist across a phase and how substantial changes in diffusion coefficients are accommodated. Attention is also given in this section to mass transport in fluids. Parts A, B and C all made the assumption that only concentration gradients provide a driving force for diffusion. Part D generalises this by including all forms of free energy gradient. From this, a general theory of diffusion is well developed. This general theory is then applied to new problems, such as diffusion due to an electric field or a mechanical stress. This section also considers diffusion in multicomponent systems. Overall, this book is written with the reader in mind. Each chapter leads the reader through the fundamentals and theories of mass transport in solids and fluids to an increasingly developed level by slowly introducing concepts and theories as required. Therefore, the early sections are quite basic and require little prior knowledge, whilst later sections are fairly advanced and extend the knowledge to a higher level. There is something in this book for everybody, whether a novice student looking a beginners’ guide or an expert looking for a reference text.