The aim of this study was to determine whether repeated removal of logging residue in Norway spruce thinning stands causes consistent long-term effects on soil microbial processes in C and N cycling and on soil concentrations of two major groups of plant secondary compounds, phenolic compounds and terpenes. The study sites were four 47-to 70-year-old Norway spruce (Picea abies (L.) Karst) stands, all growing on relatively fertile sites in southern and central Finland. These stands had been thinned twice, the first thinning 22–29 years ago and the second thinning 10 years after the first, 12–19 years ago. After thinnings, the logging residue was either removed (whole-tree harvest, WTH) or left on the site (stem-only harvest, SOH). In one experiment there was also a treatment where a double amount of logging residue was distributed on the plot. Samples were taken from the organic layer (Ofh). Removal of logging residue did not affect the C-to-N ratio or pH much. Removal of logging residue did not affect the amounts of C and N in the microbial biomass but tended to decrease the rates of net N and C mineralization (CO2 production). It decreased both sesquiterpene and diterpene (mostly resin acids) concentrations but did not affect triterpene (mostly sterols) concentrations. Neither total water-soluble phenolic compounds nor an important group of phenolic compounds, condensed tannins, were affected by removal of logging residue. At these four study sites, the effects of removing logging residue were strongest on the two least fertile sites, whereas the most fertile site did not respond much to removal. In conclusion, with regard to the processes and ratios indicating N availability, stem-only harvest seems generally to be more favorable than whole-tree harvest in long-term.Since the demand for production of bioenergy is increasing, forest management using logging residue from both clear-cuttings and thinning stands is becoming more common. In whole-tree harvest a large portion of the tree branches and needles are removed, instead of retaining them on the site as in stem-only harvest. Thus the soil receives less organic carbon and nutrients compared to a situation, where logging residue is left on the site. For N, the decrease has been reported to be 64–126 Changes due to removal of logging residue in microbial processes related to C and N cycling were observed in one relatively fertile Norway spruce thinning stand 10 years after the treatment ( The aim of this study was to determine whether removal of logging residue in Norway spruce thinning stands has any consistent long-term effects on soil microbial processes in C and N cycling and on soil concentrations of two major groups of plant secondary compounds, phenolic compounds and terpenes. These two groups of compounds were of interest since logging residue contains higher proportions of most of these compounds than other litter material does ( The experiments studied here were carried out in four, 47-to 70-year-old, Norway spruce ( One composite sample consisting of 20 subsamples was collected systematically from the organic layer (O Soil water-holding capacity (WHC), dry matter and organic matter contents, pH, and total C, H and N in soil were measured as described by N and C in the microbial biomass were determined using the fumigation-extraction method, as described previously ( To determine the mineralization of C, soil samples were incubated in 125 N transformations were studied in the same 6-week aerobic laboratory incubation experiments at constant temperature (14 To determine whether the soils are limited by easily-available carbon, glucose-induced respiration was measured. This was done only for organic layer samples from the Ruokolahti experiment (735), which were collected one year later than the other samples but similarly to the previous ones. Glucose solution (10 Sieved samples of humus layer were dried at 40 Concentrations of sesqui-, di- and triterpenes were determined from 1 Concentration of total water-soluble phenolic compounds, divided further into low- and high-molecular-weight (about >0.5 Concentration of condensed tannins was determined from 0.5 To describe the quality of the organic matter, the results are presented on the basis of organic matter. Differences in soil characteristics between whole-tree harvest and stem-only harvest were tested using ANOVA with removal of logging residue as the treatment and the experiment as the block factor. There was no interaction between the treatment and the block factor, i.e. the experiment. To describe the relationship between different variables, Pearson’s correlation coefficients were calculated. Removal of logging residue did not affect pH of the organic layer ( Removal of logging residue did not affect NH Removal of logging residue did not significantly affect the amounts of C and N in microbial biomass in the organic layer ( Removal of logging residue tended to decrease the rate of net N mineralization ( Removal of logging residue tended to decrease C mineralization ( Removal of logging residue increased the C-to-N ratio but only slightly ( Glucose-induced respiration was measured in the Ruokolahti experiment (735). Removal of logging residue did not affect glucose-induced respiration significantly ( Removal of logging residue decreased both sesqui- and diterpene concentrations ( The concentration of total water-soluble phenolic compounds was not affected by removal of logging residue ( For the above data, the highest, and positive, correlation was found between C mineralization and concentration of sesquiterpenes ( In the Petäjävesi experiment, there was also a treatment with a double amount of logging residues. Since there were only two replicates and the variation in some parameters was high, the results should be considered to be trend-setting rather than significant. The concentration of diterpenes increased in the order: no logging residue Repeated removal of logging residue tended to decrease the rates of net N and C mineralization in the organic layer, meaning that the amounts of both easily-mineralizable N and C were lower after whole-tree than stem-only harvest. Residue removal also decreased the concentrations of both sesqui- and diterpenes. This is a surprisingly long-term effect since 11–19 years had elapsed since the treatment. Even in the Petäjävesi experiment, where the latest harvest had been as long as 19 years ago, some differences were still observed between WTH and SOH. Changes due to removal of logging residue were greatest in the Petäjävesi and Ruokolahti experiments where the site index, i.e. site fertility, was lowest. On the contrary, very little effect of logging residue removal was observed in Eno experiment, which was the most fertile site without a mor layer. As regards Finnish conditions, all sites in this study were relatively fertile, and Eno was an unexceptionally fertile forest site. Decrease in net N mineralization appears to follow the C-to-N ratio of stem-only harvested plots; the higher the C-to-N ratio, the greater the decrease in net N mineralization. The tree stand in the Eno experiment was 20–25 years younger than the tree stands in the other experiments. Four experiments, however, are too few to allow us to reach any definite conclusions. In a previous study, also in a Norway spruce stand, the rates of net N mineralization and C mineralization were lower in whole-tree harvest than in stem-only harvest ten years after the treatment ( Removal of logging residue did not affect microbial biomass C or N. In this study the fungal and bacterial biomass were not separated. Therefore it remains unclear whether their biomass ratios differed. Two important ratios were higher when logging residues had been retained, namely net N mineralization/C mineralization and net N mineralization/microbial biomass N. These results indicate that retaining logging residues on the less fertile sites increases the amount of N released in decomposition, compared to C, and decreases immobilization of N to microbial biomass in the mineralization process. Thus, it seems likely that more nitrogen may be available after stem-only than after whole-tree harvest. Logging residue, consisting of tree tops, branches and needles, contains large amounts of many plant secondary compounds (  In forestry practice, logging residues are not evenly distributed on the soil surface; instead, there are places with hardly any logging residues and places with large amounts of these residues. In one of the field experiments with only two replicate plots there was also a treatment with a double amount of logging residue, where the additional logging residues were brought from adjacent whole-tree harvested plots. For most of the parameters measured, results from the treatment with double logging residue did not differ much from treatment with the normal amount of residue. However, with diterpenes containing mostly resin acids, the concentration order was: no logging residues In conclusion, removal of logging residue resulted in long-term differences in soil microbial activities related to C and N cycling and in certain characteristics of the organic layer, but these effects were not visible on the most fertile site. With regard to the processes and ratios indicating N availability, in general, stem-only harvest seems to be more favorable than whole-tree harvest. We are grateful to Raino Lievonen, Jukka Luiro and Ismo Kyngäs for help with field work, Anneli Rautiainen and Piia Kinnunen for laboratory work, Anne Siika for making the figures and Dr. Joann von Weissenberg for checking the English language of this paper. This research was funded by the Academy of Finland.