Nano grease is found to be stable and homogeneous (wherein carbon nanotubes act as sole thickeners and oil is polyalphaolefin (PAO)). This is a good indication that three dimensional (3D) percolation network structures among carbon nanotubes (single wall and multi wall) play a crucial role in stabilization. To better understand this assumption and provide further evidence, some additional carbon nanomaterials, such as carbon nanofiber (CNF), graphene, fullerene (C60), Ni-coated single wall carbon nanotube (SWNT), are selected to make the grease. Unfortunately, CNF, graphene, fullerene (C60) and Ni-coated SWNT do not form stable greases as nanotubes do. In addition, SWNTs were mixed with CNF and Ni-coated SWNT respectively to see if stable grease could be formed. The results indicate that the CNF/SWNT did not form the stable grease, while Ni-coated SWNT/SWNT did. Inter molecular Van der Waals forces could reasonably explain these experimental results. Appropriate tube size (nanotube and nanofiber), stereo structure (nanotube, graphene and fullerene), surface energy (nanotube and Ni-coated nanotube) are critical factors that determine if Van der Waals forces could take effect or not. The scientific merit of this paper is that we understand in what manner stable greases are formed and what kinds of carbon materials are appropriate for acting as sole thickener.Grease generally consists of a solid or semi-fluid two-phase system that is widely used in various application areas as a lubricant or sealant. Typical commercial greases are normally comprised of polyalphaolefin based oil and a metal–soap thickener such as lithium, calcium and aluminum ( The remarkable structural, thermal, electrical and mechanical properties of CNTs make it a potential material in many application such as nanocomposites (  In this paper, five different carbon nanomaterials; graphene/graphite, Ni-coated SWNTs, carbon nanofibers, Ni-coated SWNTs/SWNTs mixture and CNFs/SWNTs were mixed with polyolefin oil respectively to make nanogrease. The aims of the work are (i) to better understand the assumption of the three dimension network structure, (ii) answer the question; why SWNTs and MWNTs are the only successful materials to fabricate stable and homogeneous grease. Single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) and multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) were purchased from Carbon Nanotechnologies Incorporation (CNI, Houston, Texas) and Beijing Boda Green High Tech Co. (Beijing, China). Graphene was purchased from Graphene Supermarket (Calverton, New York). The specific surface area of the graphene is 60 The grease containing Fe Homogeneous and stable nanogrease have been made successfully by mixing SWNTs and MWNT respectively with polyalphaolefin oils (DURASYN   Using 7.0 The AFM images show that the CTNs are interconnected with each others through a 3D network structures and this 3D network structure occurs either (1) tube–tube within the structure or (2) between neighbor bundles through their contacts. Therefore, the 3D network depends on the Van der Waals forces of the nanotubes themselves and the ability of creating strong attractive forces between adjacent nanotubes or adjacent bundles.  In addition to SWNTs and MWNTs, graphene was mixed with the polyalphaolefin oil in an attempt to fabricate stable and homogeneous smooth grease similar to the one which was obtained by SWNTs and MWNTs.    The instability of the 7    9 The thermal conductivity of the SWNTs grease was measured and the effect of using different concentration of Fe In recent times, only 1.9 Greases were made by mixing DuraSyn 166 oil with SWNT, MWNT, CNF, graphene, Ni-coated SWNT, Ni-coated SWNT/SWNT mixture and CNF/SWNT. Only SWNT, MWNT and Ni-coated SWNT/SWNT mixtures could form stable and homogeneous greases. The 3D network structure is believed to be the main reason for the stable and homogeneous grease. Some oil leakage was observed in CNF grease, probably because of the weak Van der Waals forces between CNF that has big diameter (um level) compared to nano level diameter of SWNT and MWNT. In addition, it has less surface area as well and the surface area per gram of carbon is less, therefore less oil is required to coat the surface. The structure is disrupted and the voids are larger, but the internal forces cannot hold sufficient oil to fill these large voids. The two-dimensional and multiple sheet structure of graphene make Van Der Waals force too weak to form 3D network structures, and thus making stable grease difficult as well. The grease made of CNFs/SWNTs mixture was also unstable, possibly due to voids in the grease between CNFs that could not be filled with SWNTs. In addition, SWNTs were not mixed thoroughly with CNFs due to the strong Van Der Waals forces between SWNTs. The Ni-coated SWNT based greases were not stable at any concentration because of the repulsion forces between Ni on the surface of SWNTs, whereas mixing Ni-coated SWNTs with SWNTs at a ratio of 3 to 1 obtained stable grease. The TC of SWNTs based greases with different load of Fe The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. The financial support of