This paper discusses the effect of particle size, impeller speed and pulp density on flotation and entrainment of coal and associated gangue, consisting mostly of kaolinite and illite. Experimental work indicated that particle size was the most important parameter influencing the recovery and entrainment behavior of coal and ash. The effects of impeller speed and pulp density were found to be less on entrainment. Lower agitation or solid density with higher kerosene concentrations yielded more selective froth products at the same recovery level and lower entrainment.Processing of fine coal (∼−600 μm) is becoming more and more important. About 20–25% of coal is produced from these fines and flotation is almost universal method of treating such coals. Studies on coal flotation is dominantly on chemical variables such as frother and collector types and concentration, gangue dispersants, effect of various ions, mineralogy of feed, etc. However, recent studies indicated that physical variables such as particle size distribution, pulp density, aeration rate, conditioning time and intensity may have significant influences on coal flotation In the period 1975 to 1980, evidence began to appear both in coal and mineral flotation fields which suggested that feed particle size distribution could have an over-riding influence on flotation response. Entrainment is a characteristic feature of fine particles and is closely related to water recovery. Several workers investigated the effects of operating variables such as froth depth, frother concentration, solid density, amount of hydrophobic particles in the feed on entrainment The results of a study Another study The aim of this investigation is to evaluate flotation response of ash, coal and water depending on particle size, agitation speed, solid concentration and frother concentration. Contribution of entrainment on total ash recovery was also discussed. A bituminous coal of −500 μm particle size from Zonguldak-TURKEY was used in experimental work. Chemical analysis and size distribution of this material are given in Flotation experiments were made in a 1.2 l Denver cell using 5% to 20% solids by weight. −500 μm material was used unless otherwise stated. The reagents used were kerosene as collector and MIBC (Shell) as frother. All experiments were conducted at pH 7.8 where no flocculation of gangue on coal was thought to be observed due to high surface of both at this pH. The weights of water and solid floated were determined at the end of each experiment. This float product was then dried and analyzed for ash. By using these data recoveries of water, ash and coal were calculated as follows: The degree of entrainment were found out by evaluating “entrainment factor” according to Warren's method The behavior of various size fractions of coal and ash are presented in A survey of For more detailed analysis of influence of particle size, tests were conducted with −500, −250, −106 and −53 μm materials. Recoveries and degrees of entrainment of various fineness are shown in  Recovery and entrainment data for various impeller speeds are shown in Recoveries of water, ash and coal increase with increasing speed leading to higher combustible recovery and ash in the froth products. The addition of energy increases the momentum of particles which improves the probability of collision and attachment to bubbles. However, this is also associated with an increase in water recovery indicating that an unselective recovery of material resulted. As seen from Recovery and entrainment data for various kerosene concentrations at 900 rpm are presented in A survey of  As it is seen from  As expected, recoveries of water, ash and coal increase with increasing kerosene amount. However, at 85% coal recovery level, both water and gangue recoveries are lower compared to those obtained at higher solid concentrations. For example, while water and gangue recoveries are 29–32% at 10–20% solid concentration, these values reduce to 24–25% at 5% density at higher collector dosage. From this, it may be stated that low solid concentration with higher kerosene consumption produces lower-ash products (19%) instead of product of higher ash content (21%) obtained at higher solid density with lower kerosene consumption. In addition, entrainment factors for the experiments of (1) Particle size is the key parameter for selectivity between coal and ash consisting mostly of kaolinite and illite. As particle sized is reduced, recovery of both water and gangue increase considerably, resulting in products of much higher ash content. Similarly, the degree of entrainment of gangue increases rapidly with decreasing size. (2) Impeller speed and pulp density have significant influences on recovery of water, ash and coal. Better results were obtained at low speeds and solid concentrations. Reductions in combustible recoveries at these conditions could be compensated by raising collector concentration. More selective products were obtained with lower speed or solid concentration at higher kerosene concentration compared to higher speed or solid concentration at lower collector consumption. (3) Higher recovery of gangue compared to water recovery at fine sizes may indicate that entrapment or slime-coating may also be effective in gangue recovery. This point can be studied by more comprehensive work. The authors would like to thank the Directorship of Research Fund of Cumhuriyet University (Sivas-TURKEY) which provided financial support to this study (Project Number M-139).