In the present study, two different sets of precursors have been used in the synthesis of strontium barium niobate (SBN50) by conventional solid-state route: I. Sr(NO3)2, Ba(NO3)2, Nb2O5 and II. SrCO3, BaCO3 and Nb2O5. The formation of SBN50 phase was completed at 1150°C. The green compacts, of the calcined powder, were sintered at temperatures varying from 1250 to 1350°C. Microstructural characterization was done using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The aim was to study the dielectric and ferroelectric behavior depending on the precursors used and the sintering conditions and correlate with microstructure. The synthesis, involving the precursor set-I, showed a duplex microstructure with large number of small grains, of size 10–15μm, sandwiched between very large grains, of size in the range of 50–200μm. On the other hand the second set of precursor resulted in a microstructure devoid of duplex nature. The microstructure consisted of polyhedral grains having more or less uniform size. SBN from set-II showed a better dielectric property compared to set-I. The discrepancies in this ferroelectric/dielectric behavior, have been explained in terms of density as well as microstructural differences.Strontium barium niobate (Sr In this paper, conventional solid-state synthesis route with different precursors, has been adopted to investigate the effect of precursors on the microstructural and dielectric properties. The precursors used for synthesis of SBN were Nb Two sets of SBN were prepared, set-I, from Nb X-ray diffraction study revealed that the SBN50 phase was completely formed at the calcination temperature of 1150 The scanning electron micrograph of the sintered pellets is shown in It is interesting to note that the C-based SBN did not show any abnormal grain growth like the N-based SBN (for the sintering conditions under consideration) although, each of them went through the same processing step. However, similar kind of abnormal grain growth has been reported earlier for C-based SBN with The density of the sintered pellets is listed in the The dielectric constant versus temperature plot for the sintering condition of 1350 The dielectric constant values for other sintering conditions for both the sets of samples are listed in Strontium barium niobate (SBN50) synthesized from conventional solid-state route, using different precursors, resulted in SBN with different microstructural and dielectric properties. SBN from nitrate precursors (N-based) showed abnormality in grain growth and a duplex microstructure when compared with the SBN from carbonate precursors (C-based). SBN from nitrate precursors is more susceptible for formation of low melting liquid phase. One of the authors (P.K. Patro) is thankful to Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India for financial assistance through Senior Research Fellowship.