Bioethanol production through integrated fungal fermentation (IFF), involving a unified process for biological delignification with consolidated biological processing by the white-rot fungus Phlebia sp. MG-60, was applied to sugarcane bagasse. Initial moisture content of the bagasse was found to affect biological delignification by MG-60, and 75% moisture content was suitable for selective lignin degradation and subsequent ethanol production. Additives, such as basal media, organic compounds, or minerals, also affected biological delignification of bagasse by MG-60. Basal medium addition improved both delignification and ethanol production. Some inorganic chemical factors, such as Fe2+, Mn2+, or Cu2+, reduced bagasse carbohydrate degradation by MG-60 during delignifying incubations and resulted in increased ethanol production. The present results indicated that suitable culture conditions could significantly improve IFF efficiency.Sugarcane bagasse is accumulated in large quantities every year by the sugar cane industry and causes environmental problems. In this material, cellulose derived from plant cell walls is usually the dominant structural polysaccharide, followed by hemicellulose and lignin (35–50%, 20–35%, and 10–25%, respectively) ( Biological pretreatments of lignocelluloses using fungi have been increasingly examined. For example,  Sugarcane bagasse samples were collected from the Lam Son Company, Thanh Hoa City, Vietnam. Bagasse samples were crushed into pieces, sun and oven-dried (at 60 The initial moisture contents of 1-g samples of bagasse powder in 100-mL Erlenmeyer flasks were adjusted by adding suitable amounts of water to 60%, 65%, 70%, 75%, and 80% (by wt). The flasks were then autoclaved at 121 Chemical factors important for delignification were evaluated using basal medium, modified from the original description by Kirk ( The monosaccharide composition and lignin concentration of pretreated and unpretreated bagasse samples were determined by the following the method described by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory ( After the CBP step, the residual bagasse powder and mycelium were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 The ethanol yield and theoretical ethanol were determined by the following equations: ethanol yield (%) The coefficient and residual component were calculated by the following equations: Coefficient Residual component (% by wt) All the experimental data was conducted in quadruplicate and shown as mean The effects of initial moisture content on the composition of bagasse pretreated with The purpose of delignification in this study was to spare much of the glucan, to be used subsequently as a source for fermentation, as well as to selectively decrease lignin. Accordingly, the lignin-to-glucan ratio (L/G value) of treated or untreated bagasse was calculated to evaluate the selectivity of lignin degradation by MG-60. For all samples, the L/G value did not change significantly after a 2-week delignification. After a 4-week delignification, there was significantly greater reduction in L/G values from the initial 0.57 to 0.43 for the 75% initial moisture content-pretreated samples. The L/G value reflects substrate availability for degradation, and the present results indicated that initial moisture content selectivity affected ability of MG-60 to degrade lignin, compared with glucan. With the lowest L/G value, 75% initial moisture content-pretreated bagasse samples provided the most available substrate; in this case, glucan for subsequent fermentation. The second step of IFF, called CBP ( Biological pretreatment is considered a potential new key process for bioethanol production. The limitation of biological pretreatment is the extended incubation times required. For example, it has been found that sugarcane bagasse degradation by three lignin-degrading fungi, A previous study reported that The lignin content was observed to be significantly lower after delignification, compared with the initial bagasse lignin content ( The performance of MG-60 fermentation on delignified bagasse was also studied for fermentation periods of 5, 10, 15, and 20  The initial moisture content and a range of additives significantly affected IFF efficiency by shortening the required duration of the biological processing. After 4 This paper was supported mainly by the