An electrolytic process is applied to the de-metalization of rinse waters emerging from nickel-plating baths. Optimum conditions of nickel recovery from this type of solution have been investigated through a series of experiments carried out in a rotating packed cell (Rollschichtzelle®). The effects of temperature and pH of electrolyte, current density, cell rotation speed, and diameter of the cathode granules were examined. Ninety percent of the nickel was recovered from a solution of 450 mL volume, with a pH of 5.5±0.05, 2 g/L initial nickel concentration, and by using cathode granules of 5 mm in diameter. At 50 °C electrolyte temperature and 325 A/m2 current density, 74% current efficiency was attained with 4.2 kWh/kg Ni energy consumption.Electrolytic nickel plating is used either for the protection of steel, brass, pressure cast zinc and plastic materials or simply for decorative purposes. Practical applications of nickel plating are carried out either in sulfate, chlorate, watts or sulfamate type of baths with various contents, details of which can be found elsewhere Almost all the rinse waters emerging from metal plating plants materialize during the washing operation of plated materials. These solutions with low metal ion contents either must be recycled within the process or be discarded to the receiving medium after decreasing their concentrations to acceptable levels determined by the environmental regulations and/or standards. Various industrial techniques and processes exist for the treatment of this type of solution. These processes can be classified under three different headings according to the fundamental principles they rely on; chemical (neutralization, chemical precipitation), physical (evaporation) and electrochemical (electrolysis). Either one or more than one of these techniques are utilized in combination for the de-metalization of these solutions. It is the aim of this present study to recover nickel from the rinse waters of nickel sulfate plating baths via an electrolytic process. The electrolysis cell used for the experiments had an increased cathode surface thus enhancing the ionic movements by convective diffusion. It was therefore suitable for the electrolysis of solutions with low concentrations. The potential vs. current density curve for hydrogen has an important role in determining the electrolysis conditions of metals, such as nickel, which are below hydrogen in the EMF series Electrolysis of solutions with low metal ion contents is quite different from classical metal electrowinning operations. Conventional electrolysis operations are carried out at very high metal concentrations (i.e. 65–80 g/L for nickel) and at current densities ranging from 30% to 35% of the limiting current densities, to obtain a smooth and compact cathodic surface, to avoid the side reactions, and to be able to work at high current efficiencies. Major reactions taking place during the electrolysis are: On the other hand, in electrolysis operations where metal ion concentrations are low, as in the case of de-metalization electrolysis of rinse waters from plating industries, the system is diffusion controlled. Thus, the diffusion limiting current decreases as the concentration diminishes. The difference between the bulk solution concentration and that of the phase boundary (Δ In an earlier study, where electrolytic treatment of nickel-containing rinse waters was investigated, Rotating action of an electrolysis cell on a horizontal axis enables metal granules (serving as cathode) and electrolyte to circulate Electrolyte temperature was thermostatically controlled by a Haake D8 heater (±0.1 °C) while its circulation was carried out by Multifix MC 2000 PEC and Ismatec IPN dosage pumps. A WTW brand pH-meter was used for measuring the pH values of electrolyte while a Keithley multimeter was used for measuring the other electrolysis quantities. Chemical analyses were carried out with an atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer). X-ray analysis of the nickel deposited on the cathode was made by a diffractometer (Philips PW 3020). A scanning electron microscope (JEOL 5410) was used to take micrographs of the nickel powders obtained. A schematic of the experimental apparatus is given in The technological applicability of nickel recovery and its ability to meet economical criteria were investigated by simulating rinse waters emerging from various plants; solutions containing 2 g/L Ni Electrolyte pH (2.5–6.0), Cathodic current density (130–325 A/m Electrolyte temperature (20–65 °C), Various cathode granule diameters (5, 7, 9 mm and their mixtures). The following parameters were kept constant in the first part of the experimental study where the effect of pH on nickel recovery was investigated: 325 A/m In the experiment where pH was not controlled (without neutralizer addition), concentration of the free acid increases in the cell causing a drop in pH, which eventually impedes the electrolytic reduction; a decelerating effect is seen in the first 2 h, terminating thereafter The maximum nickel recoveries are obtained within the pH range of 5.45–5.55. The amount of nickel that remains in the solution starts to increase at higher pH values (5.9–6.0). The effect of current density on nickel recovery was investigated by carrying out experiments at various cathodic current densities, while keeping pH at 5.5 and other parameters constant. In the experiment conducted at high current density (325 A/m Effects of current density and temperature on nickel recovery are given in Electrolyte temperature has been varied between 20 and 65 °C, in the experiments where effect of temperature was investigated while keeping the current density (325 A/m  SEM micrograph and X-ray diffraction patterns of nickel, electrowon under the optimum conditions, are given in As a result of the experimental work, 90% of the nickel was recovered from the solutions initially containing 2 g/L, with a 74% current efficiency and 4.2 kWh/kg Ni energy consumption, when the electrolysis parameters were: pH 5.5±0.05, 50 °C temperature, 325 A/m At 130 A/m Current efficiency values decrease intolerably when the nickel recovery operation is continued until the nickel concentration is less than 10 mg/L in the solution, which results in higher specific energy consumptions as unavoidable side reactions occur. Therefore, the limit of concentration at which the electrolysis operation must stop should be determined from an economic viewpoint when waste waters contaminated by nickel are treated for de-metalization. The rest of the nickel could easily be eliminated by the application of other techniques such as ion exchange resins, etc.