To test the impact of cooling history and prolonged hydrothermal activity on the grade and total endowment of the tungsten deposits, we obtained new and detailed geochronology from the Yashan W-Mo and the Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposits in the Wugongshan mining district in Jiangxi Province, South China. Both deposits contain stockwork and greisen ores within contact zones between granitic plutons and wall-rock metasandstone and mudstone and within the granitic plutons. New SHRIMP U–Pb zircon analyses yielded weighted mean 206Pb/238U ages of 231.0 ± 5.0 Ma and 161.5 ± 1.8 Ma for the monzogranite and granite in the Yashan W-Mo deposit, and 154.7 ± 1.7 Ma for the granite in the Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposit. Three molybdenite samples from stockwork ores in the Yashan deposit and four molybdenite samples from greisen and stockwork ores in the Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposit yielded Re–Os isochron ages of 156.0 ± 2.8 Ma and 156.4 ± 8.7 Ma, respectively. Two muscovite samples from greisen W-Mo ores and W-bearing stockwork in the Yashan deposit gave 40Ar/39Ar plateau ages of 152.77 ± 0.78 Ma and 152.36 ± 0.78 Ma, and two muscovite samples from greisen W-Mo-Be ores and W-Mo-bearing muscovite-quartz stockwork ores in the Xiatongling deposit gave 40Ar/39Ar plateau ages of 146.85 ± 0.8 Ma and 146.31 ± 0.75 Ma, respectively. The age data indicate that the ore-forming granitic magmas were emplaced earlier at the Yashan deposit than the Xiatongling deposit, but Mo mineralization was concurrent at both deposits, and the last hydrothermal ore-forming alteration started earlier again in the Yashan deposit.
                  The U-Pb, Re-Os and Ar-Ar geochronological data indicate that both deposits had similar durations of magmatic-hydrothermal process: 9.1 ± 1.9 m.y. for the Yashan deposit and 8.6 ± 1.8 m.y. for the Xiatongling deposit, but with different cooling path rate. The Yashan deposit experienced a slow cooling rate (36.4 °C/m.y.) followed by a moderately rapid cooling rate (48.6 °C/m.y.), whereas the Xiatongling deposit had an early rapid cooling rate (74.1 °C/m.y.) followed by a slow cooling rate (29.7 °C/m.y.). Unlike porphyry Cu systems, the longevity of magmatic-hydrothermal process is not likely to be a key controlling factor for the total endowment and grade of W deposits. However, our analyses show that rapid cooling rates might facilitate formation of high grade stockwork and greisen W deposits.Recent achievements in geochronology, such as sensitive high-resolution ion microprobe (SHRIMP) and laser ablation inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) have enabled high-precision measurements of U-Pb, Re-Os, and Ar-Ar isotopic ages ( The Yashan W-Mo and Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposits are located in the Wugongshan mining district in Jiangxi Province, South China. The district is situated between the Yangtze and Cathaysian blocks where a number of Mesozoic W-Mo-bearing granitic intrusions occur. For instance, the Hukeng quartz-vein type W deposit (with a total of 77,000 tonnes WO The Yashan W-Mo and Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposits in the northeastern Wugongshan district are situated at the junction of the Yangtze and Cathaysia blocks ( The Wugongshan mining district is entirely underlain by the Wugongshan inlier ( A number of granitic plutons occur in the Wugongshan district ( The Yashan W-Mo ( Yashan W-Mo deposit was discovered in 1958. From 1980 to 1982, the Third Jiangxi Nonferrous Geological Survey carried out a small-scale drilling program, and discovered WO The Yashan W-Mo ores occur in the contact zone between the Huangzhuping granitic pluton and the Neoproterozoic meta-sandstone, and also within the granite. The Huangzhuping granitic pluton occurs as a small, tuberculate-shaped stock with an exposed area of only 0.03 km Mineralization in the deposit is presented as either wolframite-bearing-quartz veins (thick-quartz-vein type) or wolframite-bearing stockwork (stockwork type). The former occurs within the granite and the wall-rock metamorphic rocks, whereas the latter occurs only within the granite. Nine wolframite-bearing, thick-quartz-vein-type orebodies and 5 wolframite-bearing stockwork-type orebodies have been discovered so far. The thick-quartz-vein-type orebodies generally dip to the NE-E at 75–87° and have an average grade of 1.08% WO3, 0.09% Mo and 0.10% Bi. The wolframite-bearing stockwork-type orebodies dip to the south at 78-87° and have an average grade of 0.42% WO The Xiatongling W-Mo-Bi deposit is located in the middle of the Wugongshan inlier ( Orebodies in the deposit occur as either stockwork or greisen ( Ore minerals are mostly wolframite, scheelite, molybdenite, bismuthinite, beryl and xenotime ( The Hukeng W deposit is one of the largest wolframite–quartz-vein-type W deposits in Jiangxi Province. The deposit is located within the southeastern limb of the Wugongshan inlier on the northern margin of the Cathaysia Block ( Igneous rocks in the Hukeng deposit area include the Hukeng granite stock (with an exposed area of 14 km Samples of ores and granitic rocks were collected from borehole cores, underground shafts, or outcrops of the Yashan W-Mo and Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposits ( Seven molybdenite samples (YS-4, YS-10 and YS-17 from the Yashan deposit, XDL14-2, XDL14-8, XDL14-9 and XDL14-10 from the Xiatongling deposit) and four muscovite samples (YS-10 and YS-16 from the Yashan deposit and XDL14-1 from the Xiatongling deposit) from stockwork and greisen ores were selected for Re-Os and Ar-Ar analyses to determine the ages of hydrothermal mineralization events. Molybdenite samples YS-4 and YS-10 were collected from a quartz + molybdenite + chalcopyrite + muscovite vein and greisen ore with chalcopyrite + molybdenite + scheelite + muscovite, respectively. Samples YS-16 and YS-17 were collected from a quartz + muscovite vein and a molybdenite-bearing ore. Samples XDL14-8, XDL14-9 and XDL14-10 were from molybdenite-bearing quartz veins in granite. Samples XDL14-1, XDL14-2 and XDL14-15 were collected from molybdenite- and scheelite-bearing greisen ores of different locations. Conventional crushing and grinding techniques were used to concentrate zircon crystals with grain sizes less than 0.2 mm before manual heavy liquid rinsing and electro-magnetic separation. Zircon crystals were then hand-picked under a binocular microscope and mounted in epoxy resin together with a standard 91,500 zircon sample (of 417 Ma in age). The zircon grains were then ground and polished to obtain a cross-section through the grains for exposing the central section of the zircon crystals. Then cathodoluminescence (CL) and optical micro-photography techniques were used for examining and analyzing zircon morphology, zoning characteristics, and interior structure of each zircon grain. The mount was then cleaned and gold coated in preparation for SHRIMP U-Pb analyses. Zircon was dated using a SHRIMP Ⅱ at the Beijing SHRIMP Center, Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences. The analytical procedure and data processing methods followed Muscovite grains (with diameter of 0.08–0.15 mm) were handpicked, washed in nitric acid, rinsed in deionized water, dried, and purified using magnetic separator and then cleaned in an ultrasonic ethanol bath. The muscovite grain capsule was irradiated for 51 h in a nuclear reactor at the Chinese Institute of Atomic Energy in Beijing and subsequently cooled for approximately 100 days. Molybdenite-bearing samples collected from molybdenite-bearing ores were crushed and molybdenite grains were handpicked under a binocular microscope (purity > 98%). The Re–Os isotope analyses were performed at the Re–Os Laboratory, National Research Center of Geoanalysis, CAGS, Beijing, China. The analytical procedure and methods, as well as data processing methods followed Zircon grains used for SHRIMP U–Pb analyses were examined with petrographic microscopy, CL microscopy, and backscattered electron imaging system. Target spots were selected based on CL images ( Sample YS-6 (monzogranite from the Yashan deposit): A total of 13 spots were analyzed on 13 zircon grains ( Sample YS-11 (granite from the Yashan deposit): A total of 12 spots on 12 zircon grains were analyzed ( Sample XDL14-7 (Xiatongling potassic granite): A total of 10 spots on 9 zircon grains were analyzed ( The Samples YS-16 and YS-10 from the Yashan W-Mo deposit have plateau ages of 152.36 ± 0.78 Ma and 152.77 ± 0.77 Ma ( Samples XDL14-1 and XDL14-15 from the Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposit have plateau ages of 146.85 ± 0.75 Ma and 146.31 ± 0.75 Ma (  The concentrations of total Re, Three molybdenite samples from the Yashan deposit yielded a model age of 155.5–156.5 Ma and a weighted mean age of 156.0 ± 2.4 Ma (2σ). An Four molybdenite samples from the Xiatongling deposit yielded a model age of 155.3–156.8 Ma, and a weighted mean age of 156.1 ± 2.1 Ma (2σ). An Zircon analyses of the sample YS-6 gave a weighted mean Re-Os analysis of molybdenite is considered to be robust because molybdenite can survive metamorphic conditions up to granulite facies ( Unlike the zircon U-Pb and molybdenite Re-Os ages, Tungsten is transported in the fluid phase principally as iso- and heteropolytungstate complexes, and as chloride and phosphate complexes ( The duration of magmatism, hydrothermal activity, and cooling history may be key factors in controlling granite-related W-Mo mineralizing systems, in addition to magma source and differentiation. It is widely assumed that giant metallic deposits are the products of exceptionally prolonged or multi-staged magmatism, alteration, and mineralization. Lifespans of mineralized system determined using multiple geochronometers are commonly longer than those determined based on a single geochronometer. This age disparity reflects the fact that Re–Os ages account for only molybdenite mineralization but may neglect later intrusive events and the duration of cooling. In contrast, muscovite Ar–Ar ages typically reflect the age of greisen alteration (at ∼325 °C), thereby taking no account of the early magmatic and hydrothermal events at 350 °C to >700 °C. However, Re–Os molybdenite dating suggests prolonged, albeit probably minimum, lifespans similar to those determined by the U–Pb methods ( The age data obtained in this study ( Previous studies on duration and cooling rate of magmatic-hydrothermal process mainly focused on porphyry copper systems. Pioneering porphyry thermochronological work was conducted in the southwestern U.S. by Recent studies show that some large porphyry-type ore deposits were produced by superposition of multiple ore-forming events ( Temperature is one of the fundamental factors controlling solubility of metals in magmatic-hydrothermal systems ( Recent studies from melt inclusions have shown that the long duration of magma-related hydrothermal activity is another important factor for unusual abundance of Be at Cerro Rico ( Does a similar relationship exist between production of high-grade ores, large metal endowments, and cooling rates for W-Mo mineralization systems? Tungsten precipitation is generally dominated by the temperature of hydrothermal fluids and therefore cooling paths can be used to assess this relation. However, when analytical errors are considered for cooling rate, the results might be permissive rather than definitive. In this case, we may just consider the median values of the cooling rate. As indicated above, both the Yashan and Xiatongling deposits had similar cooling durations of 8–9 million years for their magmatic-hydrothermal systems ( Rapid cooling rate from molybdenite precipitation to wolframite precipitation might be responsible for high-grade WO  We report new ages for the Yashan W-Mo and Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposits. For example, SHRIMP U–Pb Zircon dating of a monzogranite at the Yashan deposit yielded a Triassic age of 231.0 ± 5.0 Ma for emplacement of the monzogranite. Seven molybdenite samples obtained from W-bearing quartz-veins in the Yashan W-Mo and Xiatongling W-Mo-Be deposits yielded Re–Os isochron ages of 156.0 ± 2.0 Ma and 156.4 ± 8.7 Ma, respectively, revealing concurrent W mineralization at both deposits. Muscovite The high-precision U-Pb, Re-Os, and Ar-Ar geochronological data obtained in this study help constrain the rate and duration of cooling at both deposits. The results show that the magmatic-hydrothermal processes lasted 9.1 ± 1.8 m.y. and 8.6 ± 1.9 m.y. from 700 °C to 325 °C in the Yashan and Xiatongling deposits, respectively. Both deposits show different cooling paths with different cooling rates. The Yashan deposit began with a slow cooling rate (36.4 ± 17.9 °C/m.y.) followed by a more rapid cooling rate (48.6 ± 28.4 °C/m.y.). In contrast, the Xiatongling deposit began with a rapid cooling rate (74.1 ± 57.6 °C/m.y.) followed by a sharply declining slow cooling rate (29.6 ± 7.5 °C/m.y.). Unlike porphyry Cu systems, the longevity of magmatic-hydrothermal processes is not likely to be a key controlling factor for the endowment and grade of W deposits. However, our analyses show that rapid cooling rate might contribute to formation of high grade ore in W deposits. This study was financially supported by