Aluminum (Al) nanopowders have potential applications as hydrogen storage medium, energetic materials, pigments, and for production of metal matrix parts via powder metallurgy, to name a few. They are synthesized by methods which are either expensive or result in the product with impurities. A novel methodology based on ultrasonication of commercially available Al foil has been developed for synthesis of Al powders. Al foil was immersed in an organic medium and subjected to ultrasonication in a 160-watt bath ultrasonicator operated at 35 kHz frequency. Morphological, crystal structural, and dimensional characterization of ultrasonicated Al was carried out with the help of scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and atomic forces microscopy (AFM) respectively. Characterization results revealed that Al foil was eroded laterally as well as axially, resulting in the formation of micro and nanosized flake-like pure Al powder.Aluminum (Al) metal has a high strength to weight ratio as compared to other structural materials, having density of 2.78 g/cm Al nanoparticles are currently synthesized by various techniques which include atomization, electrowinning, mechanical comminution, mechanochemical techniques, laser ablation techniques, exploding wire technology and by wet chemical processing. In atomization, molten metal is sprayed in the form of fine droplets which form metal powder upon solidification Ultrasonication is commonly used for cleaning of different materials such as glassware, wafers of semiconductors, and textiles Commercially available Al foil ( Al foil was initially immersed in water and ultrasonicated for different intervals of time. Condition of Al foil as a function of ultrasonication time is shown in the SEM images of aluminum hydroxide formed as a result of reaction of Al with water during ultrasonication are shown in the To avoid formation of aluminum hydroxide, water was replaced an organic medium (WD-40 oil) and ultrasonication was carried out for 36 h. Effect of ultrasonication time when WD-40 oil was used as ultrasonication medium is shown in the SEM analysis of the powder obtained from the sediment and from the suspension are shown in the The proposed methodology is based on acoustic cavitation effect which caused erosion and disintegration of Al foil laterally as well as axially, resulting in the formation of Al micro and nanoflakes. XRD measurements confirmed purity of the exfoliated powder whereas morphological and dimensional characterization confirmed development of Al nanopowder with an average particle height of A novel methodology, based on the acoustic cavitation effect, has been successfully developed for synthesis of nanosized Al powder from commercially available Al foil. X- ray diffraction analysis confirmed absence of any chemical reaction during ultrasonication when organic medium was used. Morphological characterization of developed powder carried out with the help of SEM, which confirmed lateral as well as axial erosion of Al foil resulting in formation of micro and nanosize flake-like Al powder. Average height Al nanoflakes was found to be The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support from