Recent studies have suggested that aortic smooth muscle cells undergo a phenotypic transition into osteoblast-like cells and mineralize when cultured in the presence of β-glycerophosphate. Since we had previously demonstrated that heparin could inhibit osteoblast differentiation and mineralization in primary cultures of murine calvaria cells, we were interested in determining if heparin would have a similar effect when primary aortic smooth muscle cells were cultured in the presence of β-glycerophosphate. The effect of heparin and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) on osteoblast differentiation and activity was therefore examined in primary cultures of bovine aortic smooth muscle cells (BASMC) over a 14-day period. Here, we report that BASMC differentiate into osteoblast-like cells when cultured in the presence of β-glycerophosphate. Moreover, we report that heparin not only inhibits this process but that it also inhibits the ability of BASMC to mineralize as well. Importantly, these effects were found not to be dependent upon heparins’ anticoagulant activity since unfractionated heparin and heparins with low anti-thrombin III affinities inhibited the mineralization process equally well. Sulfation, however, was found to be a major determinant of heparins ability to inhibit BASMC mineralization since neither dermatan sulfate nor N-desulfated heparin were able to demonstrate an effect. We conclude that BASMC cultures can undergo a phenotypic transition into mature osteoblasts and that both the differentiation process and their ability to mineralize are inhibited by heparin.Calcification of the vessel wall can be a particularly troublesome complication of atherosclerosis Numerous studies indicate that osteoblasts arise from mesenchymal stem cells that can differentiate along several lineages. In the bone marrow, mesenchymal stem cells differentiate not only into osteoblasts but also into adipocytes, chondroblasts, and smooth muscle cells The purpose of the current study was two-fold. First, we wished to verify reports of primary smooth muscle cell cultures undergoing osteoblast differentiation and mineralization in the presence of β-glycerophosphate. In addition, we were also interested in determining if heparin could inhibit this process since we had previously demonstrated heparins’ ability to inhibit osteoblast differentiation and mineralization in primary cultures of murine calvaria cells Unfractionated heparin (173 anti-factor Xa U/mg) and the low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), Fragmin (100 anti-factor Xa U/mg), were a generous gift from Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, Montreal, Canada. Well-defined heparin fractions with molecular weights ranging from 3000 to 18000 Smooth muscle cells were harvested from fresh bovine aorta obtained from a local slaughter house as described previously Bovine smooth muscle cells (5 Osteoblasts were identified histochemically by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining as described previously In some experiments, ALP was also quantified by using a commercially available assay (Sigma Chemical Co.). Briefly, the cells were washed three times with PBS, lysed with 1% Triton X-100, and then 2 BASMC were plated at a cell density of 2 Smooth muscle cells, at an initial cell concentration of 5.0 BASMCs were cultured in 24 well plates using DMEM supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum, 10 Independent Student's Cultures of bovine aortic smooth muscle cells (BASMC) were cultured over a 14-day period in the absence or presence of 10 To further characterize BASMC mineralization, mineralized cultures of BASMCs were analysed by transmission electron microscopy. As shown in We have shown previously using primary murine calvaria cells that both heparin and LMWH produce a concentration-dependent and statistically significant ( In parallel to its effect on osteoblast differentiation, both heparin and LMWH were also found to reduce BASMC mineralization ( We compared the effect of low-affinity heparin with that of unfractionated heparin in order to determine whether the pentasaccharide sequence with high affinity for anti-thrombin III was mediating heparin's effects on osteoblast differentiation and mineralization. Heparin was fractionated by affinity chromatography on an anti-thrombin III column and the low affinity fraction was tested for its ability to inhibit both alkaline phosphatase activity and mineralization. As illustrated in To determine the extent to which the effects of heparin on BASMC mineralization was charge-dependent, BASMC were cultured with either dermatan sulfate or We have shown that primary cultures of BASMC undergo a phenotypic transition into osteoblast-like cells in the presence of β-glycerophosphate and that this transition can be inhibited by heparin. Thus, we have shown that cultures of BASMC lose their smooth muscle cell phenotype while gaining an osteoblast-like phenotype when cultured in the presence of β-glycerophosphate. In addition, we have shown that heparin inhibits not only this process but also BASMC mineralization as well. Like heparin, LMWH inhibited both osteoblast formation and mineralization in these cultures. Only sulfation and not anticoagulant activity was found to be a major determinant of heparins’ ability to affect BASMC differentiation and mineralization. To our knowledge, this is the first study demonstrating an effect of heparin or LMWH on either osteoblast-like differentiation or mineralization in primary BASMC cultures. How analogous the differentiation of BASMC cultures in the presence of β-glycerophosphate is to mesenchymal stem cell differentiation is unknown. Several investigators have cloned a subpopulation of BASMC that are capable of expressing osteoblastic specific genes and forming a mineralized matrix in vitro A number of studies have suggested that vascular smooth muscle cells must form multicellular nodule-like formations in order to calcify The mechanism by which heparin influences the differentiation of BASMC cultures in the presence of β-glycerophosphate is uncertain. A variety of factors, including interleukin 1-β, tumor necrosis factor-α, and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) have been implicated in osteoblastogenesis Net negative charge and structure were found to be an important determinant of heparin's ability to inhibit both osteoblast differentiation and mineralization in BASMC cultures. Thus, while unfractionated heparin demonstrated strong inhibition of both osteoblast differentiation and mineralization, In summary, we used BASMC to determine the effect of heparin on osteoblast differentiation and mineralization in the presence of β-glycerophosphate. Here, we report that BASMC cultures can undergo a phenotypic transition into mature osteoblasts and that both their ability to promote mineralization and the differentiation process itself can be inhibited by heparin. These findings suggest that the calcification of atherosclerotic plaques may share similarities with the mineralization of bone and suggest a plausible mechanism by which atherosclerotic plaques may calcify.