The aims of this research are to quantitatively evaluate the complexity of the pore structure in coal frozen with liquid nitrogen (LN2) and then study the influence of the modified pore system on coalbed methane (CBM) extraction. To do this, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and fractal dimension theory were used to determine the properties of the coal's pore system after samples of low rank coal had been frozen and then thawed. The fractal dimensions of pores in frozen-thawed coal samples were divided into five types according to pore size and the state of the fluid in the coal pores. The results showed that the fractal dimension DA of adsorption pores was less than two, indicating that these pores did not exhibit fractal characteristics. The fractal dimensions Dir and DT representing closed pores and total pores presented low fitting precision, so the closed pores showed insignificant fractal characteristics. However, the fractal dimensions DF and DS representing open pores and seepage pores had high fitting precision, suggesting that open and gas seepage pores exhibited a favorable fractal characteristic. Correlation analysis revealed that DF and Ds were negatively correlated with LN2 freezing time and the number of freeze-thaw cycles. After being frozen and thawed, coal porosity and permeability showed a strong negative correlation with fractal dimension and this relationship allowed predictive models for permeability and fractal dimensions (DF and DS) to be constructed. The models showed that the smaller the fractal dimension, the more uniformly the pores were distributed and the higher their degree of connection. These properties favor the production of CBM. This study also showed that compared with single LN2 freezing events, repeated cyclic freezing with LN2 followed by thawing is more favorable for CBM production.Coalbed methane (CBM), a gas common in coal seams, is produced during the development of some coal deposits Generally, CBM is adsorbed onto microcellular structures of coal and is difficult to extract directly because coal reservoirs have low-permeability In order to reduce the deficiencies of existing permeability enhancement techniques and reduce the environmental degradation that can be associate with hydraulic fracturing, anhydrous fracturing technologies such as using liquid nitrogen or liquid carbon dioxide as fracturing fluids have gradually attracted more attention Quantitatively evaluating the pore structures in frozen-thawed coal is important for the study of CBM seepage and migration. Fractal geometry was initially founded by Mandelbrot As for describing the fractal dimension of coal surfaces, CT and SEM images of coal generally undergo digital processing and then fractal dimensions can be calculated using several methods including correlation, similarity, capacity, and box dimensions There are no relevant studies on the fractal dimension of pores in coal after freeze-thaw treatment of the coal with LN The coal samples used for the experiments were lignite taken from the Shengli coalfield in Inner Mongolia, China. In order to ensure uniformity, all of the coal samples were drilled from the same block of coal, as shown in The freeze-thaw treatment of the coal samples was conducted in a LN An MR-60 NMR rock core analyzer manufactured by Shanghai Niumag Electronic Technology Co., LTD (Shanghai, China) was used to analyze the cores, as shown in Similar to electrons, nuclei also have spin angular momentum and spin magnetic moment After the RF magnetic field is removed, the magnetic field M By employing NMR to test the CPMG (Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gil) pulse sequences on completely water-saturated rock cores, the decaying signals of spin-echo strings are obtained. The decaying signals are the superposition of hydraulic signals in pores with different sizes The coal samples were tested using NMR before and after the LN Coal porosity can be nondestructively detected by NMR. By testing the water-saturated and the centrifuged coal samples, the total porosity and bound porosity of the coal can be obtained. The free porosity of the coal can be calculated by subtracting bound porosity from the total porosity The diameter of methane molecules ranges from 0.34 to 0.37 According to fractal geometry theory, the diameter of pores in the coal conforms to fractal structures and the number of pores A derivation operation is conducted for The cumulative volumes of pores in the coal with a diameter less than Eq. Therefore, the total pore volume in the coal can be expressed as follows: The cumulative volume fraction Because Eq. Capillary pressure exhibits the following relationship with pore diameter Eqs. According to the NMR relaxation mechanisms, the transverse relaxation time T The values of Eq. According to the above analysis, the By substituting Eqs. After taking the logarithm of both sides of Eq. It can be seen from Eq. Five fractal dimension calculations based on NMR spectra for coal samples frozen by LN According to fractal geometry theory As shown in The NMR data for the coal samples frozen by LN  In addition, D Based on the analysis presented in We measured the permeability of coal using the non-destructive nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) under SDR model This correlation analysis shows that fractal dimensions reflect porosity and permeability. The larger the fractal dimension, the lower the porosity and permeability, and the stronger the anisotropy. All of these factors inhibit gas seepage and therefore would reduce CBM production. Generally, the cubic law of permeability with porosity has been widely accepted for the CBM reserve permeability quantification and prediction, which can be expressed as follows  It can be seen from Eqs. Pore structures in coal during freeze-thaw treatments with LN Correlation analysis shows that D By fitting the data points for porosity and permeability of coal treated with LN This work was financially supported by the