Objective
                  The enamel matrix derivative (EMD) has a positive effect on the proliferation of human periodontal ligament cells and the healing of periodontal tissues. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of EMD on the proliferation and differentiation of human dental pulp cells (hDPCs) in vitro.
               
                  Methods
                  hDPCs were isolated from human impacted third molars and cultured in vitro. After treatment with100μg/mL EMD, the proliferation of hDPCs was determined by a cell counting kit 8 (CCK8) assay. After incubation in EMD osteogenic induction medium for 14 days, the osteogenic differentiation of hDPCs was evaluated by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, alizarin staining and the expression of osteogenesis-related genes.
               
                  Results
                  The EMD osteogenic induction medium enhanced the proliferation of hDPCs. After osteogenic induction, EMD increased the osteogenic potential of hDPCs, as measured by alkaline phosphatase activity and calcium accumulation; the expression levels of osteogenesis-related genes, such as ALP, DSPP, BMP, and OPN were also upregulated. In addition, the expression levels of odontogenesis-related transcription factors Osterix and Runx2 were upregulated.
               
                  Conclusions
                  EMD could enhance the mineralization of hDPSCs upregulated the expression of markers for odontoblast/osteoblast-like cells. Further studies are required to determine if EMD can improve pulp tissue repair and regeneration.The health of teeth depends on the integrity of the hard tissue and the activity of the pulp and periodontal tissues, which are responsible for supplying nutrition to the teeth. Lack of nourishment provided by the pulp tissue can increase the risk of tooth fracture. In immature permanent teeth, impaired root development is another outcome associated with lack of nutritional support of the pulp. Maintaining the viability of the residual pulp tissue as far as possible is the main consideration in the procedure of pulp therapy. Direct pulp capping and pulpotomy are therapeutic approaches for exposed vital pulp, in which the formation of reparative dentine is facilitated by sealing the pulpal wound with a dental material. Emdogain (Straumann AG, Basel, Switzerland) is a commercial enamel matrix derivative (EMD), derived from porcine developing enamel matrix. The main component of EMD is amelogenins. In addition, EMD contains low concentrations of matrix metalloproteinases and growth factors, including transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1), BMP-2 and BMP-4. The addition of EMD can promote periodontal cell proliferation EMD gel (30 Human impacted third molars were collected from an adult (22 years, male) at the clinic of the Peking University School of Stomatology and used to culture hDPCs. The patient provided written informed consent, and the ethical committee of the Medical School of Peking University approved the protocol to obtain extracted teeth. After the teeth surfaces had been cleaned, the teeth were cut around the cementum-enamel junction with sterilized dental fissure burs to expose the pulp chamber. The pulp tissue was gently separated from the crown and root, and subsequently digested in a solution of 3 Single-cell suspensions (0.5–1.0 To induce differentiation, cells were cultured in a control medium with osteogenic induction media (OSTEO), comprising 50 hDPCs (1 According to the above experiment, 100 After 7 and 14 days culture in the OSTEO, EMD and normal control medium, cells were rinsed three times in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then lysed for 10 After 7 and 14 days of culture in the EMD, OSTEO and normal control medium, the hDPCs were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 After 14 days of culture in the EMD, OSTEO and normal control medium, the of hDPCs were rinsed three times in PBS and the total RNA of the cells was extracted by using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Isolated RNA was then subjected to reverse transcription using an Oligo dT primer and superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen), according to manufacturer's instructions. Semi-quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed using the ABI Prism 7000 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with SYBR green (Roche, Shanghai, China). The reaction conditions comprised 70 Statistical analysis was performed using the paired Student's t test in SPSS. The level of statistical significance was set at hDPCs viability increased in an EMD dosage-dependent manner. Among the EMD concentration used, hDPCs showed the highest cell viability compared to the untreated group ( The CCK-8 results showed that cells incubated with EMD had a higher growth rate than those incubated with normal medium alone at 1, 3, 5 and 7 days of the cultivation ( To investigate the effect of EMD on the odontoblastic differentiation of hDPCs, we assessed the levels of ALP activity, mineral nodule deposition by Alizarin Red S staining, and messenger RNA expression of differentiation markers. The results showed that the ALP activity of the EMD group increased compared with that of the OSTEO group at 7 and 14 days of cultivation (both Vital pulp therapy, including direct pulp capping and pulpotomy, minimizes pulpal injury by protecting the pulp tissue from the toxic effects of chemical, bacterial, mechanical or thermal insult. The extent to which growth or differentiation agents applied directly to pulp tissue can induce reparative dentine has been a focus of many biomedical trials. As it is commercially available and economical compared with other bioactive agents, clinicians have recently become interested in using EMD as a pulp capping material. EMD is a gel-type agent that does not rapidly diffuse into the pulp tissue. The differentiation and mineralization of osteoblasts and odontoblasts involve an initial period of extracellular matrix biosynthesis and proliferation, which is followed by cell differentiation. Alizarin Red S staining has been used for decades to evaluate calcium-rich deposits by cells in culture. The cell phenotype of differentiation-induced hDPCs presents several crucial characteristics of odontoblasts, as shown the increased ALP activity and the expression of the odontogenic genes, such as DSPP, and osteoblastic genes, such as ALP, BMP1 and OPN. DSPP is believed to play a regulatory role in the mineralization of reparative dentine, and serves as a specific marker for odontoblasts. Osterix, is also an essential transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation: osterix-deficient mice were deficient in bone formation because of maturation arrest of osteoblasts. In the current study, ALP, DSPP, BMP1, OPN, osterix and Runx-2 were selected as differentiation markers for odontoblasts in hDPCs. We observed a significant increase in ALP activity, mineral nodule deposition, and upregulation of markers for odontoblastic differentiation, such as ALP, DSPP, BMP1 and OPN in hDPCs treated with EMD. In addition, the results also showed that essential transcription factors, such as Runx2 and osterix, were upregulated in the EMD-treated group compared with the OSTEO group ( The mechanism by which EMD influences the function of pulp cells is not completely understood. In a previous report, the function of odontoblasts or pulp cells might have been stimulated directly by EMD to produce collagen matrix for calcification. EMD could enhance the mineralization of hDPCs and increased the expression of markers for odontoblast/osteoblast-like cells. Further studies are required to determine whether EMD can improve pulp tissue repair and regeneration. This work was supported by a grant from the