In the present investigation, evolution of microstructure and texture was studied for a β titanium alloy during cold rolling (unidirectional rolling (UDR) and cross rolling (multi-step cross rolling (MSCR) and two step cross rolling). For both UDR and MSCR of initially hot rolled alloy consisting of elongated and equiaxed grain structure, the occurrence of shear bands inside the grains was the main feature of the microstructure. The density of these shear bands was dependent on the cold rolling reduction and strain path and was found to be orientation dependent. Shear bands preferentially occurred in γ-fiber (normal direction (ND)//〈111〉) oriented grains. The regions with shear bands had higher hardness than the regions without shear bands, and {111}〈112〉 component of the γ-fiber was found to be more susceptible to formation of shear bands. The orientation dependence of these shear bands was analyzed within the framework of Dillamore's plastic instability criterion. During UDR, strong α and γ-fibers were observed after highest strain (ε = 1.6), while strong rotated cube ({100}〈110〉) texture developed after MSCR at highest strain (ε = 1.6). The volume fraction of both α and γ fibers gradually increased with the increase in cold rolling reduction during UDR. For MSCR, the rotated cube component gradually increased with increase in cold rolling reduction. In solution annealed β-Ti alloy with equiaxed grain structure, α and γ fibers were formed after highest strain (ε = 1.6) during UDR. However, due to large grain size, both α and γ fibers were discontinuous. The texture development was found to be more strongly dependent on the strain path than the initial microstructure during cold rolling.Titanium (Ti) alloys (α, near α, α + β and β) are primarily used in aerospace and automobile industries due to good combination of corrosion resistance, fatigue properties, crack propagation resistance and higher strength-to-weight ratio [ Texture development during cold rolling (UDR (unidirectional rolling) and MSCR (multi-step cross rolling)) has been extensively studied for various BCC metals and alloys like different grades of low carbon steels [ The chemical composition of Ti-15V-3Cr-3Sn-3Al alloy (in weight % alloying elements, as determined by Olympus, USA X-ray Florescence spectrometer) used in the present investigation (hereafter designated as Ti15333) is given in Microstructures for all the samples were observed on the plane containing RD and ND. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) were used for microstructural examination. For SEM, standard metallographic procedure was used to polish the samples up to 2500 grit followed by polishing with suspension of alumina in water (0.3 μm) and finally with suspension of polycrystalline diamond (0.1 μm). Samples were etched with Kroll's reagent (92 ml distilled water, 6 ml HNO Bruker D8 DISCOVER diffractometer using CuK   The important observations of the present investigation are briefly summarized below: The microstructures showed the presence of shear bands for all the conditions of deformation. These shear bands were relatively higher in frequency in γ-fiber grains than the grains with other orientation i.e. they were orientation sensitive. UDR-RD sample had higher frequency of occurrence of shear bands than MSCR-RD sample. The misorientations (represented in the form of average KAM, average GOS) and X-ray peak broadening was higher for UDR-RD sample than MSCR-RD sample for corresponding condition of deformation in general. Two starting materials, (a) with initial texture (α and γ fibers), average ECD grain size ~50 μm (bimodal consisting of elongated and equiaxed grains) and (b) with weak rotated cube texture and large ECD grain size ~75 μm (uniform equiaxed) were cold rolled unidirectionally (UDR-RD and SA + UDR-RD) respectively. After 80% UDR-RD of (a), strong and uniform α and γ fibers were formed. However, after 80% UDR-RD of (b), strong and discontinuous α and γ fibers were formed. This indicates a significant role of initial texture and grain size in deciding the final deformation texture. For 80% MSCR of (a) i.e. MSCR-RD, a very strong rotated cube texture with very weak γ-fiber was formed, while for 80% UDR-TD of (a), uniform α and γ fibers were observed. The discussion has been divided into two parts - microstructures and texture. The observations on the formation of shear bands can be rationalized in terms of instability criterion [ The lower value of average KAM and average GOS in MSCR-RD sample than UDR-RD sample indicates strong effect of strain path. When the sample was rotated 90° about ND after each rolling pass, the change in strain path might lead to activation of more number of slip systems than unidirectional rolling. Lattice rotations in cross rolling are not cumulative and hence the formation of cumulative microstructural features like transition bands/shear bands will take place to a lesser extent and hence lower misorientation development is expected. Further, the local misorientation measure like KAM also depends on texture of material apart from plastic strain and lattice rotations [ After cold rolling, the textures of Ti15333 alloy resembled that of LC steels [ In present investigation, for MSCR-RD, due to the change in the direction after every rolling pass, the existing sub-structure gets destroyed [ In the present investigation, development of microstructure and texture during cold rolling was investigated for a β-Ti alloy. The following conclusion can be drawn: The β-Ti alloy (Ti-15V-3Cr-3Sn-3Al) showed pronounced shear banding during cold rolling. The presence of shear bands was found to be orientation dependent, with γ-fiber grains having higher tendency for formation of shear bands than the grains with other orientations. The preferred appearance of shear bands in γ-fiber oriented grains was explained on the basis of Dillamore's plastic instability criterion. The misorientation developments and X-ray peak broadening was higher in unidirectionally rolled (UDR-RD) samples than the multi-step cross rolled samples (MSCR-RD). This may be due to the activation of increased number of slip system during MSCR-RD. The texture of initial hot rolled sample (having bimodal grain structure consisting of elongated and equiaxed grains) showed the presence of uniform α and γ fibers. The strength of these fibers increased with the increase in cold rolling reduction during unidirectional rolling. The textures were similar when rolling was carried out along the original hot rolling direction or perpendicular to initial hot rolling direction. The solution annealed sample showed weak rotated cube texture and α and γ fibers were discontinuous after cold rolling due to the large and equiaxed initial grains. Multi-step cross cold rolling resulted in the development of very strong rotated cube texture and very weak γ-fiber. The authors would like to thank The Director, VNIT Nagpur for providing the necessary facilities and constant encouragement to publish this paper. Thanks are also due to Prof. I. Samajdar, Convener, ‘National Facility of Texture & OIM (a DST-IRPHA facility)’, IIT Bombay for EBSD measurements. One of the authors, RKK, wishes to acknowledge the