Estimating rock strength parameters using operational drilling data can be a fast and reliable method. In this case, several researchers have proposed different analytical models based on force or energy equilibrium methods. Most of them propose methods to estimate uniaxial compressive strength through the investigation of interaction between the bit and rock in drilling process. Although in the proposed models, operational drilling system, rock strength parameters, bit geometry and contact friction were considered, some of the important factors such as crushed zone and its mechanical properties, contact frictions between the bit and rock and friction between the rock and crushed zone need to be explicitly considered. In this research work, a theoretical model is developed based on limit equilibrium of forces and considering contact frictions, crushed zone and bit geometry in the rotary drilling process by a T-shaped drag bit. Based on the model, a method is used to estimate rock strength parameters form operational drilling data. The operational drilling parameters such as thrust force, torque, rate of penetration and speed of rotation were obtained by a developed portable drilling machine. The portable drilling machine is able to drill the rocks with different strength range coincident with measure and record the parameters. A set of drilling experiments were conducted on three different rocks ranged from weak, medium and hard strength. Obtained results based on proposed model for uniaxial compressive strength, cohesion and internal friction angle of rock are well fitted to the results of the conventional standard tests.Unconfined Compressive Strength (UCS) of intact rock has been considered as the main parameter in most rock mass classification systems and also as a high limit of the rock mass strength. Determining UCS using suggested standard methods is costly and time consuming mainly due to difficult sample preparation and destructive procedure. Therefore, many indirect methods such as scratch test, point load, Schmidt hammer and punch tests have been proposed for this purpose. Estimating the UCS of rock using drilling parameters is also an alternative method. In this method, continuous measurement of drilling parameters and evaluating of rock strength during the drilling is possible. Beside the advantage of continues measuring, it can be used as a quasi-nondestructive method in field. In large scale, this method can be easily facilitated due to simply movement and no need for sampling. In this case, the drilling methods as well as the bit are most important. Regarding extensive use of rotary drilling systems, it has attempted more attention compared with the other systems and most of the represented methods are accommodated in this drilling system. The drilling process is conducted through two stages of feeding and cutting. At the first stage, the bit indents into the intact rock by the thrust force. As a result of the indentation, a part of rock is crushed and pressed. The compressed crushed zone is formed in front of bit due to the rake angle, cutting face friction and spiral motion of the bit. The next stage of rotary drilling occurs due to the rotational motion of the bit. At this stage, the horizontal force is transferred to the rock along rotating bit but unlike the first stage, the force is transferred to the rock through an intermediary. The intermediary is the compressed crushed zone, which damps a part of the force as frictional one. The crushed zone is more important in investigating the interaction between the bit and rock as well as estimating the strength parameters of rock. This issue, mostly have not been considered in previous proposed models. According to the literature, previous proposed models which estimate rock strength using drilling technique or propose methods for this aim through the investigation of interaction between the bit and rock is categorized in two forces equilibrium-based and energy equilibrium-based models. The former category has been introduced by Evans Detournay and Defourny Generally, the rotary drilling process of rock is conducted through two stages. In the first stage, the indentation performs along with axial motion of the bit, which is included the indentation, crushing and smashing. The second stage is the cutting force, which is perpendicular to the axial motion and only cuts the rock. Both stages require to perform the drilling process, since the axial motion of bit needs to keep the cutting depth and feeding and the rotary motion perpendicular to the indentation motion needs to cut the rock. The two stages occur in a continuous and fast process and can be considered simultaneously. The resultant of the two forces have important role. One of the resultant forces functions along the bit axis and the other one is the resultant of forces which are parallel to the bottom hole. The amount and ratio of the two forces in frontal face of the bit mostly depend on the bit geometry especially rake angle and the contact friction. Hereon, the friction force between the compressed crushed particles and rock as well as the bit-end (head) friction affect the forces. Considering the condition, a model is proposed based on the force limit equilibrium in a T-shaped drag bit with negative rake angle, Several factors control the formation of the crushed zone and its compacting in front of the bit. These factors include the rake angle of bit, continuous downward movement of the bit, cutting face friction angle, and the presence of an enclosed space inside the drill hole, which does not allow to move upward the cuttings material from bit in front. In fact, the compressed crushed zone performs as the initial indenter into the intact rock. The compressed crushed zone also transfers a part of the applied forces of bit to the intact rock. In other words as a result of the applied force ( In Also in the potentially fail face of wedge, shear, Considering Mohr- Coulomb failure criterion of rock, If In order to obtain the minimum value of Finally minimum value of Now, considering the acting forces in the bit as well as the Eqs. The following equation is obtained by multiplying the value of If the value of Since This equation indicates a linear relationship between drilling specific energy and drilling strength of rock for a blunt bit, in which the slope is Denoting Eqs. By subtracting the Eq. If When a bit is ideally sharp, the According to this equation, when a bit is sharp the rake angle and friction between the bit and compressed crushed zone are deciding factors. Meanwhile, the rake angle could be controlled by operator and therefore optimizing of its value is necessary. The effective range of the parameters must be investigated to estimate the strength parameters of rock (internal friction angle, cohesion and UCS of rock). According to the proposed model, the Eq. By estimating the friction angle between intact rock and compressed crushed zone ( According to this model, variation of the slope of According to the Another important parameter in this model is the intercept of the linear relation between The UCS is also estimated using drilling data from A portable drilling machine ( The machine is operated with different rate of penetration, rotary speed, drilling depth, maximum value of the thrust force and the maximum rate of torque with a computer or touch screen. The system starts to drill as the self-control and measures also torque parameters and thrust force for drilling in different depth and then saves the data in an Excel file. The diagram of the thrust force and torque in different drilling depth for a green onyx which are presented in Different drilling tests were conducted on rocks with different UCS in lemon travertine as a weak rock, green onyx as medium rock and rhyolite with as hard rock. Lemon travertine and green onyx consist only one mineral composition while rhyolite with a porphyry fine grain texture contains different minerals such as quartz, sanidine, plagioclase, phenocrystals and biotit. The drilling tests are conducted using 8–9 mm T-shaped drag bits with tips of tungsten carbide ( Correlation between the drilling specific energy ( Intercepts of the Now, the UCS is calculated using equation Based on the limit equilibrium of forces model, a method used to estimate cohesion, internal friction angle and UCS of the three types of rock (weak, medium, and high strength range) from operational drilling data. The effects of parameters such as crushed zone, friction and bit geometry considered. The obtained results of experiments suggest that the estimated strength parameters for the three rocks using the drilling data have a good conformity with the results of the conventional standard experiments. However, points must be considered in order to obtain desired results: In order to estimate the internal friction angle of rock from drilling data particularly for medium and heavy strength rocks it is better to use a sharp bit (Eq.