In a powder, each particle is different and it is the distribution of the properties of the particles which distinguish one sample from another. A powder process that seeks to change the distribution in a controlled manner, and the necessary model which describes the change, is known as a population balance. The creation of such a model is essential to the design and control of processes such as grinding, crystallisation, and granulation. The basic ideas underlying population models were established at a time when the numerical capability to solve them was much less than it is today. In this perspective article, it is suggested that the population model should be simpler in concept but more ambitious in purpose if full advantage is to be gained from the modern computing capability.Process engineers live by mass balances and energy balances. In order to design and control a process, it is a requirement to be able to account for the total mass and the total energy. For particulate processes, the additional requirement is the population balance. In fact, the word balance can be misleading since the major objective of most particle processes is to change the particle population and, thus, to change the functional properties of the system. Whether it is a powder, paste, slurry, aerosol or spray, the particle population at the end of the process is usually different than at the beginning, otherwise the process has achieved little. It may be that the word “balance” is used because the change in population is usually written as some form of the continuity equation. The classic exposition of the population balance was due to Randolph and Larsen The general form of the population balance as written by Randolph and Larsen is as follows: In this equation, the particles are distributed with respect to some intrinsic parameter, The divergence term is divided into two because it recognizes that the particle has ‘external’ and ‘internal’ coordinates. The external coordinates are literally so and express the change in population in a particular volume due to the particles passing through that volume with velocity This formulation of population balance modeling was perceptive and showed great foresight, but, after 50 years, it is not inappropriate to ask whether our subsequent experience requires us to adapt and redirect the topic. Much has been achieved in that time and the collective experiences in solving the equation are considerable. However, it must be admitted that as the particles and the processes become more complex, the direct relationship of the coefficients in those solutions with the basic physics and chemistry becomes more obscure. That fact justifies a reappraisal of the formulation. Although population balance modeling was conceived as a general approach to all particulate processes, it has developed in separate literature streams which mirror the original ‘unit operations’ structure of process engineering. The terminology is not consistent and it is sometimes difficult to identify the various mechanisms as separate terms in the equations. For example, crystallisation research has been concerned mainly with the growth of the particles. The internal coordinate is considered to be the linear size of the particles and the search is for a function to describe the growth rate. In this literature, breakage and agglomeration are often considered to be discrete birth and death events. In the milling literature, on the other hand, the breakage is a rate event and the search is for the breakage function. In the agglomeration literature, the rate and discrete processes are differentiated as two separate growth mechanisms, layering and coalescence. The search is then for the kernel, which describes the rate of coalescence. In the meantime, the paradigm of process engineering has changed from that of unit operations, and as more complex processes are developed, all of the mechanisms are occurring simultaneously. With the systems approach, each process is analysed at various scales of length and time. Thus, we can understand that they are discrete events when one particle breaks or when two particles collide. However, when those events are averaged over sufficient time or volume, then they become rate events. Both scales of scrutiny are important but they should not simultaneously appear in the same equation. In any process, the particles are either increasing or decreasing in size or are changing in composition. When averaged over a population, these are rate events, and any creation or destruction of mass is represented by a change in the integrated mass of the population curve. The discrete events, which occur at the particle scale, provide the mechanistic interpretation for the rate events. It remains to be explained how we can consider a process such as nucleation to be a rate event when clearly, on the particle scale, new particles are being born. The answer to this question is that we can only do so if we choose the size and the distribution parameter carefully and if we do not neglect the medium surrounding the particle. Consider first the size parameter. If a particle breaks into a number of fragments, the sum of their size is not that of the original A similar argument must be made for the distribution parameter. Whenever a particle breaks, or whenever particles combine, the number of particles change but the mass of particles does not There is also an argument to be made for sometimes using a cumulative distribution function rather than the density function, particularly when the distribution is discretised. The discretised distribution function is a histogram, which expresses only the total mass contained within two limits. If a particle breaks, the mass is removed from one place in the distribution and is added to one or more other positions. Similarly, if two or more particles agglomerate, the changes occur at the point where the new agglomerate is formed as well as the point of origin. This leads to some problems of summation that have been well described by Hounslow Randolph and Larsen ( This is written in discrete form as: When only breakage occurs, the terms above the diagonal should be zero. If each particle is broken once, and only once, then the terms in the matrix are the breakage function and this is a material property. However, if there is selection and multiple breakage, then the matrix includes features of the machine and must be split into separate terms. When breakage and agglomeration occur simultaneously in a process, both mechanisms are combined in the terms of the matrix. Thus, although the relationship appears to be first order, it is in fact a combination of mechanisms. When there is particle interaction, then the terms of the matrix depend upon the ambient size distribution and the equation must also include non-linear terms. Clearly, it will be impossible to formulate such separable, non-linear equations unless the terms in each matrix represent actual masses and when the mass balance is automatically satisfied. Starting from this premise, what is the way forward? We may first realize that we should not confine the size parameter to the solid phase. An agglomerate, for example, also has both porosity and moisture content which are the important intrinsic parameters for controlling an agglomeration process. The physical importance of these parameters to the agglomeration process has been well described by Iveson Whenever an agglomerate breaks or two agglomerates coalesce, the total mass of all three phases is preserved. It is by the choice of the dimensions of the particle parameter that all of the other intrinsic parameters can be described or derived. Porosity and moisture content are dimensionless ratios that can easily be derived from the values for each phase. If the chemical composition of the particle is important, it can be described by adding the appropriate number of components to each phase. An agglomerate with two solid components would become four dimensional in volume space. Particle shape can be also be modeled by a judicious choice of the particle envelope. A simple but elegant example is shown in In a crystallization process, a two-phase parameter is also sufficient, but in this more concentrated system, it is necessary to ascribe a portion of the liquid phase to each particle such that both the liquid and the dissolved solids are included. Thus, the total space can be sub-divided into a set of Voronoi polyhedral, each of which contains one solid crystal. A change in concentration of solids or of the degree of supersaturation then reflects a change in the population of the two-dimensional parameter: If it is required to differentiate the crystal from the dissolved solids, then we write: Such a description would include the nuclei in the s If the volume of the particle is a vector, then the distribution parameter is also a vector which is the mass of solid, liquid, and air. When the population is discretised, the distribution becomes a ( Thus, my perspective is that the population model can only be extended to describe these realistic processes if both the size and the distribution parameters are based on the mass of all of the relevant phases and components. In this way, the population is automatically balanced by mass and the requirement is to make an elegant choice of the relevant components for each problem which permit the mechanisms to be apparent.