The breakage ratio (selection function) and the breakage function are needed for population balance analysis, which is a common practice to evaluate the performance of comminution systems. In this paper, four materials of various sizes, impact velocities and number of impacts are tested in a new experimental apparatus (impact machine). The experimental results are compared to an existing empirical model for the breakage ratio and to a newly developed one that presents the breakage ratio as a function of the impact velocity and the number of impacts. The comparison to the new model shows a very good agreement. The same function is also used to describe the decrease of the median size. The breakage ratio is discussed comprehensively in the paper and the discussion is accompanied by experimental evidences that suggest that the main cause to the breakage ratio (selection function) is the particle strength distribution.In the chemical processing industry, breakage or fracture (the process whereby a particle splits into smaller parts, usually a large number of smaller parts and includes a range of sizes of daughter particles) and chipping (the removal of material from a particle such that the material removed is very much smaller than the original particle) can strongly influence the operation and economics of a manufacturing process Massive fracture usually occurs when the overall stress acting on a particle exceeds some critical value and results in disintegration of the particle into a large number of fragments, all significantly smaller than the mother particle. Chipping is usually associated with smaller applied stresses for which the critical value is only exceeded locally (at the edges, for example). In this case, the original particle retains its identity but experiences a slow, more or less continuous, loss of mass. At the same time, there is a continuous production of fragments much smaller than the parent A complete mechanistic understanding of particle breakage is not yet available despite a number of fundamental studies In this paper, we present tests conducted with our new impact machine The principal idea of our new machine is to accelerate targets that are assembled at the periphery of a rotating disk towards particles that are free falling at a low velocity A special motor of 0–400 Hz, which is able to rotate up to 24,000 rpm and at a power of 4.5 kW at 18,000 rpm, is fixed below the bottom plate of the box and enables tests with impact velocities of up to around 250 m/s. The rotating targets holder is made of stainless steel with an outer diameter of 220 mm. At the periphery of the holder up to eight targets of maximum 60×35 mm can be mounted. The size, thickness and material of the targets can easily be changed according to the test aims. Also, the angle of the targets can easily be changed to enable the tests to be performed with various angles of collisions. The particles are fed by a Fritsch vibrational feeder that enables mass flow rates over a range of 1–2500 g/min by changing the vibration frequency from 0 to 50 Hz. The particles exiting the feeding channel fall freely for a short distance until one of the moving targets hits them. A large sample of material can be tested in a short time with no possibility of collision between the particles (about 100 g in about 20 min). The new impact machine was analyzed extensively to overcome experimental difficulties and to reduce the errors Population balance is commonly used to analyze attrition and comminution systems. In order to conduct such an analysis two material functions are needed. The selection function, which is sometimes called the probability function, defines whether a particle will break under defined loading conditions. The breakage function gives the fragments sizes if the particle breaks. These two material functions are also needed for use in numerical models (such as combined CFD and DEM) that calculate the impact conditions. The power of such an approach to analyze size reduction systems was demonstrated by Han et al. Salman conducted many researches on the breakage rate of particles due to impact under various angles (e.g., Refs. Peukert By analyzing experiments with a number of materials, Peukert et al. found that the power of the energy was around one for all materials, The following function was found to fit well with the experimental results of the breakage ratio as a function of the impact velocity, as shown for GNP in The function in The effect of the number of impacts is assumed to be pronounced in the empirical correlation parameters The distribution parameter, The median velocity, Inserting  In order to compare to the presentation that is shown in For a detailed population balance analysis, the breakage function is also needed. At this stage, the median size of the fragments is used to estimate the fragments size. By applying the same procedure described above and similar correlation, the median size can also be derived as a function of the impact velocity and the number of impacts. The general function describing the decrease of the median size as the impact velocity increases is: The breakage ratio (probability function or selection function) denotes the fraction of particles, which is broken after a certain number of stressing events and is commonly used to describe the process of size reduction Inserting a sample of particles to any system that applies a certain stress event in terms of impact velocity or energy and number of impacts would cause a certain breakage or size reduction of the particles. Therefore, theoretically a selection function can be defined for any comminution system. Moreover, since the breakage probability as a function of impact velocity, for instance, is always an “S” shape curve for a sufficiently large range of velocities, any two systems can be compared and equivalency can be found. The equivalency might be defined through the number of impacts and/or the impact velocity. The equivalence factor defines the relation between the number of passes through the systems at a certain impact velocity or the relation between the impact velocities at a certain number of passes, all to cause the same breakage ratio. In this way, Kalman et al. Let us analyze the case of repeated impacts of GNP particles at 20 m/s. A given particle will break at a sufficiently high impact velocity. Although at lower velocity, it will not break, the strength should be decreased. At this stage, we would like to describe how the strength (in terms of crush force) is decreased as the number of impacts increases. The strength of a particle is defined as the force required to break a particle that is compressed between two platens (crush strength). As a particle is stronger, the force required to crush it will be higher. The testing procedure was as follows: An initial sample of the tested material of about 100 g of mono-sized particles was prepared. A representative sample containing about 100 particles was taken out from the initial sample. Each particle of the representative sample was crushed individually and the crush strength distribution (accumulative percentage of number of crushed particles as a function of the crush force) was plotted. The remaining of the initial sample was impacted once (first impact) in the impact machine in the predefined impact velocity. The particles were collected and sieved to define the breakage ratio. The crush strength of about 20 representative particles from the survived particles (those remained in the initial size range) was measured and the crush strength distribution of the particles after the first impact was plotted. The remaining of the survived particles was inserted to the impact machine for the second impact. The breakage ratio was defined and the crush strength distribution was plotted for the second impact in the same way as before. The procedure was repeated until the sample of particles reduced to a small number, or it was decided to stop the test. At this stage, we have plots of the breakage ratio as a function of the number of impacts and the crush strength distribution after each impact cycle. Two phenomena affect the results. On the one hand, the average strength should be increased because the weaker particles are breaking and the stronger particles survives. On the other hand, the strength of the survived particles should decrease due to fatigue and crack propagation. Therefore, the analysis was done in a unique method. In order to be able to follow the fatigue process the initial population of the particles was divided into 10 groups of strength. The dividing was obviously done only at the analysis stage because, unfortunately, it is impossible to do it the experimentation stage. Although the accuracy of the analysis increase as the number of selected groups is higher, it seems that 10 groups are sufficient. Each group has a similar range of strength and represents 1/10 of the initial sample by weight (or number of particles). The weakest group is indicated by “1” and the strongest by “10”. After each impact test, a sample of particles was measured for crush strength. However, we need to keep in mind that at the same time the ratio of broken particles is increasing each impact. Therefore, it is required to convert each strength distribution to the portion of the survived particles among the initial sample. The calculation is simple by taking only one reasonable assumption that at each impact cycle only the weakest particles are broken. The conversion is done by the following equation:  The percentage of broken particles is also shown in the figure by solid squares. Taking the percentage of broken particles into account, some strength symbols are circled. Circled symbol means that the group represented by the symbol is partly broken and the strength represented by the symbol is the average strength of the survived particles from this group. After four impact cycles, for instance, 56.2% of the initial sample are broken, i.e., groups 1–5 are totally broken and 62% of group 6 is also broken. It seems that two borderlines at crush forces of about 32 N (dashed horizontal line) and about 17 N (solid horizontal line) can be plotted. The borderlines separate between three zones. In the upper zone, the strength of particles decrease linearly at each loading due to fatigue (crack propagation). Particles start to break when their strength reaches the upper borderline, i.e., all the circled data are below this borderline. In the breakage zone, the particles are breaking, i.e., all the circled data are in this zone. No evidence of particles surviving below the bottom borderline. Therefore, the bottom borderline may be regarded as the strength limit. The process of fatigue is described in the figure by a linear line, although further investigation may show a different behavior. In the fatigue zone, the linearity is in a reasonable accuracy and it indicates that the strength of each group decreases by the same amount at each impact. The strength is expected to decrease more sharply just before the particle breaks in the breakage zone. The fast decrease of the strength may be shown by modifying the circled symbols. Since in this measure, some of the particles are broken (reached the strength limit), the actual average strength of the group should be much lower than the circled symbol.  The results shown in Population balance calculations count for the change of each particle size fraction. The mass fraction of each particle size is increased by bigger particles breaking to the same size and decreased by particles of that size breaking to smaller ones. For the amount of the particles breaking out of a certain size range, we need to know the selection function or breakage ratio of the particles of the same size. A new empirical model for the breakage ratio (selection function) is developed in the paper. The model determines the breakage ratio as a function of the impact velocity and the number of impacts. Comparison of the model to many experimental results shows a maximum deviation of about 9% that is better than a previous model that present a maximum deviation of 25%. However, the previous model that is based on Weibull distribution is much simpler to use and only one empirical parameter is needed to be defined. By measuring the crush strength of the survived particles after each impact loading, the physical explanation for the breakage ratio is provided. The main cause for the breakage distribution is the initial strength distribution. Each particle is weakening at each impact loading until the strength reaches a critical value and the particle breaks. However, this also suggests that the strength of any particle size depends on the source of the particle, whether it is originally manufactured at this size or has been broken from larger particles. empirical parameter ( particle equivalent diameter, m particle median size, m empirical material function ( empirical parameter ( empirical parameter for empirical parameter for breakage ratio distribution empirical parameters for impact velocity, m/s empirical parameters for median velocity that cause 50% of particles to break, m/s median velocity that cause the median size to reduce to half, m/s median velocity at the first impact, m/s Breakage ratio or selection function Initial Final This research 23/00 was supported by The Israel Science Foundation.