The ejection velocity associated with coal burst is an important parameter for support and protection structure design against coal ejection, as the support or protection design rationale is to dissipate or absorb the kinetic energy carried by ejected coal. This paper provides a novel method to estimate the average particle ejection velocity of rib burst based on the energy dissipation and coal fragmentation of coal brittle failure. This research shows that the scale of kinetic energy released by coal burst in underground roadways can reach over 107 J, which can offer ejected coal with an over 26 m/s initial velocity and cause serious even fatal injury to miners without sufficient protection.Coal burst is always accompanied by a sudden release of accumulated elastic energy, micro seismic events and ejection of a large amount of coal into the roadway or longwall face, which can lead to personnel causalities, equipment damage and even significant economic losses. Rib burst of roadways accounted for a large number of total coal burst accidents occurred in underground coalmines. In Colorado of the U.S., nearly half of the bursts occurred during roadway development or in the roadways. Many researchers have reported using laboratory observations of particle ejection under triaxial or uniaxial compression load to understand the fragmentation behaviour in post-failure process of coal samples and to assess the burst properties of coal in on-site underground mining engineering. In this paper, we present a novel method for ejection velocity estimation based on energy and fragmentation analysis. A new fragment energy calculation function is proposed based on Rittingers's theory and fractal model, which provides a novel mathematical model for the quantitative study of energy dissipation process of coal/rock fragmentation. Based on the energy analysis and fragmentation study, we present a method to estimate the average ejection velocity of coal ejections. Laboratory test is designed to verify the feasibility of this method for the estimation of ejection velocity of coal samples with high burst propensity. Also discussed in this paper is a case study to demonstrate the feasibility of this method for the ejection velocity estimation of rib burst in underground roadways. The method introduced in this paper could further advance our skill in reliably estimating rib burst scale and enable better understanding brittle failure of coal, which can help mining industry to understand the energy scale of coal burst hazards and hence to improve the underground mining safety by addressing sufficient protection and controlling measures. As shown in Hence, according to eq. Most of the elastic energy dissipates in the forms of work during the coal burst process, resulting in the fragmentation and ejection of coal particles. The geophysical energy, which accounts limited portion of the total elastic energy, is dissipated as acoustic or seismic energy. According to Rittingers's theory, Fractal model was appropriately adopted by some researchers to describe the particle size distribution of cylindrical coal samples subject to uniaxial cyclic loading conditions According to volume formula, the equivalent size of total fragments before failure is Plugging eqs. The value of As shown in A total of four samples taken from an Australian local coal mine were tested under uniaxial compression load displacement control. All the coal samples were prepared by a 54 mm diameter coring machine in laboratory. The drilling direction was oriented perpendicular to the joint direction. To maintain the original physical state of the coal, all blocks taken from the site were fully wrapped with aluminium and plastic membranes. Coal cores were processed into 108 mm height coal samples through the process of cutting and polishing the both ends. All other conditions (parallelism, flatness and verticality) of the coal samples should meet the requirements for application of uniaxial compression strength method published by ISRM (International Society of Rock Mechanics) guidelines. A 500-tonne digital hydro-powered Instron universal testing machine was adopted in the test. The vertical displacement of the coal samples was continuously logged by a linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) fixed on the upper loading platen of the machine and then recorded by the controlling system. The loading rate is 0.5 mm/min displacement control. A spherical seat was placed under the coal samples to provide a uniform axial stress distribution on the end of coal sample. The stress-strain curves of these four samples are shown in In the experiment, the failure of coal under uniaxial compression load is brittle and rapid, leading to the production of numerous fragments owing to the sudden release of elastic energy. As shown in It is not clear whether size effect will affect the accuracy of this estimation method as the scale of rib burst is thousands of times of coal samples. A rib burst case occurred in Australian coal mine was selected for case analysis in this paper. On 15 April 2014, a pressure burst occurred in the left hand sidewall at an Australian underground coalmine with 480 to 560 m mining depth.  Based on analysis above and eq. The burst in the ribs of underground roadways is an important coal burst type, which can result in very high ejection velocity of coal blocks or particles. The ejection velocity is a vital parameter for not only support and protection structure design bur also burst scale estimation in burst-prone coal mines. In this paper, we present a novel method to estimate the ejection velocity of coal based on the energy dissipation and fragment size distribution of coal brittle failure. Based on energy dissipation analyses, eq. The method for assessing coal ejection velocity developed in this study can be used as a basis for further research regarding the proper roadway support and protective structure design for use in burst-prone coal mines. Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. The first author would like to express sincere appreciation for the scholarship provided by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at