A short stack composed of two layers with anode-supported SOFCs was operated galvanostatically for 100,000 h. The operating temperature was 700 °C, the current density 0.5 A cm−2 and humidified hydrogen and ambient air were used as gases. Over time, the degradation slope varied and the overall voltage degradation finally amounted to 0.5% per 1000 h. After dismantling the stack all relevant components were post-test analyzed. Here we report on our cell findings. The Ni/8YSZ support, the 8YSZ electrolyte and the perovskitic cathode contact layer appear nearly intact after 11 years. Most of the observed changes/interactions can be attributed to the anode (Ni/8YSZ), the barrier layer (GDC) and the cathode (LSCF). Close to the barrier layer, the cathode is fragmented, elementally disintegrated and Cr poisoning was detected. The GDC also shows some fragmentation close to the cathode and some interaction with chromium. Elements from both layers, the cathode and the barrier, interdiffuse to a certain amount. The fuel electrode displays some foreign phase formation consisting of manganese and aluminium. Additionally, and this was found for the first time in a solid oxide fuel cell stack, Ni enrichment in the anode was observed.The market entry and establishment of solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) and electrolysis cell (SOEC) systems is still limited for two main reasons: the costs are too high and the reliability is not proven for long-term operation with an appropriate number of systems or in minimum stacks. As more and more industrial companies enter the solid oxide cell (SOC) field, the costs can be reduced by (i) the use of larger amounts of the necessary raw materials (which typically reduces purchase prices per kilogram), (ii) implementing scalable processes with high throughput (part costs per unit time), (iii) introducing robotic handling systems, artificial intelligence etc. (thereby reducing personnel costs) and (iv) cutting greenhouse gas emissions thus reducing environmentally based costs (taxes, CO In the last five years, many developers have operated stacks and systems for more than 10,000 h [ The SOFC stack analyzed consisted of two layers in the configuration known as the Jülich F10 design with cells of 100 × 100 mm Two overview SEM micrographs of the entire cell are shown in The contact layer LCC12 was mainly characterized by measuring the elemental distribution over the layer thickness (cf. A closer look at the cathode and its microstructure is given in A detailed analysis by TEM-EDS of the GDC barrier layer indicates some interdiffusion with elements from the cathode (Fe, Sr, La) adjacent to the cathode layer and from the electrolyte (Zr) adjacent to the 8YSZ. Vice versa, Gd and Ce diffuse at short lengths into the LSCF and the interface GDC/8YSZ shows the well-known interdiffusion of these two fluorite phases. However, compared to cells which were only tested in single cell units or which operated for short times, the cells operated for longer times do not show any considerable interdiffusion between GDC and 8YSZ. Thus it is concluded that this interdiffusion only takes place during GDC sintering in the cell manufacturing process. Additionally, two neighboring GDC particles and their grain boundary in the GDC bulk area were characterized by two EDS point analyses in the grains and one EDS line scan across the grain boundary. No foreign elements were detected within the grains or at the grain boundary ( The very tiny particles on the GDC surface and the inner surface of the GDC pores are shown and analyzed in The porosity of the cathode was measured by Fiji image analysis software. As the cathode is only composed of LSCF and pores, the software can easily distinguish between the two phases. In addition to the cell after long-term operation also the pristine cell was characterized. In the pristine cell, the cathode has a porosity of 40.5% ± 2.4% (mean porosity from 10 micrographs). After long-term operation the cell shows a cathode porosity of 45.6% ± 2.2% (also 10 micrographs). On the cathode layer surface, depending on location, a varying amount of SrCrO In From The description of the 8YSZ electrolyte can be kept very brief. The 8YSZ shows no elemental de-mixing over the entire thickness (verified by numerous EDS point analyses) and also no interdiffusion during operation. The interdiffusion of Gd, Ce, Y and Zr during GDC sintering was detected, but there was obviously no additional diffusion after 100,000 h at 700 °C meaning that the 8YSZ electrolyte is still intact. This finding is consistent with the relevant literature (from optical observation and kinetic modelling point of view) [ The fuel electrode was mainly characterized with respect to the microstructure, e.g. the pores, 8YSZ and Ni fraction and the pore size. In Ten SEM micrographs from one cell sample in the same magnification were taken for image analysis to characterize the anode microstructure and possible changes after the 100,000 h test. To compare this microstructure to the initial pristine one, an old cell from the same manufacturing period fabricated using the same materials and the same processing technologies was characterized in a similar manner. As stated in the experimental section, these 10 pictures of each sample were characterized with the Fiji software. Unfortunately, the Ni fraction of the anode and the 8YSZ fraction of the anode appear in the SEM micrographs with nearly the same grey scales so that they cannot be easily distinguished. Details of the exact operation used to distinguish between pores, Ni and 8YSZ are given in the supplementary information. After some picture refinement, the program was able to measure and calculate the individual fractions. Theoretically, the area fraction of Ni in the anode is 32.7% (based on the composition). The pristine sample shows a calculated Ni fraction of 31.95%, which is in very good agreement with the theoretical level (bearing in mind the numerous transformation steps of the SEM micrographs). From this result the authors conclude that the manipulation and calculation provide correct and reliable data. Calculating the Ni fraction in the cell after long-term operation shows an unexpected Ni fraction of 40.22% (!). This means that the amount of Ni is higher in the operated cell than in the pristine sample. The mean pore size in the anode increased by a factor of ~2, which means that small pores were reduced while larger ones increased. This is confirmed by the number of pores per μm The overall porosity shrank from 20 to 18%, but as the amount of Ni was enhanced this could be partly due to Ni migration. The bulk of the cathode contact layer composed of La The La The second cathode area is the bulk, starting underneath the surface down to approx. 2–4 μm above the LSCF/GDC interface. Here the cathode seems to be unaffected with respect to the microstructure or foreign phase formation. It can be seen that after long-term operation the cathode shows a porosity of ~45% while the porosity of the pristine sample is around 40%, but whether this result is an effect of the long operating time or whether the cathode has a slightly higher porosity from the beginning is unclear. We know from our internal quality assurance that the cathode microstructure changes slightly from paste to paste. This depends on various factors such as particle size distribution of the raw powder, viscosity of the paste, temperature and humidity during screen printing. All of the aforementioned parameters influence the cathode microstructure, even if the same printing parameters and printing screens are used. This is an effect of batch manufacturing. In industrial production these batch effects would be minimized. We assume that the porosity of the long-term cell was higher from the beginning because there is no convincing explanation why the LSCF should lose ~10% of its material or should post-anneal as the operating temperature of 700 °C is far lower than the sintering temperature (1080 °C) during manufacturing. The third layer area distinguished in the long-term cell is the border to the GDC barrier layer. Here the microstructure of the LSCF is obviously changed and it appears fragmented (we know that this fragmentation is not present in pristine samples from various microstructural analyses for different reasons – quality control, microstructural investigations after single cell measurement etc.). SEM micrographs, SEM-EDS point analyses, TEM micrographs and related EDS point analyses show two different effects: on the one hand, in many areas Cr was detected as a foreign element and, on the other hand, many LSCF grains show different chemical compositions compared to each other. It seems that either during the long operating time and/or in conjunction with the incorporated chromium, the cathode material reacts with the volatile Cr-oxide/-hydroxide forming different Cr-containing species (even partly pure Sr chromate crystals) and the LSCF grains separate elementally into different chemical equilibrium compositions. It remains unclear whether these remaining (LSCF) grains of different compositions are still perovskites or whether they have reacted to double perovskites or Ruddlesden-Popper structures. X-ray diffraction from the top of the cathode surface was unable to detect the areas close to the barrier layer as the cathode thickness is too great (~40 μm) and similar diffractions on cross sections gave no evidence of any crystal structures other than the original perovskite. However, this result is not surprising as in the cross -sectional view all layers are simultaneously irradiated (from substrate to cathode) and the part of the layer that may have been changed (a few microns) is very small and thus even if the perovskite had deteriorated the resolution of the X-ray diffraction is not sufficient to detect the relatively narrow interface area. What could be clearly detected by X-ray diffraction is that the bulk of the LSCF is unaffected since the crystal lattice parameters of the base material are a = 5.494 Å and c = 13.380 Å and the parameters after long-term exposure of the LSCF a = 5.504 Å and c = 13.390 Å are very similar. It should be noted that the stack operated for a long time with LSCF is the third type of stack that shows Cr-containing species at the border of the cathode and the GDC barrier layer, which contradicts the older published literature. A similar result has been found for stacks with cells having an extremely thin electrolyte (~2 μm) [ The preparation of a very thin FIB lamella (<50 nm) from the cathode to perform EBSD (electron beam backscatter diffraction) in SEM or TEM in order to detect the crystal structure of the LSCF failed due to the high porosity of the layer. Up to now it has proved impossible to prepare such a thin lamella from this highly porous structure. The GDC barrier layer also shows two distinct zones. One ranges from the interface to the 8YSZ electrolyte up to roughly the middle of the bulk layer, while the second is the part between the bulk and the cathode interface. The zone between 8YSZ and GDC shows typical interdiffusion among the two fluorites. As the thickness of the zone is roughly comparable to that of a pristine sample, we conclude that this intermixing simply takes place during cell manufacturing and sintering of the GDC above the 8YSZ. We found no indication that the interdiffusion happens or progresses during long-term exposure. In contrast, the interface between the GDC and the LSCF cathode shows two phenomena: firstly, also a kind of fragmentation and the appearance of numerous tiny crystals, and, secondly, coverage of the inner GDC layer pore surface also with tiny crystals. In addition to Gd and Ce, most of these small crystals also contain Cu, Co, Fe and Cr in varying stoichiometries. These small mixed oxide crystals have never been observed in stack tests before, but the stacks post-test analyzed in Jülich only had test durations of up to approx. 35,000 h. Thus, we conclude that this fragmentation and foreign phase formation only takes place on a very long time scale (>40,000 h). As stated in Refs. [ As the electrolyte shows no special changes, neither interdiffusion/de-mixing nor cracking, nor delamination or foreign phase formation, we expect no perceptible influence from the electrolyte on degradation behavior. In the fuel electrode two differences, compared to a pristine cell, were found: the formation of small grains of foreign phases composed of aluminium and manganese and an enrichment of nickel. The appearance of the small Mn- and Al-containing crystals is not new, but was unexpected as the amount of Mn in the metallic interconnect used is very small. However, the long operating time may permanently promote Mn release from the IC and the deposition and accumulation of the volatile Mn species at the border of the anode/electrolyte. This phenomenon has been observed previously [ The observation of a nickel enrichment was surprising and to the best of our knowledge never observed/published before. It is known from the literature [ Thus, both anode changes, i.e. the formation of small Mn–Al-rich foreign phases and Ni enrichment, lead to reduced anode performance and therefore may be one major cause of the overall degradation of approx. 0.5% per 1000 h. In summary, the measured degradation of approx. 0.5% per 1000 h can be attributed to: i) the Ni enrichment in the anode (fewer triple phase boundaries due to Ni coarsening), ii) interaction of the GDC barrier layer with Cr species resulting in layer fragmentation and surface covering (resulting in enhanced interface resistance) and iii) interaction of the LSCF cathode with Cr species resulting in cathode fragmentation and possibly crystal structure change (not proven). Unfortunately, no conclusions could be drawn about the magnitude of each effect, nor can it be established which effect dominates the degradation during specific operation intervals. A two-plane short stack with anode-supported SOFCs was operated for nearly 100,000 h at 700 °C and a current density of 0.5 A cm  Norbert H. Menzler: manuscript planning, writing, data handling, evaluation of SEM micrographs, transformation into area ratios, data conversion, evaluation and interpretation. Doris Sebold: SEM micrographs, manuscript proof reading. Yoo Jung Sohn: X-ray diffraction, manuscript proof reading. Sebastian Zischke: TEM micrographs, manuscript proof reading. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge Roland Peters (IEK-14, Jülich) for calculating the air velocities, Martina Schiffers and Kevin Kistermann (GfE, RWTH Aachen) for FIB lamella preparation, Dr. David Udomsilp (IEK-1, Jülich) for reading the text and the Jülich post-test analysis group for their regular, stimulating and fruitful discussions. A special acknowledgement goes to Prof. Ludger Blum (Jülich, IEK-14) for his 20 years support, engagement and continuity within the SOC development in Jülich. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at