This paper weaves two interlocking histories together. One strand of the fabric traces the development of the American mathematician Joseph B. Reynolds from a peripheral player to an active contributor to mathematics, astronomy, and engineering and to the founding of a sectional association of mathematicians. The other piece describes the evolution of his institution, Lehigh University, from its founding in 1865 to a full-fledged research department that began producing doctorates in 1939. Both Reynolds and Lehigh straddled the line between the pre- and post-Chicago eras in American mathematics.J.B. Reynolds (1881–1975) and R.L. Moore (1882–1974) were contemporaries who contributed to the emerging American mathematical community in vital ways, yet their contributions reflect entirely different strata within this community. Moore is well known for his eponymous teaching method and pivotal role in the development of topology. He is regarded today as a figure who towered above the American mathematical landscape in the first half of the 20th century [ We exhume Reynolds's record because of his varied productivity in pure and applied mathematics, astronomy, and sundry fields of engineering. Along the way we strive to portray his human side by drawing from his professional writings and diaries, as well as interviews and correspondence with surviving family members. And for the historian it is always refreshing to find a mathematician with an abiding interest in history. Not only did he sign his book on genealogy “Jos. B. Reynolds, Family Historian” [ Reynolds spent all but one year of his academic life at Lehigh, where changes that took place in the 1920s typify the struggle that many American universities endured while attempting to replicate successful programs at the country's leading institutions. The histories of the mathematics departments at most of the latter institutions have been fairly well documented, but not those at emerging departments, so we sketch the history of Lehigh through the first half of the 20th century. (For instance, the three-volume At the turn of the 20th century dramatic changes in higher education transformed the mathematical landscape in the United States from an educational backwater to a legitimate enterprise. The groundbreaking book by Joseph Benson Reynolds was born on May 17, 1881, in Skidmore, near New Castle, the county seat for Lawrence County, located in western Pennsylvania near the border with Ohio. He was the seventh of eight children born to Peter Stafford and Lydia Ann (Kemp) Reynolds, who married in 1865 and lived in a log cabin. In 1872 the family moved into a brick farmhouse they built themselves, where they became expert in farming and stock raising. Deeply held religious beliefs formed the core of their daily existence, with values transmitted to their children so thoroughly that none ever touched a drop of liquor. As another indication, every mention of a Saturday night social event in Reynolds's diaries finds him leaving in time to arrive home by midnight; there is never any mention of frivolity on the Sabbath and only on rare occasions a hint of work, including grading papers or conducting research. Reynolds received his early education at the one-room Painter Hill School and then New Castle High School. His contemporary R.L. Moore also attended a one-room school. Reynolds, however, could only take classes in winter during nonfarming seasons, so he turned 22 just before receiving his diploma in 1903, the first person in his family to graduate from high school. The previous year he earned a Teachers Provisional Certificate for “being a person of good moral character” and passing examinations in 12 subjects, including mental arithmetic, written arithmetic, algebra, and the theory of teaching, which suggests plans to become a high-school teacher. It is unknown whether he harbored loftier ambitions at the time. This brief survey provides the first sign of Reynolds' straddling posture. His farming roots and secondary education reflect an earlier period in American mathematics, but his higher education was a product of emerging trends. He enrolled at Lehigh University on a full scholarship based on a superior performance on the entrance examination in eight subject areas, including algebra, plane geometry, Greek, and Latin. It is natural to ask why Reynolds left his close-knit family for a school located in the eastern part of Pennsylvania, some 350 miles away. After all, the University of Pittsburgh was within 50 miles and in the midst of an exciting period inspired by the grand opening of the Hotel Schenley, while Slippery Rock University was located just 16 miles away. An interview with his nonagenarian daughter, Mrs. Jane Parsons, revealed that Reynolds detested farm work and was anxious to get as far away from it as possible. As a mature student, Reynolds fared very well at Lehigh. He was listed as honorable mention in a university contest conducted toward the end of his freshman year, with grades in mathematics courses of 9.7 (out of 10) in spherical geometry, 8.4 in algebra, and 7.8 in trigonometry. In his sophomore year his grades included a 9.8 in physics, 8.4 in analytic geometry, and 8.6 in calculus. In his final two years, the only mathematics courses he took were least squares and determinants, though he elected related courses in astronomy, analytical mechanics, and physics. As a result of his outstanding performance, he graduated with first honors, a $10 prize for first honors in mathematics, election to Phi Beta Kappa, and selection as salutatorian of the class. Lehigh required all candidates for the A.B. degree to produce a thesis. Reynolds wrote his on “The temperature compensation of the Bond sidereal clock of Sayre Observatory at Lehigh University,” a topic that portended his abiding professional interest in applications of mathematics [ Lehigh University offers a prime example of second-tier departments that initiated plans for graduate programs in the 1920s but did not see them blossom until after World War II. We recount its founding and compare it with two others that emerged contemporaneously, Johns Hopkins and Cornell. We also describe the mathematics curriculum, which was influenced strongly by that of the United States Military Academy at West Point. We then trace the development of upper-level offerings during the 45 years Reynolds was associated with the department, emphasizing the radical change in its mission from his student days at the beginning of the 20th century to the time of his retirement in 1948. Lehigh was founded in 1865 by Judge Asa Packer (1805–1879) to educate “men learned in … careful and exact thought by a due study of the dead languages and mathematics” [ While the founding of Cornell was supplemented by funds from the Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862, neither Lehigh nor Johns Hopkins benefited directly from the act. Unlike Johns Hopkins and Cornell, Lehigh was not named after its benefactor, but the most significant difference was the influence of West Point on staffing and curriculum. Lehigh's first president, Henry Coppée (1821–1895), was an 1845 graduate of the Military Academy who served in the army during the Mexican War and taught at West Point and the University of Pennsylvania before moving to Lehigh in 1866. Besides administrative duties, Coppée taught classes in history, logic, rhetoric, political economy, and Shakespeare, and wrote several elementary textbooks, including one on logic. Faculty appointments of West Point graduates ensured that mathematics would play a central role. The initial Lehigh faculty consisted of five professors, with one in mathematics, mechanics, and engineering (MM&E) and another in physics and astronomy. The first MM&E professor, Edwin Wright Morgan (1814–1869), taught there from the time classes began in the fall of 1866 until his death three years later. An 1837 West Point graduate, he was superintendent of a military institute in Kentucky before coming to Lehigh. Morgan was replaced by Hiero Benjamin Herr (1842–1920; USMA 1866), who had taught at West Point the two previous years. The mathematics and physics departments underwent a dramatic change in 1871, when MM&E became mathematics and astronomy, and physics joined with mechanics. The first professor of physics and mechanics was Lorenzo Lorain (1831–1882; USMA 1856). But Herr remained at Lehigh for only five years, being succeeded by Charles Leander Doolittle (1843–1919), who chaired the department 1874–1895. Doolittle, with no apparent connections to West Point, had received a C.E. degree from the University of Michigan a few months before accepting the Lehigh offer. Known affectionately as “Poppy Doo” by his students, he strengthened the curriculum during his 21-year tenure, in which five of the six instructors he hired were Lehigh graduates and both of his sons served as instructors after receiving their bachelor degrees. Doolittle left in 1895 for the University of Pennsylvania, where he became the Flower Professor of Astronomy the following year. He was succeeded by Charles Lewis Thornburg (1859–1944), who had earned four degrees (B.S., B.E., C.E., and Ph.D.) in four consecutive years (1881 through 1884) at Vanderbilt University, culminating in a dissertation on the transit of Venus. Thornburg became quite ill during his first autumn on campus and tendered his resignation, but the administration refused to accept it, so he returned the next fall in full health and set about modernizing the curriculum. The first two years of the Lehigh curriculum had remained basically the same for all students from 1866 until 1896, requiring courses in mathematics, physics, and chemistry as well as composition and literature, history, drawing, and languages (Latin and German both years, plus Greek the first and French the second); a thesis was required for graduation. By the time Reynolds enrolled in 1903 his texts in geometry, algebra, and trigonometry no longer reflected West Point, earlier popular editions having been replaced by more modern versions. The new model was Chicago, not the Military Academy. The change in mathematics offerings under Thornburg resulted in the curriculum shown in A popular tradition known as the Calculus Cremation tells how Lehigh students felt about their experience in mathematics. It began in the mid-1870s with students hiring bands to play songs set to well-known tunes with lyrics they themselves had composed, but by the next decade it grew into an elaborate torch parade through the streets of Bethlehem, with printed programs distributed to crowds numbering in the thousands. When the parade reached campus, a trial was conducted on an effigy of Calculus, which was dragged into court, confronted by witnesses dressed like professors, and sentenced to death by fire, resulting in a blazing bonfire of calculus books. Unfortunately during the 1890s the affair turned into a drunken orgy and the administration replaced it with a more respectable program restricted to campus. Not surprisingly, student interest waned. An attempt was made during Reynolds's undergraduate days to revive the tradition but the revival never took root and the Calculus Cremation was interred during World War I. The initial fuel for the fire was the popular text by Charles Davies (1798–1876), Lehigh graduate offerings experienced a checkered history. As early as 1873, alumni could remain as “resident graduates” to attend lectures in any department over the next three years free of charge. An 1879 announcement that the university would award master's, Ph.D., and Sc.D. degrees showed the influence of Johns Hopkins, but whereas Hopkins president Daniel Coit Gilman conducted an international search for researchers to lead new programs, Lehigh presidents Henry Coppée and John McDowell Leavitt sought personnel within the Lehigh family. This attempt was clearly misguided. By 1896 only two Ph.D.s had been granted, neither in mathematics, so all doctoral programs were unceremoniously terminated. Nonetheless, the 1879 announcement prodded faculty to offer advanced courses, as reflected in the 1895 catalog description of a two-year program in mathematics consisting of six graduate courses:  First year: spherical astronomy, methods of least squares, numerical calculus. Second year: celestial mechanics, interpolation and quadrature, and computation of orbits and perturbations. Although P.A. Lambert's calculus book was never adopted by his home institution, he spent his entire career at Lehigh after receiving his bachelor's degree. So did Reynolds. He was hired as an instructor in 1907 by department head C.L. Thornburg, who appointed only 6 Lehigh graduates among the 17 new faculty members hired during his 30-year tenure (1895–1925). Although Reynolds complained mildly in his diary about the burden of teaching an 18-hour load, he managed to pursue advanced courses and obtain an M.A. degree in 1910. His transcript shows that between 1907 and 1910 he took only three formal courses, none in mathematics: theoretical astronomy (four credits), practical astronomy (two), and theoretical mechanics (nine). The introduction to his thesis, “The determination of the elements of the orbit of a minor planet: Taunton no. 94, ‘Lehigh,’ ” describes the nature of his work and the naming of the asteroid (then called a “minor planet”) [  Regarding the name of the asteroid, J.H. Ogburn offered to compute its orbit in return for naming rights but Reynolds actually carried out the calculations. Reynolds proceeded to study the asteroid's movement for the next 3 years, resulting in his first three publications, each presenting an ephemeris of the planet in the weekly Although Reynolds seemed to be on course for a career in astronomy, his interest in mathematics had not waned, as he took a one-year course in differential equations (and another in theoretical mechanics) during 1910–1911, the year after receiving his master's degree. The dearth of offerings in mathematics in the Lehigh Valley at that time surely limited his opportunities, yet he showed no interest in pursuing graduate work at the University of Pennsylvania (unlike J.R. Kline, who graduated from nearby Muhlenberg College in 1912, entered Penn the next year, and became R.L. Moore's first Ph.D. student in 1916). Reynolds was unable to take any mathematics courses during 1911–1912 but the next year he enrolled in the second year of the theoretical mechanics sequence. Happily, Lehigh reduced teaching loads uniformly in 1915 to 12 hours (or 13 for those who, like him, taught a four-hour course in mechanics), although class size averaged 20 during the period of higher teaching loads but increased beyond 30 afterwards. The reduction afforded Reynolds time for independent study, which he devoted to vector analysis. There is no clue in his diary for this sudden change in primary interest from astronomy, but the end result was a doctoral dissertation, “The application of vector analysis to plane and space curves, surfaces, and solids” [  The dumbbell: The bowknot: The devil: The practice of awarding doctorates by small colleges is practically nonexistent today, but it thrived up to about 1920. Founded in 1742 as separate boys' and girls' schools, Moravian College did not grant advanced degrees for over a century. A history of the institution states that in 1863 Moravian was “authorized to award a variety of earned degrees, including the doctor of philosophy and the master of arts. In the course of its history about a dozen of the former were granted, mostly to members of the teaching staff” [ Reynolds devoted the minimum amount of time to the program. According to faculty minutes from 18 October 1917, his proposal listed four areas of investigation beyond work he had completed for his master's degree:  A study of Richter's A study of Love's A course in differential geometry offered at Lehigh University. A dissertation titled “The application of vector analysis to plane and space curves, surfaces and solids.” The Moravian faculty minutes concluded, “The work is to cover two years. The charges are to be 25.00 per year and the diploma fee is to be 10.00.” Minutes from 3 April 1919 confirm that Reynolds satisfied all requirements within two years:  Not until the turn of the 20th century did it became widespread practice for doctoral recipients in the U.S. to acknowledge a dissertation supervisor. For instance, at the University of Pennsylvania, Edwin Schofield Crawley (1862–1933) was awarded a doctorate in 1892 with a dissertation composed of papers already published, and he was listed as the supervisor for a dissertation the following year. That turned out to be the only such attribution at Penn in the years 1893 to 1902, but during 1903 to 1924, 16 of the 20 dissertations cited a supervisor. The last one lacking such mention was completed by Perry A. Caris (1890–1966) in 1925. (See the booklet [ Reynolds's dissertation does not list a supervisor but his diary entry from 8 March 1919 records, “Turned in my work for Ph.D. degree this afternoon. Dr. Rau much pleased with thesis.” Albert George Rau (1868–1942), dean of Moravian College from 1909 until his death, was a polymath with a B.S. degree from Lehigh (1888) and Ph.D. from Moravian (1910) in economic sociology. He published books on the history of 19th-century Europe (1898) and on music by American Moravians (1938), as well as many monographs on colonial history. He and Reynolds became charter members of the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) when it was formed in late 1915. They both solved Degree in hand, and already 38 years old, Reynolds set about establishing academic credentials. He had published but one paper, in the Reynolds's production increased markedly from 1923 to 1927 as the result of a critical event that occurred when Charles Russ Richards, Dean of Engineering at the University of Illinois, assumed the Lehigh presidency in 1922. Richards sent word to the faculty at once that “there was going to be a change and that we could expect to leave off being a small college and become a university; that members of the Faculty would be expected to do research work” [ The other notable event from the fall of 1925 linking Reynolds with Bennett, as well as J.R. Kline, was the founding of an MAA section. A recent paper [  The years 1922 to 1927 were critical for Lehigh and for Reynolds's career. His work before then put him in league with those mathematical enthusiasts who filled 19th-century journals with small papers and contributed vigorously to their problem sections. But he adapted well to the charge set out by President Richards, as can be seen in a key diary entry from 2 February 1925 that encapsulates the president's view of professionalism and Reynolds's stature within that view:  Richards was a man of his word, and a year later Reynolds was on his way to Princeton as guest professor. The experience in upper-level graduate courses offered by world-class scientists would affect Reynolds deeply for the rest of his life. One can only wonder what he might have accomplished if he had been afforded such an educational opportunity at age 20 instead of 45. Interestingly, Reynolds thrived in the engineering courses, notably one from the fall of 1926 conducted by George Erle Beggs (1883–1939), a civil engineer who applied his method for predetermining stress resistance to the construction of the Arlington Memorial Bridge and the towers of the Golden Gate Bridge. He also studied spectroscopy under Henry Norris Russell (1877–1957), whose pioneering use of atomic physics for analyzing stars played a principal role in laying the foundations for modern astrophysics. The following spring Reynolds took a course on the theory of X-rays with Arthur Holly Compton (1892–1962), who would be awarded the Nobel Prize in physics that fall for his experiments on the intensity of X-ray reflection from crystals, resulting in what is known in quantum physics today as the “Compton effect” or “Compton scattering.” While Reynolds found these courses stimulating, his experience in mathematics was somewhat disappointing. On the one hand, his diary contains regular complaints about the obscurity of Wedderburn's lectures on algebra, as well as occasional gripes about the inaccessibility of Veblen's seminar on differentiable geometry. Fortunately guest lectures to the mathematics club by such luminaries as Herman Weyl, Alfred Haar, and Dirk Struik provided a helpful counterbalance, so overall Reynolds found Princeton exhilarating and rewarding. Richards was delighted with Reynolds's performance at Princeton and promoted him to Professor of Mathematics and Theoretical Mechanics. That position came with new responsibilities, however, one of which took effect immediately upon his return to campus in June 1927, when he taught a six-week course in mathematical surveying to a group of engineering students that involved living in a tent at a camp on mountains about two hours from Lehigh. As he had done at Princeton, Reynolds commuted in his new Essex car every Monday morning and Friday afternoon. Beginning in the fall of 1927 Reynolds put his Princeton experience to good use in investigations that resulted in numerous papers and books in mathematics and engineering. His work at the interface of engineering and mathematics soon resulted in an invitation to present his views at a distinguished conference.  Reynolds continued to publish in both mathematical and engineering journals from the time of the Cornell conference up to World War II. Given his practical bent and engineering expertise, it is somewhat surprising that he never participated directly in either world war, unlike Bennett, for example, who volunteered in both. In 1945 the 64-year-old Reynolds was appointed head of the department, a position he held for three years until his retirement. Minutes from a meeting of the Pi Mu Epsilon student chapter held a couple of months before his retirement state that he was the guest of honor and that he “gave an account of the progress and amusing events he has seen take place in the more than forty-one years he has been associated with Lehigh University” [ Following retirement, Reynolds moved to Sugar Run, PA, a rural town located 115 miles northwest of Bethlehem. He remained there until his death in December 1975, a fact not recorded in the In 1908 Reynolds married the former Chloey Bessie Graham (1881–1971), a high-school graduate who had been a teacher in New Castle. They had three children: Peter Graham (1909–1995), Jane Niblock (b. 1913; married Rev. William A. Parsons in 1938), and Joseph Benson Jr. (1920–1992). (See Problems played a central role in almost every 19th-century mathematics journal in America. The only such journal still flourishing today,  Problem 309. The tangent at one cusp of a vertical, three arched hypocycloid is horizontal, and a particle will just slide under gravity from the upper cusp to this cusp. Find the equation which the coefficient of friction must satisfy. Problem 384. In what time will a sum of money double itself at 6 per cent interest per annum if compounded at indefinitely short intervals? Reynolds was smitten by the problems bug. Later issues in 1915 acknowledge correct solutions to three problems, with one proposed by Finkel appearing in print. The next year, when the Those who regard problems as lowly exercises would probably assign Problem 384 to this lot, but Problem 309 is of a different ilk. Cajori wrote, “This solving of problems is very beneficial at first, but it becomes a waste of time if one confines himself to that sort of work” [ If Reynolds's claim to fame was only as a section organizer and problemist, there would be little reason to profile his contributions to American mathematics. We regard him, however, as an accomplished mathematician who served as liaison with the engineering community in the first half of the 20th century. It is important to emphasize that he was not a first-class research mathematician; he neither published in a major research journal nor presented a paper at an AMS meeting. Even participation in MAA affairs was with the section he helped found and not the national association. However, he presented invited papers at a national engineering society, which places him again at the interface of mathematics and engineering. Reynolds's original investigations in several different fields display an impressive versatility, beginning with the period 1910–1921. This can be seen in a small note in the The transitional period 1922–1927 saw Reynolds's output increase substantially. In 1923 two A paper from 1925 foreshadowed an interest in methods of calculating area and volume, adopting clever methods for computing volumes of pyramids, spheres, and surfaces of revolution using limits intuitively but no other concepts from calculus [ Reynolds engaged in none of these lower sorts of publication after his sabbatical. From the time he returned to Lehigh in June 1927 until he retired 21 years later, he published 12 papers on mathematical topics, 13 in engineering, and 5 textbooks on calculus and mechanics, one of which ran to three editions. The remainder of this section presents a chronological overview of his contributions in each of these realms—mathematics, engineering, and textbooks. Within mathematics, Reynolds published five papers in the Reynolds wrote only two papers in pure mathematics in the 1930s. One was a The Reynolds's contributions to engineering were remarkably varied, featuring numerous works in fields developing in the 1930s, some co-authored with colleagues in various departments and others with industrial engineers. By contrast, all of his writings in mathematics were solitary efforts. His collaborative efforts in engineering were foreshadowed by two papers in the 1920s that highlight his ability to publish in nontraditional venues. The short “How to find the contents of storage tanks” was coauthored with a Lehigh chemical engineer, which explains why it appeared in Reynolds's remaining papers concerned topics in automotive, agricultural, chemical, and civil engineering. One on stresses endured by truck frames was written with the engineer in charge of trailers at Mack Trucks, a subsidiary of International Motor Corporation [ A diary entry from 4 June 1926 notes the difficulty all scholars face when attempting to publish outside their immediate specialty. Reynolds reports that he asked a colleague “where to send [my] paper on twisted drills that the This book was the last of the five texts Reynolds wrote, four of them on mechanics. (See Reynolds wrote one other text, a standard calculus book co-authored with his Allentown-born colleague Frank Mark Weida (1891–1977) that was adopted at Lehigh for a short while [ Joseph Benson Reynolds was 22 years old when he graduated from high school and 38 when he was awarded a doctorate from Moravian College, hardly the typical background of a successful research mathematician. After his doctorate he initially seemed content with being a mathematical enthusiast who savored problem solving and applications to engineering. However, in 1922 his institution, Lehigh, brought in a new president with a charge to transform the institution from a college to a university, a radical change that required faculty members to publish as well as teach. Reynolds adapted particularly well to the transformation, which is especially impressive in view of his limited formal education. Yet it was his exposure to world-class scientists during a sabbatical year at Princeton—at the educationally advanced age of 45—that profoundly influenced the rest of his life. Until this point, Reynolds had taken only four courses beyond calculus, two at the undergraduate level (least squares, determinants) and two in graduate school (differential equations, differential geometry), all at Lehigh. But the research initiatives of the mathematicians Veblen and Wedderburn, the engineer Beggs, the astrophysicist Russell, and the physicist Compton stimulated him to write 12 papers in mathematics, 13 co-authored works in engineering, and 5 textbooks over the final 20 years of his career. All the while he engaged in It is difficult to characterize Reynolds within the history of mathematics in the United States in the first half of the 20th century. His case is not as simple as, say, R.L. Moore's, who spent the first part of his career as a researcher and the second as a mentor. Moore, and his doctoral students, published in the leading journals (even in Europe), presented invited papers at national meetings, and held the highest offices in the AMS and MAA. Reynolds certainly does not fit this mold. He published no papers in mathematics research journals (at least one was rejected by the Reynolds's work in mathematics followed an evolutionary path, even if his university, Lehigh, radically reinvented itself. Likewise, his contributions to mechanics evolved from classroom assignments that began in 1915 and continued to World War II. His engineering papers were written with many coauthors across a range of disciplines, most resulting from regular contact with colleagues in various departments, a common occurrence in midsize universities. In this way Reynolds emerged as a sort of mathematical consultant for engineers, reminiscent of T.H. Gronwall, who was portrayed in this role so convincingly in [ In attempting to characterize Reynolds, it is useful to adapt The author gratefully acknowledges the help he received from Lehigh curators Philip A. Metzger and Ilhan Citak, Lehigh registration assistant Judith Petrick, and Moravian archivist Jan Ballard. He is very appreciative for the interviews he was able to conduct with Reynolds's daughter Jane Parsons and her children Ruth and David. He is indebted to Mrs. Parsons for providing him unrestricted access to her father's diaries and to Ruth Parsons for serving as tour guide to the family's home in Sugar Run. Finally, the author extends sincerest thanks to Joseph H. Reynolds, grandson of our Joseph B. Reynolds, for providing much personal information about his paternal grandfather. Listed below are the majority of works by Joseph B. Reynolds. The list is complete for papers published in mathematics journals but may be missing some items from engineering journals that we are unaware of.