In this contribution, we demonstrate a low cost, scalable, flexible and reproducible multifunctional sensor developed by dry drawing pencil traced graphitic track on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) sheet. Characterization of the graphitic tracks on PET is performed using X-ray diffractometry, Raman spectroscopy and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy techniques. The graphitic tracks by varying number of drawing iterations showed electrical tunable resistance characteristics. As an acoustic vibration sensor, the sensing platform displayed the sensitivity of 1.23 × 10−3 Hz−1, current switching capability of 1.0:1.35 at 150 Hz added with an acceptable response time of 37 ms. It has shown considerable electrical resistance change in response to human muscle movement. Resistance change with strain was measured by motorized force and torque tester. The present sensor has a capability to replace existing high-cost sensors employed for the same applications.The necessity of multifunctional thin and flexible sensors having high sensitivity is huge and the challenges faced in order to achieve high sensitivity added with low-cost fabrication techniques are always been the center of interest of many research groups all over the globe. In particular, the vibration and muscle strain sensors have gained huge importance because of their widespread range of potential applications in various scientific and engineering domains. Recently, carbon and metal nanomaterials-based, low cost, thin, portable and efficient sensing devices The tracks of graphite flakes have been prepared by simply dry drawing (20 times) the pencil over a polymer sheet. Electrical resistance of the graphitic tracks for different iterations of pencil dry drawing over the PET sheet was carried out using conventional multi-meter and the results were correlated with geometrical dimensions of the graphitic track. In order to quantify parameters such as width and height of the graphitic track, both optimal microscopy (Olympus Microscopy, Model BX53, Perkin Elmer) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, Hitachi 3400N) techniques were employed. The considerable variation in electrical resistance after each drawing iteration can be utilized for the preparation of resistances with desired electrical resistance. Afterwards, both ends of the developed platform were extended through conducting copper wires and silver adhesive. In order to test the device as acoustic vibration sensor, the sensing film was placed in close vicinity of the speaker connected to an audio oscillator. The applicability of the same sensing platform is further extended for sensing right-hand muscle movements. In order to test the device as a strain sensor, mechanical actuation is provided by motorized force and torque tester (Model ESM303, Mark-10). The electrical data was recorded using Keithley 2400 source meter. In order to understand the structural and compositional nature of graphitic traces, X-ray diffraction (Miniflex60, Rigaku), Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (Shimadzu 1S) and Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw 1000) techniques were employed. Digital camera photograph of the developed sensing platform (graphitic track on PET film) is shown in The graphitic tracks traced on the PET substrate can be used as the simple tunable resistor, whose resistance strongly depends on number of pencil drawing on PET sheet. The graphitic film-based platform can be used to sense minute audio frequency signals.   The strain was calculated using equation ɛ′ = d/2r, where ɛ′ represents bending strain, d represents the thickness of substrate and r is the bending radius. The device was placed between two clamps, one movable and the other fixed. The strain was increased gradually as the machine actuates the moving clamp causing outwards movement of the strip and tensile strain comes into picture, which leads to the separation of graphite sheets and thus increases the resistance The magnitude of the curvature varies with the speed of the actuator and the strain is calculated with the variation in bending radius. The study was further continued in order to effectuate the ability of the graphitic track to sense the strain induced by hand muscle movement. Closing of hand (stage II in The present study successfully demonstrates the exploration of graphite pencil traces over PET sheet as a tunable electrical resistor, acoustic vibration sensor, strain sensor and movement sensor. As a tunable resistor, the resistivity of the graphitic track was found to be a strong function of the number of layers traced over PET film. The capability of the developed platform was further tested for vibration sensing and muscle movement monitoring applications. The percentage change in the relative current change at 150 Hz was measured to be 56% and the approximate response time was clocked at 37 ms. The device had a maximum sensitivity of 1.23 × 10 Suresh Kumar would like to gratefully thank and acknowledge Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 