Nanostructured Cu98Cr2–W composite powder was synthesized by high-energy ball milling and consolidated by spark plasma sintering (SPS). For comparison, pure Cu and Cu98Cr2 composite were also prepared under similar condition. Phase and microstructural characterization was carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Hardness, wear property and electrical conductivity of the composite was evaluated and compared with pure Cu and Cu98Cr2 composite. The Cu98Cr2–W composite, show ~5% and ~21% higher hardness compared to Cu98Cr2 and pure Cu respectively. It also shows significant improvement in wear property and electrical conductivity, which makes the newly developed composite a potentially better candidate for high voltage circuit breaker application over existing Cu–Cr based composites. Development of metal matrix composites (MMCs) draws an overwhelming research interest due to the property combinations that are unattainable in the pure state of either constituent [ Recently Cu–Cr composites have found widespread applications in medium voltage circuit breaker and for contact cable applications, owing to its superior strength-conductivity combinations [ Prosviryakov et al. [ In the present study, hardness, electrical conductivity and wear resistance W particle dispersed Cu–Cr matrix composite prepared by a combination of high energy ball milling, and SPS was evaluated and compared with base the Cu and Cu–Cr composite. Starting materials were pure (>99% purity, 50–100 μm particle size) elemental powders of Cu, Cr and W. These powders were mixed in determining the quantity to get a nominal composition of Cu-2 at. % Cr-1wt. %W and loaded into tungsten carbide vial. Milling media was 10 mm diameter tungsten carbide balls. Mechanical milling was carried out in a Fritsch pulverisette-5 mill with the ball to powder weight ratio 10:1. Since Cu is very ductile, toluene was added as a process control agent to avoid excessive oxidation and cold welding of the powder with vial and balls. MM was performed for 30 h. During milling, powder samples were collected at regular intervals for phase analysis. Phase and structure of as-milled powder are examined by x-ray diffraction (XRD, X'Pert PRO, PANalytical) with CuKα incident radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm). The crystallite size (d For detailed microstructural investigation and compositional analysis, the as-milled Cu Ground and the polished pellets were also studied by TEM and EDS. SPSed samples were cut into 3 mm disk and mechanically thinned by 2000# abrasive paper to 20 μm thicknesses for the TEM investigation. Final thinning was done by ion milling (GATAN Precession Ion Polishing System Model-691). The average hardnesses of the SPSed pellets were measured with the help of Vickers microhardness tester (LECO LM700), using 30 g load and 10s dwell time. At least 10 indents were taken and averaged out for getting the average hardness value, and the corresponding standard deviations were noted for comparison. The density of the sintered compacts was measured through the Archimedes principle. Tribological behaviours of the samples were measured by (ball-on-plate type wear tester (DUCOM TR-208-M1). The wear tracks were studied with a field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, NOVA NANO SEM 450, FEI). Electrical resistivity of the sintered pellets was measured by van der Pauw four-probe method [ The XRD patterns at different stages of the as-synthesized powders are presented in Since, the average crystallite size evaluated from the XRD peak broadening is an estimate only, TEM investigation of the samples were carried out to ascertain the particle size and its distribution in the as synthesized composite powder. The bright field (BF-TEM) micrograph of as milled composite powder and corrosponding selected area (electron) diffraction (SAD) pattern is shown in The XRD patterns of SPSed Cu, Cu The measured density and hardness of the consolidated samples are presented in The variation of coefficient of friction is presented in The electrical resistivity of the metal based on the Matthiessen's rule can be expressed as [ The salient conclusions of the present research work are summarized here: Hard metal (W) dispersed Nanostructure Cu Successive Spark plasma sintering at 300 °C for 10 min is effective to form dense (8.96 g/cc) products from mechanically alloyed powder mixture which yields excellent combination of mechanical and electrical properties The matrix phase undergoes significant grain growth during sintering; the isolated hard metal dispersion does not undermine noticeable change in particle size or distribution. Addition of 1 wt% nano-W particle results an increase in hardness by 21% (from 111 HV The present approach makes it a choice of material for high voltage electrical applications. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.