Crystallization kinetics of lithium aluminosilicate glass powder has been investigated by model-free and model–fitting methods. Non-isothermal experiments were carried out using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) to monitor crystallization behavior. Model-free activation energy has been calculated based on Ozawa-Flynn-wall (OFW), Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose (KAS) and Friedman (FR) methods during crystallization progress. Although activation energy does not significantly differ between the models (400–470 kJ/mol), partial Avrami coefficient n(α) varies considerably with rate and crystallization progress. A better description of the crystallization behavior could be observed by the comparison of model-free and model fitting methods. The conformity of one model has been approved with comparison of theoretical DSC curve and experimental results. Finally, a model which can more accurately describe the crystallization behavior of this material was suggested.Since the discovery of glass-ceramics by Stookey in the 1950s [ Glass-ceramics are a product of crystal nucleation and growth of a glassy material. The nucleation and growth rate always relate to kinetics and therefore with the concept of activation energy. Crystallization kinetic of glass-ceramics can be investigated isothermally or non-isothermally [ The main objective for the crystallization process is the determination of the kinetic parameters such as activation energy (E), pre-exponential factor (A), and reaction model. These parameters are known as kinetic triplet and can be used to identify the crystallization process mechanism [ In numerous studies, crystallization behavior of lithium aluminosilicate glass-ceramics has been investigated in presence of different additives. A wide range of 47–550 kJ/mol is reported for crystallization activation energy. The authors mostly have used non-isothermal methods based on simple model-fitting methods. Used methods and calculated activation energy in different studies are summarized in Obviously using different methods in literature, activation energy cannot be easily compared. Avrami exponent (n) is mostly estimated based on Augis & Bennett equation (Eq. Ambiguity of choosing optimum parameters has leaded the researchers to develop an easy, decisive method. Model-free method has been used recently to omit the previous uncertainties. Needless of the prior knowledge of the reaction mechanism, model-free methods concluded to be a reliable method to determine kinetic triplet of thermally activated complex processes. The application of these methods requires a series of non-isothermal DSC experiments performed under different heating rates [ Combination of model-free and model-fitting methods helps to comprehend the best way to explain the crystallization mechanism and choose the best model for describing crystallization phenomena. In previous study, microstructure, dielectric properties and crystallization behavior of this lithium aluminosilicate sintered glass-ceramics was studied [ Commercially available glass composition was used in this study. The glass composition of 13.2Li Glass frit was prepared through melting lithium carbonate (Himfarm, medical grade, Russia), fused silica (Jiangso, 99.8%, China), aluminum oxide (Sigma-aldrich, 99.5%, USA), zinc oxide (Merck, Research grade, Germany) and barium carbonate (Merck, Research grade, Germany) at around 1570 °C in a gas hand-made furnace. The glass melt was quenched in distilled water, and milled down to a mean particle size of around 2.5 μm using a planetary mill (Retsch pm400, Germany) with zirconia medial and balls (diameter of 3 mm) [ For each DSC analysis (NETZSCH DSC 404C, Germany), 40 mg powder was used. All experiments were done up to 900 °C with five different heating rates (2, 5, 10, 15, 20 °C/min). Each heating rate was repeated 3 times to have more reliable data. The crystallization progress has been normalized regarding the total area under peak. A linear base line was chosen for DSC peaks to distinguish the total peak area [ For a non-isothermal method to analyze the crystallization peaks with a DSC, typically various heating rates are used. The DSC crystallization peaks are shown in Crystallization progress parameters have been investigated from 5% crystallization up to 95% with step size of 5% for kinetic investigation. Details of DSC results are summarized in Area under peak depicts the crystallization progress, therefore integrating from the onset temperature of crystallization peak to desired temperature can shows the amount of conversion ( Depending on heating rate onset of crystallization would shift and when mostly half of the material is crystallized (αm around 50%), rate of crystallization decline ( Model fitting methods are known for their simplicity in providing the kinetics triplet though they suffer from inability to establish a unique model for whole reaction [ α is the fraction of crystalline phase and for Solving Eq. The rate equation can be solved if and only if the function f(α) is known and remains constant for the entire reaction which rarely exists in the real case for solid state reactions [ This integral is called “temperature integral” in kinetics literature and has no analytical solution but several approximations. One of the most popular model fitting methods is introduced by Coats-Redfern [ Activation energy and pre-exponential factor can be figured from plot of Different activation energy and pre-exponential factor (A) are observed related to the applied model and consequently for the applied crystallization mechanism. Similar behavior is reported in other studies [ For the studied case, the highest value of correlation coefficient is approved with applying chemical reaction models Solely statistical data of curve fitting is not enough to judge the model and consequently mechanism of crystallization. It can be concluded for determination of corresponding model, either mechanism should be known in advance or activation energy should be calculated from other independent methods. Therefore optimum model could be chosen with the nearest value to real activation energy and highest correlation coefficient. Traditionally Kissinger and Ozawa methods are commonly used for investigation of crystallization kinetics triplets as simplest model fitting methods. Kissinger is a model-fitting method for nth order chemical reaction For the first order reaction i.e. Matusita et al. developed a model based on advancement of crystallization by a nucleation and growth process. In addition to activation energy, Matusita's method provides information about Avrami coefficient and dimensionality of growth [ As shown in A plot of Avrami coefficient (n) is not a constant value but decreased with increasing the temperature or in the other word with crystallization completion. So there would be an ambiguity for choosing the n coefficient relying on classical model fitting methods. The crystallization proceeds through heterogeneous reactions with nucleation and growth mechanism [ Many authors have used model fitting methods to study kinetics of crystallization for various types of amorphous materials. Vyazovkin and Wight demonstrated that model-fitting methods are not reliable procedures to determine the Arrhenius parameters [ Recently model-free methods have been developed which help to determine activation energy of thermally activated complex processes without any knowledge about reaction mechanism. The application of these methods requires a series of non-isothermal experiments performed under different heating rates [ The rate of conversion from amorphous to crystalline phase The second part on the right-hand side of above equation is zero because at α = const, f (α) is constant. Adding the first readily derives from Eq. Integration of Eq. These three methods are isoconversional i.e. the activation energy can be determined for any reaction progress, even when the function f(α) is not known. The apparent activation energy has been extracted from the DSC experiments featured in The value of activation energy (E Higher activation energy values are achieved from KAS method, however KAS and OFW method has a difference less than 1.5%. Resemblance of data for these two methods is reported by other researchers [ As already mentioned above, apparent activation energy of crystallization has a declining trend in all methods. Such a decreasing trend has been already observed for other glass compositions [ By FR method the activation energy at α = 5% is determined much higher than its average. Omitting the activation energy value of α = 5% for FR method, the standard deviation would be approximately ±13% for FR method and ±7% for KAS, OFW methods. R-squared values are mentioned In Selecting the most fitted model according to highest r-squared value could mislead to selection of improper model. Therefore prior knowledge of activation energy could help to choose the best fitted model. Using model-free methods activation energy can be calculated without any knowledge of crystallization mechanism. Hence relying on activation energy from model-free method and highest r-squared value from model-fitting method, Avrami-Erofeev model Furthermore using calculated activation energy, Avrami exponent and best fitted model, DSC curves can be replotted. DSC curves are plotted from single point traditional model-fitting method and partial values of model-free methods to compare their accuracy. In this study two value of n = 4 and 3 (4: bulk crystallization, 3: 3d surface crystallization) and activation energy from Kissinger method are investigated which represent model-fitting method. On the other hand partial n values of model-free method and partial activation energy can be used for model-free method. Trustworthiness of local Avrami Exponent and chosen fitted model is evaluated by calculating theoretical DSC curves based on kinetic equation [ Local Avrami exponent, n(a), which was defined by Calca et al. [ Local Avrami exponent, n(α), is plotted from Eq. Variation of Avrami coefficient represents variation of mechanism during crystallization. The surface crystallization mechanism will be dominated when Avrami coefficient is less than 3 and n more than 3 stands for bulk crystallization [ DSC curves are plotted theoretically based on kinetics parameters. Calculations are done form 1–99% crystallization with a constant Avrami coefficient of 3 and 4, activation energy from Kissinger method and from the other side with Partial Avrami coefficient and activation Energy ( The model-free methods Ozawa-Flynn-Wall (OFW), Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose (KAS) and Friedman (FR) were used as well as model fitting methods to evaluate crystallization kinetics of lithium aluminosilicate glass ceramics containing TiO Model-fitting methods were done for comparison and investigation of the best model for describing the crystallization progress. A result of model free methods depict the apparent activation energy is changed slightly during crystallization with temperature. As a consequence the whole crystallization cannot be described by a single model. However Avrami-Erofeev model is chosen as a predominant model for describing the crystallization behavior of this material mathematically. Considering the partial Avrami coefficient and apparent activation energy theoretical DSC curves are recalculated. A reasonable coincidence between model-free theoretical calculation and experimental data confirm usefulness of model-free methods as powerful tool for simulation. Using the model-free method without prior knowledge of crystallization mechanism combined with model fitting methods can help to find the crystallization mechanism. Partial Avrami coefficient shows bulk crystallization is predominant mechanism and it changes especially at the final stages of process which is shown in different studies as effectiveness of TiO Experiments are done by H.R. Savabieh under supervision of F. Clemens and P. Alizadeh. The manuscript was written through contributions of H.R. Savabieh, P. Alizadeh, B. Nayebi and F. Clemens. The authors declare no competing financial interest. The authors are grateful to the