Poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC)-based membranes of N,N-bis-succinamide-based dendritic molecule with tetrabutyl ammonium bromide (TBAB) as a cation inhibitor and dibutylphthalate (DBP), dioctylphthalate (DOP), dibutyl (butyl) phosphonate (DBBP) and 1-chloronaphthalene (CN) as plasticizing solvent mediators were prepared and used as nitrate ion-selective electrodes. Optimum performance was observed with the membrane having I–PVC–TBAB–DBP in the ratio 1:33:1:65 (w/w). The electrode has a linear response to nitrate with a detection limit of 3.9×10−5
                     ±0.07M and Nernstian compliance (57.0±0.2mV/decade) between pH 2.8 and 9.6 with a fast response time of about 20s. The selectivity coefficient values of the order of 0.001 for mono-; bi- and trivalent anions; indicate high selectivity for nitrate ions over these anions. The preparation procedure of the electrode is very easy and inexpensive. The electrodes were used over a period of 45 days with good reproducibility. The analytical usefulness of the proposed electrode has been evaluated by its application in the determination of nitrate ions in waste water samples.The development of potentiometric membrane-based anion sensors with analytical useful selectivity remains a formidable challenge. Indeed, there are relatively few types of lipophilic ionophores, required for preparation of such sensors that display significant preference for one anion over others Dendrimers are perfect and unified macromolecules with regular and highly branched architectures that are obtained from a repetitive procedure. They are characterized by the presence of a large number of functional groups on the surface which results in solubility, viscosity, and thermal behaviors different from those of more classical polymers. They are also characterized by the presence of internal cavities which can be functionalized and by a core that does or does not bear functional groups. While they have found their potential applications in the fields of molecular electronics, material science (high performance polymers, catalysts, adhesives, etc.), the field of membrane chemistry still remain unattended, though, their unique structures make them suitable candidates for host–guest chemistry. Multiple identical end groups allow multiple binding of guest molecules at the periphery, which can lead to specific molecular recognition. Thus, in the recent years there has been considerable interest in the incorporation of functional units on the surface or in the interior core of the dendrimer so as to generate supramolecular assemblies having applications in chemical sensors This compound has earlier been tried to develop an iodide sensor All reagents used were of analytical reagent grade and were used without further purification; high molecular weight poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) were obtained from Aldrich, USA, tetrabutyl ammonium bromide (TBAB), BDH, England, dibutylphthalate (DBP); and dioctylphthalate (DOP), Reidel India; dibutyl (butyl) phosphonate (DBBP), Mobil, USA, 1-chloronaphthalene (CN); E. Merck, Germany and tetrahydrofuran (THF) was obtained from Ranbaxy, India. Carbonate, bicarbonate, bromide, chloride, iodide, fluoride, acetate, sulphate, sulphite, nitrate, phosphate, nitrite, dichromate, permanganate, etc. solutions were prepared from sodium or potassium salts and were obtained from Ranbaxy, India. N,N-bis-succinamide-based dendritic molecule used as the ionophore (I) in this work was synthesized by Chandra et al. Potentiometric measurements were carried out on a Mettler Toledo pH/ion analyser (model MA235). The membranes were prepared by adding THF (5–10 Proper equilibration of a membrane, to be used as a sensor, is essential for generating stable and reproducible potentials and to avoid long response time. It is necessary to optimize the concentration of the contacting solution and the time required for complete equilibration. The membranes were found to be equilibrated within 3–5 days in 1.0 A fixed concentration of NO In preliminary experiments, the potentiometric response of the plasticized PVC membrane electrode based on ionophore to various anions was measured. In the presence of the proposed carrier, the optimized membranes demonstrated Nernstian response and remarkable selectivity for nitrate anion over a wide variety of anions. The potentiometric response curves obtained for individual metal ions with ionophore under identical conditions are given in The potentiometric response characteristics of nitrate ion sensor based on N,N-bis-succinamide-based dendritic molecule as electroactive material, with various plasticizers; DBP ( The influence of measuring solution pH on the potentiometric response of the membrane electrode was examined at 1 The practical response time of the sensor was calculated by measuring the time required to achieve 95% of the equilibrium potential from the moment of addition of 1.0 The membranes were used over a period of 45 days without significant change in potentials. Whenever a drift in potential was observed, membranes were re-equilibrated with 1.0 The stability (chemical and structural) of an ionophore over a time under operational conditions is a very important characteristic and is very well studied using potentiometry The most important characteristic of any anion selective electrode are its response for the primary ion in the presence of other anions. The selectivity is defined in terms of potentiometric selectivity coefficient, defines the ability of an ion-selective electrode to distinguish between different ions in the same solution. The potentiometric selectivity coefficient The order of selectivity coefficient values has been found to be: The selectivity pattern clearly shows a deviation from conventional Hofmeister anion response pattern for highly lipophilic anions. The deviation from the Hofmeister series resulted from the unique interactions between the ionophore and anions, rather than hydration free energy of the anions. Most of the interfering ions showed low values of selectivity coefficients (∼10 In The developed nitrate sensor has also been used for determination of nitrate in several water samples. The determination of nitrate ion is important in water industry as more and more water supplies are becoming polluted with it. This nitrate comes from various anthropogenic sources of which industrial wastes related to agricultural fertilizers, food processing, munitions are very common. Also the disposal from septic tanks, oxidation of ammonia in sewage works contributes to the high level of nitrates in water. Three samples from local industrial wastes were collected, filtered and stored without any further pretreatment. The analyses were performed by direct potentiometry using calibration plot and the results showed the nitrate content in the waste water obtained from triplicate measurements with the sensor was found to be in agreement with that determined spectrometry ( The results demonstrate the usefulness of the N,N-bis-succinamide-based dendritic molecule as selective ionophore for the quantification of nitrate ion through ion-sensors. The electrode is more selective towards nitrate in contrast to several commercial and a number of the recently reported electrodes. The electrode can be used over a wide pH range, 2.8–9.6, which makes it useful for measurements in different samples and also in certain alkaline conditions. The electrode shows good response characteristics (sensitivity, stability, life time and response time). Author (BS) is grateful to