In this study, recovery of vanadium and gallium from solids waste by-products (vanadium sludge and electrofilter dust of calcination plant) of Bayer process was investigated. An efficient purification process was developed based on the removal of impurities such as phosphate by water leaching, neutralisation using CO2-enriched air and addition of aluminate solution. Recovery of V2O5 from the purified solution via the precipitation of ammonium metavanadate, its conversion into polyvanadate by the addition of ammonium sulphate and sulphuric acid, respectively, and then the ignition of the latter at 560°C was demonstrated. Effects of various parameters on the purification and precipitation processes were shown. A treatment process involving sintering and two-stage of carbonisation was also demonstrated to produce a Ga-rich precipitate. A gallate solution suitable for electrolysis of Ga was also shown to be prepared from this precipitate. A complete flowsheet was proposed for the treatment of vanadium sludge and electrofilter dust.Gallium is an important metal with extensive application in high-tech industries ( Previous studies have concentrated essentially on the recovery of Ga from leach solutions in that solid wastes received only very limited attention. Electrofilter dust of calcination plant is a waste product produced during the calcination of alumina and contains a significant amount of gallium. However, most studies appeared to focus on the recovery of aluminium rather than gallium from electrofilter dust and Bauxite ores also contain vanadium at appreciable levels ( In this study, research and development of environmentally acceptable, technically sound and low-cost processes were undertaken for the recovery of gallium, aluminium and vanadium solid waste by-products (electrofilter dust of calcination plant and vanadium sludge) of the Bayer process. The treatment processes proposed in this study are based essentially on the technology, which is a commercially proven technology and is currently exploited in Pavlodar Aluminium Plant of Kazakhstan ( Samples of electrofilter dust of the calcination plant and vanadium sludge were obtained from Seydisehir Aluminium Plant, located in Konya province of Turkey. By X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer with wave dispersion Venus 200 PANalytycal BV (PANalytycal B.V., The Netherlands). The survey was made using diffractometer D8 Advance (“Bruker”), α-Cu, voltage across tube 40 The chemical composition of the sludge sample XRF (by X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer with wave dispersion Venus 200 PANalyical BV) is shown in Treatment of the vanadium sludge involved leaching, neutralisation and precipitation stages. A thermostated stainless steel reactor equipped with an anchor impeller was used in the tests. Leaching of the sludge (dissolved at a ratio of liquid to solid matter is equal 2.0-2.5:1.0) in distilled water was performed at 90–95 A sodium aluminate solution containing 220 Following the removal of impurities, the purified solution was cooled to a temperature of 35–45 The sample of electrofilter dust was determined to contain 38 Initially the dust sample was sintered with soda ash (Na  In the process of neutralisation, upon achievement of solution рН of 10.5 and then further reduction to рН 9.0, hydrolysis of sodium aluminate takes place with the formation of aluminium hydroxide (Eq. The above reactions for hydrolysis of aluminate and precipitation of phosphate and fluoride yield hydroxide ion and hence, pH tends to increase as the reactions proceed. This adversely affects the extent of hydrolysis/precipitation. In this regard, CO Purified solutions were cooled to a temperature of 35–45 The influence of sulphate ion on ammonium vanadate precipitation was also investigated using a purified vanadium-containing solution (33.3  The conversion of metavanadate into polyvanadate was also performed by repulping the metavanadate precipitate in hot distilled water to obtain V  After the second stage of carbonisation, a precipitate containing various aluminium and carbonate phases (29.9% Al In this study, the treatment of by-products (vanadium sludge and electrofilter dust of a calcination plant) of Bayer process for the recovery of V A process route based on sintering and two-stage of carbonisation was also developed for the treatment of electrofilter dust of calcinations plant for Ga recovery. It was shown that a Ga-rich precipitate could be produced after a series of alkaline digestion and then two-stage carbonate precipitation procedure. This precipitate was found to be used for preparation of Ga This collaborative research was based on the results of bilateral contacts of the Mineral-Metal Recovery and Recycling (MMR&R) Research Group, Mineral Processing Division, Department of Mining Engineering, Suleyman Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey and the Centre of Earth Sciences, Metallurgy and Ore Beneficiation, Almaty, Kazakhstan. The authors would like to thank Cengiz Holding (Seydisehir Aluminium Plant, Konya, Turkey) for kindly providing the samples.