Aspergillus niger (A. niger) and Syngonium podophyllum (S. podophyllum) have been used for wastewater treatment, and have exhibited a promising application in recent years. To determine the effects of A. niger on uranium enrichment and uranium stress antagonism of S. podophyllum, the S. podophyllum-A. niger combined system was established, and hydroponic remediation experiments were carried out with uranium-containing wastewater. The results revealed that the bioaugmentation of A. niger could increase the biomass of S. podophyllum by 5–7%, reverse the process of U(VI) reduction induced by S. podophyllum, and increase the bioconcentration factor (BCF) and translocation factor (TF) of S. podophyllum to uranium by 35–41 and 0.01–0.06, respectively, thereby improving the reduction of uranium in wastewater. Moreover, A. niger could promote the cell wall immobilization and the subcellular compartmentalization of uranium in the root of S. podophyllum, reduce the phytotoxicity of uranium entering root cells, and inhibit the calcium efflux from root cells, thereby withdrawing the stress of uranium on S. podophyllum.With the rapid development of nuclear power, the demand for uranium resources is increasing, which also promotes the development of uranium mining and metallurgy. However, uranium mining and metallurgy produces a large amount of uranium-containing waste rock, uranium tailings and uranium-containing wastewater. Under long-term rainwater, uranium in uranium-containing waste rock and uranium tailings gradually leach out and enter water in open air ( The booming bioremediation technology in recent years has the advantages of low cost, safety, environmentally friendly, and the ability to treat a variety of pollutants simultaneously, making it suitable for remediating massive volumes of wastewater with low-concentration pollutants. This has become a research hotspot for low concentration uranium wastewater remediation ( Bioremediation technologies mainly include phytoremediation and microbial remediation. As phytoremediation are used for the containment, degradation, or extraction of pollutants, which generally occurs through phytoextraction, phytodegradation, phytofiltration, phytovolatilization, phytostabilisation and so on ( Recent studies have found that some fungi can not only secrete auxins, cytokinins, gibberellins and ethylene to promote the growth of plants ( Therefore, the present study established a  The different concentrations of low-concentration simulated uranium-containing wastewater were prepared by adding uranium standard solution to the modified Hoagland's nutrient. And the uranium concentrations were 0.5 mg L Each container (3L) was provided with 2 L of low-concentration simulated uranium-containing wastewater and two strains of After the hydroponic experiment, the water samples were ﬁltered with 0.45-μm Millipore cellulose membrane ﬁlters, and the uranium concentration was measured with ICP-MS (7700Series, Agilent, USA). Then, the plants were harvested and rinsed with deionized water immediately, and the residual water was absorbed by filter paper. Afterwards, the height and the fresh weight of each plant were measured, and the change of their biomass were calculated. Afterwards, they were divided into three parts: roots, stems and leaves. These were soaked with 10 mmol L The fresh samples were quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −86 °C. A heavy metal extraction procedure was carried out to determine what proportion of the metal was bound to, according to the method described by The frozen samples of The chemical forms of uranium were separated by sequential extraction using different chemical polar reagents ( The uranium concentration in Hoagland's nutrient solution was adjusted to 3.0 mg L Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 20 for It can be observed in As shown in Compared with 0.5 and 1 mg L Uranium has different effects on the growth of different plants. When uranium concentration is 1.0–3.0 mg L As shown in The reason may be that uranium can precipitate in the roots of plants in the form of uranyl phosphate minerals, thereby affecting uranium uptake of plants ( The above results revealed that after the hydroponics, the removal efficiency of uranium in wastewater was higher in the treatment group than in the control group, which is closely correlated to the higher biomass, bioconcentration factor (BCF) and translocation factor (TF) of The valence analysis results of intracellular uranium in the roots of In the XPS spectrum, the orbital binding energies of U(IV) 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 appeared at 380.4 eV (±0.3 eV) and 391.5 eV (±0.3 eV), respectively, while the orbital binding energy of U(VI) 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 appeared at 382.2 eV (±0.3 eV) and 392.9 eV (±0.3 eV), respectively ( When When the It can be observed in With the increase in content of radionuclides and heavy metals entering the organelles, the ultrastructure of It is noteworthy that with the increase in uranium concentration in wastewater, the proportion of uranium entering the organelle gradually increased in the control group, while this gradually decreased in the experimental group ( The results in Since the solubility of uranium in different chemical extractants are very different, the chemical form of uranium binding in plant cells can be determined through the sequential extraction procedure. Metals extracted by ethanol and deionized water were mainly bound with chlorides, nitrate ions, dihydric phosphate and organic acids, were water-soluble, and had a higher transferability and the strongest phytotoxicity. Metal extracted by HAc and HCl were in the forms of un-dissolved phosphate and oxalate, which had no or low phytotoxicity, and revealed a lower transport capacity, when compared to other types of chemical forms ( Since more than 90% of uranium was stored in the root of It indicated that  Plants and microorganisms mainly change the chemical form of heavy metals by two ways: (1) They can secrete flavonoids, phenolic compounds and protons, which can form a complex with heavy metals or cause redox reactions of heavy metals. (2) They can adjust the production of nicotianamine, organic acids, glutathione and metallothioneine through signal recognition. Then, the low molecular weight chelates complex with heavy metals entering the cell and change their chemical forms ( As the most important second messenger in plant cells, Ca In After adding 3.0 mg L After treated with 3.0 mg L  Project supported by the