The effect of the chloride ion concentration on the composition of diverse aquachloro and aquachlorohydroxo osmium(IV) complexes, which are formed by the osmium tetroxide reduction in sulfuric acid solutions, is described. The respective osmium(IV) complexes can be separated by applying ion exchange chromatography. While at low chloride concentrations, cis- and trans-isomers of cationic [{OsCl2(OH)(H2O)2}2(μ-OH)]+ as well as anionic fac-[{OsCl3(OH)(H2O)}2(μ-OH)]− and [OsCl5(H2O)]− are present in solution, an increase of the chloride concentration leads to an increase in the number of different osmium-containing species.
                  The chemical and physical behavior of cis-[{OsCl2(OH)(H2O)2}2(μ-OH)]+ (1), trans-[{OsCl2(OH)(H2O)2}2(μ-OH)]+ (2), fac-[{OsCl3(OH)(H2O)}2(μ-OH)]− (3), fac-[OsCl3(OH)2(H2O)]− (4), fac-[{OsCl3(OH)(H2O)}2(μ-O)]2− (5), [OsCl5(H2O)]− (6) and [OsCl6]2− (7) in regard to their solvent extraction with tri-n-octylamine (TOA) or tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) is presented. The extraction of [OsCl5(H2O)]− (6) as a function of the concentration and type of the appropriate extractants as well as the nature of the diluent applied is studied. Stripping of 6 can successfully be carried out either from TOA extracts in ammoniac solutions or from TBP extracts in diluted sulfuric acid solutions.
                  A possible mechanism is proposed for the chemical processes, which may take place during the absorption of osmium tetroxide in the gas cleaning system of nickel- or copper-producing plants.One of the most promising routes for the recovery of osmium in nickel- and copper-producing plants is the use of sulfuric acid solutions of wet cleaning (scrubbing) of gases from pyrometallurgical processes The behavior of osmium in scrub sulfuric acid solutions considerably depends on the type of equipment used for gas cleaning. With the use of concurrent equipment, for example a Venturi scrubber, the scrub solution contacting the dirty gas can contain no chloride ions, and therefore, the formation of sulfito complexes of osmium is possible. However, if countercurrent spray towers or packed columns are used for scrubbing, a contact in the initial stage of the respective gases with the solution occurs, which contains 2.0–3.0 M of sulfuric acid and the highest amount of impurities, including chloride ions (0.04–0.10 M). In a three-column set-up, most of the osmium is caught in the first scrubber from which the processed scrub solution is removed The extraction behavior of aquachloro and aquachlorohydroxo complexes of Os(IV) is less studied (for example, Here, we describe the extraction of osmium(IV) species from sulfuric acid media in the presence of chloride ions. The chemical behavior of the extracted osmium species during the stripping will also be discussed. Tri- A glass column with inner diameter of 35 mm was filled with diethylaminoethyl cellulose (DEAE 23 SS, Serva, Germany) as gel and was used for ion exchange chromatography. The height of the ion exchanger layer was 500 mm. The sulfuric acid (1.0 M) was applied as an eluent with the flow rate of 10 ml h The appropriate experiments on solvent extraction of the respective Os(IV) complexes were carried out at 20 °C. To prevent third phase formation, 10% (vol.) of 1-octanol was added as modifier in Sulfuric acid solutions (2.0–3.0 M) containing NaCl and Na The reaction mixture obtained by the reduction of OsO Addition of sodium chloride (0.04 M) to the model solutions results in the appearance of a new sharp absorption band at 362 nm. At the same time, the intensity of the absorption bands between 460–480 nm lessens, which proves the decrease of the concentration of osmium sulfito complexes in solution ( These data allow assumption that the cationic complex The highest concentration of chloride ions in scrub sulfuric acid can reach 1.0 M, if NaCl is added to such a solution to recover zinc by anion exchange technique To separate complexes Seven different chloro-osmium complexes The chromatographic fractions with maximal concentrations (0.05–0.45 mmol l The extraction of complex Among the isolated Os(IV) complexes Further experiments on osmium(IV) extractions from sulfuric acid media were carried out by using [OsCl Extraction of anionic [OsCl The effect of the extractant concentration on the extraction of osmium was studied by using trioctylamine, dioctylamine, dodecylamine and tributyl phosphate as reagents and decane as a diluent. Slope analysis was used to determine the composition of the extracted species. The obtained data allow the assumption that the extraction is accompanied by the formation of complexes which contain one molecule of extractant. The extraction was performed from the water phase, which contained sulfuric acid and chloride ions. Therefore, each amine (Am) was present in the organic phase as chloride and bisulfate salt. The extraction of osmium by using amines is outlined in The extraction of [OsCl The effect of the solvent on the extraction of osmium(IV) from the OsO The use of carbon tetrachloride as a diluent is inexpedient, due to the low value of the respective distribution coefficient. The high viscosity of Osmium(IV) species can be stripped from TOA solutions (0.1 M) loaded with [OsCl The stripping process includes the following two steps Use of, for example, potassium hydroxide as a stripping agent leads to fast hydrolysis of the respective osmium complexes and OsO The stripping of osmium(IV) from solutions containing TBP can easily be performed by using water or solutions of mineral acids, which are poorly extractable by TBP. Thus, the use of diluted H The above described findings allow us to propose a possible process which may occur during the absorption of osmium tetroxide from pyrometallurgical gases as well as during the extraction of osmium from sulfuric acid scrub solutions The reduction of OsO The reduction of OsO This work was partly supported by the Deutsche Akademische Austauschdienst (DAAD) (A.M.), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie. We would also like to express our appreciation to Degussa/Hanau for the very generous gift of OsO