Ceramics materials are extensively used in armor applications. Various parameters were considered for selecting the most suitable ceramic materials such as hardness, fracture toughness, and dynamic properties. However, better understanding of the dynamic properties i.e., hardness and toughness required deep insight so as to predict mechanical behavior of ceramic subjected to dynamic loadings. In this paper, these properties were investigated by using different amounts of 3Y-TZP (10–40wt.%) in zirconia toughened alumina (ZTA) for the purpose of evaluating the relationship between the strength, hardness and fracture toughness of dynamically loaded ceramics. The highest dynamic strength of 4.9GPa was obtained with the combination of ZTA with 20wt.% of 3Y-TZP. In addition, the composition also had better hardness and fracture toughness responses in comparison with others.After the World War II, ceramics comprehensively used in military applications and ceramic armor were developed for personal and mobile devices such as tank, aircraft and helicopter. Ceramic materials have lower density, higher hardness and a good compressive strength compared to metals. On the other hand, ceramic material is brittle, and this reduces their ability when used as an armor to withstand multiple impacts. This brittleness also facilitates propagation and coalescence of microcracks and may lead to the damage and comminution of ceramic due to impact and penetration. For the design of advanced ceramic armor, the knowledge on the mechanical properties of ceramics is very essential. Fracture toughness and hardness are two major parameters that armor designer focus on Testing a ceramic material by using SHPB is normally accompanied with a typical indentation problem that causes stress concentration due to the metallic nature of the indenter, which is softer than ceramic. For this reason, Nemat-Nasser Since there is no sufficient information available on the dynamic properties of ZTA, the precise evaluation of materials to be used as ceramic armor is not yet defined  ZTA samples with 5 different amounts of 3Y-TZP (0, 10, 20, 30 and 40 The samples were tested for Vickers hardness, fracture toughness and dynamic compressive strength (SHPB). Vickers hardness test (Shimadzu Vickers hardness tester HSV-20, Japan) was carried out at a load intensity of 30 Dynamic compressive strength of ceramics was evaluated by using the modified SHPB for ceramics In the above equations subscripts b and s are the bar and sample, respectively, A is the cross sectional area and L is the length. C Surfaces of the sample were ground, polished and thermally etched at 1400  The two major mechanisms that were playing role in the toughening the ZTA were stress induced transformation and microcrack toughening. In transformation toughening, once the cracks travel, the stress concentration at crack tips can change zirconia from tetragonal to monoclinic phase. The phase change resulted in volume expansion around the crack tip and the neighboring grains became compressed thereby impeding the crack propagation. To overcome such compressive stress, more energy is required to propagate the cracks. A combination of grain reduction and phase transformation could toughen ZTA matrix Although these hardness and fracture toughness measurements are considered to be essential parameters that provide basic knowledge on the behavior and failure mechanisms of the ZTA samples, they are only limited to the static behavior of the sample. Therefore, these static measurements are not very useful for the determination of the ballistic performance of the ZTA samples, especially when these materials are intended for ceramic armor applications. This is, due to dynamic nature of penetration process, which occurs in microseconds or even faster. The performance of the ceramic amour when it experienced multiple hit shootings cannot be determined accurately. For this reason, the availability of the dynamic data of the ZTA samples is unavoidable prior to their selection for ceramic armor applications. For measuring the dynamic property, the modified SHPB was used. In all tests the striker bar velocity was fixed at 20 The highest dynamic compressive strength of 4609 According to the Ashby and Sammis On the other hand, the compressive strength (σ This means that two-third of the pressure beneath the indenter is hydrostatic, and one third is deviatoric (shear) stress Therefore, both hardness and fracture toughness had a positive correlation on the strength of ceramic. Although Eq. Compressive strength had an inverse relationship with square root of grain size Compressive strength of ceramic is sensitive to the strain rate and with increasing the strain rate such that the former increases with the latter increase In this paper, the mechanical properties of different amounts of ZTA were measured while the relationships between hardness and fracture toughness on the dynamic compressive strength were also investigated. ZTA that comprised 20 