Microtomography gives a visualisation of the adsorption of gold di-cyanide onto activated carbon. The computed tomography (CT) images show that the loading of gold in macro pores is negligible, and indicate that surface diffusion is the dominant mechanism for the penetration of the gold cyanide complex into the internal carbon structure. The images also show that at loadings typically obtained in a carbon in pulp (CIP) plant, the gold is predominantly adsorbed on the external surface of the carbon, with film diffusion being the rate limiting mechanism. At high gold loadings, the external surface sites become saturated and further adsorption requires the transport of the adsorbed gold into the interior of the carbon. The use of conditions which result in film diffusion are recommended for activity testing of carbon, as they are more representative of plant conditions. A method based on solvent extraction and gas chromatography has been developed for analyzing the concentration of the flotation frother IF50 in cyanide leach solutions. This frother adsorbs very strongly onto activated carbon, severely hindering both the equilibrium adsorption of gold and, more importantly, the rate of gold adsorption.The adsorption rate of gold cyanide onto activated carbon (commonly referred to as activity) controls the solution tails in a carbon in pulp (CIP) circuit. The activity determines the amount of carbon required, contact time (tank size), gold inventory (lockup), and overall efficiency of the plant ( Activated carbon has a large surface area that consists of macro, meso, and micro pores. It is widely accepted that there are three major mechanisms controlling the rate of gold adsorption onto activated carbon: (1) film diffusion: mass transport of gold cyanide from the bulk solution phase through a hypothetical hydrodynamic boundary layer or film surrounding the carbon particle; (2) pore diffusion: mass transport of the dissolved species in the solution filling the pores; and (3) surface diffusion: migration of the adsorbed molecules along the internal pore walls ( A number of rate equations that describe the various rate limiting mechanisms have been proposed ( Ideally rate plots would be determined under conditions similar to that in the plant. However, CIP is a continuous process with carbon in contact with leach liquors for 2–4 weeks in a process where carbon is moved in batches counter current to the slurry. It is not practical to simulate this in the laboratory and experiments only need to provide operators with consistent data for addition, regeneration and control of carbon movement to minimise gold losses. Problems arise when the experimental conditions for activity determination are not consistent. As activity procedures are not standard across the industry, adsorption rates are not directly comparable, and in some cases the rate mechanisms being measured are not representative of the carbon’s activity. Meaningful comparisons of the rate constant thus require an appreciation of the initial conditions and the range for which the right mechanism is valid. X-ray computed microtomography had its origin in the medical services (widely known as CT – computed tomography) and has now been applied to non-medical and industrial applications including minerals processing. The term “micro” is used to indicate that the pixel sizes of the cross-sections are in the micrometer range. In general X-ray microtomography systems use penetrating X-ray radiation to image an opaque object and determine its internal features ( In this study, the activated carbon grains that had loaded for 24 To validate the microtomography results, the same carbon samples were also analysed using the QEMSCAN (or previously known as QEM The rate of gold adsorption onto activated carbon (activity) was measured by the change in gold solution concentration with time. New carbon (Kuraray QA6/12HAH) was screened (+2.36, −1.70 Experiments were also carried out to investigate the effect of frother fouling on carbon activity using the commercially available flotation frother IF50 (1,1,3 triethoxybutane or TEB). Interest in frother analysis of CIP liquors arose due to the common use of flotation prior to CIP. Xanthates and frothers are common flotation reagents which find their way into CIP feed streams and foul carbons. Xanthate residues in solution can be measured using UV–vis spectrophotometry, but frother analysis has not been generally available. The high stability of frothers means that this reagent is often responsible for the poor carbon activities experienced in downstream CIP circuits. Typical levels of residual frother in CIP slurries is not known, and the level at which they could be tolerated without adverse impact on carbon activities was sought. An accurate measure of residual reagent provides a first step to controlling frother fouling of activated carbons. Solutions containing various concentrations of frother IF50 were prepared by adding different amounts of IF50 into 500 The concentration of IF50 frother was analysed using GC–MS. A range of standards with known frother concentrations were prepared to obtain the calibration curve. IF50 (0.1 The volumes of each reagent and the final GC standard obtained are given in Solution samples containing frother were treated in a similar manner and were then analysed using GC under the conditions shown in Despite the extensive work that has been carried out to investigate the adsorption of gold cyanide onto activated carbon for over 30 years, the mechanisms controlling the adsorption rate still remain assumptive with little physical evidence. The advent of microtomography, which produces a three-dimensional density map, offers new opportunities for investigating carbon adsorption with a distinctive advantage of giving a visualisation of the loading of gold in the internal structure of the carbon. The image on the top left in  The microtomography images of a carbon grain loaded with 25,000 It is also worth noting in the density plot that the gold loading around the perimeter of the carbon displays a plateau, indicating a loading saturation point at the external surface. This plateau (reflected as a golden-colored band in the trans axial image, or as a dark gray band in the printed monochrome version of the figure) is extended to a depth of ∼500 Based on the microtomography results discussed above, two major rate limiting mechanisms can be used to describe the adsorption of gold cyanide onto activated carbon. Initially at low gold loadings, due to the high availability of external surface active sites, the adsorption is rapid and controlled by film-diffusion through a hypothetical hydrodynamic boundary layer. However, as the adsorption at the external surface approaches saturation, further adsorption requires the slower transport of adsorbed gold along the internal carbon surfaces into the depth of the carbon, and thus surface diffusion becomes rate limiting. The rate of gold adsorption onto activated carbon is typically calculated using the slope of the first order plot (ln([Au] An alternative mathematical approach to determining the rate constant from the slope of the data shown in  Carbon activity tests can produce data from the two rate controlling mechanisms depending on the initial test conditions employed. Only the film diffusion mechanism, however, correctly represents the activity of carbon in most gold operations. Also, the mechanism can change within the time frame of the test, (ie at intermediate loadings), where the rate limiting step may vary from film diffusion to surface diffusion as the readily accessible external surface sites are depleted. This may lead to an error in the rate constant ( It should be clear that within a loading of 100–3000 In order to study the effect of frother on the adsorption of gold onto activated carbon, a method for quantifying the concentration of frother IF-50 in solution was initially developed. This was based on the extraction of the frother into a small quantity of DCM, and the solution then analysed using gas chromatography; a sample chromatogram is shown in The three traces shown in The rate of frother IF50 adsorption was measured for 500 The equilibrium loading of IF50 onto activated carbon is shown in As IF50 is adsorbed faster and more strongly onto carbon than gold, it is expected to have a severe impact on gold adsorption when they co-exist in solution. The effect of IF50 loading on the rate constant for gold adsorption,  The value for Microtomography was used to investigate the activated carbon grains that had been loaded with different concentrations of gold. The microtomographic images obtained clearly showed that the gold adsorption was not enhanced around macro pores, suggesting that the diffusion of gold cyanide within the aqueous phase to down macro pores is poor. As a result, the contribution of pore diffusion to the total loading of gold is low and could thus be excluded from the rate limiting mechanisms. The microtomographic images also showed that at low gold loadings, the gold is predominantly adsorbed at the external surface with film diffusion being the rate limiting mechanism; whilst at high gold loadings, the external surface sites are saturated and further adsorption requires the transport of the adsorbed gold into the interior of the carbon via a surface diffusion mechanism. The initial test conditions, and hence ultimate gold loading, have a significant impact on the measurement of carbon activity. At ultimate gold loadings below 100 A method, based on the extraction into a small quantity of dichloromethane and the subsequent analysis by GC–MS, has been developed for quantifying frother IF50 in aqueous solutions. IF50 was found to adsorb very strongly onto carbon, severely hindering both the equilibrium adsorption of gold and, more importantly, the rate of gold adsorption (activity). This highlights the importance of monitoring the carbon activity closely and measuring it correctly.