Fluorite is a non-renewable mineral that is used for anhydrous hydrofluoric acid and aluminum fluoride purposes. In China, along with the excellent fluorite resource, which is over-exploited, many off-specification fluorites (CaF2 > 93, under 97%; SiO2 > 1.5%) are produced. Improving the grade of fluorite instead of costly technologies of the Buss and CHEMCO are conducted. To improve the grade of fluorite, an excessive amount of sodium silicate is commonly used. However, this approach cannot stably produce high-quality fluorite and result in excessive reagent consumption, poor selectivity and high-water content of the fluorite concentrate. To solve these problems, suitable hydrophilic polymer depressants, which are highly stable, safe, non-toxic, hydrophilic, biodegradable and low processing cost because of abundant in nature, are selected to replace sodium silicate. To make the study practical, the testing location chosen was in Chenzhou (Hunan, China) and was operated by Xinyuan mining Co. Ltd., the largest monolithic fluorite ore producer in Asia. Meanwhile, to prevent the above problems from occurring, the focus throughout this study was achieving separation in the flotation process through the successful occurrence of two sub-processes. The first process was desilicication using dextrin, and the second process was decalcification using tannin.
                  A tech-economic assessment based on the pilot program showed that compared with sodium silicate, the new technology (dextrin + tannin) improved fluorite recovery by 19.23%, removal rate of CaCO3 by 13.43% and SiO2 by 8.93% and reduced production costs by $2914.8 per day. The technology (dextrin + tannin) produced an excellent result, simplifying the flow during fluorite flotation, which can led to a reduction in power consumption as well as reduction in production costs for each ton of 105% sulfuric acid of $3.24 (t/t) for the entire production chain lifecycle. The new technology was an efficient, economic and environmentally friendly and has widespread applications and promising market prospects.Fluorite minerals have been found on every continent, but they are mainly concentrated in the circum-pacific metallogenic belt and make up approximately half of the global fluorite ore reserves. The main producers are South Africa (0.2 Mton), China (3.8 Mton), Mongolia (0.38 Mton) and Mexico (1.1 Mton), and estimated reserves (CaF For now, fluorite is the main material in the manufacture of anhydrous hydrofluoric acid and aluminum fluoride in China. To our knowledge, the fluorite powder quality index is commonly CaF Currently, flotation is the most common method for enriching fluorite and is well documented ( Sodium silicate is a widely used depressant for worthless minerals ( The focus throughout this study is to prevent these problems from occurring through separation in the flotation process, which is achieved through successful application of two sub-processes. The first process involves enriching ore in such a way that the silicate minerals can be rapidly removed. The second process requires the ore to have a similar solubility and the same active Ca As always, organic depressant reagents are cleaner than conventional inorganic reagents. Some researchers have focused their attention on the application of a polymer (starch, dextrin, CMC, guar gum and other polysaccharide polymers as a depressant for alum inosilicate minerals present as impurities in sulfide ores) ( In addition, another challenge is that the efficient calcite depressant should be inexpensive and must not affect the subsequent treatment of hydrofluoric acid production. References to the use of tannin in froth flotation have been found recently for the depression of pyrite ( Consequently, developing a new flotation technology to decrease the damage from water glass and increase the removal efficiency of impurities as well as recovery of fluorite are worthwhile objectives. To our knowledge, no data have been published on the application of hydrophilic polymers (dextrin + tannin) to separate fluorite, calcite and sericite in the fluorite industry. Based on these considerations, this work provides details regarding a process that applies dextrin for the removal of sericite and tannin for the removal of calcite in the fluorite flotation process. To assess the superiority and sustainability of the new system, indicators for the recovery and grade of fluorite were obtained and compared to those of the old fluorite flotation system. The technical treatment and cost–benefits were evaluated in detail by testing the work at the plant. This study was implemented at Hunan Xinyuan Minerals Corporation in Chenzhou city, China, as seen in Multi-elemental chemical analysis of the sample was conducted by Atomic Adsorption Spectroscopy (AAS) and an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICPOES), and the analysis results are shown in The reagents used for all of the tests were obtained from the following sources: oleic acid C In the batch flotation tests, the ore (500 g, crushed to −2 mm during sampling) was ground to the desired proportions by passing through 37 μm filter into a closed steel XMQ-240 + 90 mm ball mill at a pulp density of 66% by weight. The bench-scale flotation tests were performed in an XFD-63 flotation cell (self-aeration), which was manufactured by Jilin prospecting machinery factory (China), with 1500 mL for rougher flotation and 1000 mL and 500 mL for cleaner flotation. The feed was added to the flotation cell with tap water to obtain the required pulp density. The pulp density (solid %) was adjusted to 30% during conditioning and 20% during flotation. Next, the required amount of depressant was added and conditioned for 4 min. Subsequently, the measured amounts of the collectors were added in order and conditioned for 2 min. Air flow was turned on after 2 min of collector addition. The flotation time was 4 min according to the results of the previous experiment (not shown). The simplified flow sheet of the flotation tests is shown in The industrial tests were performed at Hunan Xinyuan Corporation's Fluorite Flotation Plant. In these tests, mud was removed early in the process by fluorite desliming rougher flotation. The old system used sodium silicate as a depressant during flotation. The flotation flowsheet of the industrial tests is described in The size of the mineral particles plays a significant role in the sequence of events that lead to the flotation of a particle ( In this study, the flotation process was evaluated by defining the removal efficiency, for which, as introduced by Mowla ( In this paper, three typical polysaccharide depressants were used to change the surface properties of sericite. Sodium silicate (SS) was not compared with polysaccharides in the same graph, which was used at a larger dosage that in previous studies. The effects of the different polysaccharide depressants on the SiO Opposite to the removal rate of SiO To further explain the disadvantage of sodium silicate (SS), the effect of CaF As mentioned earlier, flotation of fluorite ores under an alkaline condition should be used before desliming, which is necessary. In this case, on the one hand, using a small amount of SS was unavoidable. On the other hand, the recovery of CaF The flotation results demonstrated that the SS and dextrin depressant with a mass ratio of 2:1 achieved the best flotation separation performance, as shown in Acidized sodium silicate (a mixture of 10% w/w sulfuric acid and 10% w/w sodium silicate in a volume ratio 1:1) and salinized sodium silicate (aluminum sulfate and sodium silicate in a mass ratio 3:1) are the main mixed sodium silicates used for depressing calcite in fluorite flotation in industrial processes ( Acidized sodium silicate and salinized sodium silicate are interchangeably used in Xinyuan fluorite cleaner flotation. Therefore, It is evident that although the addition of ASS was larger, ASS achieved a beneficial result that was superior to that of the SSS depressant in fluorite flotation, but the recovery of fluorite was obviously inferior to using SSS. The maximum grade of fluorite achieved with ASS as the depressant was 92.45%, but the recovery of fluorite was only 54.34%. Meanwhile, the maximum recovery of fluorite with SSS as the depressant was 66.56%, but the removal rate of calcite only reached maximum values of 49.01%. These results explain why ASS is often used in cleaner flotation, which has low recovery, and why the grade of fluorite is low when SSS is used instead of ASS in production. Thus, the tannin depressant results provide more thorough comparisons between the above two reagents, which could avoid the above problem. When the dosage of tannin was 50 g/t, the grade and recovery of its fluorite concentrates were 94.05% and 81.31%, respectively. The removal rate of CaCO For each change in the flotation system, the reagent dosage and regime were implemented in the flowchart. Due to the good depression performance for sericite and calcite, the dextrin and tannin method was selected for the industrial tests performed in Xinyuan. The old and new flotation flowsheets and flotation conditions are listed in  It is evident from the results presented in In industrial practice, efficiency related to cost is an indicator for choosing the best treatment method. In previous studies, many fluorite indicators have been used for this purpose. The moisture content of the fluorite concentrate is one of the most important factors, leading to 105% sulfuric acid consumption for the production of HF or Aluminum fluoride. In the past, the moisture content was approximately 18% of the concentrate, and dehydration was difficult because a large number of fine powder particles existed, which contained sodium silicate residues. Compared with the old system, the filter efficiency increased by 15–20% (  In addition, the SiO CaF This study revealed that two-stage depressing using a hydrophilic polymer can comprehensively improve the process of fluorite flotation. The batch flotation experiments identified that a range of hydrophilic polymers can be used instead of sodium silicate. Dextrin and tannin appear to exhibit considerable promise for depressing the impurities during fluorite flotation. This two-stage depression technology has been proven by successful implement in laboratory experiments and at the Xinyuan plant. Based on our investigation, expansion of the use of hydrophilic polymers has great potential, and the following excellent results were quantified. We found a practical application of the two-stage depressed technology and assessed the effects, including: (1) the desilicication ability of dextrin: the technology improved the removal rate of SiO Therefore, the optimal use of a hydrophilic polymer for fluorite production dramatically reduced the potential environmental impacts and costs and can be considered to be a cleaner alternative to conventional depressing reagents in fluorite flotation. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the