To ensure safety in underground excavations, it is important that the support systems used are capable of resisting the dynamic loads produced, for example, by rock bursts. In this paper, a dynamic simulation model for a cone bolt is proposed based on an experimental study. Drop weight tests were performed on resin-based cone bolts. These experiments revealed that the bolt has two energy absorption mechanisms: sliding in the resin and plastic deformation. To simulate this behaviour, a two degrees-of-freedom lumped-mass model is proposed. Experimentally, the proportions of sliding and plastic deformation were found to vary significantly from one test to another. To account for this variability, two methods are proposed to determine the value of the parameters governing the sliding of the bolt in the resin, whereas a dynamic force–elongation model is used to simulate the plastic deformation. Comparing the results of a simulation to experimental data proved that the constitutive elements of the model are appropriate to simulate the dynamic response of the cone bolt.Nowadays, underground excavations can be as deep as 5000 The dynamic models proposed in the literature for rock support elements can be divided in two main categories: lumped-mass and dynamic deformation models. Thompson et al. On the other hand, dynamic deformation models are based on the theory of strain (or stress) waves in solids In order to study the local strain distribution along the length of the bolt, Ansell In this paper, a lumped-mass model is proposed to simulate the dynamic behaviour of a resin-based cone bolt. The advantage of this lumped-mass model, compared to the other ones, resides in its simplicity and particularly in the use of dry friction to simulate more accurately the bolt sliding in the resin. Contrarily to certain models presented above, the formulation proposed here is valid for elastic and plastic deformation. The testing apparatus available at CANMET-MMSL is illustrated in The setup is well equipped to measure the relevant displacements and forces at any time during the impact. For displacements, there is a wire potentiometer connected to the drop weight to measure its position and two digital line cameras recording the displacements of both extremities of the bolt, i.e., the cone and plate displacements. For forces, the setup is equipped with two piezoelectric load cells measuring the force applied to the bolt by the drop weight and the force transmitted to the support beam. Both loading signals were found to be very similar so only the force transmitted to the support beam will be shown throughout this article. More details about the instrumentation can be found in So far, all tests were performed on Modified Cone Bolts (MCB) whose dimensions are shown in For the experiments, the cone bolts were grouted into steel tubes using two cartridges of DuPont Fasloc polyester resin. Each cartridge has two compartments: one contains the polyester resin and the other one has the catalyst. The dimensions of the sample tube as well as the installation procedure are illustrated in It is also important to mention that the angle of the cone has a significant influence on the performances of the cone bolt. Increasing the angle of the cone will allow the bolt to dissipate more energy when sliding in the resin. However, this will also increase the anchoring force of the bolt which needs to be overcome to activate sliding. Therefore, if the cone angle is too large, the bolt will not be able to slide resulting in a premature failure of the tendon. Nonetheless, in this study, the cone angle will not be varied; we have focused our interest only on bolts that are currently used in Canadian mines. Most of the drop weight tests were conducted using one of the two following testing configurations: 1016 In addition, two samples were tested without resin in order to compare the local strain distribution obtained with the results of Ansell Comparing the typical testing parameters used for the various experimental setups reported in the literature can reveal insightful information about the type of model chosen to simulate the test. Such a comparison is given in However, the mass used varies significantly for the setups presented in In general, if the impact duration of the test is too short to allow the plastic wave front to reach the other end of the bolt, a dynamic model will be preferred to a lumped-mass model. Considering a steel plastic modulus of 15 The typical results collected during a drop weight test are shown in The cone displacement indicates the amount of bolt sliding in the resin whereas the difference between the plate and cone displacements gives the bolt elongation. These are the two mechanisms of the cone bolt to dissipate and absorb the impact energy. Both mechanisms are present at each drop, but their proportions vary significantly from a test to another. It is also interesting to note that in The third part of the loading signal, i.e., the series of damped oscillations, can be modelled by a mass connected to a fixed base by a spring and a damper in parallel. A methodology to obtain the stiffness and damping values from experimental data is described in Using this methodology, values of stiffness and damping were calculated for every test where the oscillation part was long enough (about three to five periods) to give consistent results. Fourteen tests complied with this criterion and the average stiffness and damping obtained were, respectively, equal to 12.868 In the previous section, the bolt elastic stiffness was obtained from experimental data. However, during a test, the bolt undergoes significant permanent deformation; therefore, it is also important to characterize the steel plastic behaviour. The quasi-static yield limit and ultimate strength of steel are available from the manufacturer and equal to 517 For a bar under quasi-static uniaxial tension, the state of stress and strain is usually assumed to be uniform through its cross-section and length. However, in the case of an impact, it is possible to have localized plasticity As mentioned in A brief summary of the dynamic mechanical properties of steel is available in The dynamic properties of steel calculated above can also be obtained from certain experimental tests. To isolate the mechanism of steel deformation from the bolt sliding in the resin, only the tests with a cone displacement less than 1 The simulation program developed is based on a lumped-mass model because the local strain distribution along the length of the bolt, presented in The drop weight is represented by the mass In order to solve the equations of motion of the model, a Each of these steps will be detailed below, but first it is necessary to introduce certain variables not illustrated in The four steps mentioned above are relevant only if the drop weight is in contact with the plate of the bolt and this is verified with the following condition: If the drop weight is in contact with the plate, the first step is to evaluate the values relative to the bolt stiffness, i.e., The second step is to solve the appropriate equations of motion. Two sets of equations are possible depending if the cone is sliding or not. If The third step is the calculation of As mentioned previously, after an impact, when the mass is rebounded, it might partially lock in the guiding rails if the force applied by the bolt has a certain eccentricity with the centre of mass of the drop weight. This phenomenon is visible in experimental data. During the series of elastic rebounds, the bolt undergoes elastic deformation only and behaves like a spring. The potential energy associated with an impact can be calculated from Experimentally, the cone displacement can vary from less than 1 Consequently, the values of the cone parameters ( Using this method, the values of The static friction The graphical method detailed above returns valid cone parameters based on the experimental loading curves. However, there is usually a difference between the experimental and simulated displacements that can be reduced. The method that will be presented here selects the cone parameters based on the experimental bolt sliding and elongation. A Considering that combinations where To prove the capacity of the model to reproduce accurately the experimental response of the cone bolt, a simulation was carried on to reproduce the results of As one can see, the cone displacement of the simulation matches very well with the experimental one. On the other hand, one has to be careful when comparing the curves of the simulated mass and plate camera. In the simulation, the mass rebounds in the air which is obviously not visible in the plate camera signal. Nevertheless, both curves converge together at the end of the test. Comparing the loading signals, one can see that the amplitude and duration of each impact is well represented, especially the first one which is the most important because it produces permanent displacements of the bolt as mentioned in A model, having two degrees-of-freedom and capable of simulating the cone bolt dynamic behaviour, has been developed and validated. The values of certain parameters of the model have been obtained from the experimental tests performed at CANMET-MMSL. For instance, the elastic stiffness and damping of the bolt have been calculated from the series of damped oscillations. A dynamic force–elongation model for the elastic–plastic deformation of steel was also defined experimentally. On the other hand, because the experimental cone displacement can vary significantly from a test to another, the cone parameters of the model need to be adjusted for each simulation. Two methods were proposed to obtain their values from experimental data: the first one uses the loading signal; the second one, the bolt sliding and elongation. Experimental tests have also shown that the local strain distribution along the length of the bolt can be considered homogeneous and this explains why a lumped-mass model was developed instead of one based on the theory of strain wave. Finally, comparing the simulated and measured responses has shown that the constitutive elements of the model are adequate to simulate the dynamic behaviour of the cone bolt. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and of the Fond Québécois de la Recherche sur la Nature et les Technologies (FQRNT). Also, T. Anderson, K. Judge and M. Plouffe of CANMET-MMSL and V. Falmagne of Golder Associates are gratefully acknowledged for their help and advice in regard to this project.