The Institute of Mineral Processing at the Montanuniversitaet Leoben in cooperation with the company CEMTEC has developed a pilot scale, 200mm table diameter, vertical roller mill for energy controlled laboratory tests. The mill provides the technical options to vary process parameters like air-flow, mass flow, grinding force and classifier speed in a wide range and is equipped to analyze the internal circulating load. In order to address grinding efficiency (defined as the increase in mass specific surface vs. net specific energy input) the energy consumption of two pilot scale vertical roller mills (200mm and 670mm table diameter) was compared to that of a sequence of laboratory comminution equipment covering the same size range. The sequence consisting of a laboratory jaw crusher and three laboratory tumbling mills of differing grinding media was operated following the principles of energy optimized comminution according to the OCS-method. With respect to the grinding energy only all the results for marble, siderite and hematite ore show energy savings when using the vertical roller mill at optimized settings. The methods used are outlined including the special features of the equipment.Comminution is one of the most energy intensive mechanical treatments in common mineral processing plants. In consideration of increasing energy prices and the demand for sustainable industrial processes the reduction of energy expense attracts more and more attention. Although the potential of alternative methods such as high voltage treatment or material's pretreatment by ultrasonic or microwaves is intensively investigated, tumbling mills and vertical roller mills still represent the state of the art of comminution in a size range between 10 The lab scale comminution tools used in this (energy) optimized comminution sequence (OCS) are arranged and operated in a way to reveal the minimum energy expense for a defined size reduction step. The energy input into the grinding chamber of all the lab systems below 10 The concept ( Subdivide a given total comminution step into a sequence of size reduction steps of low size reduction ratio using comminution tools optimized to the feed size. For an optimum mechanical energy transfer from the comminution tool to the material, keep the amount of fines as small and the retention time of fines after their generation in the comminution chamber as short as possible. The fines cause the absorption of energy due to compaction. A closed circuit design with prescreening and high circulating load result from these requirements. The general setup of an OCS is shown in Close to Bond's method the continuous operation is simulated in each step by batch wise comminution with pre- and intermediate screening and classification respectively. Common laboratory comminution equipment (jaw crushers, rod mills, ball mills) is arranged in the sequence. The circulating load is adjusted to 100% for rod mill operation, to 250% and 300% for mill operations using balls and cylpebs respectively. The energy input into the grinding chamber is controlled by torque measurement. All intermediate classification down to 200 For homogenous materials the size distribution often linearizes in the Gates, Gaudin, and Schuhmann (GGS) plot indicating a potential relation between the particle size and the percentage passing. As no other machinery was found up to now to produce a distribution of steeper inclination it is considered to be material inherent and is called the “natural breakage characteristic” (NBC) according to Steiner. Plotting the mass specific surfaces of the feed and the products determined by permeametry versus the assigned mass specific energy consumption, the course of measurement results can be fitted best by a straight line. As the experimental findings (down to k Apart from the evaluation of grindability in tumbling mills and benchmarking grinding systems, the method provides reproducible size distributions, characteristic for one type of material, which is needed e.g. for integrated intergrowth investigations. The grindability index R varies between 20 The sequence to evaluate the vertical roller mills consisted of a laboratory jaw crusher, a rod mill and two ball mill stages with differing grinding media. The dimensions and settings of the laboratory mills are given in The tumbling mill used with different types of grinding media is equipped with a torque rod for direct energy measurement. The size reduction steps are set to 100% − The VRM200 is a laboratory scale vertical roller mill with two truncated conical grinding rollers (LOESCHE system) of 133 The mill power draw is measured by a torque rod situated in line with the main drive shaft. The specific power consumption ΔeVRM200 in J/kg could be calculated by the control system according to Eq. The main process factors to vary are the grinding pressure, the table speed, the classifier speed, the air flow and pressure drop and feed rate respectively. The feed of the VRM600 (100% − Over all experiments stable process conditions must be guaranteed. A constant pressure drop (at fixed feed rate), constant air flow, a stable mass balance (feed mass equals product mass) and stable product fineness over a 1.5 To guarantee an energy optimized grinding process, at the parameter settings given in The mass specific surfaces of all the comminution products were measured by permeametry. An average value was calculated out of two obtained by Blaine's apparatus and two by the Permaran of Outokumpu respectively. For evaluating the entire surface of coarse comminution products (− The measurement of the specific surface in the sieve size classes (e.g. − In order to cover a range of grindabilities but to avoid differential grinding behavior, marble of constant composition (provenience: Austria, density 2.71 The materials were all crushed and screened to a maximum feed size of 8  Referring to The linear relation between mass specific surface and the cumulative energy consumption within the OCS was found experimentally for all the tested materials up to a surface of 4000 Blaine and energy inputs up to 80 At the Institute of Mineral Processing at Montanuniversitaet Leoben the material characteristics – the natural breakage characteristic (NBC), the Rittinger index (R) and the shape factor (f) – have been recorded in this way for more than 30 All the results achieved by the VRM200 and the VRM600 are situated to left of the Rittinger line and thus clearly indicate lower energy consumption to obtain the same increase of mass specific surface. In order to compare the results of the two roller mills and to put them in relation to data given in literature the term “energy savings” is defined as the difference of the energy consumptions of the vertical mill and OCS at a given surface related to the energy consumption derived from the OCS. The energy savings of the vertical roller mill decrease for marble and hematite with increasing surface from about 62% at 2000 Blaine and 3400 Blaine respectively to 35% at 6000 Blaine. For the siderite ore the energy savings show different behavior increasing from 48% at 3000 Blaine to 60% at 6000 Blaine. Reasons for this may be found in the mineral structure showing extraordinary increase in the surface below 40 Compared to the VRM200 the savings for the VRM600 are significantly lower in the range beyond 6000 Blaine depending on the type of material (about 15% for the marble, 25% for the siderite and 1.5% for the hematite). The difference in the behavior of the roller mills can be explained on the one hand by the different design of the classifiers. At the VRM200 the classifier operates most efficiently between cut sizes (d98) from 70 to 100 According to the most frequent application of vertical mills most of the data reported in literature refer to cement and slag. From data published by Referring to In order to obtain a steep particle size distribution with a low content of fines beyond 40 More detailed experiments are subject of ongoing research work to understand the interaction of high circulating load, classifier efficiency and energy utilization in the particle bed. The paper aimed to provide traceable measurement results to compare the energy consumption for grinding only of ball mills and vertical roller mills using lab scale equipment. At similar stress conditions to industrial mills the energy input into the material could thus be obtained by using torque rods, that are free of the losses immanent to power measurement at the power supply. In addition the settings of the apparatus can be adjusted to an optimum with respect to the specific energy consumption by increasing the throughput rate to a maximum at stable conditions for the vertical roller mills and by using the optimized comminution sequence for the tumbling mills. Three types of material at decreasing comminution resistance (marble, siderite ore and hematite ore) were tested in a range of product dispersity between 2000 and 7000 Blaine. Even at optimized conditions stochastic grinding in ball mills could not overcome the results obtained by the vertical mills stressing the material in the compressed bed. The energy savings seem to be material dependent with no distinct correlation to the comminution resistance described by the Rittinger index.