A semiempirical method is proposed to evaluate the damage parameter related to failure wave formation, based on the analysis of free-surface velocity history with linear acoustic theory. Experiments were conducted to demonstrate this method with velocity profiles measured by a velocity interferometer system for any reflector (VISAR). Results showed that the degree of damage in the failed layer depends strongly on the glass material.Advanced ceramics are increasingly being used in armor elements, engine turbine blades, and other structural components due to their unique mechanical and thermal properties. In practical applications, one of the great concerns is the damage or failure induced by shock waves. Unlike ductile materials, brittle materials such as ceramic, rock, and glass, often fail explosively under dynamic loading. Failure waves have been reported within geological materials   Defining Both the longitudinal and transverse wave velocities for a cracked solid, generally, decrease with increasing crack density, indicating the degradation of elastic moduli with incremented crack density (e.g. From  The damage parameter is widely used to describe the failure state of a solid, and different damage models have been proposed Experiments were conducted using two optical glasses — K9 and ZF1 — whose physical properties and chemical composition are given in  Glass is assumed to be macroscopically homogeneous. Microexamination shows, however, that, due to the immiscibility and phase separation of its contained oxides, the glass body is essentially inhomogeneous at the microscopic scale. For example, in the BaO–SiO Compared to velocity or stress, damage is a parameter difficult to measure experimentally, partly because of being defined as the void volume percentage in damaged material. We have demonstrated a semiempirical way to evaluate the real-time degree of damage induced by failure wave formation, which is expected to provide new understanding of this phenomenon. Computation based on free-surface velocities observed from two types of glass — K9 and ZF1 — indicates that the degree of damage depends strongly on the glass material. We thank Dr. G.I. Kanel for his great help in experiments. This study was supported by the Science Foundation of the China Academy of Engineering Physics.