The collection of valuable minerals along rougher flotation banks was evaluated using top-of-froth measurements, which consist of sampling the froth surface. Considering non-selective froths observed in rougher flotation circuits, it was found the top-of-froth grades were similar to the bubble load grades, which allowed for a direct estimation of the collected mineral characteristics (size distribution, mineralogy, and grade). Thus, the flotation process evolution can be characterized by analyzing the collection of valuable minerals by true flotation instead of the classical mass balances approach, which strongly depends on the reliability of the tailings grade data. In addition, comparison among different valuable minerals was observed without significant sampling disturbances caused by solid entrainment.
                  It is expected the top-of-froth measurement will be a useful tool for evaluating the effect of operating variables such as pulp conditioning, air flowrate and solids percentage on the true collection process along a flotation bank.A fundamental aspect in flotation equipment modeling is the characterization of two zones, pulp (collection) and froth (separation) ( Despite the froth influence on mineral recovery is well known, the impact on mineral grade because of selective detachment in the froth zone is yet a concern. For instance, On the other hand, flotation characterization at industrial scale has been typically based on adjusted mass balances which allow for estimate mineral recovery as a function of feed, tail and concentrate grades. For a better insight into the process kinetic, a common approach consists of developing distributed samplings along flotation banks, which are subject to critical sampling constraints such as unsafe or limited access, inadequate sampler, sampling cut uncertainties, among others ( In this paper, the collection of valuable minerals in different flotation plants was studied by using top-of-froth (TOF) measurements. This approach allowed the floatable grade decay along rougher banks to be identified. The TOF grades were compared to those measured using a bubble load device. These results provide a base of comparison for froth selectivity and performance evaluation at industrial scale. Bubble load was measured using the USM bubble load sensor (  A previous approach on sampling the froth surface was reported by    In order to characterize the flotation performance along a rougher flotation bank, the TOF grade profile was measured in each cell as an indirect observation of the mineral collection. As it was previously stated, the properties of particles entering the froth as particle-bubble aggregate (true flotation) can be represented by the TOF samples, for low froth selectivity.  The collected valuable mineral in the first cell presented a higher Cu grade because of the higher flotation rate of the liberated particles. Down the bank, the change in the collected mineral quality was identified as TOF grade decrease, suggesting a decrease in the solid liberation as well as in the flotation rate. Notice that the local concentrate grade along the bank showed a similar profile; however, it was strongly contaminated by entrainment, which hinders the flotation performance with regard to the collection rate of valuable material. The characterization of the valuable mineral in the feed showed that Cu was mainly as chalcopyrite. Thus, a TOF grade of Cu in the first rougher cell lower than 10% indicates an evident lack of liberation, which was consistent with the low rougher recovery of 77%. Then, by decreasing the +150 Notice that the froth depth in the fifth rougher cell was approximately 1   The TOF measurement provided an insight of the collection process of valuable minerals without the sampling constraints usually found at industrial scale. A minor degree of froth selectivity per size class was observed, especially for coarser particles. Additionally, particle size distribution and mineral grade along rougher flotation banks were identified without entrainment disturbances. Flotation rate characterization follows standard measurements to identify the overall flotation performance looking at the feed, tailings and concentrate stream in flotation cells or banks. This classical approach does not take explicitly into account the evolution of the true collection rate down the flotation banks. The potential for identifying the impact of the mineral characteristics (particle size and liberation) as well as the effect of different manipulated variables (reagent dosage, froth depth, gas dispersion) on the true flotation process remains hindered. The information provided by bubble load and TOF samples allows evaluating the floatable mineral evolution (grade, particle size, liberation) down the bank. On the other hand, using TOF grades along flotation circuits, the flotation rate might be characterized. This approach allows describing the quality of the mineral collected by true flotation that was not rejected at the froth zone. Further developments on this subject are being conducted to pursue this research area. A program of TOF measurements at industrial scale will increase the current database. Also, kinetic modeling and studies of the true flotation as a function of the operating condition (e.g. gas flowrate, froth depth) are under development. Other flotation circuits such as scavenger and cleaner stages will be evaluated using TOF information. A new approach to evaluate the flotation process evolution based on the top of froth (TOF) grade was proposed and tested in six industrial concentrators. Comparisons between Cu grades of bubble load and TOF were carried out. Results showed that the grade of particles attached to bubbles did not change significantly through the froth phase in rougher circuits. Therefore non-significant froth selectivity was observed in single rougher cells. The TOF grade was 2–5% higher than bubble load grade for the fractions −75 Particle size distribution and Cu grade per size class on TOF were identified in different rougher flotation banks. Down the bank, a TOF grade decrease of collected minerals was observed, which indicates a decrease in the mineral liberation as well as in the flotation rate per size class. Thus, the TOF measurement allowed for an indirect identification of the liberation effects on the flotation process by means of simple and reliable sampling. Comparison of Cu and Mo collected mineral grades, by TOF measurements, showed that valuable Cu mineral grades decayed down the rougher banks, whereas a peak in the TOF grades of Mo was observed due to an increase in Mo collection relative to the Cu minerals. Funding for Process Modelling and Control Research is provided by CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1130568 and Federico Santa María Technical University, Project 271351.