Oxide fraction of zinc ash originating from hot dip galvanizing plant was investigated. Chemical and phase compositions of the material were characterized in details. The zinc ash contained simonkolleite, zinc oxide and metallic zinc as main phases. Influence of solid to liquid ratio (150–500 kg/m3) and sulphuric acid concentration (20% and 25%) on dissolution of zinc and metallic impurities was investigated. 95–97% zinc recovery was obtained for 150–200 kg/m3 in 20% H2SO4, but the solutions were contaminated mainly by Mn(II) and Fe(II, III) ions. Acid leaching of the zinc ash was accompanied by exothermic effects. Precipitation purification of the leach liquor from iron ions was followed by zinc electrowinning. Final product of 99.5% purity at a current efficiency of 92% was obtained.Recycling of secondary materials from industrial processes reduces amount of waste to be finally disposed. Metallurgical wastes contain usually valuable elements that can be recovered and reused, making them important from both economic and environmental points of view. Zinc is one of a few metals which can be recycled at all stages of the production and usage. It is estimated that over 80% of zinc available for recycling is currently recycled ( General statistical data on worldwide metal utilization shows that about half of the annual production of zinc is applied for steel galvanizing. It corresponds to approximately 5.5 million tons of the metal per year ( Typically, the zinc ash represents 12–20% of total zinc consumed during hot dip galvanizing ( Waste ash of high zinc percentage can be used as a valuable source of secondary metal, especially that zinc ash is not dangerous good ( Various methods were proposed to recover zinc or its compounds (e.g. oxide, sulphate) from the top ash coming from the HDG process. Pyrometallurgical and physico-metallurgical methods operate in a temperature range from below 600 °C to above 1000 °C ( Usually, diluted sulphuric acid solutions were used for leaching of the zinc ash ( Literature data indicate sulphuric acid as the most common leaching reagent for zinc materials. It is relatively cheap, abundantly available and can easy react with many metal compounds. H The previous study ( Zinc ash was collected in an industrial HDG plant and screened to remove metallic zinc lumps (by applying own method) leaving oxide fraction. The latter, as received from the plant, was used in this investigation. Morphology of the oxide fraction (called further “zinc ash”) was observed with an optical microscope (Nikon) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi). Phase composition of the ash was determined by means of X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku MiniFlex, Cu General and detailed analysis of the elemental composition was accomplished using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy EDS. For comparison, 0.5–1 g samples of the ash were dissolved in 200 mL 20% H Content of metallic zinc in the ash was determined by both volumetric and wet analytical methods. Volumetric measurements were performed by dissolution of 1 g samples of the powder in 400 mL 20% H Wet chemical analysis was based on a cementation reaction ( Next, 10 mL of 0.5 M (NH After that, portions of 20% H Due to the presence of iron in the zinc ash, blank tests were also performed by using manganometric titration of 1 g of the ash dissolved in 25 mL 20% H Content of soluble chloride ions in the ash was also found. It was determined by means of conductometric titration with 0.1 M AgNO The zinc ash was leached in 200 mL of 20% and 25% H pH of the solutions was measured before and after the process. Concentration of free H Thermal effect of the leaching was determined using calorimetric method. Measurements were performed using isolated glass container equipped with a magnetic stirrer (500 rpm). 150–400 g/L of the zinc ash was added to 200 mL 20% H Leach liquors of various pH were used for zinc electrowinning. Electrolytes were used as received or were purified from iron ions. The latter was realized as follows: 190 mL of the leach liquor (obtained for 150 g/L of the zinc ash) was heated to 75 ± 5 °C, then 2 mL of 30% H The electrowinning was conducted at ambient temperature using 100 mL of the electrolyte. Lead anode and aluminum cathode were used (each 3 cm × 3 cm). The solution was agitated with a magnetic stirrer (100 rpm). Cathodic current density from a range of 1–5 A/dm All measurements described above were realized at least twice and at ambient temperature of 21 ± 1 °C (except as indicated). Zinc ash used in this study was formerly deprived of coarser metallic fraction in the galvanizing plant by using self-developed method. Received powder (without any pretreatment) was observed under microscopes. SEM-EDS analysis of the powder was performed on the areas of about 3.5 mm Percentage of metallic zinc in the zinc ash was determined by both volumetric and titration methods. It was found that the volume of hydrogen gas evolved during reaction of the zinc ash with sulphuric acid changed in a characteristic way ( Accordingly, the average content of the zinc metal in the raw material was 7.02 ± 0.20%. The results were quite compatible with the data based on cementation process followed by the manganometric titration, which showed 7.95 ± 1.53% of metallic zinc in the zinc ash. Obtained results are closed to that reported by Dvořák and Jandová ( Conductometric titration was used for the analysis of chloride ions present in the zinc ash in a form of soluble compounds. It was found that only 9.30 ± 0.05% of Cl could be dissolved in water. It corresponds to about 50% of total amount of chlorine existing in the material (EDS). It can indicate the presence of soluble chloride-containing compounds in the ash like remainders of the flux (ZnCl  The zinc ash was leached in sulphuric acid solutions. Thermodynamic calculations based on standard free energies of the individual compounds ( Leaching was performed using acid of two concentrations (20% and 25%) to facilitate dissolution of higher portions of the zinc ash in one-step batch leaching and to obtain more concentrated zinc solutions than received previously for diluted H Obtained results showed that zinc and aluminum compounds reacted easy with the acid, while a scatter of the results was found for other metals, especially for Fe and Mn. The latter is understandable in terms of alkalization of the solution during leaching ( and accidental sampling of the precipitated particles (with diameter in the range of 0.5–1 μm). The changes of the solution pH affected also on the contamination by Cd(II) ions, and for less acidic solutions no cadmium was detected. In turn, behaviour of lead compounds was determined by the presence of chloride ions. Solubility of PbSO Solid residues were collected after leaching. They represented 3.7–47% of the initial mass of the sample, depending on the solid to liquid ratio and the acid concentration. Generally, for the bath loadings of 150–200 g/L, the solid residues were in the range of 3.7–6.1% for both H Analysis of the solid residue obtained after “complete” dissolution of the ash was performed (  The leaching of the zinc ash was accompanied by heat effects ( Thermal effects of the leaching The estimated amount of the heat generated during the dissolution of the material was determined per 1 kg of the solid phase. Exothermic effects of the leaching were observed with decreased amount of the heat from about −750 kJ/kg for 150 g/L to about −450 kJ/kg for 400 g/L. The results confirm that for high loading of the bath no total dissolution of the material can be observed. Moreover, the heat release can affect the rate of the process itself without special heating of the system. The solutions obtained after leaching were contaminated by various metallic ions. Some of them can negatively affect the subsequent zinc electrowinning, but other cations can act positively. The first group includes Fe(II, III), Ni(II), Cu(II) as examples. Such ions decrease cathodic current efficiency of the zinc electrodeposition due to parallel reactions like favorable reduction of Fe(III) to Fe(II), enhanced coevolution of hydrogen gas on metallic inclusions or secondary corrosion of the zinc cathode. The second group is represented by Pb(II), Cd(II) and Sn(II) ions, which show high hydrogen overpotential and, hence improve efficiency of the electrolysis. Independently on the type of the metal codeposited with zinc, purity of the final product is decreased. However, the latter seems not to be a hindrance, since intentionally zinc alloy should be returned to the HDG bath. Therefore, the purification stage was focused on removal of iron(III) ions as the most unfavorable impurity. It was realized by traditional method, i.e. hydrolytic precipitation of the hydrated iron(III) oxide with application of calcium oxide for regulation of the pH. CaO (14–20 g per 190 mL of solution) was added until pH of the suspension reached about 4.5 ± 0.3. After filtration of the solid residues (i.e. CaSO It is worth also to mention other methods that can be used for iron removal from the zinc sulphate solutions ( Electrowinning of zinc was conducted using the solutions of various pH, i.e. obtained directly after leaching (pH 0.3 and 3.7) or after purification stage (pH 5.4). Zinc ash originated from hot dip galvanizing represents valuable source of secondary zinc. It contains high percentage of zinc in leachable forms like metal, oxide, oxychloride. The zinc ash is usually purchased by recyclers and sold by HDG plants for 35–45% of zinc price. Despite that pyrometallurgical recycling of the zinc ash is used predominantly in practice, it may be replaced by hydrometallurgical technology. It was shown that zinc ash can be effectively leached (95–97% zinc recovery) in 20% H Further development of the proposed method should focus on elimination of chloride ions from the electrolyte and determination of technical parameters for closed circle of the hydrometallurgical recycling of zinc from the zinc ash. Finally, it should be noted that simple methods used for the determination of metallic zinc in the material can be applied successfully for the analysis of the zinc ash even in poorly equipped laboratories of galvanizing plants. Author declares no conflict of interests. This research work was realized under the project no. POIR.01.01.01-00-0032/16 in the frame of Smart Growth Operational Programme 2014-2020 financed by Narodowe Centrum Badań i Rozwoju (Poland).