The digestion of plant material in mammalian herbivores basically depends on the chemical and structural composition of the diet, the mean particle size to which the forage is processed, and the ingesta retention time. These different factors can be influenced by the animal, and they can presumably compensate for each other. The pygmy hippopotamus, a non-ruminating foregut fermenter, has longer mean retention times than ruminants; however hippos do not achieve higher (fibre) digestibilities on comparable diets, which could be due to ineffective mastication. We performed feeding trials with six pygmy hippos (Hexaprotodon liberiensis) and six banteng cattle (Bos javanicus) on a grass diet. As predicted, both species achieved similar dry matter, organic matter, crude protein and gross energy digestibilities. However, neutral and acid detergent fibre digestibility was lower in pygmy hippos. Apparently, in these species, fibre digestibility was more influenced by particle size, which was larger in pygmy hippos compared to banteng, than by retention time. In spite of their higher relative food intake, the banteng in this study did not have greater relative gut fills than the hippos. Ruminants traditionally appear intake-limited when compared to equids, because feed particles above a certain size cannot leave the rumen. But when compared to nonruminating foregut fermenters, rumination seems to free foregut fermenters from an intrinsic food intake limitation. The higher energy intakes and metabolic rates in wild cattle compared to hippos could have life-history consequences, such as a higher relative reproductive rate.Herbivores rely on symbiotic microorganisms for the digestion of plant material. These microorganisms are located in voluminous anatomical structures where the fermentative digestion takes place; hence, these structures are mostly referred to as fermentation chambers ( Forage digestibility is considered to be inversely related to the amount of cell wall and lignification ( Animals have evolved different adaptations to optimize digestive efficiency, i.e. altering diet composition, particle size and retention time. The chemical composition of the ingested diet can be influenced by diet selection, i.e. selecting food items with a lower fibre and lignin content ( It is reasonable to assume that these different factors (diet composition, particle size and retention time) can compensate for each other. For example, We investigated the digestive efficiency in two different foregut fermenters, the non-ruminating pygmy hippopotamus ( We predicted that pygmy hippos would display similar nutrient digestibilities as banteng on the same diet. Longer ingesta retention times in hippos would outbalance their less effective ingesta mastication. These longer ingesta retention times could be a consequence of instrinsic characteristics as a lower food intake, or a greater gut volume, or both. Based on previous reports on hippo food ingestion (reviewed in The trials were performed with six pygmy hippos and six banteng at the Zoological Gardens of Berlin (ZGB) and Halle (ZGH) in summer 2005 and 2006. Body mass (BM) of the pygmy hippos was measured at the beginning and the end of each trial period, whereas BM of the banteng were estimated by the keepers by visual judgement (height and width) and age and sex as reference. Details of the animals are summarized in The animals were fed fresh grass only, the staple diet at both zoos during summer. Grass (C3-species) was harvested from mixed swards of the surrounding countryside. Since the grass diet was usually supplemented with fruits and vegetables in hippos and with sugar beet pulp in banteng, an adaptation period of 14 days was allowed to pass before the trial started. It was planned to study each animal in two trials on different intake levels (with a second adaptation period of 5 days in between) — All animals were fed separately. Due to the husbandry techniques at the respective zoos, not all animals could be kept separately at all times, and feeding regimens differed. Three pygmy hippos (animals 1–3) received food once daily, approximately at 17:00 h and had access to the food until the next morning. The other pygmy hippos (animals 4–6) as well as three banteng (animals 7–9) received food twice daily, at approximately 08:30 h and 17:00 h. These animals had access to the food until the next meal was offered. Three banteng (animals 10–12) were kept together between the feeding times; in these animals, the individual access to food was limited from 08:30 h to 11:00 h and from 15:30 h to 18:00 h. Food items offered and leftovers were quantified on a daily basis by weighing, and representative samples (for each individual) of food offered and leftovers were stored frozen (− Two of three banteng that were kept together received a coloring agent in their ration (animal 10: titanium dioxide 40 g/d; animal 11: brilliant blue food colour, Sensient Food Colors, Geesthacht, Germany, 2 g/d; both fed twice daily; the blue color was mixed in approx. 200 g sugar beet pulp for better acceptance), so that faeces could be ascribed to the individual animals. Defaecations were collected completely in regular intervals, cleaned from sand (when contaminated), weighed, thoroughly mixed, and an aliquot (200–400 g) was taken and stored frozen. Faeces voided by hippos into the water pool at night were not sampled. For nutrient analyses food and faecal samples were dried at 40 °C and 60 °C, respectively. Dry matter (DM) content of food and faecal subsamples was determined by drying at 103 °C to constant weight. Samples were ground with a ‘Nossener mill’ (Gebrüder Jehmlich, Nossen, Germany, 1 mm round perforated screen). Food samples were additionally ground afterwards with a laboratory mill (A11basic, IKA, Staufen, Germany) to minimize the presence of long glumes. Subsamples of all ground samples of food provided, food left over and faeces, respectively, were pooled, resulting in three samples per animal and trial. Pooled samples were analysed (in duplicate) according to MFN (% total faecal nitrogen, TFN) = MFN (% faecal dry matter, DM) ⁎ 100/N (% faecal DM) With MFN (% faecal DM) = N (% faecal DM) – NDF-N (% faecal DM) With NDF-N (% faecal DM) = MFN is defined as the nitrogen fraction in the faeces of bacterial and animal origin. Faecal Gross energy (GE) was determined by bomb calorimetry (IKA-Labortechnik, C5003control, Staufen, Germany). The nutrient content of the ingested diet was calculated by substracting the content in the leftovers from the content of the offered diet. In a previous paper ( One faecal subsample per animal and diet treatment was used for the determination of the mean faecal particle size (MPS) using wet-sieving technique (Retsch VS 1000, Haan, Germany) with sieve mesh sizes of 16, 8, 4, 2, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125 and 0.063 mm. After thawing, 5–15 g of the samples were soaked in tap water overnight (stored in the fridge) and stirred with a spoon before sieving for 10 min at an amplitude of 45 (approx. 1.5 mm). The particles of each fraction were dried at 103 °C to constant weight together with a subsample for DM content determination. The MPS of each faecal sample was calculated numerically after fitting a suitable function to the respective sample data ( The apparent nutrient digestibility (aD), the digestible energy intake (rDEI) and the true protein digestibility (TPD) were calculated as in The indigestible gut content (V V With F (faeces output, kg DM/h) = total daily faeces output/24 and with MRT = mean (2 mm) particle retention time through the whole digestive tract (h). V = V With V Wherever possible, nonparametric methods were used, because the normality presumption for parametric tests cannot reliably be tested with very small sample sizes. Thus, the Mann-Whitney-U-Test was used for comparisons between species; the high and low intake levels were compared separately. Monotonous associations between pairs of variables were measured by calculating Spearman's correlation coefficient (SCC). The latter analysis should be considered as exploratory since all trials, and thus repeated measurements per individual, were combined. To avoid misunderstandings, we have added quotation marks when designating these results as “significant”. Linear and multiple regression analysis were used for the calculation of intraspecies relationships and ANCOVA for interspecies comparisons of interrelations between OM or The animals appeared to be healthy throughout the study and did not lose weight (measured in pygmy hippos, and judged by external appearance in banteng, see The grass at Berlin and Halle zoo contained on average 27 At the high intake level, pygmy hippos ingested a diet (≠ offered) of significantly lower In pygmy hippos, mean retention time (MRT) and rDMI were negatively correlated, in contrast to banteng ( The mean faecal particle size was significantly higher in hippos compared to banteng at both intake levels ( There was no significant difference in the nutrient digestibility of the banteng calculated with ADL OM or The species did not differ significantly in their relative dry matter gut fill, which constituted on average 1.8% of body mass ( The limitations of digestion studies have to be considered when interpreting the results. The grass was harvested over the whole experimental period from different swards and therefore differed in plant community and maturity. However, the nutrient composition of both the grass offered and ingested, was mostly similar among species, and therefore, an interspecies comparison in nutrient digestibility is feasible. One problem was that the food access in three banteng (animal 10, 11, 12) was time limited (due to husbandry techniques), and it turned out that the supposed ad libitum DMI (HI) was actually a comparatively low intake level for these three animals (omitting them from the mean gives a rDMI of 71 instead of 51 g/(kg Hippos 1–3 were fed less frequently (once vs. twice a day) and had less time to feed (14 vs. 24 h) than hippos 4–6, however they had similar or even higher rDMIs than hippos 4–6. Thus, it can be assumed that trial limitations as feeding frequency and time of food access were not substantial contributors to the response of the animals. In one pygmy hippo (animal 5, HI, LI) and one banteng cattle (animal 8, LI) the DM digestibility was much lower than the OM digestibility (≥ In banteng, which could not be weighed, the results on rDMI, rDEI and total gut fill depend on accuracy of weight estimation. In fact, the results are within the range of feral and domesticated cattle (on comparable diets) given in the literature ( As predicted, both species achieved similar dry matter, organic matter, crude protein and gross energy digestibilities. However, fibre digestibility was lower in pygmy hippos, although they had longer retention times than banteng. Apparently, in these species, fibre digestibility was more influenced by particle size, which was larger in pygmy hippos compared to banteng, than by retention time. As predicted, pygmy hippos displayed a lower rDMI compared to banteng. In contrast to common hippos that achieve greater relative gut capacities than ruminants ( We had expected that multivariate analyses, using the digestibility of OM or The fibre digestibilities in banteng were similar to those in feral and domesticated cattle on comparable (forage only) diets (grass hay: The effect of different particle sizes of the same feed on the efficiency of the The metabolic faecal nitrogen loss did not differ between the investigated species at the low intake level and was even higher in pygmy hippos at the high intake level compared to banteng. This result was in contrast to our expectations, which were based on earlier findings indicating comparatively lower metabolic faecal losses in hippos as compared to ruminants ( rDMI and MRT were negatively correlated in pygmy hippos ( The negative relationship of MRT and rDMI in hippos indicates that they cannot increase food intake without compromising digestive efficiency by accelerating ingesta passage. Therefore, hippos are limited in the extent by which they can increase energy uptake by increasing food intake ( What are the consequences of a supposed difference in metabolic rate between ruminants and hippos? It has been suggested that the reproductive potential of a species is linked to its metabolic rate ( Traditionally, our view of ruminants has been dominated by the comparison with the hindgut (colon) fermenting equids ( This study was supported by grants from the Freie Universität Berlin (NaFöG) to AS and the German Science Foundation (DFG) to SO (OR 86/1-1). We thank Ragnar Kühne, Timm Spretke, Uwe Fritzmann, Kurt Goedicke, Conny Hofmann and colleagues from the Zoological Gardens of Berlin and Halle, Heidrun Barleben, Doreen Pick and Erin Bambury from the IZW Berlin, Olaf Dibowski, Stephan Kohlmüller and their colleagues from the Landeslabor Brandenburg, Germany, and Julia Fritz from the Ludwig-Maximilian Universität München for their engaged support. Sincere thanks to the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.