A process was developed for extracting zinc from refractory zinc silicate (hemimorphite) by mechano-chemical leaching in sodium hydroxide solution with calcium oxide added to inhibit the leaching of silica. The effects of mechanical activation, calcium oxide dosage, temperature, leaching time, liquid–solid ratio and sodium hydroxide concentration were investigated. The dissolution of silica was considerably inhibited by adding CaO, but zinc extraction was almost unchanged. Under optimum conditions in 4.5 mol/L NaOH and twice the stoichiometric CaO at 383 K, the dissolution of Zn and SiO2 were 93.6% and 7.3%, respectively, after 1 h using a liquid–solid ratio (L/S) of 10:1.Oxidized zinc ores are generally found in the forms of silicate or carbonate such as smithsonite (ZnCO Mineralogical studies showed that smithsonite (ZnCO Milling operations have been widely applied to induce mechano-chemical reactions such as phase transformation and solid state reactions. In this work, an improved hydrometallurgical process was developed involving mechano-chemical reaction between Zn The zinc silicate ores used were from Zhuzhou (Hunan Province, China) and were ground in a ball mill. The ground ore was analyzed by chemical methods and characterized by X-ray powder diffraction analysis using CuK Leaching experiments were carried out with 25 g ore (− The effect of mechanical activation on the rate of dissolution of zinc from the untreated ore is presented in The effect of increasing calcium oxide dosage on the leaching of Zn and SiO When the ore was leached for 2 h at different temperatures increasing from 323 K to 473 K, the results in The ore was leached for 2 h at 383 K at different Liquid/Solid ratios ranging from 4 to 12. Other experiments conducted over times ranging from 0.5 to 4 h found very little change in zinc and silica dissolution so the leach time was standardized to 1 h. When the ore was leached at L/S of 10:1 for 1 h at 383 K, the dissolution of zinc and silica increased with increasing concentration of NaOH up to 4.5 mol/L, when no further zinc was leached ( The leaching of refractory hemimorphite (L/S 10:1) with 4.5 mol/L NaOH was found to be more efficient under mechanical activation in a ball mill at 383 K. In the presence of added CaO at 1–2 times stoichiometry, 93% Zn extraction was achieved with only 7%–10% SiO This work was financially supported by The National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2007CB613603).