The molten salt reactor is one of the six concepts retained by the Generation IV forum in 2001. Based on the MSRE and MSBR concepts developed by ORNL in the 60s which involve a liquid fuel constituted of fluorine molten salt at a temperature close to 600°C, new developments with innovative approach and technology have been realized which contribute to strongly improve the concept. The thorium breeder potentiality is closely related to the use of a liquid fuel which is able to be periodically treated. A reprocessing scheme has been established to treat used fuel by extraction of fission products. According to the Gen IV philosophy for closed cycle nuclear reactor, the actinides are sent back in the reactor core. In this way, the wastes radiotoxicity is strongly decreased and the use of natural resource is optimized. This paper describes an innovative reactor concept, the TMSR-NM (non-moderated thorium molten salt reactor), from the nuclear physic point of view and the different steps involving in the reprocessing scheme from the chemical point of view.The concept of molten salt reactor (MSR) has been developed in the 60s by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) of USA. This type of reactor is well adapted to the thorium fuel cycle ( In parallel, the design of an industrial MSR (MSBR for molten salt breeder reactor) was performed at ORNL MSRE and MSBR were designed to operate in a thermal neutron spectrum. The liquid fuel was circulated through a core of graphite bars which acted as moderator. Studies by Scott and Eatherly Thus, in our opinion, major drawbacks of both designs were: (1) the use of graphite moderator with a rather short lifespan, (2) a reactor fuelled with a non-available natural fissile isotope ( This paper aims to describe an innovative concept, the TMSR-NM (non-moderated thorium molten salt reactor) covering the nuclear physics properties of the reactor as well as the various stages of the fuel processing. For two of these stages, the process proposed is a reductive extraction using a liquid metal solvent. Some analytical relations will be given to understand the influence of the liquid solvent composition on the extraction efficiency. The calculations shown below rely on MCNP neutron transport code The CNRS-Grenoble in France has proposed an innovative concept called TMSR-NM for non-moderated thorium molten salt reactor  The core structures are protected by reflectors which ensure that 80% of the neutron flux is either reflected or absorbed. To avoid thermalization of the reflected neutrons, the axial reflectors are made of ZrC. In the radial reflector, tubular structures contain binary fluoride salt with thorium ( These calculations assume a reprocessing efficiency of the fuel salt done in two steps. First, an on-line gaseous extraction with helium bubbling removes all gaseous fission products and noble metals. In our simulations, the extraction time of these elements is assumed to be 30 Core calculations presented here have been made considering that 100 Reactor deterministic safety is good since the feedback coefficients of the TMSR-NM are negative in both The evolution of a typical fuel salt composition for a The deployment capacity of a given reactor depends on its capacity to generate the amount of fissile fuel (here The viability of a reactor concept, in terms of both safety and economy, depends on the lifetime of its components and on constraints imposed on its operation mode. For a MSR, they strongly rely on the quality of the chemical processing of the fluorine molten salt (measured both by its extraction efficiency and the amount of waste generated during the process) and on the compatibility of the salt with the reactor (including the heat exchanger) structural materials. Concerning this last point, we have already noted that in the TMSR-NM concept the removal of the graphite moderator automatically improves the performance of the reactor. As far as reprocessing is concerned, a prior requirement is an accurate knowledge of the physico-chemistry of the molten salt including the redox and chemical properties of the various solutes (heavy elements, fission products). Then, based on this knowledge, a pyrochemical reprocessing scheme must be designed which allows a separation of actinides and fission products within a reasonably short time. Pyrochemical separation and extraction of actinides and fission products can be performed in different ways. For instance, some methods ( Both thermodynamic and kinetic aspects have to be considered to evaluate a reprocessing scheme. From fundamental data (redox potentials, activity coefficients The aim of this paper is to present the first chemical scheme established for the reprocessing of the molten salt of TMSR-NM concept. Some of these steps that it includes have been already proposed within the scheme of the ORNL–MSBR project. However, the nature of the molten salt generates a major difference between the two concepts. Indeed, the salt mixture of MSBR, which has fully been deal with references In addition, a major difference between the US concept and the one discussed in this work is the required reprocessing rate. In the MSBR concept, breeding conditions could only be reached when the reprocessing time of the entire core was less than 10 days. Despite the small size of the MSBR core, this translated into a daily treatment of about 4000 For the TMSR-NM concept, the reprocessing rate is of the order of 40 The complete reprocessing scheme proposed for the treatment of the liquid fuel of TMSR-NM is depicted in Moreover, we should not only consider the fuel carrying salt. Indeed, since TMSR is intended to be a breeder, the reprocessing must also take into account the salt in the blanket from which the fissile As mentioned in Section The second phase is an off-line reprocessing line in which 40 This step aims at removing the elements with high gaseous oxidation states, such as U, Np, Pu for the actinides and Nb, Ru, Te, I, Mo, Cr, Tc for the fission products. The global reaction is given in Three successive NaF traps are used at different temperatures to separate and recover the different elements. The rate of recovery of UF Concerning Pu, it has been demonstrated that extraction by fluorination is possible when small (100 The separated elements are next reduced by action of hydrogen. The balance of this first stage is given in The remaining actinides (Pu (the fraction not removed by fluorination stage), Pa, Am, Cm) are now extracted from this batch by a reductive extraction in a liquid metal solvent constituted of Bi with metallic thorium. The metallic thorium in the bismuth pool is here the reductive reagent. Its concentration is chosen to control the potential of the metallic pool. The potential is given by the following relation: In this relation, The value of the potential is one key experimental parameter because its control is crucial to optimize the decontamination factor of actinides. Indeed, it must allow a reduction of actinides while leaving lanthanides in the salt. The elements involved in this extraction are Pu, Pa, Am and Cm. Fission products such as Zr can also be reduced by this step if they are not removed in the on-line reprocessing line of helium bubbling. The back extraction is realized by anodic oxidation in cleaned LiF–ThF The extraction of lanthanides is also performed by a reductive extraction in liquid Bi pool containing metallic thorium as reductive reagent. The difference with the previous stage is due to a modification of the metallic pool composition by changing the concentration of thorium which modifies the potential value or by increasing the volume of the metallic phase. In this case, the concentration of metallic thorium is kept higher than the concentration used for the actinide extraction in order to sufficiently lower the potential to values which correspond to the reduction of the lanthanides dissolved in the molten salt. The maximum of thorium concentration in bismuth is close to its solubility The back extraction of lanthanides from the Bi–Th bath is done by anodic oxidation in LiCl–KCl (58.5–41.2 As mentioned in the last two stages of the salt processing, the potential of the Bi–Th solvent metal is controlled by the amount of Th in the liquid bismuth by the relation In relation The extraction efficiency of the element M is given by the following relation: In the relation (R3), A relation between the potential and the efficiency can then be deduced from the relations (R2) and (R3):  For the 3.2.2.2 stage, one can work with a Th mole fraction in Bi equal to 10 The extraction of Nd remaining in the reprocessed salt is then performed via the 3.2.2.3 stage of the scheme. In this case, a lower value of potential is needed. This is achieved by increasing the concentration of Th in the liquid Bi. For a concentration of Th equal to its solubility in Bi, the extraction efficiency of Nd is equal to 87%. To extract a larger quantity of Nd, a multi-stage extraction is necessary. A best efficiency can also be obtained by increasing the mole ratio The innovative TMSR-NM concept proposed appears to be a very promising MSR concept. It has several specific advantages, mainly due to the liquid fuel and to the thorium cycle. Among the properties not yet mentioned, one can note that the LiF–ThF The reprocessing scheme that we propose as reference is both comprehensive and compatible with the volume requirements for the TMSR. It allows a detailed study of all fuel and waste streams. Obviously, it is still a starting point which needs further exploration and improvements. We should keep in mind that the nature of the liquid metal can still be modified to cope with the low solubility of Th in Bi. The choice of the solvent metal in stages 3.2.2.2 and 3.2.2.3 (here above Bi) has to be optimized considering the several extraction stages. This optimization will take into account the extraction efficiencies for the all elements, particularly those of lanthanides which are neutronic poisons. A more accurate knowledge than presently available of fundamental data, such as activity coefficients, is essential to realize this study successfully. Experimental measurements are currently underway. All the properties of TMSR-NM combined with an integrated chemical reprocessing scheme put this innovative molten salt reactor concept in a very good position to fulfil the conditions defined by the GEN IV International Forum and to produce the large amount of nuclear energy that the world will need in the future. The authors wish to thank PACEN (Programme sur l’Aval du Cycle et l’Energie Nucléaire) of the