NiAl–10vol.% Al2O3 
                     in situ nanocomposite has been synthesized by reactive milling and subsequent spark plasma sintering. The synthesized nanocomposites have ∼96% of theoretical density after sintering at 1000°C for 5min. Microstructural analysis of consolidated samples using TEM has revealed the presence of α-Al2O3 particles of 10–12nm size in NiAl matrix of submicron grain size. Consolidated NiAl–10vol.% Al2O3 nanocomposite has shown very high hardness of 772HV0.3 and compressive strength of 2456MPa with ∼14% plastic strain. The high hardness and compressive yield strength are attributed to the presence of nanocrystalline α-Al2O3 particles and the appreciable plastic strain is attributed to the submicron grains of NiAl.Ordered NiAl has relatively low density, high strength, high melting point, high thermal conductivity, excellent oxidation resistance. Due to these attractive properties ordered NiAl is considered as a potential candidate for high temperature parts of gas turbine engines for aircraft-propulsion systems, bond coats under thermal barrier coatings, electronic metallization compounds in advanced semiconductor heterostructures and surface catalysts. However, inadequate room temperature ductility is the limiting factor for this material to be used in structural applications The mechanical properties of NiAl can be improved by reinforcing them with particles such as Al NiAl–TiC nanocomposite has been synthesized successfully by carrying out reactive milling of Ni, Al, Ti, and C powders Recently, NiAl–Al The consolidation of nanocrystalline NiAl powders has been accomplished by different techniques like hot pressing The present study aims to develop Reactive milling was carried out for NiO (Alfa Aesar, 99% purity, −325 mesh) Al (Loba Chemie Pvt Ltd., 99.7% purity, −325 mesh) and Ni (Loba Chemie Pvt, 99.5% purity, −200 mesh) powders at a composition of NiO–33 Microstructural analysis was carried out for bulk consolidated samples using Philips CM20 transmission electron microscope (TEM) operating at 200  The calculated crystallite size and lattice strain of The long range order parameter, S, of the NiAl phase is calculated in the following way The as milled powder was consolidated using SPS at 1000 The TEM micrographs of NiAl–10 Since the XRD and TEM analysis of the compacted samples show that the reaction is complete the theoretical density of the synthesized nanocomposites is calculated using rule of mixture based on the aimed amount of phases. The density of NiAl–10 In the present study, the TEM analysis of NiAl–10  In general, higher strength is achieved with the loss of plasticity. However, it has not been observed in the microcrystalline NiAl data, since this data involves addition of appreciable amount of alloying elements to improve the mechanical properties. For example, NiAl prepared by Guo et al. Kim et al. Coreno-Alonso et al. It has been inferred from the collected mechanical properties data that the nanocrystalline NiAl would result very high yield strength with very low ductility and submicron grain structured NiAl has slightly lower yield strength with appreciable amount of plastic strain. The yield strength values obtained in the present work for NiAl–10 The microstructure of NiAl–10 NiAl based