The previous study indicates that both reagent usage and the variation of water conductivity affect froth stability and therefore coal flotation behavior. In this study, Central Composite Rotatable Design (CCRD) was conducted to investigate the interaction
                        1
                     
                     
                        1
                        A term in statistics meaning that the effect of two or more variables is not simply additive.
                      of saline water with collector (diesel) and frother (MIBC) in controlling froth stability which was indicated by air recovery. The results show that a significant interaction (see footnote 1) existed between flotation reagents and water conductivity, which affected froth stability, combustible matter recovery and the mineral matter content of flotation concentrate. Frother and salt ions had a joint action in producing a more stable froth. On the other hand, collector and salt ions had a joint action in reducing the combustible matter content of flotation concentrate and the combustible matter recovery. A methodology was developed to avoid overly stable froth and maximize coal flotation performance by adjusting reagent additions based on water conductivity.Saline water is an important part of the Australian mining industry. In Australia, borehole water or sea water with a high ionic strength has to be used on mine sites for production, site rehabilitation, and downstream processing due to the scarcity of fresh water. Most Australian coal mines have adopted water re-use as a means for making freshwater savings. However, water re-use results in increased salinity in site water stores, which is driven largely by evaporation and ongoing salt inputs from soil, minerals and groundwater ( The water quality in a flotation plant can change over time ( Water constituents can have a joint action with the chemical reagents added to flotation circuits in affecting the flotation response ( Collector also affects the froth properties. Sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) was found to destabilize the froth when used along with polypropylene glycol frother in the flotation of sulfide ores using water containing various salts ( In fact, the joint action of collector and frother in flotation has been studied since 1950s. The objectives of this paper is to identify the synergy of saline water and flotation reagents (frother and collector) in coal flotation and develop a guideline for flotation reagent usage based on the variation of water conductivity to avoid overly stable froth problems while producing satisfactory coal flotation performance in terms of combustible matter recovery and the mineral matter content of flotation concentrate. The coal sample examined in this study was obtained from a Glencore coal flotation plant in the Bowen Basin in the state of Queensland, Australia. A quantitative XRD analysis shows that this coal sample composes of 82.9% unidentified/amorphous mineral, 5% quartz, 3.9% kaolinite, 2.8% muscovite, 3.4% mixed illite/smectite, 1% siderite and 0.4% pyrite. The size of the coal sample is − Simulated process water was used in this study. Salts were added to deionized water to produce three types of simulated process water with a minimum, medium and maximum conductivity or salinity which occur in Australian coal flotation plants ( 128–384 145–145 0.18–12.24 The range of collector and frother dosages was determined based on the baseline dosages used in the coal flotation plant, 80 The statistical design was conducted in a way to investigate the effect of 3 factors (frother dosage, collector dosage and water conductivity) on 3 responses (air recovery, combustible matter content of flotation concentrate, combustible matter recovery) using the minimum required number of experiments detecting any curvature. In the previous study, air recovery was found to be the best indicator of froth stability for fine coal flotation using saline water with an over-frothing issue. Combustible matter content of flotation concentrate and combustible matter recovery are indicators of the coal flotation performance. A full factorial design requires a minimum of three levels per variable to obtain the prediction of quadratic terms in the response model ( The design for the twenty experiments showing the coded and actual variables is shown in Flotation was conducted in a 1.5 The wet concentrates and tailings from flotation were filtered and then dried in a laboratory oven at 80 The air recovery parameter was chosen to represent the froth stability. The air recovery, or stability parameter α can be defined as the fraction of air introduced in the pulp which becomes unbroken bubbles as defined in Eq. Air recovery was determined in the same flotation cell that was used for flotation by measuring the vertical froth rising velocity. When air was introduced to the flotation cell, a timer was used to record the time the froth took to reach the maximum equilibrium height. The experimental set-up is shown in The summary of CCRD experimental results for the 20 tests is shown in The main factors affecting the froth stability and interaction (see footnote The main factors affecting the combustible matter content of flotation concentrate and interaction (see footnote The main factors affecting combustible matter recovery and interaction (see footnote In the previous study, overly stable froth was obtained with 50% air recovery when saline water with a medium conductivity was tested in line with the observation in the plant (  The left graph in  The left graph in  The left graph in It is interesting to observe that water conductivity affected froth stability significantly in a non-linear way (AR This study also shows that the joint action of frother and water conductivity in affecting froth stability, which is expected. As discussed previously, saline water augments the reduction of surface tension by frother ( The grade of flotation concentrate depends on the recovery of both valuable and gangue minerals through true flotation and mechanical entrainment. In a flotation cell, entrainment occurs simultaneously along with true flotation. Unlike true flotation, the entrainment of minerals is not chemically selective and it occurs through water films between air bubbles without a direct attachment of particles to bubbles ( This study shows that water conductivity had a significant effect on the combustible matter content (MC It is interesting to find that collector dosage acted together with water conductivity causing a decreasing trend in combustible matter content (− The combustible matter recovery was affected significantly by frother dosage and water conductivity in both linear (MR In fact, flotation frother has been shown to produce small bubbles increasing bubble-particle collision efficiency in flotation pulp as well as creating stable froths to transport valuable materials ( However, in this study the joint action of frother dosage and conductivity caused a decrease in combustible matter recovery (MR In general, this study indicates that water conductivity was an important factor in affecting froth stability, combustible matter content and combustible matter recovery. Frother dosage was an important factor in affecting combustible matter recovery and its effect on froth stability was through the joint action with water conductivity. Collector dosage did not have an important effect on froth stability and combustible matter recovery, but did affect combustible matter content through the joint action with water conductivity. This knowledge may be used to guide coal flotation plants to avoid overly stable froth problems while producing satisfactory coal flotation performance based on the variation of water conductivity. However, this knowledge was developed from coal flotation using diesel and MIBC as collector and frother, respectively. Validation of this knowledge is required before it is used in other flotation systems. In addition, due to the limitation of statistical models and a difference in laboratory and plant flotation, the recommended reagent usage to avoid overly stable froth requires validation and optimization before a robust strategy is applied in any flotation plant. The results from Central Composite Rotatable Design (CCRD) in this study show that interactions (see footnote The results also provide the general direction of flotation reagent usage with a variation in water conductivity for coal flotation plants. Several suggestions were made with regards to the flotation reagent management to allow the generation of froth without being overly stable while producing acceptable combustible matter content and combustible matter recovery. As the surface models are not linear, a simple reagent solution in coal flotation using saline water does not exist. The authors gratefully acknowledge the