Shear flocculation characteristics of celestite (SrSO4) mineral have been investigated using sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and Aero 845 as anionic surfactants. The celestite suspension could be flocculated by SDS and Aero 845 in the broad pH range. However, these surfactants were slightly more effective on the celestite suspension at a pH of 7. The shear flocculation of celestite with SDS and Aero 845 increased rapidly with increasing surfactant concentration. However, it decreased at SDS concentrations higher than 45mg/dm3, and eventually stabilization of the suspension took place at concentration values above approximately 80mg/dm3. From the experiments carried out to determine the effects of stirring speed and flocculation time on the shear flocculation of celestite suspension, it was found that a stirring speed of 500rpm and a flocculation time of 3min were required to achieve the maximum aggregation degree of celestite particles. The effects of sodium silicate, sodium phosphate and sodium polyphosphate used as inorganic dispersants on the shear flocculation of celestite were also studied. Sodium silicate strongly prevented the shear flocculation of celestite with SDS. However, the dispersive effect of sodium silicate was low in the presence of Aero 845. In the case of sodium polyphosphate, a dispersive effect on the celestite suspension was not observed for both surfactants. On the contrary, the shear flocculation power values increased slowly in the presence of sodium polyphosphate. In addition, the similar phenomenon also took place for sodium phosphate in the presence of SDS.Celestite (SrSO Shear flocculation is the aggregation of fine particles at a convenient stirring regime after hydrophobization by the adsorption of surfactants. Hydrophobic electrically charged fine particles can also form stable suspensions. Therefore, the shear flocculation process requires mechanical energy to overcome energy barrier, arising from the electrical charge on the particle surfaces Comminution is required to liberate the valuable constituents, and separation results strongly depend on the degree of liberation. However, fine particles produced during the grinding process in mineral processing operations decrease the efficiency of the concentration processes This paper aims to determine the shear flocculation properties of celestite mineral with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and Aero 845. In addition, the effects of addition of sodium silicate, sodium polyphosphate and sodium phosphate into the suspension on the shear flocculation of celestite were studied. Determination of such characteristics experimentally regarding to celestite mineral will help fine particle processing of celestite ores. Pure celestite mineral was used in this study. The mineralogical analysis of the celestite revealed that the sample contains more than 99% SrSO The shear flocculation experiments were carried out in a 300 The performance of the shear flocculation process was assessed using the formula given below, defined previously  The effects of the concentration of sodium dodecyl sulfate and Aero 845 on the shear flocculation of celestite suspension at pH 7 are shown in The shear flocculation characteristics of celestite using sodium oleate (C The shear flocculation behaviors of celestite suspensions performed at various stirring speeds are shown in  The effects of the concentration of sodium silicate on the shear flocculation of celestite suspension at pH 7 and 10.5 are shown in  As seen in Polyphosphates can adsorb onto solid surfaces either electrostically or by hydrogen bonding, or by forming strong covalent bonds with a number of metallic cations Celestite mineral was flocculated using sodium dodecyl sulfate and Aero 845 as anionic surfactants in the wide pH range of 3–11. However, the shear flocculation of celestite suspensions reached a maximum value for both surfactants at neutral pH. The shear flocculation power values for celestite suspension increased rapidly towards 15 From the experiments performed to determine the effects of sodium silicate, sodium polyphosphate and sodium phosphate used as inorganic dispersants, it was found that the dispersive capability of these inorganic dispersants on the shear flocculation of celestite suspension varied depending on the surfactant type used in the experiments. Sodium silicate was more effective in the shear flocculation of celestite suspension with SDS than Aero 845. In the presence of sodium polyphosphate, the shear flocculation of celestite suspension increased slowly for both surfactants. The similar increase was also observed for sodium phosphate in the presence of SDS. However, sodium phosphate dispersed the celestite suspension in the presence of Aero 845. In addition, the trends of the shear flocculation power curves obtained at pH 7 and 10.5 as a function of concentration of these dispersants were very similar to each other. Accordingly, it was concluded that celestite mineral cannot be dispersed by sodium polyphosphate and sodium phosphate, especially in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate. This finding can be useful when selective shear flocculation of celestite mineral from celestite ores containing calcium minerals is practiced. The authors acknowledge the financial support of this study provided by Selcuk University Scientific Research Project Fund for project no. 04/46.