Sulfate reduction rate measurements by the 35SO4
                     2− core injection method were carried out in situ with a benthic lander, LUISE, and in parallel by shipboard incubations in sediments of the Black Sea. Eight stations were studied along a transect from the Romanian shelf to the deep western anoxic basin. The highest rates measured on an areal basis for the upper 0–15cm were 1.97mmolm−2
                     d−1 on the shelf and 1.54mmolm−2
                     d−1 at 181m water depth just below the chemocline. At all stations sulfate reduction rates decreased to values <3nmolcm−3
                     d−1 below 15cm depth in the sediment. The importance of sulfate reduction relative to the total mineralization of organic matter was very low, 6%, on the inner shelf, which was paved with mussels, and increased to 47% on the outer shelf at 100m depth. Where the oxic–anoxic interface of the water column impinged on the sea floor at around 150m depth, the contribution of sulfate reduction increased from >50% just above the chemocline to 100% just below. In the deep sea, mean sulfate reduction rates were 0.6mmolm−2
                     d−1 corresponding to an organic carbon oxidation of 1.3mmolm−2
                     d−1. This is close to the mean sedimentation rate of organic carbon over the year in the western basin. A comparison with published data on sulfate reduction in Black Sea sediments showed that the present results tend to be higher in shelf sediments and lower in the deep-sea than most other data. Based on the present water column H2S inventory and the H2S flux out of the sediment, the calculated turnover time of H2S below the chemocline is 2100 years.The Black Sea is a land-locked deep basin which contains the largest permanently anoxic water body in the world with a volume of 423,000 The Black Sea was a freshwater lake during the Pleistocene, and limnic sediments are found today at 0.5 The chronology of these changing conditions in the Black Sea is based on Because of its permanent stratification caused by temperature and salinity gradients, the Black Sea is an ideal natural laboratory to study how the main geochemical processes change through the transition from oxic shelf sediments to sulfidic deep sea sediments. An important question is how the relative significance of the main oxidants changes across the shelf break and upper slope where the oxic/anoxic interface intercepts the sea floor. This transition is characterized by very low oxygen and by relatively high nitrate concentrations. It is a zone that has many similarities to continental margin sediments underlying waters with strong upwelling, extensive oxygen depletion, and nitrate enrichment (e.g. The dynamics of the oxic/anoxic interface and its influence on mineralization processes in underlying sediments are still poorly known. Mineralization processes such as sulfate reduction in Black Sea sediments have been studied under laboratory conditions by radiotracer incubation of retrieved sediment cores ( In situ measurements of benthic fluxes have been done earlier on the north-western Black Sea shelf by Samples were obtained from nine stations in the western Black Sea during a cruise onboard the Russian RV Sediment properties changed significantly with the transition from oxic to sulfidic conditions. On the shelf and out to the shelf break the sea floor was densely covered by mussels, A free-falling benthic profiling lander ( A chamber lander ( Immediately after recovery of the lander the water samples were divided and a subsample for ΣCO No tube-dwelling macrofauna was found. The vast majority of the fauna consisted of mussels that had their water inlet and outlet directed to the open water. Thus, bioirrigation and biopumping within the sediment were presumably less significant. The difference between the total oxygen uptake in the chamber minus the diffusive oxygen uptake of the sediment was, therefore, assigned to the faunal respiration ( Sulfate reduction rates (SRR) in the sediment were determined by the whole-core During ascent and recovery of the lander, additional sulfate reduction may occur which will be affected by transient warming and decompression. To be able to estimate this error and to correct for it afterwards, the two additional cores were taken with the remaining coreliners and injected only a few hours before the ascent of the lander. By subtraction of the data of this short-term incubation from those of the longer-term incubation, the in situ sulfate reduction during the intervening incubation time on the sea floor could be calculated. The correction was generally <20% of the measured sulfate reduction rates. Further details of the instrument operation are given in Immediately after recovery of the lander the cores were sectioned and incubation was stopped. The upper 0–5 Three undisturbed subcores of the same diameter as the in situ cores were obtained from individual cores taken by a multiple corer at the same locations as the lander deployments. After subsampling and temperature equilibration, the cores were injected horizontally with 10 All laboratory and in situ SRR were determined using a single step acid Cr-II distillation method to volatilize and trap the total reduced sulfur species ( Porewater for measurement of sulfate in 1–2 Total carbon, nitrogen and sulfur were measured in a CNS-analyser (Fisions NA 1500, Series 2) by flash combustion (e.g. Water samples were collected by a rosette water sampler, and hydrographic parameters (temperature, salinity and pressure) were simultaneously recorded by a CTD (Sea-Bird SBE 19). Oxygen, nitrate and sulfide were measured onboard. Immediately after recovery, the O The shelf stations 1–4 typically had a light gray, occasionally greenish, soft mud with a superficial fluff layer or fluffy aggregates (0–2.5 The sediment of St. 0 further south ( Laminated sediments without living macrofauna were observed at all the deeper St. 5–8. On the upper slope at St. 5 (181 At St. 6–8 we observed finely laminated coccolith ooze (cf. As an example of the stratified water column, CTD data from St. 5 are shown in Because of the dense pavement with mussels across the entire shelf, only a few, incomplete in situ microprofiles of oxygen were obtained at St. 1–4. Oxygen in the near-bottom water was detectable down to about 140 Sulfate reduction was measured by both shipboard and in situ incubations. An example of a laboratory incubated core from St. 0 is given in Results from the other stations are presented in The profiles show several main characteristics: Sulfate reduction rates in shelf sediments are higher than in deep basin sediments. In shelf and upper slope sediments the maximum rates were found at 1–2 The maximal sulfate reduction rates in shelf sediments (which are best evaluated from the laboratory incubations due to loss of surface fluff from in situ cores) decreased from 30–50 Depth-integrated rates of sulfate reduction, expressed per m Depth profiles of organic carbon, carbonate carbon, and atomic ratios of In comparison to St. 1–4, where the total sulfur concentrations were below 0.3% dw, the average sulfur concentrations measured over the whole sediment core of St. 5–8 varied between 0.2 and 1.2% dw (data not shown). Highest sulfur concentrations (2.7% dw) were found in the sapropel below 30 A comparison of laboratory measured sulfate reduction rates with rates obtained in situ showed statistically significant differences ( A transient increase of temperature, from 7–9°C in situ to 20°C at the surface, is a second factor that could enhance sulfate reduction in subcores for shipboard incubations (cf. A third potential factor is the release of hydrostatic pressure in laboratory incubated sediments from the deep stations. Recent work on the pressure dependence of sulfate reduction on the continental slope off North Carolina at a water depth of 750 showed no systematic differences between in situ and shipboard incubations ( Station 5 does not fit with the overall trend of lower in situ than laboratory rates ( In conclusion, based on the present results and observations we cannot give a consistent explanation for the differences in measured sulfate reduction rates from in situ and laboratory incubations. The potential effects of recovery and handling procedures will require more detailed study. Sulfate reduction rates in sediments from the western Black Sea measured during this and earlier studies are compared in The database is still small, and it is not possible to discriminate the extent to which differences in rates are due to geographical variations. The radiotracer techniques for sulfate reduction measurements differ among authors, which may explain part of the scatter in rates, although systematic differences in the data among authors are not obvious. The total oxygen uptake rate of the sediment, as measured in situ by the benthic chamber lander, is an integrating measure of aerobic respiration and chemical oxidation of reduced inorganic compounds. The aerobic respiration is due partly to heterotrophic organisms oxidizing organic carbon directly and partly to lithotrophic organisms oxidizing reduced inorganic products of anaerobic mineralization, e.g. H In At the inner shelf stations, St. 1 and 2, the oxidation of organic carbon was predominantly aerobic and sulfate reduction contributed only 5.6 and 14.7%, respectively, although these stations had the highest sulfate reduction rates ( For the oxic St. 1–4, shipboard sediment incubations were performed during the cruise to estimate the contributions of Mn(IV) and Fe(III) reduction using the approach of At St. 5 the seawater above the sediment was anoxic and depleted of nitrate. The sulfate reduction rate was significantly higher than at the shallower outer shelf St. 4, and sulfate reduction was the completely dominant respiration process. Since the station is situated at the shelf break, some influx of manganese and iron oxides may occur and contribute to sulfide oxidation. At the deeper St. 6–8, the water column is sulfidic and H According to our data, the deposition of organic material available for sulfate reduction changes mostly across the shelf and upper slope and becomes more constant between 400 and 2000 The Black Sea is the world's largest sulfidic basin with a total water column inventory of H The areal rates of sulfate reduction presented here cover only the upper 0–15 The mean If a mean H If Redfield stoichiometry for the organic matter oxidation by sulfate reduction of In conclusion, it appears that only the lowest areal sulfate reduction rates found in this and some other studies are in accordance with the organic carbon supply and that, consequently, many of the We thank Kirsten Neumann for assistance in the isotope lab and onboard the ship, Volker Meyer, and the captain and crew of RV