This database presents the optimization of ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) for the analysis of EPA-priority endocrine disruptor compounds (13 hormones and bisphenol A). Various method parameters were tested and compared for improved sensitivity. Data related to the selection of the ionization source (heated-ESI vs. APCI) are presented, including optimization results of source parameters. Compound-dependent responses when varying the UHPLC mobile phase salt concentration of ammonium fluoride (NH4F) are supplied. Details on the chromatographic gradient program and chromatographic data demonstrating the separation of α-estradiol and β-estradiol are provided. In addition, we supply the details on mass spectrometry parameters under the optimized conditions, relative responses of quantification and confirmation MS/MS transitions (QT/CT), and number of points present in UHPLC-MS/MS spectra. The sample preparation and instrumental analysis procedures under the retained conditions are also described. The herein dataset supports the research “Analysis of Environmental Protection Agency priority endocrine disruptor hormones and bisphenol A in tap, surface and wastewater by online concentration liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry” Goeury et al., 2019. The data presented can be used by other scientists to monitor endocrine-disrupting compounds in water. The data can be used to assist end-users with the selection of salt concentration, ionization source type, and mobile phases. The data can also be used to implement chromatographic gradient conditions allowing the separation of α-estradiol and its β isomer. The optimized instrumental parameters can be used in future LC-MS/MS method development and applications of hormones and bisphenol A. The following dataset includes 9 figures and 1 table that support the method optimization for the ultra-trace analysis of EPA-priority endocrine disruptors (hormones and bisphenol A). Mass spectrometry optimization is supported by 5 figure elements and one table. The tested mass spectrometry conditions are also described in our related research In accordance with U.S. EPA criteria we verified that each UHPLC-MS/MS chromatographic peak had a minimum of 10 data points ( The overall procedure for sample preparation is presented in The samples were submitted to on-line solid phase extraction (SPE) coupled to ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) through a polarity-switching ionization source. A total analysis time of 15.5 minutes per sample was achieved. The sample delivery system comprised a dual switching-column array. In-loop sample injection was performed with an HTC thermopal autosampler (CTC Analytics AG, Zwingen, Switzerland). The column-switching system An Accela 1250 quaternary pump (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, U.S.A.) was used for sample elution from the enrichment column and subsequent separation on the analytical column. Analyte separation was performed using a Thermo Hypersil Gold C18 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 1.9 μm particle size) from Thermo Fisher Scientific (San Jose, CA, U.S.A.). The analytical column was thermostated at 55 °C and the mobile phases flow rate set at 500 μL·min The TSQ Quantiva triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) was coupled to a heated electrospray ionization source (heated-ESI), operated in fast polarity-switching mode. Source parameters under the optimized conditions were as follows: sheath gas (60 arbitrary unit), auxiliary gas (15 arbitrary unit), sweep gas (0 arbitrary unit), ion spray voltage (+3kV or -3kV, polarity-switching), capillary temperature (350 °C), vaporizer temperature (400 °C). The scan time was set at 20 ms. The first and third quadrupole (Q1 and Q3) were set at unit resolution (0.7 Da FWHM). The collision gas pressure in the collision cell (q2) was fixed at 1.5 mTorr. The analyzer was operated in selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode, and two MS/MS transitions were monitored for each compound This work was supported by the The following is the transparency document related to this article: Transparency document associated with this article can be found in the online version at