Growth of Al–Pd–Mn–Ga quasicrystalline thin film is hindered by the low melting temperature of Ga (30 °C) and the formation of residual binary phases. In this study, a stable icosahedral film with a composition near Al67.5Pd19Mn7.5Ga5.7 has been achieved using the co-sputtering of Al64.9Pd20.7Mn8.4Ga6 and Al materials followed by ex-situ annealing. The increase in the 6d lattice parameter from 6.45 to 6.48 Å of icosahedral phases suggested that Ga (+1) successfully replaced Al(+3) in the composition. The temperature-dependent XRD study (from RT to 700 °C) reveals that the icosahedral phase found only in a narrow temperature window of 350 – 450 °C. Interestingly, Al63Pd18Mn7.5Ga6 quasicrystalline thin film exhibits cluster spin glass behaviour due to spin-spin interaction of localized Mn ions. These stable icosahedral thin films with crack-free well-defined surfaces can be useful for potential surface-related applications.Intriguing properties of quasi-crystals (QC) such as significant negative thermoelectric power coefficients (up to several tens of μV/K), low thermal conductivity and high corrosion resistance (especially useful at high temperatures) have opened up multiple avenues for their applications It can be noted that the formation of icosahedral phase is limited only to the composition near Al Creating a thin film of composition Al Structural characterization of the generated films was performed using Glancing angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) (SIE-MENS D500 diffractometer) with an incident angle of 1.5°. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI QUANTA 600F) attached with energy dispersive analysis of X-rays (EDAX) (Bruker Quantax XFlash 4010) was used for chemical analysis. The magnetic properties were measured with in-plane film configuration in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS™) using vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, 5 – 300 K). The susceptibility (χ) over the entire temperature range was measured in an applied field of 500 and 150  Oe following a zero-field-cooling (  SEM micrographs for the annealed films at 400 and 550 °C are shown in To investigate icosahedral phase formation and its thermal stability below the melting point of the icosahedral phase, we plotted in-situ temperature-dependent XRD patterns in The magnetic state of quasicrystalline films (Al The need for producing stable icosahedral Al(Ga)–Pd–Mn quasicrystalline thin films is important to comprehend their surface, structural and magnetic properties for various applications. In this study, we have shown how the optimization of the growth condition and post-annealing treatment is crucial in achieving icosahedral Al(Ga)–Pd–Mn thin films. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study: The icosahedral Al(Ga)–Pd–Mn phase can be stabilized by co-sputtering of Al Ex-situ annealing favours stable icosahedral phase rather in-situ growth while keeping substrate heated. Control of binary Al–Pd alloy is a significant challenge, icosahedral phase found only in the critical temperature range (350 – 450 °C). Selection of substrate material plays a crucial role in obtaning uniform crack-free surfaces of the icosahedral phase. Our Al The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.