Chitosan is very efficient at removing cadmium through chelation mechanisms involving amine groups of chitosan. The optimum pH is 7, and in acidic solutions, the protonation of the biopolymer reduces the binding of cadmium on amine groups due to electrostatic repulsion. The influence of particle size, temperature and agitation speed on metal sorption is investigated using chitosan flakes and chitosan gel beads. Temperature and agitation speed hardly influence equilibria and kinetics in the selected experimental conditions corresponding to a large sorbent dosage. The major effect on sorption performance is due to sorbent particle size, especially for chitosan flakes. Though intraparticle diffusion represents an important step in the kinetic control, the contribution of external diffusion may not be neglected.Cadmium is widely used in several industries including metallurgy, surface treatment, dye synthesis or battery production. Due to its toxicity, cadmium removal from aqueous effluents has been classified as a priority in the last decade. Industrial wastewaters are usually treated through chemical precipitation. However, these processes involve the production of highly toxic sludges, which must be further treated before being environmentally safe for disposal Chitin is an aminopolysaccharide which is readily found in nature: fungal biomass, crustacean shells, insect cuticles. It is commercially extracted from crustacea shells Owing to the low porosity of chitosan, sorption performances are frequently controlled by mass transfer resistance. The influence of diffusion mechanisms is also controlled by the chemistry of the metal and by the conditioning of the biopolymer. Since chitosan is soluble in acidic solutions, it is necessary to increase its chemical stability in acidic solutions for the sorption of several metal anions whose recovery is only effective at pH lower than 4–5 This work concentrates on the study of cadmium sorption using gel beads and flakes. The influence of several experimental parameters on sorption kinetics is investigated with both raw and crosslinked materials: particle size, agitation velocity, temperature. The diffusion of cadmium in the gel beads is also studied using SEM-EDAX analysis (scanning electron microscope coupled with an energy-dispersed analysis of X ray apparatus) for several points of a typical kinetic curve obtained on raw chitosan gel beads put in contact with a cadmium solution. Chitosan was used as received from ABER Technologie (Plouvien, France). Previous characterization performed on the raw material had shown that the deacetylation degree was about 87% and the molecular weight was approximately 125.000 g mol The crosslinking was performed by mixing a known amount of chitosan with aqueous glutaraldehyde solutions: the molar ratio between amine groups of chitosan and glutaraldehyde was fixed at 1:2. The large molar excess of glutaraldehyde induces a strong reaction of amine moieties with aldehyde ends. With such a large molar excess of glutaraldehyde, a complete saturation of amine groups is suspected. Cadmium was used in its CdCl The study of the influence of pH was performed by adding 50 mg of chitosan (dry weight) to 50 mL of cadmium solution (initial concentration: 10 mg L Sorption isotherms were obtained by mixing varying volumes of cadmium solutions (buffered at pH 7 with a 0.1 molar phosphate buffer, initial concentration: 20 mg L These experiments were performed on chitosan gel beads (diameter 2.75 mm) using a buffered cadmium solution ( The embedding of the samples was performed using a Resicrom resin (Fibras y Resinas de Irapuato Mexico): samples were mixed with increasing percentages of embedding resin in the mixture resin/propylene oxide. Then, the mixture (resin+sample) was polymerized at 60°C for 72 h. The sections were polished with several abrasive silica discs of decreasing grain size (Buehler No. 600 and 240), alumina pulp 1–0.3 and 0.05 μm (Buehler Micropolish) and a diamond pulp (1/4 μm Buehler Metadi II). The carbon coating was performed with a Cold Sputter Each Unit Carbon Evaporation Accessory (Denton Vacuum DESK II). The SEM-EDAX analyses were performed on a LEICA S-420 s with an X-ray Dispersive Micro-Analyzer Kevex Superdry (FISONS) with a accelerating voltage of 25 kV. The growing power was 150 X and the current intensity was 268.1 nA. The L Sorption kinetics may be controlled by several processes including diffusion steps: (i) bulk diffusion, (ii) film diffusion, and (iii) intraparticle diffusion. The adsorption reaction and the bulk diffusion are usually considered instantaneous, and sorption kinetics is controlled by either external or intraparticle diffusion or by both diffusion mechanisms at the same time The external diffusion is modeled using the simplified approach described by Findon et al. By plotting ln Crank has proposed a model whereby diffusion is controlled only by intraparticle mass transfer for well-stirred solution of limited volume ( The infinite sum terms are summed until the summation does not vary. In this study, The surface diffusion modified Biot number,   This result contrasts with that cited by Findon et al.  However, the curve obtained at 10°C was significantly different than the trend followed by the other curves: the initial sorption rate appeared to be the lowest, but the second step in the sorption process was faster and made it possible to reach the same equilibrium as at 25°C. Considering the fractional approach to equilibrium, it also appeared that the curves at 25°C and 40°C overlapped while the curve at 10°C was significantly different (not shown). This representation of the kinetic curves allowed the kinetics to be compared while minimizing the effect of the differences in the equilibrium metal uptake. With chitosan gel beads the differences were less marked than with flakes. Though the kinetics obtained at 40°C was slightly worse than at 10°C and 25°C, the curves drawn using the fractional approach to equilibrium were perfectly overlapped indicating that sorption kinetics is not significantly influenced by temperature. This conclusion was confirmed by the order of magnitude in the intraparticle diffusion coefficients obtained with the selected experimental conditions (0.7–8×10 The weak effect of this parameter on kinetic curves did not deserve the study of its influence on sorption isotherms. Several studies had previously shown that the differences were not very marked for usual temperatures (in the range 5–55°C) for copper, zinc or mercury sorption The particle size and the conditioning of the sorbent have been shown to control sorption performance for chitosan and derivatives   Sorption isotherms may be affected by particle size, especially in the case of the sorption of large molecules on compact sorbents characterized by low porosity. In this case, the sorption is restricted to the external layers of the sorbent Glutaraldehyde crosslinking strongly reduced cadmium sorption (not shown), the chemical reaction between aldehyde and amine groups diminished the availability of chelating sites. For chitosan flakes the sorption capacity was decreased to 0, and for gel beads it did not exceed 0.2 mg g  Chitosan is very effective at removing cadmium with sorption capacity exceeding 150 mg g The authors would like to thank the University of Guanajuato (Fomento a la Investigación 1998–1999) for its financial contribution, the CONCYTEG (Grant 99-16-203-021) and the Franco–Mexican Programme PCP (99/4). The authors would like to thank M.S. Dolores Elena Alvarez Gasca (from the Microscopy Laboratory of the Architecture Faculty, University of Guanajuato) and M.S. Armando Obregón (from the Microscopy Laboratory of IIBE, University of Guanajuato) for their helpful contribution in the SEM-EDAX studies, and Dr. Charles La Via for revising the manuscript.