The rougher circuit at Miduk Copper Concentrator, Iran, includes five Microcel™ flotation columns in parallel, each 12m in height and 4m in diameter. The main objective of this communication was to describe the mixing conditions of rougher columns using residence time distribution (RTD) data. A liquid radioactive tracer was employed to trace the material reported to tailing and concentrate. External scintillation detectors were used to record the tracer intensity without disturbing the flow pattern. Data analysis showed that large and small tank-in-series and N perfect mixers in series were the best models to present the flow pattern of liquid transferred to tailing and concentrate, respectively. Solids mean residence time from a theoretical model for counter-current columns was estimated. A 1.4:1 ratio between the residence time of liquids and solids was achieved. In order to complete the diagnosis, solid content and grade profiles along the collection and froth zone of one of the columns were also measured. The results of the present study showed that despite the presence of vertical baffles, the mixing conditions of industrial rougher columns were close to well mixed ones. The possible causes for mixing in industrial columns were described. As expected by increasing gas flow rate, the mean residence times of liquid transferred to both tailing and concentrate streams reduced and the mixing degree increased.To simulate the kinetic behavior of a continuous flotation process and design a flotation cell, it is required that the mixing conditions of material be properly described. Effective mixing is relevant to flotation because it is required for particle suspension, fine bubble generation and dispersion in order to promote particle–bubble collisions ( The actual flow regime of particles in the collection zone of flotation columns is normally characterized by tank-in-series, axial-dispersed plug-flow or some compartment models. Axial-dispersed plug-flow model can describe the hydrodynamics of laboratory or pilot scale columns properly, but due to the following limitations it cannot be used for industrial columns. One of the shortcomings of this model is that it must be used for vessel dispersion numbers lower than 0.2; however, this value is significantly higher (0.3–2.7) for industrial columns. Besides, in this model radial mixing, which can be considerable in an industrial column, has been neglected ( Miduk is a porphyry copper deposit that is located in the South East of Iran. The concentrator processes 18,000 A schematic diagram of flotation circuit of Miduk copper concentrator is presented in Small amounts of tracers required in addition to on-line measurement without disturbances related to process sampling are the main advantages of radioactive tracers. The experience of using radioactive tracers for RTD studies in industrial flotation cells is rather scarce ( In the present study, Br-82 in solution (100 To complement the RTD data, slurry samples from different points along the collection and froth zone were taken and analyzed for solid content and copper and silica grade. The collection zone was sampled at distances of 1.5 Residence time distribution curves were plotted as normalized intensity Liquid RTD curves for tailing and concentrate are presented in LSTS model consists of one large perfect mixer (residence time It is sensible to assume that tailing liquid RTD can reasonably present the mixing characteristic of particles reported to tailing stream, where particles are preferentially non-floatable. But concentrate liquid RTD can mainly show the flow pattern of fine particles, valuable or gangue, or feed water recovered in concentrate. Mean residence times measured in this study was for liquid and it was assumed that the liquid phase of the slurry closely approximated the behavior of the solids phase. This assumption of using the liquid dispersion number to evaluate the solid behavior was confirmed in an industrial column with solids in the range of 25–150 In flotation columns, mixing has a deleterious impact on recovery and also selectivity ( Mixing or turbulence of industrial columns can be mainly attributed to convective pulp recirculation and dispersion due to the turbulence caused by the counter-current bubble swarm/pulp contact as well as the feed and air entrances near the top and bottom of the column, respectively. A picture of turbulence caused at the feeding point of current columns can be seen in Operating variables can also influence the mixing behavior of an industrial flotation column. A comparison between the measured and expected mean residence times offers an opportunity to infer flow characteristics. The ideal situation would be for the deviation to be zero. However, in practice, there is a deviation between these two values. The following equation was used to calculate the expected residence time ( Solid content of slurry as a function of depth along the collection and froth zones of rougher columns is shown in Profiles of copper and silica grade along the collection and froth zones of rougher columns are plotted in The Miduk copper processing plant is one of the few concentrators which use flotation columns as roughers. In the present study, the mixing condition in an industrial rougher column using residence time data was modeled. A liquid radioactive tracer (Br-82) was used to show the flow patterns of material reported to tailing and concentrate streams. RTD analysis showed that large and small tank-in-series and The authors would like to thank National Iranian Copper Industries Company (N.I.C.I.C.O.) for supporting this research. Special appreciation is extended to the operating, maintenance and metallurgy personnel of Miduk Copper Concentrator and the staff of Nuclear Energy Organization of Iran for their assistance. The contribution of R&D of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex, in particular, Mrs. Zeidabadi, is acknowledged. The help received from R. Shamsadini and M.R. Yarahmadi as industrial advisors as well as from A.A. Mohammadzadeh, during the profile tests, is gratefully appreciated. The authors are also grateful to J.E. Nesset and Prof. Yianatos for their fruitful comments on RTD data.