In this paper, the pore structure characteristics of CPB specimens were characterized using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) techniques, and the relationship between the unconfined compressive strength (UCS) and the pore characteristics of cemented paste backfill (CPB) was investigated. The results showed that the pores in CPB specimens were mainly small, “non-damaging” ones, which accounted for about 70 vol% of all pores in CPB specimens. Although the “damaging” and “multi-damaging” pores only accounted for 3.93 vol% and 6.99 vol% of all pores respectively, they had significant impacts on the UCS of CPB specimens. With the increase of curing time, the porosity of CPB specimens decreased gradually (i.e. the average porosities of CPB specimens at the curing time of 3 d, 14 d and 28 d were 11.07 vol%, 8.58 vol% and 7.09 vol%, respectively). Besides, the porosity of CPB specimens also decreased with the increase of solid concentration of CPB slurry. On the basis of fitting analysis, it could be observed that there was a negatively exponential relationship between the UCS and the porosity of CPB specimens and a linearly inverse relationship between the UCS and the fractal dimension. Our study demonstrates that it is feasible to study the relationship between mechanical properties and pore characteristics of CPB specimens by using the NMR technique.Transverse relaxation time, ms Free relaxation time of free fluid, ms Surface area of pore, cm Pore volume, cm Lateral surface relaxation strength, μm/ms Diffusion coefficient Gyromagnetic ratio, rad/(S·T) Magnetic field gradient, Gs/cm Echo time, ms Pore-shape factor (3 for spherical pores; 2 for tube bundle pores) NMR The total amplitude of the standard specimen Number of scans of standard specimens during NMR data acquisition Number of scans of the test specimen during NMR data acquisition Receiving gain of the standard specimen during NMR data acquisition Receiving gain of the test specimen during NMR data acquisition The total water content of the test specimen, cm specimen volume, cm Unconfined compressive strength (UCS), MPa Cemented paste backfill Nuclear magnetic resonance Mercury intrusion porosimetry Unconfined compressive strength  Scanning electron microscopy Ettringite Calcium silicate hydrates Cemented paste backfill (CPB) is playing more important role in the mining industry due to its technical, economic and environmental benefits. CPB provides secondary self-supporting after being placed underground for cost-effective mining operations and safety concerns. Meanwhile, it can also reduce the amount of environmental hazards and the costs of tailings management as they are diverted into underground goafs or stopes In recent years, a number of studies have been carried out to investigate the relationship between the pore characteristics and the macroscopic properties (i.e., strength, permeability, and shrinkage) of CPB A number of studies have been conducted to investigate the mechanical properties of CPB specimens by other non-destructive methods such as electric resistivity measurement, ultrasonic pulse velocity test, and artificial intelligence (AI) techniques. For example, Xu et al. To sum up, previous studies mainly investigated the effects of microstructure and pore distribution on the strength, permeability and durability of rock, coal or concrete, but rarely studied the microscopic pore structure of CPB by using the NMR technique. Moreover, these studies paid little attention to the relationship between the strength and the porosity and pore structure of CPB, and did not involve the fractal dimension in analyzing CPB microstructure. As well, the NMR technique had seldom been applied to study the relationship between the pore structure characteristics and the UCS of CPB. On account of this, in this study, NMR was applied to characterize the micropore structure characteristics including pore size distribution, porosity and fractal dimension of CPB specimens. Next, the relationship between the pore characteristics and UCS of CPB specimens was established. The tailings utilized in this study were obtained from a tungstic mineral dressing plant in Jiangxi Province of China. The tailing slurry was filled in plastic buckets for natural sedimentation of seven days. After that, the upper layer clear water was removed and the left sedimentation was dried for preparing CPB specimens. The water used for preparing CPB specimens was common tap water. The binding agent was Portland cement (P.O32.5), whose main physical properties and chemical compositions are shown in The Portland cement was used as the binding agent, and the tailings were as the backfill aggregate. The tailings/cement ratio was set as 6.0 according to the engineering application in Xiangluoshan Tungsten Mine. The solid concentration was designed as 70–78 wt% to ensure that the slump value of the CPB slurry exceeded 170 mm The CPB specimens were prepared as follows. Various raw materials were weighed according to the designed ratio and then well mixed in a cylindrical column mould (∅50 mm × 100 mm). After the specimens were taken out of the mould, they were cured in the cement curing box at the temperature of 20 ± 1 °C and the relative humidity of 95%±1% for 3 d, 14 d, and 28 d. Finally, triple CPB specimens were prepared for each experimental scenario and their mean values were used for analysis. The prepared CPB specimens were covered with a layer of Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) to avoid moisture loss before the NMR test. The NMR test was conducted using the MacroMR12-150H-l analysis system (Suzhou Niumag Analytical Instrument). As shown in Once the NMR test was finished, CPB specimens were taken out of the NMR test system for the UCS test. The UCS of each CPB specimen was characterized using an electronic universal testing machine with a loading capacity of 50 KN (MTS C43.504). The load was applied by displacement control with a loading rate of 1 mm/min. After the UCS test, one cubic specimen with a side length of 5 mm was cut from the center part of each CPB specimen for the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observation. The dust on the surface of the specimen was removed using rubber suction bulb to get a fresh and clean cross section, which was then coated with a layer of metal conductive film in a vacuum coating machine. The morphology of the specimen was observed using a JSM-6460LV SEM. In a uniform magnetic field, there are three types of relaxation mechanism, namely free relaxation, surface relaxation and diffusion relaxation. The total transverse relaxation time of the CPB specimen is where When there is only one kind of fluid in the pores, the volume relaxation is much slower than the area relaxation, so the free relaxation can be neglected. When the magnetic field is uniform (the corresponding magnetic field gradient Eq. Based on the relationship between the capillary pressure and the pore radius Eq. The porosity of the CPB specimen can be obtained from the intensity of NMR signals using the following equation According to Eq. Based on the effect of pore size on the mechanical strength, Wu et al. classified the pores in concrete into four categories: “non-damaging” pores (pore size less than 20 nm), “less-damaging” pores (pore size 20 nm - 100 nm), “damaging” pores (pore size ∼200 nm) and “multi-damaging” pores (pore size larger than 200 nm) Based on Wu’s classification, the pore volume proportions of the four types of pores in CPB were calculated and the results are shown in The peak area of the NMR The decrease of the porosity of CPB specimens with increasing solid concentration of CPB slurry can be mainly attributed to the increase of the cement content in CPB specimens. The fractal dimension is related to the NMR transverse relaxation time As discussed above, 70 vol% of the total pore volume in CPB specimens was filled by “non-damaging” pores, whereas “damaging” pores only filled 3% of the volume. The pore structure has an important influence on the UCS of CPB  The core content of this study is to explore the relationship between the pore structure characteristics and the UCS of CPB by NMR technology. Compared with techniques in the literature, this study is advantageous in the following aspects. Firstly, both porosity and the fractal dimension were considered in this paper, among which porosity reflected the pore size and pore number of CPB samples while the fractal dimension reflected the distribution characteristics of the pores. As indicated by Li et al. It is a clear limitation of this paper that the long-term strength of CPB has not been studied and the proposed method can be more expansive than UPV method. Another limitation is that the location of CPB pores is not studied by nuclear magnetic resonance imaging, so the effect of the position of the pore distribution on the mechanical properties of CPB not include in this study. A final limitation is that other influencing variables, such as temperature, of the pore structure characteristics and strength of CPB were not investigated in this paper. In this paper, the porosity, fractal dimension and pore size distribution of CPB were explored by using NMR technology. The relationship among the porosity and fractal dimension with UCS was investigated, and several conclusions were drawn as follows: The The CPB specimens cured for 3 d mainly contained “less damaging” pores. The “non-damaging” pores accounted for about 70 vol% of the total pore volume, and the average proportions of “damaging” and “multi-damaging” pores accounted for only about 3.93 vol% and 6.99 vol% respectively. The “damaging” and “multi-damaging” pores had a negative influence on the UCS of CPB specimens. Higher proportion of these two kinds of pores could lead to the decrease of the UCS. The UCS decreased exponentially as the porosity increased and had a nearly linearly inverse proportional relationship with the fractal dimension. NMR could be a non-destructive technique for studying the microscopic pore structure characteristics and mechanical properties of CPB. This research was supported by the The authors declare no conflict of interest concerning the publication of this paper.