Atmospheric acid leaching has advantages of low energy consumption and operating cost, compared with high pressure acid leaching of low-nickel limonitic laterites. However, it suffers low nickel recovery, low leaching selectivity of nickel/cobalt over iron and excessive waste generation. In this work, a new method was used for selective leaching of nickel and cobalt, as well as for preparing iron phosphate intermediate material by atmospheric phosphoric acid leaching of limonitic laterite. The results show that 98.7% of nickel and 89.8% of cobalt are leached from the calcined limonitic laterite under optimized leaching conditions; meanwhile, 98.3% of iron is converted into insoluble FePO4·2H2O, resulting in the selective leaching of nickel and cobalt over iron. The leaching precipitate of FePO4·2H2O has a purity of 94%, which is expected to be a high-value by-product, providing an extra economic value. This work presents an alternative for value-added processing of laterite, featured by high leaching efficiency of nickel and cobalt without generation of solid waste.Laterite ore has become the main source of nickel production due to the fast consumption of nickeliferous sulfide ore. Pyrometallurgical processing is known to be a widely applied technology for the treatment of laterites (with a portion about 70%) to produce ferronickel ( The acid leaching processes of low-nickel-grade laterite can be classified into two groups, namely high-pressure acid leaching (HPAL) and atmospheric (acid) leaching (AL). The HPAL process has advantage of high recovery of nickel and cobalt (above 90%), as well as selective leaching of nickel over iron. The ferrous minerals (especially goethite) are dissolved initially and then ferric ions precipitate in the form of hematite during leaching ( To date, sulfuric acid has been extensively used in the industry for extracting nickel because of its easy availability and low price. Alternatively, hydrochloric acid and nitric acid are also applied as leaching agents of laterite because sulfuric acid cannot be recycled ( Phosphoric acid was reported to extract cobalt and lithium from the waste LiCoO In this work, phosphoric acid was utilized as leaching and precipitating agent to separate and recover nickel, cobalt and iron from the limonitic laterite. The effects of phosphoric acid concentration, leaching temperature, time and liquid to solid ratio on the leaching of nickel, cobalt and iron were investigated. Besides, the precipitate after leaching was also characterized. Expectedly, nickel and cobalt can be effectively separated from iron which could be recovered as FePO The typical limonite-type laterite ore used in this work was from Indonesia. According to the XRD profile ( The leaching reagents, involving phosphoric acid (H The laterite ore was dried at 105 °C for 120 min, and then ground and sieved with a 74-μm standard sieve. The pulverized laterite sample was loaded in a corundum crucible and then calcined at 400 °C for 60 min in a muffle furnace. After calcination, the porcelain boat was taken out and cooled down to room temperature. The calcined samples were then used for acid leaching. The dried or calcined laterite sample was leached either by sulfuric or phosphoric solution. The leaching was performed in a beaker immersed in an electro-thermostatic water bath. Acidic solution (1, 2, 3 and 4 M) was added into the beaker and heated to the experimental temperature (20, 40, 60, 80 and 90 °C) in the water bath. Five grams of pulverized laterite sample was then charged into the solution for leaching, with stirring rate of 200 rpm. After leaching, the mixture was filtered and washed with distilled water. The chemical compositions of solid powdery samples were examined using an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF, PANalytical, Axios mAX, Netherlands). Mineral constituents were determined by an X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU, D/Max 2500, Japan with Cu Kα radiation), under the conditions of tube current and voltage: 250 mA, 40 kV, scanning range: 10–80° (2θ), step size: 0.02° (2θ) and scanning speed: 8°/min. Thermal gravimetric analysis and differential scanning calorimetry (TG-DSC, STA 449 C, Netzsch, German) was conducted under the conditions: temperature range of 30–800 °C, heating speed of 10 °C/min, air atmosphere, gas flow rate of 20 mL/min. Nickel and cobalt contents in acidic leachate were determined using a plasma emission spectrometer (ICP-AES, Icap7400 Radial, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The leaching ratios of Fe, Co and Ni and their corresponding leaching selectivity (Ni or Co over Fe) were used to evaluate the leaching process. The leaching ratios of Fe, Co and Ni were calculated according to Eq. Subsequently, the leaching selectivity of Ni or Co over Fe could be obtained by Eq. Our previous studies ( It can be seen in  Overall, the calcination improves the leaching of laterite. After calcination, the transformation of goethite into poor-crystallized hematite ( Phosphoric acid leaching of laterite calcined at 400 °C for 60 min was conducted with different phosphoric acid concentrations at 80 °C for 120 min with a liquid to solid ratio of 10 mL g It can be seen from The effect of leaching temperature on the leaching of laterite calcined at 400 °C for 60 min is shown in  Effect of leaching time on the leaching of calcined laterite was investigated, and the leaching conditions were kept as follows: 3 M phosphoric acid, leaching temperature of 80 °C and liquid to solid ratio 10:1 mL g  The effect liquid-to-solid ratio on the leaching calcined laterite is shown in It can be seen from Based on the aforementioned experimental results, the optimal leaching conditions could be obtained as follows: phosphoric acid concentration of 2–3 M, leaching temperature of 80–90 °C, leaching time of 180–240 min and liquid to solid ratio of 10 mL g The main phase of precipitate is FePO During phosphoric acid leaching, the selective leaching of nickel and cobalt over iron can be achieved, depending on the precipitation of iron phosphate. To illustrate the mechanism of selective leaching, the precipitation pH In the aqueous solution, the ionization of phosphoric acid occurs stepwise as follows: For phosphate precipitation reaction of bivalent cation: Similarly, for the trivalent cation, The precipitation pH  During the leaching of calcined laterite with phosphoric acid, the main reactions include dissolution of metal oxides and precipitation of metal cations. Firstly, nickel, cobalt and iron oxides within laterite react with H It can be seen from Phosphoric acid was used to effectively utilize limonite laterite via an AL process. Ni and Co were selectively leached, while iron was recovered in the form of FePO This work was supported by the