Acoustic emission (AE) is a physical phenomenon in which part of the strain energy under loading is released by transient elastic waves in the process of cracks propagation and expansion in rocks In order to investigate evolution mechanisms and mechanic properties in the process of rock failure, researchers performed much work on AE characteristics with different rocks Ren et al. Understanding the properties of AE events has made some progress for different non-salt rocks under different conditions, which provides important data for geotechnical engineering. However, only AE characteristics of halite were investigated on salt rocks, it is not sufficient to understand AE properties of salt rocks by analyzing a kind of salt rock. Additionally, salt cavern is recognized as an ideal storage place for oil, natural gases and radioactive wastes in the world The tested samples of halite, glauberite and gypsum were taken from Jiangsu, Sichuan and Shanxi, respectively. These samples were processed into the standard cylindrical specimens in size of The experiments were conducted using TYT-600 rock mechanics testing system under uniaxial compression by monotonous loading or cyclic loading. In the process of uniaxial compression, the loading strain rate for specimens was controlled as 0.00002/s. During the loading process, AE data was collected and analyzed by SDAES digital AE monitoring apparatus with four testing channels. Monitoring position arrangements of AE sensors and specimen are shown in In this study, AE properties of the three types of salt rocks were investigated during the uniaxial compression test. For halite, only one group of three specimens was tested under uniaxial compression by monotonous loading. Four specimens of glauberite, as a group, were tested under uniaxial compression by cyclic loading I. For gypsum, 12 specimens were divided into four groups according to different specimen humidity and loading conditions. The loading conditions of the three types of salt rock specimens were described in detail in In these measurements, the threshold of signal acquisition was set as 30 In the experiments, AE data of every group is consistent under uniaxial compression, thus, the specimens No.3 In general, stress–strain curves of rocks during uniaxial compression are divided into four stages: pressure consolidation stage, elastic deformation stage, plastic deformation stage, post-peak stage The experimental results suggested the structures of the three types of salt rocks are compact, original pores and fissures are few. Therefore, the pressure consolidation stage is relatively short, the AE number is less and the energy is lower except for glauberite No.D In the elastic deformation stage, the AE events number and energy of halite and glauberite were still lower due to less micro-crack propagation and expansion happened in the specimens During the plastic deformation stage, the AE events number and energy change of gypsum is different from the other two salt rocks. There is no obvious sharp increment of AE events for gypsum close to the peak strength as shown in According to the incremental slope of AE events, the plastic deformation stage of halite and glauberite is divided into two periods: crack initiation and expansion period and crack coalescence period. In the earlier period of plastic deformation stage, the dislocation of crystal lattices arises with increasing stress, further micro-cracks that are formed in the specimens gradually extend, which causes the linear increment of number of AEs and energy for halite. However, it is non-linear for glauberite because of different loading style. For halite, the incremental slopes of AEs number and energy are 0.012 and 31.7, respectively. The AE events number and energy of glauberite change with a wavelike form around a certain value. In the later period of plastic deformation stage, micro-cracks rapidly extend and most of cracks coalescence. This result agrees with The experimental results suggest that the variation rules of number and energy of AE events are consistent in the process of halite and glauberite failure, and they reach the maximum value at the peak intensity. Consequently, the number and energy of AE events in different stages and periods provide important parameters for forecasting halite and glauberite failure. However, variation rules of AE characteristics of glauberite containing interlayer and gypsum are irregular. Therefore, AE properties of gypsum and glauberite containing interlayer are complicated or dubious. The results imply interlayer changes internal structures of salt rocks. The detailed parameters of AE characteristics of the three types of rocks are described in In consideration of the previous result of cyclic loading effect on behavior of halite As shown in In order to discuss the effect of brine on AE characteristics under cyclic loading, specimens of the groups 5 and 6 were soaked in half-saturated and completely saturated brines for 20 days, respectively. As shown in wIn the middle and late period (108–372 Experiments were performed for AE properties of halite, glauberite and gypsum using SDAES digital AE monitoring apparatus under uniaxial compression. AE properties analyses of the three types of salt rocks, different loading conditions and saturation conditions were carried out. The main findings of this study are summarized as follows: The variation rules of number and energy of AE events are consistent in the process of halite and glauberite failure. AE properties of gypsum and glauberite containing interlayer are complicated or dubious. The mudstone interlayer affects the mechanical behavior of glauberite rock. Cyclic loading weakens structural strength of rock as a result of lowering the number and energy of AE events. The three types of rocks have Kaiser Effect under uniaxial compression by cyclic loading. However, there is no effect of the brine on Kaiser Effect under cyclic loading. Therefore, Kaiser Effect is mainly dependent on rock properties and loading condition. Compared with the results under monotonous loading, the number and energy of AEs of gypsum are higher under cyclic loading. The AEs number under cyclic loading is 2.15 times as that under monotonous loading, and its energy is 1.28 times as that of monotonous loading. The number and energy of AE events of gypsum soaked in brine is comparatively low due to the weakening and corroding effects of the brine on dry gypsum, the failure style of gypsum is converted from brittle to ductile by soaking in brine. This study was financially supported by the