In the present study, FactSage predictions were systematically compared from the present experimental results and the experimental data from the literatures in the CaO-SiO2-MgO-Al2O3-“TiO2” system. These results reveal that the discrepancies are significant between the predictions and experimental results. The predicted primary phases in CaTiO3 and TiO2 primary phase fields were consistent with the experimental results, but a number of inconsistent results were found in other primary phase fields including M3O5 and spinel. The predicted liquidus temperatures were higher than the experimentally determined liquidus temperatures at low titanium level (<~ 20 wt% TiO2), whereas the predicted liquidus temperatures were much lower than the experimentally determined liquidus temperatures at high titanium section (>~ 40 wt% TiO2). In TiO2 primary phase field, the experimentally determined liquidus temperatures can be 130 °C higher than the predicted ones. Up to 107 °C differences still exist between the experimental results and predictions for the liquidus temperatures in M3O5 primary phase field. The Al2TiO5 phase has a significant influence on the phase equilibria in the M3O5 primary phase field but it is not included in the current FactSage database.Titanium is an important and valuable element present in many minerals FactSage In this study, the predicted liquidus temperatures and primary phases by FactSage were compared with the experimentally determined results from both publications The experimental method used in the present study involves high-temperature equilibration, quenching and electron probe X-ray microanalysis (EPMA) The experiments were conducted in a vertical electric tube furnace heated by lanthanum chromite elements under ultrahigh purity argon gas (> 99.999%). The schematic diagram of the vertical electric tube furnace is shown in FactSage version 7.2 was used in this study. The used module was “Equilib” with the databases “FactPS” and “FToxid”. The oxygen partial pressure was fixed by fixing the activity of oxygen in the gas phase. In the FactSage calculations, for air condition, the activity of O The representative phase equilibria results from the previous investigations are shown in The comparisons of the reported measurements and the FactSage predictions show that the liquidus temperatures predicted by FactSage are close to the measurements while the primary phase fields cannot be well predicted. For the compositions in CaTiO The primary phases and liquidus temperatures are also analysed in M The full comparisons of experimentally determined liquidus temperature and predicted liquidus temperature by FactSage in the TiO  As shown in All titanium extraction processes from the ores are operated under the reducing conditions. Under the reducing condition, Ti Al Briefly, after decades’ development, FactSage software has been widely applied in many related fields and it is very helpful for the research and industry. However, large deviations still exist between the experimental results and FactSage predictions in the CaO-SiO The phase equilibria of high TiO The authors would like to thank Ms. Jie Yu for the lab assistance. The authors acknowledge the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland, for providing facilities and scientific and technical assistance. Shuai Wang acknowledges the financial support from