The kinetics of photocatalytic degradation of four different model organic compounds, formic acid (FA), oxalic acid (OA), 4-chlorophenol (4-CP) and the herbicide monuron (3-(4-chlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea) in a self-constructed batch-mode plate photoreactor with a thin flow of contaminated aqueous solution circulating over an illuminated particulate layer of TiO2 P25 (Degussa) was compared. Both OA and FA were adsorbed on TiO2 surface; their mineralization, induced by direct transfer of photogenerated holes, proceeded in a single step, without observable intermediates, following approximately zero order kinetics. Numerical simulations were performed using a newly proposed kinetic model based on the photostationary state assumption. The model allowed an explanation of the observed reaction order as well as the comparison of independent with competitive adsorption of organic compound and oxygen on the photocatalyst surface, yielding a better fit for the case of competition. 4-CP and monuron, which were not adsorbed under the conditions used, were degraded through the action of photogenerated hydroxyl radicals. Their degradation proceeded with lower photoefficiency than for the adsorbed compounds (FA and OA). While the mineralization of both 4-CP and monuron followed zero order kinetics, their degradation was close to first order. The different reaction orders were consistently explained using the photostationary state approach.Photocatalysis on TiO Two different types of photoreactor are generally employed in photodegradation studies, containing either mixed aqueous slurries or immobilized layers of the TiO The topic of semiconductor photocatalysis studies is frequently the comparison of the effect of various photocatalysts on the degradation of a selected model pollutant with the aim of optimizing process efficiency A number of methods for immobilization of TiO This paper represents a continuation of previous studies devoted to the investigation of the role of mass transfer and photon flux in controlling the kinetics of the photocatalytic degradation of oxalic acid in aqueous films flowing over illuminated particulate layers of TiO The two groups of model compounds chosen – aliphatic versus aromatic – differ in two important respects, namely in their adsorption properties and in the complexity of their degradation mechanism. Accordingly, comparing their degradation behavior allows us to address the role of these two mechanistic aspects on the degradation kinetics. The experimental results will be discussed with reference to current kinetic models of photocatalysis; a new model will be put forward to allow a more detailed description of the photostationary state approach and to compare two adsorption situations, i.e. independent versus competitive adsorption of the organic model compound and of molecular oxygen on the surface of the photocatalyst. TiO Monuron was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich, oxalic acid from Fluka. 4-Chlorophenol, formic acid, methyl alcohol and acetonitrile for HPLC were Merck products. All chemicals were used without further purification. A batch-mode plate photoreactor with a thin flow (thickness about 1 To follow the degradation kinetics, samples of the reaction mixture were taken at various irradiation times. The concentration of OA was determined by titration with potassium permanganate. The concentration of FA was estimated through its carbon content determined employing a TOC analyzer Shimadzu 5000. The degradation course of both 4-CP and monuron was followed in parallel by means of UV–vis absorption spectroscopy, HPLC and TOC analyses. HPLC analysis was carried out employing Shimadzu chromatographic set with LC-10ADvp pump and SPD-M10Avp diode array detector. A mobile phase acetonitrile/water (35:65, v/v) was applied with a flow rate 1 Kinetic dependences of both total organic carbon (TOC), measured by TOC analysis, and organic carbon (OC) corresponding to OA, calculated from the OA concentrations determined by permanganometry, are shown in A reaction mechanism of the photocatalytic degradation of OA was proposed previously The initial reaction of OH radical with the hydrogen oxalate anion, which is the most abundant form of OA at natural pH, leads to the hydrogen oxalate radical: This reaction proceeds relatively slowly in homogeneous aqueous solution ( The fate of the hydrogen oxalate radical, formed in both reactions These radical anions are known to undergo fast bimolecular reactions, forming either hydrogen oxalate by recombination or formate and carbon dioxide by disproportionation: However, because of the low photostationary concentration of carbon dioxide radical anions produced by continuous irradiation, the bimolecular reactions An analogous kinetic TOC dependence for the photocatalytic degradation of FA carried out in the same photoreactor is also shown in The initial reaction of OH radicals with the formate anion, the most abundant form under the used conditions, leads to carbon dioxide radical anions: In homogeneous aqueous solutions, this reaction proceeds much faster ( This step will be followed by reaction In parallel to the oxidation of the organic substrates, reductive reactions are necessary to close the photocatalytic cycle of TiO It can be concluded that both OA and FA can be mineralized in a single step following the initial oxidation attack by hole transfer. Under conditions of continuous irradiation involving low photostationary concentrations of photogenerated charge carriers, their primary transfer reactions will control the overall kinetics of the photocatalytic degradation of OA and FA because the subsequent reactions Similarly to diuron The measured TOC values and the corresponding OC values for monuron (calculated from its concentrations determined by HPLC) are shown in Unlike monuron, 4-chlorophenol was measurably adsorbed on a TiO UV–vis absorption spectra of the reaction mixture measured during the photocatalytic degradation of 4-CP (initial concentration 2.0 TOC results and OC values corresponding to 4-CP, calculated from the concentrations determined by HPLC, are shown in Hydroquinone (HQ) and benzoquinone (BQ) were identified in the reaction mixture by HPLC as degradation intermediates of 4-CP. The dependences of their concentrations on irradiation time are shown in As in the case of monuron described above, an estimate of the overall concentration of all absorbing components was derived using The initial degradation rates (d It is apparent that the initial degradation rates of FA and OA on one hand and of 4-CP and monuron on the other hand were similar. However, the former values were by more than one order of magnitude higher than the latter ones. This indicates major differences in the reaction mechanisms for both couples. While the carboxylic acids OA and FA most probably formed surface complexes on TiO The mineralization rate of OA was twice higher than the corresponding value of FA, because both compounds were mineralized in a single step following direct hole transfer, producing two CO Comparing 4-CP with monuron, the corresponding values of initial degradation rates were almost the same ( It was experimentally proved that the effect of flow rate on the degradation kinetics of model compounds was almost negligible. It means that the flow regime became turbulent and the mass transfer phenomena did not play any important role. The mechanism of the photocatalytic degradation of organics has frequently been discussed in connection with the adsorption of the compound to be degraded on the photocatalyst surface. The reaction rate in TiO However, a generally applicable kinetic treatment of photocatalytic degradation cannot be obtained in this way, because neither the formation of intermediates with distinct adsorption properties and reactivities, nor the presence of co-adsorbants, in particular molecular oxygen, are taken into account. The simple Langmuir–Hinshelwood approach may therefore fail in the case of complex degradation mechanisms, but, as we will show below, may also be unable to account for the experimentally observed kinetic order in the “simple” carboxylic acid systems. It has been pointed out earlier that considerable discrepancies may exist between adsorption coefficients A realistic model for the description of photocatalytic degradation kinetics should take into account the photogeneration of electron–hole pairs, their recombination and charge transfer reactions, as well as the adsorption equilibria of the substrate to be degraded, its intermediate photoproducts, and of molecular oxygen. This will not be possible in the general case, since the chemical nature, the adsorption properties and the reactivity of the intermediates are frequently unknown. However, the special case of the carboxylic acids OA and FA lends itself well for a model treatment since, as shown above, no organic intermediates complicate the degradation mechanism. We have therefore proposed a novel kinetic approach, described in detail in This model, formally described by the flow scheme shown in Applying the numerical photostationary model to all systems studied in this work is beyond the scope of the present paper. However, qualitative pictures can be obtained which are discussed in the following. We have shown above ( As the concentration of OA decreases in the course of the degradation process, a gradual transition from zero order to first order kinetics should be observed according to the Langmuir–Hinshelwood model, i.e. the measured rate should slow down. Actually, the experimental results exhibit the opposite tendency (as shown in As stated above, the application of the photostationary model to the degradation of the aromatics monuron and 4-CP is hampered by the complexity of the reaction mechanism. Nonetheless, some interpretation is possible here as well. The most conspicuous result as far as reaction order is concerned is the observation, valid for both monuron and 4-CP, of first order substrate degradation and of zero order mineralization kinetics (see Monuron and 4-CP were only negligibly adsorbed in the conditions used and thus their degradation was mediated by photogenerated OH radicals. It is known that a large number of reaction products may be produced by reaction of OH radicals with benzene derivatives, indicating complex reaction sequences; in the case of stationary irradiation, these intermediate products in turn can undergo further reactions with OH CO The comparative kinetic study of the photocatalytic degradation and mineralization of simple organic compounds (oxalic and formic acid) and selected pollutants (4-chlorophenol and the herbicide monuron) of more complex molecular structure showed particularities as well as common features of heterogeneous photocatalysis. The proposed general kinetic concept based on the photostationary state approximation provides a consistent explanation for the different reaction systems, whereas the classical Langmuir–Hinshelwood formalism is unable to explain all kinetic features. In the case of oxalic and formic acid, which were adsorbed on TiO For monuron and 4-chlorophenol, due to their negligible adsorption, the degradation was mediated through photogenerated hydroxyl radicals. The photodegradation followed first order kinetics while mineralization proceeded according to zero order. The different kinetic orders were consistently explained on the basis of general mechanistic assumptions using the photostationary state approach. The numerical application of the photostationary model was successful in explaining the particular kinetic behavior of the OA/TiO The authors thank for financial supports by grants KONTAKT 2002-11, KONTAKT 2005-22, to the European Commission, project ABWASZ (contract KA3-CT-1999-00016) and to the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport of the Czech Republic (project 1M0577). The heterogeneous photocatalytic system is based on light absorption by semiconductor particles, typically of TiO These charge carriers may recombine inside the semiconductor particles, or migrate to the surface where they can be directly transferred through the interface to adsorbed molecules, holes to an electron donor (D) and electrons to an electron acceptor (A): Under continuous irradiation, the photocatalyst absorbs a constant light intensity ( Under constant irradiation, the rates of photogeneration and consumption of charge carriers will be dynamically equilibrated: The corresponding photostationary concentrations of charge carriers can be obtained, solving the equation set The surface concentrations of electron donor ([D] Independent adsorption of both D and A (two types of adsorption sites): Here, In the case of the photocatalytic degradation of OA, the mineralization proceeds in a single step; therefore, OA is the unique donor. Its adsorbed concentration can be obtained by solving the equation set The bulk concentration of oxygen, which acts as the electron acceptor, is constant during the photodegradation process due to its continuous equilibration with the gas phase. That is why a classical Langmuir isotherm formula can be used for the adsorbed concentration of oxygen from the equation set Competitive adsorption between OA and oxygen. The Eqs. Both sets of expressions for the adsorbed concentrations of OA and oxygen, i.e. Numerical simulations were performed employing the software ModelMaker 4.0 (Cherwell Scientific Ltd.) to fit experimental dependences of bulk concentration of OA on irradiation time. Both fits are shown in