The use of new printing technologies based on flexographic inks hampers ink elimination during paper recycling, making necessary the development of alternative methods. Decolorization of four flexographic inks has been evaluated by using fungal laccases, three of them from basidiomycetes (Trametes villosa, Coriolopsis rigida, and Pycnoporus coccineus), and one from the ascomycete Myceliophthora thermophila in the presence of synthetic and natural mediators.
                  The results obtained showed a higher capacity of the three basidiomycete laccases to decolorize flexographic inks as compared with M. thermophila laccase, a low redox potential laccase. Basidiomycete laccases decolorized inks without mediators at long reaction times, although the presence of natural or synthetic mediators (above all HBT) accelerated the process. On the other hand, M. thermophila laccase was unable to decolorize the inks assayed. The addition of syringyl-type mediators led to medium levels of decolorization except for R48 ink, which was almost completely decolorized.
                  Most decolorization was obtained during the first hours of treatment, when all the basidiomycete laccases were fully active in the presence of mediators. As opposed to other basidiomycete laccases, which become inactive in the presence of HBT after 24h, the enzyme of P. coccineus was not deactivated by this mediator even after 48h. A complete loss of M. thermophila laccase activity was observed at short times with acetosyringone and methyl syringate, the only two mediators able to promote ink decolorization with this enzyme.Recycled paper industry has experienced a great development in the last years due to its economical and environmental advantages. Ink elimination, the major difficulty in paper production, is usually performed by flotation because of its low water consumption. Its efficiency depends on factors like ink and fiber properties, printing process, and coating compounds. Although flotation is efficient in offset printed paper deinking, the use of new printing technologies, as flexographic inks, present recycling problems. Flexographic inks are made up of pigments, resin, solvent, and additives. Ink/fiber detachment in these inks is easy, because ink can be dispersed at alkaline pH due to carboxylate group's formation, and then pigment particles are liberated. Nevertheless, the flotation process is difficult in these conditions because acrylates act as dispersants and pigment particles are small and exhibit hydrophilic character. This behavior causes problems in black waters clarification and also produces ink particles redeposition in fibers. Laccases are multicopper oxidases that catalyze the oxidation of phenolic compounds, aromatic amines, and other compounds by abstraction of one electron, using oxygen as electron acceptor. The oxidative process can subsequently progress through non-enzymatic reactions. The driving force of the enzymatic mechanism lies on the difference between the redox potential of the reducing substrate and that of the copper T1 site (where the reducing substrate is oxidized) that varies between +0.5 and +0.8 Among laccases, high-redox potential laccases (HRPLs) produced by basidiomycete fungi ( In an attempt to contribute for the searching of alternative methods for deinking flexographic paper, we assayed the decolorization of flexographic inks (Blue 1, Red 48:4, Violet 3, and Flexiprint Magenta HX-E) by fungal laccases. The flexographic inks, Blue 1 (B1), Red 48:4 (R48), Violet 3 (V3), and Flexiprint Magenta HX-E (MG) ( Laccases from Laccase activity was determined at 25 Synthetic mediators used in enzymatic treatments were 1-hydroxybenzotriazole (HBT, Fluka), and 2,2-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS, Roche), and natural mediators were syringaldehyde (Aldrich), acetosyringone (Aldrich), Biodeinking treatments were performed in a total volume of 5 Ink samples were dissolved in 75% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Merck) (v/v), stirred 1 Ink decolorization process by using basidiomycete laccases was carried out at pH 4 since the enzymes were sufficiently stable at this pH, at least for 24 Due to the inks complexity, composed of different compounds as mentioned above, comparison of enzymatic efficiency in these treatments is a difficult task. Flexographic inks are not soluble in aqueous systems, forming a stable suspension whose absorbance cannot be measured. Several solvents, as methanol, ethanol, and acetonitrile were assayed to solubilize ink suspensions, being DMSO the most adequate since it gave a transparent solution with the four inks. Different ink concentrations in each treatment were chosen to avoid the saturation of the absorbance range of the spectrophotometer. Ink decolorization led in general to an overall depletion of absorbance in the visible spectra ( In general, higher ink decolorization yields were found by using basidiomycete laccases than that obtained with In the case of treatments with The degradation efficiency of the laccase–mediator system is expected to depend on several factors. The redox potential of the enzyme has to be enough to initiate the mediator oxidation, generating new oxidative species which should show affinity towards the substrate. Radicals and/or oxidation products formed from HBT were the most reactive towards the chromophoric groups of the pigments. The lack of ink decolorization with As previously reported On the other hand, the natural mediators assayed, except The successful use of syringyl-type phenolics as mediators of The effect of mediators on laccase stability is shown in As an exception, addition of HBT caused around 50% of activity loss in laccases from Different results were reported by using On the other hand, Flexographic paper cannot be deinked with the flotation methods currently used in recycled paper production. In this study we demonstrate for the first time the feasible decolorization of flexographic inks by using fungal laccases. Basidiomycete HRPLs were able to decolorize these inks to some extent, although the addition of mediators improved the action of the enzyme at very short times. In general, the use of HBT produced the highest decolorization values. The This work has been funded by PROLIPAPEL II S-2009AMB-1480 project (