The cytoplasmic coenzyme NAD+-dependent alcohol (methanol) dehydrogenase (MDH) employed by Bacillus methanolicusduring growth on C1-C4 primary alcohols is a decameric protein with 1 Zn2+-ion and 1–2 Mg2+-ions plus a tightly bound NAD(H) cofactor per subunit (a nicotinoprotein). Mg2+-ions are essential for binding of NAD(H) cofactor in MDH protein expressed in Escherichia coli. The low coenzyme NAD+-dependent activity of MDH with C1–C4 primary alcohols is strongly stimulated by a second B. methanolicus protein (ACT), provided that MDH contains NAD(H) cofactor and Mg2+-ions are present in the assay mixture. Characterization of the act gene revealed the presence of the highly conserved amino acid sequence motif typical of Nudix hydrolase proteins in the deduced ACT amino acid sequence. Theact gene was successfully expressed in E. coli allowing purification and characterization of active ACT protein. MDH activation by ACT involved hydrolytic removal of the nicotinamide mononucleotide NMN(H) moiety of the NAD(H) cofactor of MDH, changing its Ping-Pong type of reaction mechanism into a ternary complex reaction mechanism. Increased cellular NADH/NAD+ratios may reduce the ACT-mediated activation of MDH, thus preventing accumulation of toxic aldehydes. This represents a novel mechanism for alcohol dehydrogenase activity regulation.Methanol is formed in large quantities in mineralization processes in nature, mostly from degradation of methylesters and -ethers that occur in plants (pectin and lignin). Methylotrophic microorganisms growing on methanol as carbon and energy sources can be isolated readily from soil. They possess a special set of enzymes for generation of energy from methanol oxidation and for synthesis of compounds with carbon–carbon bonds from methanol ( Three different type of enzymes catalyze the initial oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde in methylotrophs. Yeasts employ an alcohol oxidase with FAD as cofactor (a flavoprotein); oxygen is used as electron acceptor, resulting in hydrogen peroxide formation. This enzyme is located in peroxisomes, an organel that also contains catalase activity ( Pure cultures of obligately aerobic, thermotolerant Studies with purified proteins showed that MDH activity with C Synthesis of the MDH and ACT proteins in  The primers used were: A1, 5′-GGCGAATTCAA(A/G)TT(A/G)TT(T/C)GA(A/G)GA(A/G)AA(A/G)AC-3′, and A2, 5′-GGCTGATCATC(C/ T/A)AC(T/C)TG(T/C)AA(T/C)TT(C/T/A) AC(C/T/A)AC-3′. These were based on the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the ACT protein ( DNA amplification reactions were performed with Vent-DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs). Reaction mixtures (100 ml) contained: enzyme buffer (New England Biolabs), dNTP (50 m Plasmid pHK1 was constructed by cloning the PCR product of primers A1/A2, with  Chromosomal DNA of Nucleotide sequencing was done using dye-primers in the cycle sequencing method ( Cells were disrupted by two passages through a French pressure cell operating at 1.4 × 10 Nudix hydrolase activity of ACT protein was determined in 300 μl of 100 m Enzyme kinetics was studied using standard assay conditions and varying substrate conditions. Data were fitted with Sigma Plot for Windows, Version 5.0 (Jandell Scientific Software) according to the Michaelis-Menten equation. Data obtained in the MDH-activator protein titration experiments was fitted according to the Hill equation. ACT protein was purified from an 8-liter batch culture of Crude extract (9.8 ml containing 534 mg of protein) was prepared as described above. Crude extract was incubated for 30 min at 60 °C. Denatured proteins were precipitated by centrifugation for 10 min at 25,000 × The sample was loaded onto a Q-Sepharose column equilibrated with buffer A. Proteins were eluted by applying a 40-ml linear 0–1 3-ml samples were applied onto a Superdex-200 column equilibrated with buffer A at a flow rate of 2 ml.min 2-ml samples were applied onto a Mono-Q column equilibrated with buffer A. Proteins were eluted by applying a 20-ml linear 0–1 MDH was purified from To separate ACT, MDH containing the bound NAD(H) cofactor, and coenzyme NAD(H), reaction mixtures were loaded on a Phenyl-Superose hydrophobic interaction column equilibrated with 20% (w/v) (NH A standard MDH reaction was performed in a total volume of 10 ml. The reaction mixture contained 100 m The metal composition of purified MDH was determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry using a PerkinElmer 1100B atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Prior to analysis, the enzyme was dialyzed extensively against 10 m Use of the A1/A2 primers based on the N-terminal amino acid sequence of ACT yielded a PCR fragment of the expected size (89 bp), which was cloned into pBlueScriptIIKS (pHK1) and sequenced. The deduced amino acid sequence was in full compliance with the previously determined N terminus of the ACT protein ( In total, 1480 bp of the 4.4-kb Screening of the available data bases revealed a strong similarity between ACT and the YQKG gene product of Extracts of Following induction with isopropyl β- The ACT protein concentration required for maximal stimulation of In view of the presence of the highly conserved Nudix hydrolase sequence motif in ACT, its (di-)nucleotide hydrolyzing activity was evaluated. Experiments were performed in a glycine-KOH buffer (pH 9.5) at 50 °C, the pH and temperature values optimal for MDH activity and for the stimulatory effect of ACT on MDH ( MDH protein was purified from The data thus show that ACT hydrolyzes free NAD Urea extracts of bMDH protein preparations, from incubations with or without ACT and/or methanol plus coenzyme NAD The combined data thus show that ACT stimulates MDH activity by hydrolyzing the MDH cofactor NAD(H) when occurring in the oxidized state (NAD In the absence of ACT, bMDH obeyed a Ping-Pong type of reaction mechanism; Hanes plots of the initial reaction rates of bMDH clearly revealed lines intercepting the vertical axis, indicating noncompetitive cosubstrate inhibition, typical for a Ping-Pong type of reaction mechanism (Fig. The presence of ACT, resulting in hydrolysis of the MDH-bound cofactor, NAD Heterologous expression of active ACT protein in MDH and ACT protein expression is under co-ordinate control (methanol induced) in A data base search for proteins with amino acid sequence similarities revealed that ACT carries the highly conserved sequence motif characteristic for MutT-related proteins ( ACT also hydrolyzes free NAD The three-dimensional structure of the glycerol dehydrogenase protein of The molecular mechanism of the stimulating effect of ACT on the reaction rate of MDH was elucidated by analysis of differences in the properties of cMDH and bMDH ( MDH cofactor analysis studies subsequently provided conclusive evidence that ACT hydrolyzes the MDH-bound NAD The data obtained so far allow us to propose a model for ACT-MDH interaction (Fig. Activated MDH has a higher affinity and  ACT is a member of the MutT proteins or Nudix hydrolases. All members of this family characterized so far are able to hydrolyze a pyrophosphate bond in different (di-)nucleotides. This protein family has been referred to as a family of “housecleaning” enzymes (