Objectives
                  The role of particle size and size distribution of glass powders in glass-ionomer cements (GICs) has been largely overlooked, being limited to demonstrations of the classical inverse size–strength relationship. This study investigated variation in properties of an experimental glass-ionomer cement when a combination of large (‘Powder A’) and small (‘Powder B’) particles was used.
               
                  Methods
                  Large- (mean size 9.60μm) and small-particle (3.34μm) glass powders were blended in various proportions and mixed with powdered polyacrylic acid to make a range of glass-ionomer powders. These powders were mixed with a glass-ionomer liquid (SDI Ltd, Australia) at powder to liquid ratios of 2:1, 2.5:1, and 3:1, and the resultant cements evaluated for working time, setting time, clinical handling, and compressive strength. Results were analysed by ANOVA.
               
                  Results
                  An increased proportion of smaller particles corresponded to higher strengths, and an increased proportion of larger particles with a decrease in viscosity of the unset cement. When 20–30% by weight of small particles was used, the paste demonstrated a peak in cohesion and working time, with a viscosity similar to commercial restorative GICs.
               
                  Significance
                  Optimisation of particle sizing and distribution may thus lead to glass-ionomer cements with improved clinical handling characteristics and greater strength, which may increase the longevity of the restoration.Glass-ionomer cements (GICs), more properly referred to as glass polyalkenoate cements, are formed from powdered glass and aqueous polyacids. The glass is generally calcium or strontium fluoroaluminosilicate; strontium provides the radiopacity and fluorine, in the form of fluoride ions, enters the matrix phase, from where it can be released to promote remineralisation of caries-affected tooth structures, and confer antimicrobial properties to the final cement Extensive work has been undertaken examining the interfacial reaction between the glass and the polyacid solution The early work of Kent and Wilson It is hypothesised that variation in particle size distribution has no significant effect on the handling, working time, setting time, and compressive strength of an experimental GIC (null hypothesis); this investigation aims to explore this hypothesis. A strontium fluoroaluminosilicate glass was milled using a laboratory ball mill, wet-sieved through a 25-μm mesh, and the suspension allowed to settle for 10 A proprietary developmental glass-ionomer liquid (SDI Ltd, Bayswater, Australia) was used as the standard liquid for all tests, consisting of polyacrylic acid (25–35%), A table of clinical ranking scores was developed for the clinical handling assessment of the pastes ( Glasses A and B were combined in various proportions as shown in The powders and liquids were measured into unassembled capsules (Riva SC, SDI Ltd) at three different powder: liquid ratios; 2:1, 2.5:1 and 3:1. Each capsule was assembled, activated, and mixed in an amalgamator (Ultramat Working time was determined as the time when the material could no longer cohesively string to a height of 10 Cylindrical specimens of height (6.0±0.1)  The graph of the powder:liquid ratio of 2.5:1 ( For pastes at the powder:liquid ratio of 3:1, no determination of working time, initial setting time, or strength could be made at either extremes of powders A or B content. Pastes made solely from powder A had paste properties similar to dry clay, and even up to 5% powder B did not form cohesive pastes ( Increasing the proportion of small particles (powder B) also increased the viscosity of the paste, but this was noticeable only above a critical value, which depended on the powder:liquid ratio and was lower at higher ratios. At very low powder B concentrations—below 15%—and at powder:liquid ratios of 2:1 or 2.5:1, the increase in viscosity due to the greater surface area of small (powder B) particles ( The 24-h compressive strength of the 3:1 materials showed a linear increase ( A theoretical modelling of the flow and viscosity of glass-ionomer pastes is extremely difficult, given the complexity of the particle–particle and particle–liquid interactions, polymeric characteristics, and gelation reaction. Even two-phase dense solid–liquid systems do not compare well with theoretical calculations At each powder:liquid ratio, the improvement in cohesion and the corresponding increase in working time were clear, though the locations at which the peaks occurred varied for the different ratios. The intermediate powders, containing various amounts of both powder A (coarse) and powder B (fine), demonstrated handling characteristics that were improved over either extreme. Powder A suffered from a lack of cohesion and, especially at higher powder to liquid ratios ( As the solids content of the mixed pastes increased, the optimal concentration of powder B also increases ( At higher powder:liquid ratios, particle packing benefits achieved by the addition of small particles (powder B) are more clearly seen, and the increased cohesion has a greater effect on the paste viscosity than the reaction kinetics. Although, the increased surface area would hasten the reaction and decrease the working time of the paste—especially given the smaller relative volume of liquid phase in the paste—powder B has a greater effect over the handling of the paste than over the rate of reaction. Also, as the powder:liquid ratio is increased, so too does the necessity of the cohesive influence of the finer particles. The increase in strength corresponded closely to a decrease in mean particle size and increase in surface area ( Overall, while the strength of the materials falls below the standards required of restorative glass-ionomer cements Modern GICs provide for the clinician both challenges and opportunities. The requirements of a strong material, combined with optimal cohesion and good working and set times, means that experimental investigation into the fundamentals of particle interaction remains a necessary research area. GICs composed of large particles (around 10 The authors wish to acknowledge the support of SDI Ltd (Melbourne, Australia) in the supply of materials and use of experimental equipment.