This article presents unsteady, magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) flow of viscoelastic fluid through porous medium. Constitutive relationship for this model is established by fractional calculus approach. Flow is considered between two parallel plates of infinite length. Finite element-finite difference scheme is used for the solution of the governing nonlinear partial differential equation. Influence of the fractional flow parameters on the velocity profile and skin friction coefficient is shown by graphical illustrations. Numerical values are also computed for the skin friction coefficient. It is expected that present work helps as a motivation for modeling further porous medium flows that involve catalytic converters, gas turbines and condensers.Nowadays transport processes of non-Newtonian fluids through porous media is an active area of research. It has wide range applications in scientific, engineering, industrial and technical fields. Precisely, catalytic converters are used to decrease the poisonous exhaust which releases from automobiles engines. In industrial processes these flows have gained high importance in geothermal energy extraction, fiber technology, crystal growth, crusade of biological fluids, food products, glass fiber manufacturing and bio-mechanics. One constitutive relation is not enough to characterize all these fluids. Therefore many expressions are required in order to capture different properties of these fluids. Flow of non-Newtonian fluids are discussed extensively by various researchers. For instance, Hayat et al. Fractional calculus is currently used as a applied technique in various branches of science. This technique gained more importance as dynamical systems in engineering described by fractional equations are increasing day by day. Fractional models are better than integer order models because they describe the hereditary and memory properties of diverse substances. Transport phenomena in differential type fluid with time-fractional derivatives is studied by Imran et al. Fluid flows through porous medium are encountered in various areas of science, including ceramic engineering, geophysics, industrial engineering, chemical engineering, food technology, groundwater hydrology, mechanical engineering, soil mechanics, petroleum engineering and mineral processing. For example in chemical engineering fluid flow contacting filtration. Complex behavior of flow is observed in porous media due to interaction between packing particles and fluid under consideration. Mansour et al. Megnetohydrodynamic (MHD) term derived from Lorentz force has extensive applications in various viscoelastic fluid flow problems which includes the medical analysis of biological fluids especially blood flow extents, nuclear reactors and MHD generators. Combined effect of porous medium and magnetic field is observed in widespread presentations such as the cooling of reactors, metallurgical processes, extrusion processes and penetration etc. Javed et al. In this article, we study incompressible fractional second grade fluid flow through a Forchheimer medium. Quadratic drag term is taken into account while analyzing the flow field. The flow is considered between parallel plates of infinite length. The fluid flows when lower plate starts moving with quadratic velocity. A no-slip condition is imposed at the boundaries. Uniform magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the direction of flow. Convergent numerical solution of the governing mathematical model is presented via Galerkin finite element method and finite difference approximation is used for fractional time derivatives. Effect of various flow parameters over the velocity profile is analyzed graphically. The main objective in this article is to indicate the inertial effects at microscopic level in the study of MHD unsteady fractional fluid flow through Forchheimer medium using finite difference-finite element scheme. In First we consider the following symbolization. The Caputo left sided fractional time derivative, of order The fractional derivative  We consider the unsteady incompressible flow of fractional second grade fluid through Forchheimer medium between two parallel plates of infinite length. Distance between the plates is 2 Rivlin–Ericksen tensors of first and second order are defined as The thermodynamic stability of the second grade fluid model required that By mean of By analogy with the fractional second grade constitutive relationship we present the modified phenomenological Darcy’s law model with fractional derivative which tells velocity and pressure drop for a viscoelastic fluid in an unbounded porous medium as follows In the present case incompressible flow is governed by the following equations Here we present the equations that govern the present boundary layer flow along with relevant initial and boundary conditions. Equation of continuity is satisfied identically by the velocity field In the above expression We consider the flow between two parallel plates of infinite length. The lower plate exhibits variable acceleration while the upper plate is fixed for Friction factor should be considered when there is an interaction between the fluid and some solid boundary. Relative friction between the fluid and solid boundary is measured by skin friction coefficient. In the present flow field coefficient of skin friction is defined as follows We use the following dimensionless quantities in order to non-dimensionalized the IBVP Using Also dimensionless skin friction coefficient is given by Finally, introduce   A numerical scheme in order to solve the problem The space of square integrable functions over the domain Let Define the partition of the domain The weak formulation of the problem Find Subsequently, a discrete weak formulation of the problem Find Making use of the approximations In this section, the theoretical error estimates are speculated and the developed numerical scheme in the previous section has been validated by performing numerical error analysis with respect to spatial coordinates. The numerical estimates are then compared with the theoretical estimates. The following theorem demonstrates the theoretical error estimates for the problems of type under consideration in this article.  The estimates In this section we demonstrate the convergence of the scheme developed in previous section and compare the theoretical and numerical error estimates. In order to compare the theoretical and numerical error estimates for the scheme of the problem we fabricate an exact solution by introducing artificial source term For the real physical simulations of the model In In this section interpretation of the numerical solutions with respect to effect of various non-dimensional quantities on the velocity profile and skin friction coefficient are analyzed in detail. Graphical studies of the velocity field has been carried out to understand the governing mathematical model. Monotonic behavior of all the parameters on the velocity profiles and skin friction coefficient is observed in this study. Effects of involved parameters on the velocity profile are plotted for the final time Effect of viscoelastic parameter  Characteristics of the magnetic parameter Ha on the velocity profile and skin friction is displayed in Finally Effects of various fractional model parameters on the skin friction coefficient at the final time MHD unsteady flow of fractional second grade fluid through Forchheimer medium is studied in this article. Finite element method along with a finite difference scheme is used to approximate velocity field and skin friction in the fluid flow confined between two parallel plates. Flow of the fluid is induced by variable velocity of the lower plate. Finite element-finite difference scheme is tested for the convergence analysis and error bounds. Effects of different parameters are discussed graphically as well as in a tabular form. Magnitude of the coefficient of skin friction, velocity and momentum boundary layer thickness increase with the increase of The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The authors have contributed in writing, commenting and proof reading of the article. Each author have read and approved the manuscript. The authors are grateful to all referee’s for their valuable suggestions to improve the quality of the article.