Pre-analysis of the geometry and deviation of multiple hydraulically induced fractures is a decisive factor in the successful multiple hydraulic fracturing operations. Besides, fracture spacing should be optimal for obtaining desired results such as maintaining sufficient aperture for proppant placement, avoiding screen-outs and also preventing fracture closure or crossing multiple fractures. In fact, the final geometry and deviation of multiple hydraulic fractures are dramatically influenced by the interaction of multiple hydraulic fractures on each other known as stress shadow effect which is caused by fracture spacing and pore pressure change. Predicting the geometry and deviation of multiple hydraulic fractures is a challenging part of conducting this technology in Ilam reservoir due to low matrix permeability and naturally fractured nature of the reservoir. Accordingly, a fully coupled stress-diffusion XFEM model for initiation and propagation of multiple hydraulic fractures with five injection zones was prepared to optimize the effect of fracture spacing and pore pressure change on the multiple hydraulic fractures’ deviation and geometry. Additionally, the XFEM model was verified by three approaches including field data, Stress Intensity Factor and KGD zero toughness solution wherein a very good agreement with negligible error was obtained for SIF, field data and KGD M-vertex solution. However, this study has confirmed that both pore pressure and stress shadows contribute to change the fracture geometry and its deviation significantly in Ilam reservoir. Also, increasing pore pressure between fractures, may affect the fracture geometry to be tighter in width and shorter in length. In addition, considering optimized fracture spacing about 75 m resulted in creation of very smooth, uniform and deeper multiple hydraulic fractures; so, there will be no closed fractures in DPH-02 horizontal wellbore and the possibility of crossing the furthest fracture by the second fracture significantly reduced when the fracture spacing was higher than 5 m.Multiple hydraulic fracturing technology performed in horizontal wells, has become an economical and viable method for producing oil and gas from unconventional hydrocarbon resources such as oil shale, shale gas or tight gas reservoirs Different authors have investigated stress shadow effects in multiple hydraulic fracturing operations as well as the effect of bedding angle and anisotropy on the deviation of hydraulically driven fractures (example of the effect of bedding angle and anisotropy as well as parametric and poroelastic analysis of multiple HF: Many researchers and scientists have investigated stress shadow effects on the orientation and geometry of multiple hydraulic fracturing; for example, Fisher et al. presented that stress induced between fractures in multi-stage HF is increased locally due to fluid injection and higher fluid pressure which can affect subsequent multiple fractures in the operations. Zangeneh et al. have investigated horizontal hydraulic fractures from adjacent lateral wells by discontinuum-based distinct-element method. In fact, as a result of applying tight fracture spacing during multi-stage HF operations, multiple hydraulic fractures are deviated steeply and this matter results in changing of hydraulic fractures’ geometry including fracture length and width. Therefore, production rates in shale reservoirs will reduce significantly as a result of creation of some closed fractures or strong deviation of multiple hydraulic cracks as well as reduction of fracture's length and width; therefore, optimization of the fracture spacing in multi-stage HF operations plays a crucial role in enhancing production rates as a result of providing opened, uniform and deeper multiple hydraulic fractures in Ilam reservoir. Meanwhile, determination of multiple hydraulic fractures’ opening is challenging since it deals with maintaining sufficient aperture and efficient communication pathways to accomplish proppant placement and avoid screen-outs or proppant bridging. Many scientists have conducted numerous researches to capture the effects of fracture spacing and stress shadows on the deviation and geometry of multiple hydraulic fractures. From the scientists point of view, by reducing fracture spacing, stress shadow effect is able to force multiple hydraulic fractures to deviate significantly and as a result of interaction of multiple fractures, fracture width (aperture) may change and fracture length may decrease but they believe that these results still require further study. Nevertheless, there is a research gap regarding the effects of fracture spacing and pore pressure on the deviation and geometry of multiple hydraulic fractures particularly in Ilam reservoir, which is a low permeability carbonate reservoir. The main factors which have a great influence on the multiple hydraulic fractures’ deviation and geometry in carbonate reservoirs (conventional reservoirs such as sandstone or carbonate) are fracture spacing and pore pressure which are able to create stress shadows as well as fluid force near the fractures in multiple HF operations. Illam reservoir is located at Siri-A oil field, in South-west Division of Sirri Island. This field was explored as an oil field in 1968, and since then, twenty wellbores have been drilled consist of five exploration wellbores and fifteen production ones. Two formations Illam and Maysharif are main reservoirs for this oil field that related to the Cretaceous-aged strata. The Illam Formation has been chosen for conduction the numerical simulation and optimization of the multiple hydraulic fracturing operation in the current study. Illam reservoir is located in Alvand or Sirri-A oil field with an in-situ deposit of 1800 million barrels, and 2% of recovery/production. Initial reservoir pressure is 3450 psi, and its bubble point is 1350 psi. Reservoir porosity has been evaluated as 5–20%, and its permeability is 0.1–3 mD. Also, when it reaches to the bubble point, the possibility of forming a gas cap is unlikely. Illam reservoir does not have an active water drive; therefore, even by installing the submerged pump after producing 36 million barrels of oil, the gas within reservoir can cause difficulties to the production process . Wellbore understudied is DPH-02 located at the northwest-southeast Persian Gulf and has been drilled almost horizontally in the direction of minimum horizontal stress. This producer wellbore has been drilled vertically till it met Illam reservoir and then the direction of the wellbore changed to the horizontal. The horizontal length of the wellbore is 6000 ft which half of the length has been drilled as Slotted Liner, and the rest is Open Hole. After feasibility and initial geological studies and determination of the exact location of the Illam reservoir, DPH-02 wellbore has been assigned for the purpose of providing the exact necessary information needed for hydraulic fracturing simulation such as rock mechanics and reservoir fluid properties. Thus, desired information such as geomechanical and elastic parameters of the reservoir including Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio, porosity, permeability, pore pressure, and in situ stresses (vertical, maximum and minimum horizontal components) have been extracted from mechanical earth models. The traction-separation or cohesive law defines the relationship between the traction tensor t and the displacement jump δ across a pair of cohesive surfaces. This law assumes that the cohesive surfaces are intact without any relative displacement, and exhibit linear elastic behavior until the traction reaches the cohesive strength The mechanical constitutive behavior of the cohesive elements can be defined using a constitutive model specified directly in terms of traction versus separation. When pore pressure cohesive elements are used in soils procedures in ABAQUS, the fluid constitutive behavior of the cohesive elements can be defined by considering the tangential fluid flow relationship and by defining fluid leak-off coefficients. Damage initiation refers to the beginning of degradation of the response of a material point. The process of degradation begins when the stresses satisfy certain damage initiation criteria. Passing this point the nonlinear behavior of the traction-separation will start as damage develops. Damage is assumed to initiate when the maximum nominal stress ratio (as defined in the expression below) reaches a value of unity. The symbol <> signifies that a pure compressive deformation or stress state does not initiate damage. The fracture propagation is related to the degradation of material stiffness when the damage initiation criterion has been met. Parameter Fluid flow governing equation in the fracture consists of tangential and normal flow that is called as gap flow leak-off in hydraulic fracturing ( Tangential flow within the gap is governed by the lubrication equations, Normal flow is defined as a flow of fluid from fracture gap into the rock matrix or vice versa due to the pressure difference between the formation pore pressure and the fracture gap ( The continuity equation of mass conservation which is presented below is the governing equation of fluid flow into the fracture and the adjacent porous material. By combining Eqs. After extracting geo-mechanical and physical properties of Illam reservoir as input data for the numerical model, the next step is the evaluation of the reservoir geometry and assigning the formation and reservoir fluid properties to the geometry of the model. After considering the geometry of the formation, the properties of materials (formation itself and reservoir fluid) have been assigned. After considering the geometry of the model and assigning the properties, now the boundary conditions and loading in the formation need to be assigned. This step consists of pore pressure, in-situ stresses, and the degrees of freedom in nodes on the boundaries of the model to make the model close to the real situation . The flow rate of 0.001 m The next step of the numerical modeling is meshing. This step has to be done to get the accurate solution and results for calculation of the fully coupled stress-diffusion analysis, the opening of the hydraulically induced fracture, length and width of the fracture and other desired parameters. Considering the wide use of SIF in fracture mechanics, its accurate estimation for postulated flaws under given load conditions is important in fracture mechanics.  This verification implies that the XFEM-based cohesive law is strongly consistent with analytical results. The comparison between XFEM-based, analytical, and normalized SIF (XFEM SIF/analytical SIF) versus tension forces for the single-edged crack model is presented in Validation of the numerical model with the actual field data is necessary to ensure the reliability of the results from numerical modeling. For this purpose, the hydraulic fracture initiation pressure from both numerical simulation and in situ test will be compared. Considering the in situ hydraulic fracturing operation performed in SIRRI-A oil field in the DPH-02 wellbore, the pressure versus time were extracted from monitoring curves during the field test and used to validate the equivalent numerical results. As shown in On the other hand, it is necessary to compare the results of hydraulic fracture propagation from XFEM with zero toughness plane strain KGD analytical solutions for validation of hydraulic fracture growth. Plane strain KGD solution (M-vertex solution) depends on the injection rate For the plane strain KGD hydraulic fracture, the crack width or opening The evolution parameter can be considered as a dimensionless toughness in the viscosity scaling For the viscosity scaling, denotes by a subscript m, the small parameter and length scale take the expilicit forms ( The first order approximation of the zero toughness solution is According to In this section, the influence of fracture spacing or injection intervals of 5 m, 15 m, 30 m, 45 m, 60 m and 75 m on the deviation of multiple hydraulic fractures with five injection zones has been investigated. Fracture spacing or the length between injection zones plays an important role on the deviation of multiple hydraulic fractures from their preferred paths which are on the According to As can be seen from Another reason for stress shadow effect is caused by pore pressure change. Fluid injection is able to pressurize pore pressure in the vicinity of multiple fractures and this matter causes the effective stress to decrease behind the fracture surfaces significantly. Therefore, due to reduction of effective stresses near the fracture's location, multiple hydraulic fractures can initiate and propagate. On the other hand, increasing pore pressure between fractures creates induced stresses or stress shadows as well as considerable deformation and volumetric strains between fractures which cause the fractures to grow away from their preferred path ( One of the technical problems related to multiple hydraulic fracturing operations is when multiple fractures grow away from their preferred path, some of the deviated fractures might be closed as a result of strong deviation and stress shadow effect between multiple fractures which is caused by pore pressure change and deformation. In fact, closely spaced fractures can influence each other by exerting more stress and deformation and this matter leads to deviation of multiple fractures. Therefore, fracture mouth may be closed as a result of stress shadow effect and when the fracture closed, the middle part of the deviated fracture might be widened as can be seen from As can be observed from In this study, the effect of fracture spacing and pore pressure on the deviation and geometry of multiple hydraulic fractures in Ilam reservoir DPH-02 wellbore was investigated. So, a new sophisticated fully coupled stress-diffusion Extended Finite Element model of multiple hydraulic fractures with leak-off coefficients, flow rate, gap flow viscosity, permeability and porosity, fracture initiation and propagation criterion was performed to analyze the effect of fracture spacing and pore pressure on the deviation and geometry of multiple hydraulic fractures (fracture width and length). In addition, this fully coupled XFEM model was verified by three approaches including field data in ILAM reservoir-Persian Gulf, Stress Intensity Factor (SIF) approach and KGD zero toughness solution or M-vertex solution. The results show a very good agreement with less than 1% error for SIF approach, 0.7% error for field data verification in SIRRI-A Oilfield-DPH-02 horizontal wellbore and about 1.6% error for KGD M-vertex analytical solution. According to the results, decrease of fracture spacing from 75 m to 5 m, would lead to severe deviation of multiple hydraulic fractures since both pore pressure and stress shadows would be able to orient multiple hydraulic fractures away from their initial paths in Ilam reservoir. Possibility of crossing the furthest fracture by the second fracture was very high when the fracture spacing was 5 m; but in other cases when the fracture spacing was 15 m or higher, the furthest fracture showed a higher curvature compared to the second fracture and this matter reduced the possibility of crossing and cutting multiple fractures significantly. In addition, by decreasing intervals between injection zones, the interaction between multiple hydraulic cracks is considerably increased and this matter results in decreasing of multiple hydraulic fractures’ length and width as a result of pore pressure and stress shadows. Moreover, by increasing fracture spacing, the interaction of multiple hydraulic fractures on each other has reduced and 75-meter-injection interval is considered as the optimized fracture spacing since it has the least effect on the deviation and stress interference of multiple hydraulic fractures; so, more uniform, wider and deeper multiple hydraulic fractures will be created and by conducting multiple HF operation in Ilam reservoir, production rate will certainly increase. At last, by considering optimized spacing for multiple fractures in Ilam reservoir DPH-02, there will be no closed fractures in the horizontal wellbore and possibility of fracture closure and proppant bridging or trapping will be certainly reduced or lost. I wish to thank my wife, Fatemeh Ataiyan for her support and encouragement throughout my study. Also, the authors would like to express their great appreciation to Dr. Zuorong Chen from CSIRO Energy, Australia, for his valuable and constructive suggestions and recommendations during the development of this research work. Additionally, Special thanks should be given to Professor Andrew Bunger, associated professor of Civil Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, USA, for his professional guidance and valuable support during doing this research project.