The issue of investigations in this study was an application of heterogeneous Fenton-type catalyst, Fe-exchanged zeolite FeZSM5, for the minimization of phenol and overall organic content in the model wastewater. Applied treatment systems included variation of heterogeneous and homogeneous Fenton-type catalyst with and without the assistance of UV irradiation, FeZSM5/H2O2, Fe2+/H2O2/NH4ZSM5, Fe3+/H2O2/NH4ZSM5, UV/FeZSM5/H2O2, UV/Fe2+/H2O2/NH4ZSM5 and UV/Fe3+/H2O2/NH4ZSM5. Processes efficiency was evaluated on the basis of phenol removal, mineralization extent, H2O2 consumption and concentration of iron ions in the bulk after the treatment. By all applied systems, complete phenol removal was achieved in less than 30min of treatment time. Systems including heterogeneous Fenton-type catalyst showed somewhat lower mineralization efficiency in comparison to the corresponding systems applying homogeneous Fenton-type catalysts and the addition of synthetic zeolite NH4ZSM5. Significantly lower concentration of iron ions in the bulk after the treatment could give these systems, particularly UV/FeZSM5/H2O2, a great advantage over the homogeneous Fenton-type systems.Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are nowadays in focus of the wide range of investigations as effective methods for destruction of the organic contaminants present in the wastewaters ( The application of heterogeneous solid Fenton-type catalysts includes different types of solid particles, such as synthetic zeolites, pillared clays or resins, as carriers of iron ions ( The goal of this study was to investigate applicability of Fe-exchanged synthetic zeolite of ZSM5 type as heterogeneous Fenton-type catalyst for the minimization of phenol and overall organic content in the model wastewater. The efficiency of both systems, FeZSM5/H Chemicals used in this study were supplied by Fluka, Germany, (phenol, acetonitrile and acetic acid), Kemika, Croatia (FeSO The first set of preliminary experiments included the adsorption of phenol on NH Experiments at established optimal conditions with the highest mineralization extent for applied dark Fenton-type process, FeZSM5/H The decay of phenol (PH) and the formation of primary oxidation by-products: catechol (CC), hydroquinone (HQ) and benzoquinone (BQ), were analyzed by HPLC equipped with Software Class In order to evaluate the efficiency of investigated FeZSM/H The first set of preliminary experiments was conducted by the addition of applied zeolites into phenol solution in the absence of any oxidant (e.g. H The next set of experiments was focused on the determination of the optimal FeZSM5/H After the optimal FeZSM5/H In further step of the study, earlier applied Fenton-type processes were combined with UV irradiation. Firstly, the set of auxiliary experiments was performed, which included the treatment of model phenol solution by UV irradiation in the presence of zeolites NH In After auxiliary tests where zeolites in combination with UV irradiation mostly acted as adsorbents and not as catalysts, the efficiency of applied UV assisted Fenton-type processes, UV/FeZSM5/H The main goal of the study was to investigate the efficiency of heterogeneous Fenton-type processes, FeZSM5/H We would like to gratefully acknowledge the Ministry of Science, Education and Sport (Croatia) (project no. 0125-018) for the financial support. We would also like to thank Dr. Ana Loncaric Bozic for very useful comments.