Scaphoid waist fractures are one of the most common carpal injuries in athletes, and their management can be challenging for orthopaedists. Athletes are best served by individual treatment plans based on their position, demands of their sport, and skill level. The anatomy of the scaphoid makes these injuries susceptible to malunions or nonunions and can lead to significant morbidity and lost playing time. Physical examination and imaging studies are paramount to timely and accurate diagnosis and can help guide treatment decisions. Depending on the athletes׳ required skill set, they may be able to return to sport participation with a playing cast or benefit from early surgical fixation to hasten their return to play. The nonoperative and operative management options and rehabilitation are further outlined to help guide orthopaedists in the most appropriate treatment for athletes that result in good outcomes and minimize the time required to return to athletic participation.The scaphoid is the most commonly injured carpal bone, with over two-thirds of scaphoid fractures occurring at the waist. Early and accurate diagnosis is paramount to improve outcomes for athletes. These injuries are commonly missed and mismanaged, as evidenced by a study by Muramatsu et al, An understanding of the unique anatomy of the scaphoid elucidates the importance of appropriate management as it can be prone to nonunion. Proximally, the scaphoid is covered almost entirely with articular cartilage and is dependent on a distally based blood flow. The scaphoid is commonly divided into 3 zones; the distal pole, the waist, and the proximal pole. Several fracture classification schemes have been proposed. Herbert and Fisher Scaphoid waist fractures can further be characterized by the direction of the fracture line. There can be horizontal oblique, vertical oblique, and transverse fractures. Of these, transverse fractures comprise over two-thirds of the patterns seen. Fractures at the scaphoid most frequently occur at the which may be explained by both carpal mechanics and osseous structure. Patients with an acute scaphoid fracture may exhibit edema and ecchymosis at the dorsal-radial aspect of the wrist. However, occult and subacute scaphoid fractures may be difficult to recognize. Patients may complain of nonspecific pain in the wrist, yet evaluation for a scaphoid fracture is often focused on tenderness over the anatomical snuffbox or the dorsal-radial aspect of the wrist. Radiographic evaluation should begin with standard posterior-anterior, semipronated oblique, semisupinated oblique, and lateral views of the wrist. If a concern for a scaphoid fracture exists, a scaphoid view can be obtained that positions the wrist slightly supinated with ulnar deviation while clenching the hand into a fist. This maneuver extends the scaphoid and permits thorough evaluation of its entire length. Initial radiographs can be falsely negative in 20%-33% of scaphoid fracture. We therefore recommend that athletes, with negative initial radiographs but examination findings concerning for a scaphoid fracture, should obtain an MRI as soon as possible to permit early return to play if no fracture or other wrist injuries are identified or to facilitate prompt treatment if a fracture is detected. Arguments against advanced imaging are regarding cost; however, the risk of missing a scaphoid fracture and risk of nonunion outweighs the cost of acquiring early advanced imaging such as MRI, CT, or bone scan in this population. A recent meta-analysis showed that MRI, CT, and bone scans are equivalent in sensitivity in detecting nondisplaced scaphoid fractures. However, bone scans had inferior specificity when compared with MRI and CT, which were found to be equivalent. In addition to fracture detection, CT scans serve a valuable role in fracture characterization, determining the degree of displacement, and detecting comminution, which may aid in counseling the patient for or against surgical fixation. Axial CT scans should be obtained along the long axis of the scaphoid with sagittal reconstructions orthogonal to this line to maximize assessment of displacement or deformity. The decision of operative vs nonoperative treatment of nondisplaced scaphoid waist fractures in the athlete׳s wrist must be made on a case-by-case basis. In athletes, operative fixation may be prudent to aim toward rapid recovery, early return to sports participation, and minimize the risk of malunions or nonunion. However, patients may also be treated nonoperatively with cast immobilization, with or without early return to play in playing casts. Unstable fractures require rigid fixation; however, nondisplaced scaphoid waist fractures can be successfully managed with or without surgery. Several studies have reported equivalent clinical outcomes at long-term follow-up. However, earlier return to work and shorter immobilization periods with operative treatment have consistently been reported Nonoperative treatment consists of cast immobilization for 2-6 months; however, this may be modified for the athlete. Nonoperative treatment has union rates anywhere from 78%-100%. Riester et al Despite adequate union rates with nonoperative treatment, it is pertinent to monitor healing regularly regardless of return to play. Any evidence of displacement during nonoperative treatment or failure to demonstrate signs of healing at 2-3 months should be reevaluated for possible surgical fixation. Multiple techniques are available for operative treatment ranging from open to percutaneous fixation. Percutaneous fixation, volar or dorsal, is often reserved for nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures. Open techniques allow for improved visualization and protection of structures; however, it requires dissection of the radiocarpal ligaments or dorsal capsular structures that leads to further soft tissue dissection and may affect healing or require longer periods of immobilization. The patient is placed in the supine position with a hand table applied to the operating room table. A nonsterile tourniquet is applied to the brachium in the event that conversion from a percutaneous to open procedure may be necessary; otherwise, the procedure is performed without tourniquet control. The upper extremity is prepped and draped in standard sterile fashion. The surgeon should be positioned in a manner to allow for his or her dominant hand to maneuver the drill in retrograde fashion relative to the patient׳s wrist. For example, a right-handed surgeon would sit in the axilla of the patient׳s left upper extremity. A draped minifluoroscopy machine is brought in toward the patient with the image intensifier typically toward the surgeon׳s chest ( Posterior-anterior and lateral images are obtained of the wrist, and a guide pin is placed on the skin to mark out the long axis of the scaphoid on orthogonal images to provide an approximation for screw trajectory ( An additional K-wire (0.035 or 0.045 The wound is copiously irrigated with sterile saline, and the wound is closed with 4-0 nonabsorbable simple sutures. The extremity is placed into a well-padded, short arm, thumb spica plaster splint. Edema-controlling maneuvers and digit range of motion is initiated immediately. At 2 weeks, the patient is placed into a removable short arm, thumb spica orthosis that is removed for hygiene purposes and for wrist range of motion. It is the authors׳ preference to allow unrestricted return to athletic participation without wrist immobilization once radiographic union occurs (typically 6-7 weeks) and full wrist and hand range of motion has been obtained. Accurate determination of union with radiographs alone can be difficult and inaccurate. Earlier return to play with 2-4 weeks of immobilization following surgery has shown good results in patients who were diagnosed and treated acutely and started on early rehabilitation. Haddad and Goddard Bond et al randomized active duty military patients with nondisplaced scaphoid waist fractures to volar percutaneous screw fixation ( A dorsal percutaneous approach, both with and without arthroscopic assistance, has been described. The union rate for nonoperative treatment ranges between 88 and 95%, with operative union rates approaching 100%. Nondisplaced scaphoid waist fractures are common among athletes and must be promptly diagnosed and treated to ensure the best outcome and fastest recovery. Nonoperative treatment with playing casts is a reasonable treatment option in athletes that do not require complex wrist or hand dexterity or are at the end of their season. Nonoperative treatment relies upon close radiographic surveillance, and any concern for progressive displacement or delayed healing must be addressed immediately to limit prolonged immobilization, malunion, or nonunion. High-demand athletes may benefit from early fixation allowing faster return to unencumbered play; however, the risks of surgery must be considered. Union should be confirmed with CT scans, and full range of motion obtained to determine at which point athletes may be released to unrestricted participation in their given sport.