Pulverized coal combustion was adopted at the end of the grate to provide sufficiently high preheating temperature in the grate when hematite was roasted to produce hematite pellets. Unfortunately, serious deposit which stuck to the walls at the end of the grate was found after using pulverized coal combustion. In the present study, chemical analysis methods were used to detect the chemical compositions of the preheated pellet powder, deposit sample and coal ash. In addition, the major phases and microstructure of the deposit sample were determined using X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) analysis, respectively. Furthermore, a thermodynamic software (FactSage 7.0) was adopted to analyze the deposit formation process. The chemical and mineralogical analyses indicated that the deposits contained high amounts of iron, particularly of silicate, aluminum, calcium and magnesium and, to lesser extent, of alkali metals. The deposit formation process in the grate was found to be caused by the mixing of hematite pellet fines and unburnt carbon from the coal ash. The hematite was reduced to wustite by the presence of residual carbon, which generated low melting phases forming sticky deposits on the grate walls.Pellets are produced from the agglomeration of crushed iron ore fines using moisture and binder However, slagging deposits are frequently stuck to the refractory walls of the grate and kiln during the iron-ore pellet production, which interrupts the normal production and decreases the production efficiency Previous researchers have focused on the deposit formation in a kiln. Their works showed that the major phases of deposit formation in a pellet rotary kiln are hematite, silicate and some limited glass phase while they are mainly composed of Al In the present work, the formation mechanism of deposits in the grate during the production of coal-based iron-ore pellets has been studied. Chemical compositions, phase constitution, microstructure of deposit samples of the pulverized coal were determined using chemical analysis methods, XRD and SEM, respectively. Finally, the mechanism of deposit formation in the preheating zone was analyzed and summarized. This study aim not only to help understand better the formation mechanism of deposits in a better way, but also to aid the producers of iron-ore pellets to take reasonable measures to reduce the tendency of deposit formation. The grate-kiln plant investigated in the present study was a Chinese hematite pellet plant. The grate furnace has 56 The materials were sampled from a hematite pellet plant in China. Hematite was used to pelletize, whose total iron grade was 65.47% and FeO content was 4.58%. The chemical composition of preheated pellet was displayed in The chemical compositions of preheated pellet and deposit samples were determined using chemical analysis methods as described in the Chinese standards The deposit sample was characterized using a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Quanta-200 FEI) coupled with an energy dispersive spectra analyzer (EDS, Ametek, Inc., Paoli, CO). Phase composition of deposit sample was determined by an X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a diffractometer (RIGAKUD/Max 2500, Japan). FactSage (Thermfact/CRCT (Montreal, Canada) and GTT-Technologies (Aachen, Germany)) is a thermodynamic software and database package, which has been widely used in chemical engineering, metallurgical engineering and mineral processing engineering Several previous researches  The chemical composition of the deposit sample was listed in X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the deposit sample showed the abundant presence of hematite. The XRD patterns of the deposit sample were illustrated in Microstructure images with different magnifications of the deposit sample were obtained using SEM. The results were displayed in  The outside view of the deposit, chemical composition and microstructure of the deposit samples indicated that the pulverized coal combustion played an important role during the deposit formation in the grate. In the grate-kiln pellet production field, the growth of deposit took place on the grate walls and had a direct relationship with the combustion of the pulverized coal. Therefore, it was essential to investigate the combustion behavior of the pulverized coal.  In the current study, the pulverized coal was injected into the preheating zone 2 along with the injection of air from the burner, which was installed at the end of the grate. Thus, it can be inferred that it was possible that the combustion of the pulverized coal was not complete before it was deposited on the walls. The composition of the deposit indicated that the preheated pellet powder was fed with the coal ash, which led to the formation of the deposit in the grate. Moreover, silicate binder phases played a dominant role in the solidification of the deposit, which can be observed from the microstructure images of the deposit ( In general, aluminosilicates which contained alkali metal had the low melting point in this system. Thus, the alkali metal was also a reason to produce low-melting-point phases, even though it was small in quantity. However, as shown in In addition, the generation of FeO during the deposit formation process in the grate can only be caused by the residual carbon in the grate. The most probable reason was that the combustion of the pulverized coal was not complete, due to which residual carbon particles existed in the coal ash. Similarly, with the coal injection in the blast furnace, the burning efficiency of the pulverized coal in the grate was hard to reach 100%. Due to incomplete combustion of the pulverized coal in the grate, residual carbon was generated. Besides, hematite particles were easily to be reduced to Fe In particular, it can clearly be seen that several very fine hematite crystal grains (<~5 Therefore, the wustite (FeO) was easily formed under reducing conditions, provided the unburnt carbon existed in the coal ash. With the presence of quartz (SiO Generally, the liquid phases aggravated the deposit formation and made the deposit to stick to the walls in the grate. The phase diagrams of SiO  In conclusion, based on the analysis results, the process of deposit formation was summarized in The study presented the deposit formation process in a pulverized coal fired grate, which also highlighted the important role of combustion characteristics of pulverized coal in the process of deposit formation. Due to the long time pellet production and strongly oxidizing atmosphere in the grate, the residual carbon was not detected in the deposit. However, the residual carbon had ever existed could be proved according to three evidences. Firstly, it can be observed that the formation and growth of the deposit in the grate have a direct relationship with the combustion of pulverized coal, the growth of deposit changed after we changed the combustion conditions such as the ratio of air and coal. Secondly, as we know, the combustion efficiency of injecting pulverized coal in blast furnace is very difficult to reach 100%, it can be inferred that the combustion efficiency of coal in the grate was more difficult to achieve 100% due to its lower temperature than the blast furnace. The residual carbon would be existed in the grate if the 100% combustion efficiency of coal was not achieved. Finally, as shown in In addition, the findings and the analysis in the current study were based on practical situation in the pellet production plant. Furthermore, even though different coals have different combustion characteristics, it is common that the complete combustion of pulverized coal is hard to occur in the continuous coal injection process. Thus, our study can help the researchers and producers to make a better understanding about the deposit formation process in coal fired grate-kilns. Deposit formation mechanism in a pulverized coal fired grate during the production of hematite pellet production was studied. The major phase of the deposit was hematite, while the microstructures of the deposit sample showed that there were pores whereas the hematite crystal grains were scattered. Additionally, the silicate phases played a significant role in the solidification of the deposit. The combustion of pulverized coal indicated that the pulverized coal was probably not burnt off completely and caused residual carbon particles to exist in the coal ash. Hematite in pellets was reduced to wustite by the residual carbon. The formation process of the deposit in the grate was summarized. The flying coal ash and preheated pellet powder flied and mixed in the grate. Afterwards, the hematite from pellet powder was reduced to wustite by the surrounding residual carbon. The produced wustite chemically combined with the coal ash to from low-melting-point phases, which changed to liquid phases promoting the deposit to stick to the walls in the grate at high temperature.