A uranyl leach liquor obtained by uranium leaching of a technological sample of Gattar GII ore was subjected to uranium extraction using the liquid emulsion membrane (LEM) technique. The solvent used was methyl trioctyl ammonium chloride commercially known as Aliquat 336 [(C8 H17)3NCH3Cl].This technique yielded much higher degrees of extraction than conventional solvent extraction processes using the same amount of the solvent. Like ion-exchange processes, the technique is particularly suited for dilute solutions such as leach and wash solutions of uranium ores.
                  The effects of the relevant parameters on the permeation rate and percent permeation of uranium were studied. The organic phase in the working LEM was composed of 0.02 M Aliquat 336 with 5% Span 80 in kerosene as diluent (a local aliphatic hydrocarbon product assaying 0.3% aromatic). The internal phase was composed of 1M Na2CO3 aqueous solution. The parameters studied included the effects of H2SO4 acid concentration in the external phase and the effect of uranium concentration in the feed solution, the effect of volume ratio of emulsion to feed solution, the effect of mixing speed on the extraction rate of uranium and finally, the effect of various internal solutions.The liquid emulsion membrane (LEM) technique is actually considered as a combined or a simultaneous extraction/stripping process where extraction takes place at one side of the membrane and stripping at the other side. Control of the several relevant factors of the process would allow having quantitative transfer of the element of interest from the medium of the outer solution to the inner stripping solution with the maximum possible concentration factor. In other words, it can realize high preconcentration factors equivalent to multiple extraction and maximize the initial aqueous/organic volume ratio. Since the invention of LEM as a new separation technique by To ensure the stability of LEM, a third component must be added. This belongs to a group of surface-active substances (emulsifiers) that can be adsorbed at the oil–water interface. Such adsorption could in turn reduce the interfacial tension and/or act as a mechanical barrier between drops. Accordingly, the energetic driving force for coalescence is reduced, and formation of large oil–water surface is realized. On the other hand, care should be taken to minimize water transport through the membrane to avoid its swelling. The latter would increase the emulsion viscosity, a matter which would have an adverse effect upon solute transport. In the present work, the basic extractant methyl trioctyl ammonium chloride commercially known as Aliquat 336, (C The leach liquor was obtained by leaching of Gattar II uranium ore. The latter is situated in the northern Eastern Desert of Egypt and occurs in a sheared zone in the younger granites in the form of fracture fillings and stainings of secondary uranium minerals, uranophane in particular.  Using Aliquat 336 in the present work, uranyl sulfate anions are extracted according to the following exchange reaction: Methyl trioctyl ammonium chloride (Aliquat 336 with 0.1% aqueous solubility) and Sorbitan mono-oleate (Span 80) were used in the present work as extractant and surfactant, respectively. These reagents were properly diluted with kerosene. Emulsions were prepared by mixing at 11500 min The working leach liquor was obtained by acid leaching of Gattar G II mineralized granite ore material. The liquor contained (in kg m After extraction, demulsification of the LEM into two immiscible phases can be achieved by several techniques. These include heating application of an electric field or centrifugation. Alternatively, some higher ketones or alcohols can also be used such as methyl isobutyl ketone (hexone) or To study the effect of the concentration of H Anions in the external phase which would compete with the uranyl sulfate anion for the exchange sites in the membrane phase include SO Furthermore, the uranyl tricarbonate formed in the internal phase can also suffer from the HSO The evolved CO Finally, in a test with an acidity of 1.5 kg m From the foregoing results, it can thus be concluded that a sulfuric acid concentration ranging from about 15 to 30 kg m To study the effect of uranium concentration in the feed solution upon its extraction, three feed liquors of 0.6, 1.2 and 2.4 kg m To study the effect of volume ratio of the emulsion to the feed solution on the extraction of uranium, four experiments were performed at the ratios of 1:1:10, 1:1:20, 1:1:40 and 1:1:80. Other experimental conditions used were fixed at 0.02 kmol m To study the effect of mixing speed, the same general conditions were fixed as before; however, the mixing speed was decreased to 150 min Four experiments were carried out to find an internal phase suitable for uranium stripping from Aliquat 336. These experiments were performed using Na The results in  From the results for uranium extraction from Gattar G II sulfate leach liquor by the LEM process using Aliquat 336, it was possible to determine suitable operating parameters. These include 0.02 M Aliquat 336 in kerosene (5 wt.% Span 80) and a sulfuric acid concentration of 15–30 kg m