This article provides a review on the theories and products for estimating sea surface albedo with satellite observations, including the importance of sea surface albedo in studies of Earth’s radiation and surface energy budget, physical fundamentals of bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) and albedo, BRDF and albedo of ocean water and sea ice surfaces, and current available sea surface albedo products generated with satellite observations. It aims to present a complete picture of the state-of-the-art development of remote sensing techniques in estimating sea surface albedo.The author would like to thank Qiang Liu and Youbin Feng from Beijing Normal University for their kind help in preparing this manuscript. This research was financially supported by the Chinese Natural Science Foundation (41601349), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2412016KJ028), the Open Funds of State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science (OFSLRSS201624), the “State Program for High-Tech Research and Development (863 program)” (2013AA122801), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2014M550025). A sea is a large body of saline water that composes of a planet’s hydrosphere. It covers about 71% of the Earth’s surface (∼ Owing to the high heat capacity of seawater and its large volume (∼ As a key variable of Earth’s radiation and surface energy budget, the sea surface albedo (SSA) indicates how much solar radiation is reflected (or absorbed) from the upper level seawater. The absorbed solar energy modifies the sea surface temperature, evaporates seawater, melts and sublimates snow and sea ice, as well as regulates the heat exchange at the boundary of ocean–atmosphere interface. The sea surface albedo is usually defined as the ratio between upward and downwelling solar radiation fluxes over the oceanic surfaces. It varies from very low value (close to 0 over dark blue ocean water surface) to high value (close to 1 over white snow-covered sea ice in the polar regions) with great contrast ( Although many parameterizations or schemes for albedo of ocean water ( Remote sensing is considered as an efficient tool for monitoring global climatic and environmental changes, which has been widely used in estimating sea surface albedo in the past decades. In this article, a comprehensive review of the theory and products for sea surface albedo is provided. It is organized as follows: Firstly, a fundamental introduction for the definitions of bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) and albedo is provided in the “ Surface reflectance ( In most of the cases, the surface reflectance depends on the wavelength and incident/viewing angle according to the optical properties and structures of the surface. For example, the reflectance of ocean water surface varies not only with the scattering and absorbing properties which are determined by the constitution of ocean water (concentrations of chlorophyll, sediment, and colored dissolved organic matter (CDOM)), but also with the slope of sea surface aroused by wind. For a specific material or surface, the spectral and angular characteristics are the two major aspects for representing the reflectance quantities. For clarity, the spectral reflectance or albedo is further defined as the reflectance value per unit wavelength, which can be practically measured over a narrow wavelength interval with a spectroradiometer. In the following section, the spectral characteristic is denoted by the subscript In the laboratory, field, and remote sensing measurements, the BRDF is usually used for describing the scattering of a beam incident light from one direction into another direction in the hemisphere (the BDR case). The spectral BRDF is defined ( The BRDF is considered as an intrinsic property of a surface, which depends on inherit optical properties and structures of the surface. As long as the BRDF is obtained, other reflectance quantities (conical and hemispherical incident/viewing geometries) can be derived by integrating of incident/view direction of the hemisphere. The BRDF is rigorously defined physical parameter for describing the directional reflectance properties of a surface. However, it cannot be measured directly. Thus, reflectance factor ( BRF is defined as the ratio of reflected radiant flux from the surface to the reflected radiant flux from an ideal diffuse reference panel under identical geometry and single direction illumination, which can be expressed as The mathematical relationship between BRF of a surface and its BRDF can be expressed as The surface albedo ( The black-sky albedo (BSA) is defined as the ratio of reflected radiant flux at all viewing directions to the incident radiant flux when the surface is illuminated with direct radiation (parallel beam light), which is also can be called as DHR. It can be expressed as integrating of the BRDF or BRF in the viewing hemisphere The white-sky albedo (WSA) is defined as the ratio of reflected radiant flux at all viewing directions to the incident radiant flux when the surface is illuminated with diffuse radiation, which is also can be called as BHR. It can be expressed as integrating of the BRDF or BRF in both of the incident and viewing hemisphere When the surface is illuminated with natural sunlight (combination of direct and diffuse light), the albedo is called blue-sky albedo, which can be approximately expressed as linear combination of BSA and WSA ( In the surface energy budget and hydrological studies, the broadband albedo is more frequently used than spectral albedo (or narrowband albedo), which can be expressed as The sea surface is dominantly covered by unfrozen ocean water, which consists of water, salt, chlorophyll, and CDOM. The BRDF/albedo of ocean water surface is largely determined by solar zenith angle, wind speed and directions (slope of the sea surface), and optical properties of the ocean water. For simplicity, the contributions of the reflectance/albedo of ocean water surface are categorized into three components: sun glints, whitecaps, and water leaving. In the following sections, the methods for BRDF/albedo of ocean water surface are described in detail. When the water body is calm without wind, the ocean water surface looks just like a mirror. Thus, the reflectance of air–water surface can be described by the Fresnel’s law. However, the unfrozen ocean water surface is seldom calm due to the wind drives the ocean water, and resulting large amount of wave facets with different slopes. When the observer looks from one direction, “glints” can be observed as bright spots from the sea surface. These sun glints can be described by the orientation distributions of the wave facets, which are closely related to the wind field.  According to the law of reflection, the angles To further consider the effect of wind direction This equation characterizes the orientation of an individual facet. The sun glints can be described by functions of wind field. A distribution function of wave slopes is proposed by  If the upwind and crosswind variations are ignored, the probability distribution function is simplified as follows: In the following decades, numeric studies had tried to improve it using new measurements ( When the BRDF effect is considered, the bidirectional shadowing factor Finally, the shadowing corrected BRDF of sun glint As the wind speed over the sea surface increases, the wind-driven waves collapse into bubbles and foams, which are usually called “whitecaps” in the oceanology. For simplicity, the contributions of whitecaps to the reflectance of sea surfaces are usually treated as lambertian. This parameterization of The water-leaving reflectance According to its definition, the water-leaving reflectance  The downwelling irradiance So far, The term Then the water-leaving reflectance can be conducted as follows: This function is the most explicit expression describing the water-leaving reflectance; however, the coefficients The Arctic and Antarctic sea ice is the other important cover type of sea surface. Sea ice is frozen seawater, which is also usually covered with snow. The BRDF and albedo properties of snow and sea ice are quite different with those of ocean water surface. So it is necessary to discuss the radiative transfer of snow and sea ice in detail. Snow is a matrix of ice grains, air, and liquid water, which also contains absorbing impurities (such as, soot and dust), while sea ice contains ice grain, brine pocket, air bubble, and impurities (e.g. sediment). The optical properties of snow and sea ice depend on the concentrations of these materials and the geometry of the ice grain. In the VIS and NIR wavelengths, the optical properties of snow depend on the refractive of ice, grain size, depth, and density of snow, as well as the size and concentration of impurities whose refractive indices are quite different from those of water and ice; and the optical properties of sea ice depend on the refractive of ice, grain size, and depth of sea ice, as well as the volume amount and size of brine pocket, air bubble, and impurities. So the most significant difference between sea ice and snow is that the volume and size of brine pocket and air bubble. The spectral reflectance/albedo of snow ( In the shortwave wavelengths (0.4–2.5 In the wavelengths of 0.3–0.7 The overall optical properties of sea ice are the same with snow. The differences are the presences of brine pocket and air bubble. The amounts of brine pocket and air bubble in the new young ice are larger than those of in the first-year and multiyear ice. As the amounts of brine pocket and air bubble decrease, the reflectance of sea ice decreases. The IOPs used in radiative transfer modeling of snow and sea ice are: (1) single scattering albedo The single scattering albedo can be expressed as According to the Mie theory, the extinction efficient factor The IOPs of snow and sea ice can also be expressed in form of parameterized functions. In the Coupled Atmosphere-Ice-Snow-Ocean System (CASIO)-Discrete Ordinates Radiative Transfer (DISORT) model ( When the wavelength For an sea ice layer with a depth of The scattering phase angle of media with high reflectance properties, such as snow and sea ice, can be expressed by Henyey–Greenstein function ( In most of the cases, the scattering effect of impurities in the snow and ice can be ignored. The imaginary part of refraction index at different wavelengths can be expressed by The absorption coefficient The absorption coefficient of sea ice with air bubble, brine pocket, and impurities can be expressed as The scattering coefficient of sea ice can be expressed as The radiative transfer theory is widely used for modeling the BRDF of snow and sea ice. In the radiative models, it usually assumes that the IOPs of snow and sea ice only vary in the vertical direction. Thus, when the depth of snow is larger than 20 When the boundary conditions of the radiative transfer equation are determined, the equation can be solved by numerical and approximating methods. The numerical solutions for radiative transfer include the method of successive orders of scattering and method of discrete ordinates. The main approximating solutions for radiative transfer equation are two streams and four streams approximating, and the asymptotic fitting method. In the following section, the Wiscombe–Warren model, DISORT model, and asymptotic solution of the radiate transfer theory (ART) model are described in detail. The Wiscombe–Warren model was proposed by The parameters of Delta-Eddington are as follows ( The other parameters are The dependences of snow grain size, solar zenith angle, snow depth, and soot concentrations on BSA are shown in DISORT ( The radiance In the asymptotic solution of the radiate transfer theory (ART) ( The extinction and absorption coefficients of pure snow can be parameterized as In the recent decades, many regional and global albedo products have been generated based on polar and geostationary satellite observations ( The current available products which contain albedo of sea surface are: clouds, albedo and radiation (CLARA) surface albedo product, visible infrared imaging radiometer (VIIRS) surface albedo product, Ocean albedo product generated with three-component ocean water albedo (TCOWA) model and reanalysis data, and Phase-2 Global Land Surface Satellite (GLASS) albedo product. The main algorithm and processing procedures of these sea surface albedo products are provided as follows. The CLARA surface albedo (SAL) is a global covered 28-year time series (1982–2009) of Earth’s black-sky surface albedo product ( In the VIIRS on-board the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) surface albedo product, the dark pixel subalgorithm (DPSA) and BPSA (bright pixel subalgorithm) were employed for estimating surface albedo. The DPSA method ( As the sea surface albedo varies with wind field and concentrations of ocean water, the contributions of sun glints, whitecaps, and water leaving to surface albedo can be parameterized with meteorological reanalysis data. A TCOWA model ( The sea surface albedo can be estimated with TCOWA model in following steps ( The global ocean water surface albedo in summer and winter 2011 were generated with the reflectance dataset of moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer (MODIS) and the MERRA meteorological reanalysis dataset. An example of this product is shown in In the Phase-2 GLASS ( In the framework of AMBRALS ( In the direct-estimation algorithm, the broadband surface albedo is directly converted from TOA/surface albedo. The relationship between surface broadband albedo and TOA reflectance can be built using artificial neural network ( As the converting coefficients vary with surface cover types and solar/viewing geometries, the relationship between TOA reflectance and broadband surface albedo for different surface types and angular bins was derived by linear regression method. In the Phase-1 GLASS albedo product, only three land cover types (vegetation, bare soil, and snow) were considered. While in the Phase-2 GLASS albedo product, six surface cover types (vegetation, bare soil, land snow, sea ice, open ocean water, and coastal water) are employed for generating surface albedo product covers both of land and sea surfaces ( The solar/viewing geometries are divided into angular bins by 4 degrees in solar/viewing zenith angle, and 5 degrees in relative azimuth angle. When the solar zenith angle, view zenith angle, and relative azimuth angle of the satellite measurements are obtained, the converting coefficients can be searched from the corresponding angular bin, and applied to estimate the surface broadband albedo. The WSA and BSA can be estimated by Finally, the direct-estimated albedo was filtered with the statistics-based temporal filter algorithm. The preliminary results of GLASS Phase-2 surface broadband albedo with a spatial resolution 5 In this article, a comprehensive review of the theories and products for estimating sea surface albedo from satellite observations is presented. The physical fundamentals of BRDF and albedo, BRDF and albedo of ocean water and sea ice surface, and current available sea surface albedo products were discussed in detail. As a key parameter of Earth’s surface radiation and energy budget, the sea surface albedo plays an important role in regional and global climate due to the albedo feedback mechanism. The satellite remote sensing technique enables to map the spatial and temporal variations of sea surface albedo with much more details than GCMs. A variety of physical models for describing the BRDF and albedo of ocean water and sea ice surface have been developed. Although the studies for estimating sea surface albedo from satellite observations were relatively scarce compared with the studies of land surface albedo, several sea surface albedo products were also been generated with long-term remote sensing dataset and meteorological reanalysis data. The main issues to be addressed in this research field are: (1) The physical models and parameterizations should be improved, especially for large solar/view zenith angle. Both of the ocean water and sea ice/snow surface exhibit a strong forward scattering effect, which may result in large bias in estimating surface albedo by integration or BRDF-correction method. (2) The temporal and spatial resolution of sea surface albedo should be improved. For example, the temporal variation of black-sky ocean water albedo is dramatic in a day, which cannot be fully described by the sea surface albedo dataset with low temporal resolution. (3) The data filling and filtering method should be developed for deriving spatial and temporal continuous sea surface albedo product. We are confident that these sea surface albedo products generated with satellite observations would be employed in the studies of global climate change, oceanology, and hydrology in the future, and improve our understandings in Earth’s surface radiation and energy budget. 