The addition of frothers in the flotation process has a significant effect on the hydrodynamic properties of the pulp phase as well as the stability of the froth phase. Some flotation collectors have been reported to have similar hydrodynamic effects, but there are few published quantitative studies. In this paper, the pure forms of the main families of sulfhydryl collectors from thiophosphates, xanthates and xanthate derivatives are tested. The aim was to determine the hydrodynamic properties of each reagent and to examine frother-collector interactions in terms of hydrodynamics. Experiments were carried out in a two phase air-water system using a 3in. diameter column. Gas holdup (εg) and foam height (Hf) were measured to construct hydrodynamic characterization curves. The collectors tested have varied hydrodynamic activity with the xanthogen subgroup of collectors showing different degrees of hydrodynamic activity depending on their structure. In general, sulfhydryl collectors used in salt formulations showed very little hydrodynamic activity, while the oily collectors showed varied hydrodynamic effects from frother-type behavior to defoaming. In all frother-collector blends tested, a variable degree of foam stability loss was observed with this effect more pronounced in blends of weak frother and collector. A slight increase in εg was measured for almost all of the collector-frother blends.Flotation performance is typically controlled by the addition of chemical reagents such as collectors and frothers. A frother has two main functions: generate and preserve small bubbles in the pulp phase; and provide stability to the froth phase. Three mechanisms of particle recovery into the froth have been proposed: by particle-bubble attachment; by water entrainment; and by entrapment between attached particles (  Relative hydrodynamic strengths can be determined from the curves produced for multiple frother concentrations. A hydrodynamically strong frother will have a sharp increase in foam height as concentration increases within a relatively small range of gas holdup (a steeper hydrodynamic curve), whereas a hydrodynamically weaker frother will have a gradual increase in foam height as concentration increases over a broader range of gas holdup. The shape of the curve therefore gives an indication of the relative strength of a frother. The main function of a collector is to selectively adsorb on a mineral surface, altering its hydrophobicity such that bubble-particle aggregation can take place for minerals which are not readily floatable in the absence of absence of collector addition. A number of recent studies investigating the influence of collectors on flotation hydrodynamics have shown that amine and many oxhydryl collectors exhibit frother-like properties ( This work characterizes the foaming properties of the main families of sulfhydryl collectors, by measuring gas holdup and foam heights to establish their hydrodynamic strength profiles. The collectors are compared to frothers of known strength. Mixtures of selected collectors with common weak and strong frothers are then analyzed to determine possible synergetic effects.  Gas superficial flowrates (J Foam height was measured using a ruler taped to the upper section of the flotation column. The foam height was measured exactly 3 The apparatus was thoroughly cleaned after each experimental run as most of the collectors used are known to form sticky precipitates. The top section of the column was dismantled and scrubbed of any residual precipitate as required. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) and Flottec F150 (a polypropylene glycol) were selected to represent a weak and strong frother, respectively. The collectors were commercial grade provided by Flottec. They were modified to contain the lowest possible levels of solvents such that the results best represented the collector chemistry and not that of the solvents typically present in the commercial products. It is appreciated that many of the collectors investigated have very strong affinities for the minerals they are typically used to float ( Although two different gas superficial flowrates were tested (J   The Flottec 305 collector exhibits some interesting hydrodynamic properties: increasing collector concentration shows a gradual decrease in ε   Flottec 1344 alone has good bubble size reduction capability ( Flottec 305 was observed to have a detrimental effect on both ε  This study is the first attempt to characterize the hydrodynamic properties of sulfhydryl collectors along with investigating the possibility of synergetic effects with frothers. It was shown that Flottec 1234, a thionocarbamate collector, was the most frother-like in hydrodynamics yielding a similar hydrodynamic characterization curve to MIBC. Flottec 2200LF, a dithiophosphate collector, was observed to have an intermediate strength hydrodynamic behavior at high J Flottec LLC is gratefully acknowledged for sponsoring and supporting this research at McGill University.