In this study, a comparative evaluation was made between column and mechanical flotation cells for fine coal cleaning. In addition, the optimum values of operating parameters were examined, which are important to achieve a desired separation performance in column flotation, such as the frother concentration, the collector dosage, the froth thickness, the wash water rate, the air rate and the feeding rate. The coal sample was collected from a classifying cyclone overflow stream consisting of nominally −130μm material. Ash, volatile mater, fixed carbon and total sulfur contents of the sample were found to be 47.50%, 20.80%, 31.70% and 0.75%, respectively. Comparison of the column and mechanical flotation results indicated that column flotation was considerably more efficient than mechanical flotation for fine coal cleaning. High froth thickness and wash water addition during column flotation made it possible to obtain cleaner coals. The column flotation produced a 15.60% product ash with a 50.92% clean coal yield and 81.85% combustible recovery.Froth flotation which is the most common separation technique used for cleaning fine coals has been widely used since 1920s. Column flotation is a sophisticated froth flotation technique, which has been developed as an alternative to the conventional, mechanically agitated flotation. The main advantages of the column flotation cells over mechanical ones include excellent separation ability, a low capital and operational cost, a less demand for plant space and adaptability to automatic control. The most important feature of the column cell distinguishing it from mechanical cells is the shape of the cell and the nonexistence of an impeller or a stator to generate air bubbles. In the mechanical cell air bubbles are generated by means of an impeller mechanism while in column flotation they are generated by a sparger by the help of air compressor. In addition, it is possible to get cleaner coals in column flotation cells by adding wash water to the froth. In column flotation, feeding is usually carried out from a height 2/3 of the column height and compressed air is given via a porous material (sparger) above the tailing outlet point of the column. By this way, the particles moving downwards collide with the rising air bubbles in the collection zone. Then, the floatable particles attached to the bubbles move to the cleaning zone. The non-floatable particles move through the bottom of the column, thus performing the separation. The major disadvantages of the flotation columns are the mixing in the axis of the column, the blockage of spargers and problems posed by the column height in installations. In the last few decades, many alternative column designs have been developed to eliminate these disadvantages and to increase the recovery via generating microbubbles. Some of them are Leeds column, Packed column, Flotaire column, Hydrochem column, Jameson column, Microcel column, Cyclonic column and Cyclo-microbubble column ( In the studies carried out by the column flotation cells mentioned above, it was observed that some parameters, such as the air rate, the feeding rate, the wash water rate, the froth thickness and the reagent dosage relatively affect the flotation performance. According to many researchers, as the air rate increases, the recovery increases to produce the maximum yield and after this point it starts to decrease ( In many studies in which the column flotation and mechanical flotation are compared, it has been claimed that column flotation gives a higher recovery with lower ash content. A schematic representation of the laboratory-scale flotation column which was used in the experiments is shown in The coal sample was obtained from a washery treating the Zonguldak seam coal. The slurry sample was collected from a classifying cyclone overflow stream consisting of nominally −130 The particle size characterization data are given in The coal sample of 1000 Single-stage flotation was applied in column tests in order to find out the optimum values of the reagent dosage, the froth thickness, the wash water rate, the air rate and the feeding rate. In other words, two products were obtained from the system: rougher clean coal and rougher tailing. Later on, it became clear that a single stage was not efficient enough for column flotation. Therefore, rougher clean coal and rougher tailing were re-fed into the column and the cleaning process was continued under the same experimental conditions. The circuit configuration of this process is shown in The combustible recovery obtained from the flotation experiments was calculated using the following equation: In order to determine the effect of the frother concentration on the column flotation performance, dowfroth250 was used as frother. It was chosen as the frother to form the most suitable froth ( Kerosene was chosen as collector ( The results of the tests carried at various froth thicknesses (15 The results obtained from the tests performed at the wash water rates of 0.10  The results of experiments at various feeding rates are presented in The optimum column parameters obtained at the end of a series of experimental studies on Zonguldak bituminous coal are shown in In conventional flotation tests, a laboratory scale, 4-liter Denver type mechanical flotation cell was used. Optimum operating conditions were determined by means of a series of pre-test studies. Thus, the best flotation performance was reached at 10% pulp concentration by weight and at 900 Initially, a single-stage flotation was carried out. Then, the obtained rougher clean coal and rougher tailing were re-fed and floated again. The related circuit configuration was the same as that of column flotation. The results of mechanical flotation tests are shown in While in single-stage column flotation clean coal obtained had an ash content of 21.55% and with 67.80% combustible recovery, following mechanical flotation clean coal had an ash content of 23.15% and a combustible recovery of 68.72%. Hence, removing of ash for both flotation types was 54.63% and 51.26%, respectively. By application the rougher–scavenger–cleaner circuit system in the column flotation, clean coal was obtained with a high combustible recovery (81.85%) and a very low ash content (15.60%). In addition, in mechanical flotation, the clean coal obtained had a high combustible recovery (82.32%), as well. However, this time the ash content was very high (19.52%). Thus, removing of ash for both flotation types was 67.15% and 58.90%, respectively.  Flotation yield has increased with an increase in the reagent dosage. However, above a certain dosage, the process reversed. At higher collector and frother dosages, combustible recovery slightly decreased, whereas the ash content of clean coal increased. The optimum collector (kerosene) and frother (dowfroth250) amounts were found to be 1200 With an increase in froth thickness (at a constant frother concentration) cleaner coals were obtained. On the other hand, as the froth depth increased, flotation yield decreased. The optimum froth thickness was found to be 25 The wash water caused the gangue minerals carried by the froth to be rewashed and prevented them from passing to the clean coal. As wash water rate increased, cleaner coals were obtained. However, at higher wash water rates, a stable froth layer could not be obtained and yield decreased drastically. The optimum wash water rate was found out to be 0.20 At lower air rates, the desired froth thickness could not be obtained, therefore, the yield decreased. At higher air rates, the yield increased. However, above a certain rate (>2.5 With the increasing feeding rate, the flotation yield decreased. Moreover, the ash content of the clean coal did not changed at all. The optimum feeding rate was found out to be 0.30 When single stage flotation was performed in column and mechanical cells, it did not recover enough coal. The combustible recoveries of the tailings were found out to be 32.20% and 31.28%, respectively, which were relatively high values. When rougher tailings and rougher clean coal were further floated separately for rougher–scavenger–cleaner circuit, high combustible recoveries (81.85–82.32%) were obtained from both of the flotation types. Nevertheless, in terms of ash removal, it was observed that column flotation was more successful. In conclusion, using column flotation the ash content of the Zonguldak bituminous coal was reduced from 47.50% to 15.60% and yielded a combustible recovery of 81.85%. By using the mechanical flotation cell the ash content of the same coal was reduced to 19.52% and 82.32% combustible recovery was obtained. The results of column flotation tests are closer to those of the release analysis tests. In other words, column flotation is more efficient than mechanical flotation for fine coal cleaning.