Finely grained samples of copper(I) sulphide were leached by CaCl2·2H2O solution with added HCl and the introduction of gaseous oxygen. The occurrence probability of chemical reactions was analysed based on literature and products, which were formed during the process, and the overall leaching reaction was defined. The effect of temperature, concentration of CaCl2·2H2O, HCl and total chloride ions, stirring speed, phase ratio and time, on the leaching degree of copper was studied. The quantity of copper dissolved increases with the increase of the values of all the parameters. The role of chloride ions is to disrupt the passivating sulphur layer on the particle surface, by promoting the formation of crystalline sulphur rather than a crypto-crystalline or amorphous product. It was concluded that the leaching reaction is second order, with respect to the concentration of total chloride ions. Experimental results show that the leaching mechanism is very complex. By using appropriate mathematical kinetic models, it is found that the leaching rate is diffusion-controlled.In spite of the fact that pyrometallurgical processes provide an efficient energy-saving method for the extraction of copper from its sulphide concentrates because the sulphide sulphur is used as fuel, hydrometallurgical processes are increasingly popular. Concerns over air pollution and the environmental problem of acid rain have made governments all over the world tighten their regulations regarding the emission of sulphur dioxide. The focus is on the production of elemental sulphur and soluble copper sulphate Leaching of copper(I) sulphide has been the subject of many investigations As early as 1933, Sullivan The results of copper(I) sulphide leaching in a solution of CaCl Many research results In chloride solutions, additional reactions of complexation are very important On the basis of literature data Anodic reaction: Cathodic reaction: Overall reaction: Anodic reaction: Cathodic reaction: Overall reaction: The overall reaction for the first and the second stage is derived from the above reactions: Cu(I) sulphide with 80.42% of Cu and 18.64% of S and the density of 5040 kg/m All leaching experiments were carried out in a 1 L glass reactor fitted with a condenser, thermometer, glass stirrer, gas inlet tube and a sampling device. This apparatus provided hermetic conditions and heating at constant temperature. Before leaching was started, the solution of CaCl Previous investigations  Leaching is strongly influenced by temperature. A slower increase in the leaching degree is noticeable after 120 min. This is probably due to the surface of Cu(I) sulphide particles being blocked by the reaction's solid products (calcium sulphate and elementary sulphur), and that, therefore, resulted in more difficult penetration of the reaction area into the centre of the grain of Cu Variations of copper sulphide leaching degree at different stirring speeds are shown in The leaching degree is higher  The formation of elementary sulphur in acid solutions is favoured instead of harmful H The reaction rate increases when CaCl The thermodynamic role of CaCl The effect of chloride ions which come from HCl and CaCl Chloride ions have the already-mentioned role of obtaining crystaline sulphur during the leaching of metal from sulphide ore. From The X-ray diffraction analysis of a solid residue, obtained at 75°C, 400 min The process of copper(I) sulphide leaching in CaCl Activation energy for the process of copper(I) sulphide leaching was calculated by using the equations of Ginstling–Brounshtein, Spenser–Topley and Wadsworth, as well as Sohn and Wadsworth This result is in good agreement with that achieved by using the Ginstling–Brounshtein equation, which confirms that the process is diffusion-controlled. Reaction order, i.e. the dependence of its velocity on leaching reagents concentration (total chloride ions), was determined from the results in From the results obtained in the study of copper(I) sulphide leaching by CaCl (1) On the basis of literature data and the products formed during leaching and X-ray analysis, it can be concluded that its chemistry mechanism is determined by the following overall reactions: The first leaching stage: see The second leaching stage: see Overall reaction for both first and second leaching stage: see (2) The experimental study of the influence of working parameters showed that high degree of leaching of copper could be achieved (>95%). The increase of temperature, concentration of HCl, CaCl (3) Kinetic analysis shows that: Both values of activation energy, 64±0.1 kJ/mol, calculated by applying the Ginstling–Brounshtein equation, and 67±0.1 kJ/mol, obtained by using the Sohn and Wadsworth equation, prove that the process is diffusion-controlled. Dependence of the leaching rate on the concentration of the overall chloride ions is second order.