Coal fines are generated during both the dewatering and Coal Seam Gas (CSG) production stages. This is due to the interaction between the fluid flow and the coal solids affixed to coal cleat surfaces. The generated coal fines may plug gas flow paths and reduce coal permeability. Although some investigations of the impact of water flow on coal fines generation were conducted, little research has been conducted into the generation of coal fines under water-gas two-phase flow condition. This is a typical flow type in the late dewatering and early CSG production phases. Two-phase flow requires higher pressure to initiate the fluid movement. Therefore, coal fines generation in two-phase flow conditions is expected to be very different from that in single-phase flow.
                  In this work, a fully coupled numerical model was developed, which integrated different flow regimes and the generation of coal fines. Coal cleat geometries were constructed using the Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images taken from a set of coal samples collected from the Bowen Basin, Australia. The two-phase flow was simulated based on the Phase Field Method (PFM). Different flow regimes were examined, including water flow, gas flow, gas-drive-water and water-drive-gas scenarios. The coal fines generation was evaluated according to the combination of shear and tensile failure criteria.
                  The simulation results revealed that more coal fines were generated in two-phase flow compared to single-phase flow. The majority of coal fines were generated around the regions where residual phase was observed. This was attributed to the substantial force induced by significant pressure difference between the residual fluid and mobile fluid. Among different flow regimes, the gas-wet gas-drive-water scenario generated the greatest amount of coal fines, with over one order of magnitude more than any other scenarios. It was observed that the change of fluid phase composition inside the cleat created considerable pressure fluctuations (up to several kPa), which was unfavourable in controlling the production of coal fines. Based on the dimensional analysis, two dimensionless numbers, namely Capillary number (Ca) and Euler number (Eu) were found to define the coal fines generation process. A new criterion that could be used to evaluate coal fines generation was obtained. The findings from this study deliver a comprehensive knowledge of coal fines generation under different flow regimes, which provides useful guideline as to how to implement effective mitigation strategies to minimize coal fines induced production delays.The life of a Coal Seam Gas (CSG) well typically consists three stages: (1) dewatering; (2) stable production; and (3) decline One of the most important operational difficulties for CSG wells relates to production of coal fines, which reduces gas productivity and presents a substantial maintenance burden. Generally, coal fines are originated from coal cleats Investigations have been conducted into the characterisation of coal fines. The sizes of coal fines majorly range from hundreds of nanometres to hundreds of microns In order to evaluate the impact of coal fines on CSG production efficiency, Guo et al. The wettability of coal and coal fines plays an important role not only in determining two phase interaction, but also in controlling coal fines migration behaviour. Zou et al. The wettability of coal has also been investigated, indicating that coal material can be both water-wet and gas-wet, which is contingent on coal rank, pressure, temperature, etc. Understanding the mechanism of coal fines generation is essential for developing mathematical models to gain insights into this complex phenomenon, and designing proper treatment to manage the migration of fines. Two major force categories are commonly considered to be responsible for the generation and migration of coal fines: hydrodynamic force and colloidal force. The release of coal fines occurs when the hydrodynamic force overwhelms the colloidal force In this work, coal fines generation during the entire process of CSG production will be examined under four flow regimes: (1) water flow; (2) gas-drive-water flow; (3) water-drive-gas flow, and (4) gas flow, including water-wet and gas-wet for two-phase flow scenarios. The amount of potential coal fines is quantified and compared for each of the flow regimes. Based on the numerical results, dimensional analysis will be conducted and a new criterion that can be used to evaluate coal fines generation will be developed, which aims to deliver a comprehensive knowledge of coal fines generation under different flow regimes and meanwhile offers useful mitigation strategies as to how to minimize coal fines induced production delay. Coal fines generation phenomenon mainly consists of and is affected by two physics, namely fluid flow and solid mechanics. The fluid flow (majorly two-phase flow in this study) exerts dynamic forces on the solid materials, creating small deformation. Such deformation will in turn affects the fluid flow status. By applying failure criteria for the solids, coal fines generation can be evaluated. The coupling process of these physics can be illustrated in In two-phase flow, apart from tracking the interface, the transport of mass and momentum for the fluids is also required. The formation of the Navier-Stokes Equation is employed to simulate the fluid flow, and the capillary effect is accounted for by including surface tension in the equation With respect to track the interface of two immiscible fluids numerically, two method are widely used, namely the Level Set Method (LSM) and the Phase Field Method (PFM) The relationship among The volume fraction of the displaced fluid ( The density ( The following equation approximates the contact angle ( The phase field help variable (ψ) is assigned: The equations listed above were employed to track the interface dynamics. The fluid flow will exert both pressure and viscous forces on the surfaces of coal cleats, given by Two main failure modes have been found to be responsible for coal fines generation: shear failure and tensile failure For shear failure, the Mohr-Coulomb criterion has been widely used for coal material investigations The shear stress ( By combining Eqs. A special case of Mohr-Coulomb criterion is that the maximum principal stress equals to zero, and failure occurs only when the applied external stress reaches the uniaxial tensile strength ( Therefore, this value was chosen to be the cut-off point that distinguishes the failure mode of coal fines from shear failure to tensile failure. The failure criterion applied in this study was then summarised as: The equations for two-phase flow, solid mechanics and the failure criterion were implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics software, which is capable of solving the equations listed above simultaneously. The coupling of fluid flow, involving single-phase and two-phase flow, and solid mechanics can be realised in this software. Moreover, the failure criterion aforementioned was integrated to evaluate potential coal fines. The validation of two-phase flow simulation was achieved by comparing the numerical results with the experimental study conducted by Dai and Zhang Since the time frame of the experimental work was not stated in the literature, only the shapes of the oil slug compared and analysed. The comparison of the results is illustrated in In this section, the governing equations are solved numerically to investigate coal fines generation behaviour under different flow regimes. The selection of model geometries and the settings of both boundary conditions are explained here. The coal samples were extracted from the Bowen Basin in Australia. The cross-sectional profiles of coal cleats were obtained using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) scanning. The SEM images were then manipulated in MATLAB to achieve the real geometries of the cleats that can be implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics. Coal matrices near cleat surface were considered as potential sources of coal fines, like shown in Initially, the cleat is saturated by water phase, and the gas phase was injected from the upstream to simulate the gas-drive-water scenario. In these simulations, the gas was considered to be pure methane. With the in-situ stress as the referencing point, the upstream gauge pressure was set to be 80 With respect to the grid layout, the simulation domains were meshed separately as coal cleats and coal matrices using COMSOL embedded meshing method. In the coal cleats, the mesh grids were fine enough to gain accurate two-phase flow results; while in the coal matrices, the grids were fine around the tortuous cleat surfaces to quantify potential coal fines, but coarser in the middle to reduce the computational time. The shape of the grids was triangular, and there were approximately 300,000 mesh elements for different geometries. The input values of physical and mechanical properties of materials in the numerical simulations are listed in Single-phase water flow occurs during the early dewatering stage (Regime 1 in The possible reasons for little variation between water and gas flow cases are that, on the one hand, for the single-phase water flow, higher dynamic viscosity generated lower flow velocity; on the other hand, for the gas flow, the flow velocity was higher because the dynamic viscosity was lower. This made the total stresses acting on cleat surfaces comparable, and as a result creating similar amount of coal fines. As stated in our previous work, the generation of fines can be induced by huge pressure difference over these micro-structures This case takes place in the majority of time from later dewatering till early stable production phases (Regime 2 in For the case that coal is water-wet, the evolutions of the water displacement process are illustrated in As can be seen from As show in Another finding is that it showed a sharp increase in the velocity of the gas phase right after breakthrough (mean velocity at the outlet increased from 0.616 Coal can also be gas-wet under high pressure and high temperature conditions It can be seen that the residual water was drop-like rather than film-like. The percentage of trapped water was less than that for the water-wet scenario (e.g. Model 2), no bypassing trap was observed. This is because that the wetting phase can invade into the microstructures more easily than the non-wetting phase Compared to the gas-drive-water scenario, the water-drive-gas scenario often occurs in well testing process (Regime 3 in  When coal is gas-wet, the water-drive-gas situations become similar to the water-wet gas-drive-water scenarios, as shown in Based on the simulation results, using the non-wetting phase to displace the wetting phase contributed to more residual displaced phase, which is unfavourable with regard to gas recovery. This is attributed to the affinity of the wetting phase for coal material, making the wetting phase forms thin films adhered to cleat surfaces. For the studied circumstances with different flow regimes, the potential coal fines were summarised in The cleat geometry, flow regime and wettability of coal have significant impact on coal fines generation amount. Given that the study was conducted at a micro-scale, one or two large micro-structures can contribute to an enormous area for potential coal fines. This is the case for Model 1 (e.g. In order to generalize the findings about coal fines generation at the micro-scale, dimensional analysis was performed based on the above results. Dimensional analysis is the analysis of the relationships among various physical parameters by identifying their fundamental dimensions (such as length, mass and time). It can reduce the number of independent parameters involved in a problem to several dimensionless groups, thus reducing the difficulty in understanding a particular issue. These groups are often the ratios of different physical scales, thereby, insights can be gained by studying the parametric dependence of the problem in light of the physical interpretation. Moreover, it can assist in the upscaling and similarity analysis of a phenomenon The Buckingham Pi Theorem was employed to perform the dimensional analysis There are 6 physical variables, and 3 independent physical units (length, mass and time), therefore, 3 dimensionless groups can be summarised, given that Δ Substituting the basic units to make each group dimensionless, they can be transformed into: It is noticed that Therefore, relationship among the dimensionless groups can be obtained:  Based on the data from the simulation results of all models, the shear stress and shear strength of the micro-structures, and the tensile stress and tensile strength (92.4 Linear regression was performed on the intersection lines to obtain the failure trend lines for both failure mechanisms. These lines offer important information for the determination of coal fines breakage and its mechanism, as demonstrated in The failure trend lines separate the distribution of log( Stable zone: micro-structures along coal cleats are stable, little coal fines will be generated. Shear failure zone: only shear failure will happen, and the failure initiates from the back corner of micro-structures, propagating towards the front side of the micro-structures if pressure difference increases. Shear-tensile failure zone: both shear failure and tensile failure occur, but shear failure starts from the back corner, while tensile failure begins from the front corner, and they propagate towards each other and finally the failure zones get connected given sufficient differential pressure over the micro-structure. Take Model 1 (a) as an example, the yellow dashed line with arrows in Furthermore, the dimensional analysis offers useful indications and suggestions in relation to the mitigation strategies of the coal fines issue. The numerical results indicate that by properly changing the fluid properties and flow controls, coal fines generation can be reduced. On the one hand, drop in the surface tension coefficient contributes to a greater In the two-phase flow cases, coal fines were not considerably produced until the interface passed by. The interface was not only the boundary of the two phases, but also the separation of high and low pressures. Well shut-in will give rise to the change of flow regime in coal seams, creating substantial pressure fluctuations. Therefore, avoiding frequent well shut-in can reduce coal fines production. Moreover, coal fines production can be also better controlled if the production pressure drawdown is kept at a rather stable level to refrain from creating massive pressure surge. In addition to predict coal fines issue, In this work, a fully coupled numerical model was developed, integrating the single-phase or two-phase flow phenomena and the generation of coal fines. Four flow regimes including water flow, gas flow, gas-drive-water and water-drive-gas (both water-wet and gas-wet) situations were taken into account. The evaluation of coal fines generation and a new criterion for determining its generation was conducted. According to the simulation results, the following conclusions can be drawn: The amount of potential coal fines was almost the same for single-phase water flow and gas flow. Two-phase flow generated much more coal fines compared with single-phase flow condition. During two-phase flow stage, the wettability of coal has a significant impact on coal fines generation. Among the flow regimes examined in this research, the gas-wet gas-drive-water scenario produced the most coal fines. The amount of potential coal fines is also strongly related to cleat geometry. Coal fines were mainly created around the regions where abrupt reduction in cleat aperture occurred and/or the displaced phase was trapped, due to significant pressure differences. According to the dimensional analysis, coal fines generation is related to the Capillary number ( Results indicate that mitigation strategies, such as changing the wettability of coal, adding surfactant and reducing production pressure drawdown, can be implemented to alleviate the coal fines issue. Results also show that the change of flow regime will induce considerable pressure fluctuations, which will generate substantial coal fines. Therefore, avoiding frequent well shut-in can reduce coal fines production. This work was partially supported by the top-up scholarship from