Staging of separation operations to improve the overall efficiency of the process has always been practiced in mineral processing circuit design, be it cells in jigs, compartments in heavy media vessels or multiple cyclone installations. In fact, staging in circuit design occurs whenever a stream passes through a series of devices. However, the arrangement of the devices can affect the outcome across the spectrum of degradation, no improvement, improvement of the separation. Thus, it is critical to understand how the arrangement will affect the outcome. This paper presents a study of three general staging arrangements.Staging is a technique that equipment manufacturers and process engineers employ to improve the performance of solid–solid separation processes. Staging is the procedure whereby multiple unit operations are arranged such that the resulting circuitry behaves as an overall separator, that is, there is one feed stream entering and two product streams exiting. An example would be the arrangement of cells in a jig or of hydrocyclones in a mill starch degritting circuit. Because the separation emulates a single separation device, a staged arrangement performance should be able to be characterized in the same manner as a single solid–solid separator. Thus, the staged arrangement should have its own fractional recovery curve If the characteristic parameters of the overall separator can be estimated from those of the individual unit operations, then the expected improvement in performance can be examined. Quite often, this can be achieved by assuming the individual unit operations have the same characteristic parameters, hence are identical. The insight gained, however, applies to circuits with non-identical units. Consider the general staging circuit For symmetrical arrangements, where For For For For Next, consider the general staging circuit For For The testing of heavy liquid concentration of minerals using multistage cyclones reported by Comparing circuit Comparing circuit Comparing circuit For For For l=2, n=3 and Analytical solutions for Finally, consider the general staging circuit For  Again, the behavior of While the staging of unit operations has the potential to improve the overall separation, it is obvious that a designer needs to examine exactly how the staging is going to perform. In particular, care must be used when unit operations have apparent by-passing associated with them. In addition, arrangements that increase the overall cut point while improving the overall distribution modulus may not be desirable. For example, in classification, there is an unique