Catalytic microwave pyrolysis aims to improve the energy efficiency and perfect product distribution. In this work, ferrous disulfide (FeS2) is employed as a catalyst for low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis reaction. The catalytic effects on pyrolysis temperature, product yields, and three pyrolysis products are also discussed. Some key analytical techniques, such as SEM-EDS, FT-IR, and GC-MS, are used to compare the products of microwave pyrolysis and catalytic microwave pyrolysis. A catalytic mechanism of FeS2 is proposed based on the catalytic effects. Results showed that FeS2 catalyst improves the temperature-rising rate and final temperature of microwave pyrolysis, leading to the change of the distribution of pyrolysis products. When 12.0% FeS2 catalyst is added for the microwave pyrolysis, the yields of solid, liquid, and gaseous products are 64.10%, 27.20%, and 8.7%, respectively, and the yield of liquid product increases by 6.40% compared with microwave pyrolysis. The number of small particles on the surface of solid product obviously decreases, and a layered phenomenon appears in large solid product. Moreover, the mass fraction of light oil significantly increases, indicating that FeS2 catalyst can make coal tar “light”. Catalytic microwave pyrolysis of low-rank coal can be divided into coal liquefaction and secondary reaction stages, and the FeS2 catalyst works better in the entire catalytic microwave pyrolysis.Low-rank coal catalytic microwave pyrolysis has attracted considerable attention among researchers to improve the yields and quality of pyrolysis products and considerably reduce the energy efficiency of pyrolysis reaction Among the numerous catalysts, iron-based catalysts, such as iron oxides and sulfides, have attracted considerable interest because of their rich reserves, low cost, and high reactivity. Their catalysis has been widely reported: Magnetic biochar was produced via catalytic pyrolysis of macroalgae using iron-based catalyst, which could be used as an electrode in Li-ion batteries Compared with coal conventional pyrolysis, microwave pyrolysis has several advantages, such as rapid heating, selective heating, noncontact heating, bulk heating, and heating from the inside out In this study, a commercial FeS A low-rank coal, a lignite, was mined from north of Shaanxi Province, P.R. China. The characteristics of coal were low ash, low sulfur, low nitrogen, and high volatile compound, and its proximate and ultimate analyses was shown in The mixture of coal powder (50 g) and FeS (1. Microwave device; 2. Ceramic insulation sleeve; 3. Quartz tube reactor; 4. First-stage absorption cooler; 5. Circulating cooling liquid; 6. Second-stage absorption cooler; 7. Electrical tar precipitator; 8. T-branch pipe and stop valve; 9. Gas collecting bag; 10. Mixed coal-gas cylinder; 11. Stop valve; 12. Flowmeter; 13. Intake tube; 14. Refitted thermocouple; 15. Stop valve; 16. Outlet pipe). The yields of pyrolysis products were calculated using the Eqs. The proximate and ultimate analysis of coal and solid product were carried out by the national standard of P. R. China (Nos: GB/T 30732-2014 and GB/T 31391-2015). The scan range was from 20° to 80° with a rate of 0.02°/s. SEM micromorphology and energy dispersive spectroscopic (EDS) analysis of solid product were achieved by using a JSM-6360LV type scanning electron microscopy (JEOL Ltd. Japan) at a resolution of 1.6 nm and accelerating voltage of 30 kV. Infrared spectroscopy analyses of solid and liquid products were performed on a Prestige-21 type Fourier Transform infrared spectrometer (Shimadzu (Guangzhou) Analysis & Technology Service Co., Ltd., China). The spectra were recorded with various indexes from 4000 cm The pyrolysis reactions at six additions of FeS The yields of solid, liquid, and gaseous products at different ratios of FeS The carbon distributions of pyrolysis products with 12.0% FeS The proximate and ultimate analyses of solid product with or without 12.0% FeS The micromorphology of solid products was observed by scanning electron microscopy, and the compositions in red square area were detected by energy-dispersive spectroscopy. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) analysis was further employed to verify the effect of FeS The composition of coal tar was divided into three categories by the number of carbon atom, namely, light oil, intermediate oil, and heavy oil The effect of FeS The molecular saturation of coal tar was characterized via the calculation of ratio of H and C in coal tar, in which the molecular saturation increased with the increase of the ratio of H and C. As shown in Similar to the FT-IR spectra of the solid product, The volume fractions of five gaseous components are summarized in Before analyzing the catalytic mechanism of FeS Because the pyrite is cheap catalyst, it is not worth to recycling, but is should be used well when it mixes into solid products. The potential utilization way for pyrolysis products is demonstrated in In this study, the catalytic effects of FeS FeS When added with FeS Obvious effects of FeS Both catalysis of FeS This work was supported from the Shaanxi Provincial Natural Science Foundation Program for Key Basic Research of China (No. 2017ZDJC-33), the Shaanxi Provincial Balanced-Planning Science and Innovation Engineering Program of China (No. 2011KTDZ01-05-04) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 51774227, 51504180). Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: