Bubble-particle detachment is the main factor to limit the recovery of coarse particle in flotation. A dynamic interaction force apparatus (DIFA) was designed to investigate the bubble-particle detachment process. The DIFA could directly measure the detachment force and visually observe the interfacial behavior during a particle detaching from an air bubble. The detachment process was composed of three sub-processes: bubble stretching process, bubble sliding process, and bubble necking process. Calculated detachment force showed good agreement with measurement force. The critical detachment force, defined as the maximum detachment force during detachment process, was proposed to determine whether a particle completely detached from a bubble. The Bond number was modified using the critical detachment force. The modified Bond number, which considers the bubble-particle detachment process, was more appropriate to evaluate the bubble-particle aggregate stability. It was found that the bubble-particle aggregate stability was enhanced by increasing surface hydrophobicity, whereas the stability was weakened by increasing particle size. The weak stability of bubble-particle aggregate results in a low recovery in coarse particle flotation.Flotation is widely used for selectively separating valuable mineral particles from other particles based on differences in the interfacial physicochemical properties. The success of flotation depends on the interaction between bubbles and particles, which involves three sub-processes: the bubble-particle collision, the bubble-particle attachment, and the bubble-particle detachment. In flotation, the probability of a particle collected by a bubble is given by ( The detachment process has been studied through the force balance method. The capillary force acting along three-phase contact (TPC) line plays a pivotal role to maintain the particle attachment to the bubble, it is described as: The pressure force is defined as the difference of the Laplace pressure and the hydrostatic pressure, it can be expressed as: The buoyancy force is related to the particle volume immersed in the liquid phase. It can be written as: The gravity force can be expressed as: In actual flotation cell, there is also centrifugal force provided by turbulence to make particles detached from air bubbles. The centrifugal force was modeled by Based on the force analysis, the Bond number ( As the force models were developed, the direct force measurement technique was proposed by Although many efforts have been made to understand the detachment mechanism of bubble and particle, the interfacial behavior and the force behavior as a particle detaching from an air bubble are still unclear, such as how do the capillary force and the detachment force dominate the dynamic bubble-particle detachment process? In this study, a dynamic interaction force apparatus (DIFA) was designed to dynamically measure the detachment force and monitor the detachment process during a particle detaching from an air bubble. The dynamic contact angle and TPC line behavior in detachment process were analyzed, the roles of capillary force and detachment force on the bubble-particle detachment were proved. Moreover, the critical detachment force and the modified Bond number was analyzed to investigate the stability of bubble-particle aggregate. Our study can further illustrate the mechanism of particle detached from air bubble, which has significant meanings for flotation industry, especially coarse particle flotation. The standard safety glass particles used in this study were purchased from Daohong Glass Beads Company Limited, China. The samples were cleaned with freshly prepared piranha solutions (H The octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) was obtained from Aladdin Industrial Corporation. The 1 mM OTS in toluene solutions were prepared as the reaction solutions which were used to hydrophobize the cleaned glass sphere surfaces via the silanation reactions ( The DIFA was developed based on the combination of an induction timer apparatus ( The bimorph used in the DIFA was purchased from Fuji Ceramics Corporation, with the dimensions of The recorded video was analyzed frame by frame. Selected frames as shown in As shown in According to the interfacial characterizations of above parts, the detachment process can be separated into three sub-processes: namely the bubble stretching process, the bubble sliding process, and the bubble necking process ( The detachment force, The dynamic detachment force can be calculated according to the parameters obtained from image analysis as shown in As shown in Glass particles with different hydrophobicity surfaces were obtained by varying immersed time for 1 min, 2 min, and 20 min, respectively. The diameters of hydrophobized particles and air bubbles were about 1.18 mm and 1.50 mm, respectively. The implication of surface hydrophobicity on detachment force between a bubble and a particle was shown in The Bond number was modified by considering the critical detachment force. The modified Bond number, A DIFA which could visualize the detachment process and accurately measure the dynamic detachment process, was designed to investigate the bubble-particle detachment. According to the interfacial analysis, the bubble-particle detachment can be separated into three sub-processes: the bubble stretching process, the bubble sliding process, and the bubble necking process. In bubble stretching process, the bubble was stretched and deformed under the acting of the pulling force, resulting in the increasing of the dynamic contact angle until the advancing contact angle was reached. The bubble sliding process was dominated by the TPC line sliding and shrinking on the particle surface in contact with bubble. Finally, a neck-shaped interface was formed during the bubble necking process which made the particle sharply detached from the bubble. The detachment force was dynamically calculated using the force balance method. The calculated detachment forces showed good agreement with the measured detachment forces. Based on force analysis, different trends of capillary force and detachment force were found, which suggested that capillary force alone cannot fully describe the bubble-particle detachment process. The critical detachment force, defined as the maximum force during detachment, was proposed to determine whether a particle completely detaches from a bubble or not. It was more reliable than capillary force to analyze the detachment process. The effects of two factors (particle surface hydrophobicity and particle size) on critical detachment force were studied. The measurement results showed that critical detachment force was enhanced by increasing the surface hydrophobicity and the particle size. However, it should be noted that in actual flotation, the bubble-particle aggregates will be subjected to other detachment forces (such as centrifugal force) which depending on the particle mass. The increasing of critical detachment force does not mean that the larger particles are less likely to detach since the inertial forces will be also larger for them. Furthermore, the Bond number was modified using the critical detachment force. The modified Bond number,  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the financial supports from the