The movement of water through the jig bed is the key to better stratification of particles. In this study a systematic analysis of the movement of water in a conventional pressurized pulsion and gravity induced suction cycle is analyzed using an instrumented jig. Detailed analysis of a single jig cycle indicates that this approach to jigging confines its operation to a narrow range of frequencies with interdependencies of amplitude and frequency of the water waveform. To improve the jigging operation, identical water movement in both the pulsion and the suction phase of the jig cycle is required. It has been accomplished, first, with the controlled application of air pressure during both phases of the jigging cycle, and second, by the implementation of a timer control operation of the air valves. This paper gives a brief account of the changes that are made to the jigging system leading to decoupling of the strong correlation between amplitude and frequency of the water waveform, and increase in the operating range of the frequency of pulsation. In the modified jig set-up, the amplitude and frequency of pulsation are varied over a wide range to generate different patterns of waveforms. The most suitable waveform is used to study the jigging behavior of different particulate systems. The role of amplitude and frequency on the progress of the bed stratification during jigging is established.The response of a jigging system subjected to variability in the feed primarily depends on the frequency and the amplitude of the jig cycle. Even though it is recognized that estimation of the correct amplitude and frequency for a jigging system is very important from an operational standpoint, these parameters remain difficult to establish a priori. However, the evaluation of the bed response to the frequency and amplitude of pulsation has been extensively studied in the past. Results of controlled jigging experiments of There are several interesting review articles available on jigging that deal with some of the theoretical as well as practical aspects of jigging ( Numerical as well as experimental results on jigging indicate that the velocity profile of the jig cycle plays an important role in the stratification of the particles. During the upstroke, particles are fluidized and then they get separated based on their physical properties and the fluid velocity. In order to understand the role of fluid velocity, as part of the present investigation, an instrumented pilot scale jig has been used. Considerable effort has been made to improve upon the jig set-up on two accounts. First, to establish independent control of the amplitude and the frequency of the jigging cycle, and second, to explore alternate control strategies for better stratification using a wide variety of jigging cycles. The modified jig set-up has been initially used for studying the fluid motion for different combinations of amplitude and frequency of the jigging cycle and later it has been used to assess the stratification behavior artificial as well as real particles in jig beds. The key operating factor that influences particle stratification in practical situations is the velocity profile of water through the jig bed. Commercial jigs that are available for research purposes do not allow obtrusive measurements to be undertaken to probe this aspect of particle stratification in jigs. For this reason we have built an instrumented jig for experimental purpose. A typical jig set-up that can be easily conceived is essentially a U-tube partially filled with water. One arm of the U-tube is opened at the top is fitted with a perforated plate that holds the particles; the other arm is connected to an air supply line. Pneumatic valves control the supply and release of air. Although this simple set-up would perform well to separate particles, it would have many limitations for a wider applicability. The main limitation is that the operation has to be carried out with an inbuilt correlation between the amplitude and frequency of jigging that is a characteristic of this type of jig set-up. Therefore, frequency of pulsation cannot be varied independent of the amplitude and vice versa. This could be a serious drawback as only a limited number of variations in jig cycles could be implemented. Therefore, an attempt has been made to analyze the jigging process to understand the dynamics of the system. Here we give an account of the analysis that led to an improved jig set-up. Experimental analysis of water displacement profiles during jigging clearly shows that the water motion is cyclic but not uniform. The vertical displacement profile of water during one cycle can be divided in three distinct parts: (i) upward movement of water during pulsation (ii) movement due to inertia, and (iii) downward movement of water under the influence of gravity. The time corresponding to this motion is depicted in In the suction cycle, although the air pressure is withdrawn the water above the jig bed still moves upwards because of its momentum. The water displacement cycle in the second and third part together constitute approximately a SHM (simple harmonic motion). Let Knowing the time periods for the different parts of the jigging cycle the total time, Two important points emerge from Eq. The jig set-up consists of a U-tube of 15 The jigging process can be controlled in two ways that can be termed as The experimental results have been analyzed with respect to fluid flow and particle stratification. Different types of waveforms that could be generated are presented. The most suitable waveform was chosen for the jigging experiments with different particle systems. In any given experiment several parameters were monitored to assess the degree of stratification of particles. Two key parameters control the jig cycle under timer control: uptime and downtime, and the air pressure in the accumulator. By changing these parameters the amplitude (maximum water level above the jig bed) and frequency of pulsation could be varied almost independently by ensuring forced oscillation of water over the jig bed. To verify this several experiments were conducted with a bed of monosize particles of diameter around 1 Amplitude and frequency of pulsation control the water velocity. The velocity in turn plays a key role in determining the degree of stratification as it directly affects the mobility of particles. In order to determine to what extent these parameters affect the fluid velocity, several tests were carried out by varying amplitude and frequency. Another series of tests were carried out by varying the air pressure, uptime, and downtime to study the jig cycle profiles that could be obtained in the modified jig set-up. Test results show that there are mainly three types of water displacement profiles that can be obtained as shown in The instrumented jig set-up was used for studying the stratification profile of artificial as well as real particulate systems. It should be mentioned that the jig is designed for batch scale operation and hence it is not suitable for detailed optimization study. Moreover, it is also not possible to generate waveforms of very high amplitude. This is because at very high amplitude the water splashes into the level sensor which eventually malfunctions. In spite of these constraints, the jig set-up with all its sensors in place has been useful in capturing minor details of the jigging operation that mostly remains unnoticed in a pilot scale jig operation. In the following experiments, amplitude and frequency were set to obtain water velocity around the minimum fluidization velocity required for the respective particle systems and then the progress of stratification was studied. Particle stratification studies were carried out using the modified jig set-up with a binary mixture of monosize spherical particles (1 Although effect of amplitude is more pronounced on the jig bed stratification, the effect of frequency of pulsation cannot be ignored. Similar tests were carried out with coal particles. Two types of mono size (13 Iron ore particles of 10 A batch jig system which has been adequately instrumented to monitor the motion of water and stratification of particles was carefully analyzed for its improved performance. In particular, the analysis was carried out with a view to increase the frequency of pulsation and to operate the jig by independently varying the frequency and amplitude of the jig cycle. From the test results it was concluded that in any given jig cycle the time taken for the upward motion of water was lower compared to the downward motion. This happens because the downward motion of water takes place solely under the influence of gravity while the upward motion is governed by the inflow of compressed air. Hence no significant change in the frequency of pulsation was possible without design modification of the jig set-up. In order to reduce the total time period of the jig cycle, it was clear that the time spent over the downward motion of the water had to be reduced. This was achieved by connecting the air chamber above the jig bed to the air compensator. This way, both the air chambers (in two arms of the U-tube) were connected to the same compensator by means of a pair of three-way solenoid valves. Thus the downward motion of the water was no longer gravity but pressure driven. This arrangement reduced the time required for the down cycle significantly. Because of the reduced time, a higher frequency of pulsation was realized. Moreover, the amplitude of pulsation could be varied independent of the frequency and vice-versa. The modified jig set-up was used for studying the water motion inside the jig. The test results revealed two important aspect of the jigging cycle. First, the water velocity in a jig is predominantly controlled by amplitude. Second, three generic types of water waveforms can be generated by varying the amplitude and the frequency. Test results on artificial binary mixture of particles using the most effective water waveform showed that at higher frequency range, there is an optimum amplitude value that would result in the optimal stratification. Test results with coal and iron ore particles suggest that the rate of stratification is higher for particulate systems having large difference in the bulk densities of the components involved.