Work has been carried out to study the effect of alloying element dispersion in the base metal by using composite fabrication technique. Al–Cu composites (5–15wt%) are prepared by stir cast method by dispersing copper powder (filings) in molten aluminium. Results are compared with the alloy having same composition. Composite metals with 5, 10, 15% by weight were also compared. Deformation and recrystallization studies show better hardness properties with the composites compared to the alloy at recrystallization temperatures. Increasing alloy contents with the composites show enhanced ageing kinetics.Composite metals are metal combinations that retain the characteristics of individual metals for particular properties/applications. In general these composites are produced by powder metallurgy route, where the metals are not soluble in the liquid state or form monotectics. Copper–tungsten for make and break contacts, copper–lead for bearings are worth mentioning in this category. On the other hand, fabrication of composites having metals with limited mutual solubility can be produced, having useful properties of the individual metals, the resulting alloy and the composite. Also, these composites can be fabricated by conventional foundry routes. With their high formability and low work hardening rates, these composites can be produced at low cost. In terms of applications, Al–Cu alloys shares a larger fraction of aluminium alloys due to their high specific mechanical properties and wide range of alloys and properties. Secondary processing and fabrication of these alloys require high energy machines compared to their base metals. Present investigation aims in fabrication of composite materials which are chemically in tune with the conventional alloys by dispersing solute metal as particulates, which posses the useful properties of the metal, alloy and the resultant composite. Al–5 Composite metals are prepared by stir cast technique, adding preheated (200 Composite metals with 5, 10 and 15% Cu, by weight, are produced with combination of particle sizes showing optimum properties after recrystallization. Ageing studies are carried out for both alloy and composites. Solutionizing treatment at 500   Though finer particle sizes yield better hardness properties after deformation, clustering/agglomeration of particles and failure of billet before 50% deformation is observed with it. Hence composites with increased copper contents are carried out using a combination of different size particles (−50    Composite metals can be produced through conventional foundry routes. Composite metals having the same chemistry of that of alloy can yield up to 80% of the hardness. Composite metals do respond to ageing behaviour.