Losses of nitrogen fertilizer from agricultural watersheds are among the main causes of water quality degradation in Quebec. Under maize crop, leached nitrate can reach up to 185 kg N ha−1. The synchronization of the nitrogen fertilization with crop uptake would be a way to optimize the use of nitrogen fertilizer and reduce nitrate leaching. Coupling an empirical nitrogen cycle model with a physical soil water dynamics model could simplify the optimization of nitrogen fertilizer use. The objective of this study was to couple the soil surface empirical nitrate production model adapted to the regional agro-climatic conditions of study area with HYDRUS to determine the most suitable combination in order to predict nitrate leaching into subsurface drains.
                  In this study, we used estimation equations of nitrogen pools and transformations in nitrate. The equations, using historical field data, were combined into 60 N-release patterns taking into account a dissolution function of nitrate, 4 transformation and dissolution functions for the ammonium, 5 organic nitrogen pools and 3 N organic nitrogen from the soil and manure release functions. These N release patterns were applied in a mineral fertilizer treatment and four organic fertilizer treatments for a total of 300 unique nitrate release patterns.
                  The results demonstrate the potential of a method to evaluate the contributions of nitrogen based on atmospheric data, crop rotation or soil particle sizes as 5% of the 300 combination gave a Nash–Sutcliffe efficiency coefficient (NSE) above 0.70. The prediction method must be different according to the source of the fertilization, organic or mineral as only 1% of the combination gave NSE above 0.70 in more than one treatment. In addition, the study showed that the soil organic nitrogen contribution to nitrate leaching tends to decrease as the organic fertilizer applications rate increases as 75% of the combination giving NSE above 0.70 in high fertilization treatment used the lower organic N pool and only 17% used the lower organic N pool for the agronomic fertilization rate and mineral fertilizer. The simulations also showed that the nitrate-leached masses are closely related to the fertilizer supply nitrogen content.Nitrogen used for agricultural fertilization is the main cause of anthropogenic perturbations of the N cycle ( In 2009, in Canada, 75% of the mass of fertilizers used in agriculture was nitrogen ( Data-based models, like SWAT, use empirical relationships to define the rate of movement between the different nitrogen pools and to evaluate nitrate leaching. These relationships do not describe natural processes. Therefore, data-based models can be applied only within the range of values that was used to derive them ( The objective of this study was to test the effect of a combination of models for the soil surface empirical nitrate production with HYDRUS in order to evaluate nitrate leaching into subsurface drains. A field experiment was conducted on long-term manure fertilizer test plots initiated in 1978 at the IRDA (Institut de Recherche et de Développement en Agroenvironnement) experimental station of St-Lambert near Québec City in the province of Québec (N 46°05′, W 71°02′). Starting in 2006, a crop rotation of maize ( The experimental site is divided in 20 plots. The 20 plots were 90 m According to the Canadian classification system, the soil is a poorly-drained Le bras series clay loam (275 g clay kg Sand, silt and clay contents are similar through the profile, although there is a noticeable decreasing trend for Ksat and increasing trend for bulk density with depth. Based on these results, the soil profile was divided into two homogeneous regions and physical properties were averaged for these two layers: 0–20 cm and 20–85 cm, which correspond respectively to the plow layer and the natural layer.  Nitrate from mineral fertilizer is considered to be instantly and completely available in the dissolved phase at the moment of the application. As shown in Five soil organic nitrogen pools were used as soil potentially mineralizable nitrogen ( We propose the use of N release functions for soil mineralizable nitrogen and manure organic nitrogen for their seasonal transformation in nitrate and their release in soil. The N release functions take into account soil nitrogen source depletion. Two of the functions are based on a logistic equation which was found to give adequate results and be representative of the soil biological temperature conditions ( The logistic equation (Eq. The second organic N release function also uses the logistic equation, but is based on soil temperature and water content. A daily rate modifier for the water content was calculated using the biophysical water function with the water filled pore space at a 7 cm depth and is multiplied by the result of Eq. HYDRUS implements time-variable boundary conditions like root water uptake, and daily variations of transpiration and rainfall. Water and solute transports were modeled for each of the five treatments. The water flux into subsurface drains was calibrated with data of the 2009 maize crop season, and validated with data of 2011 wheat crop season. The HYDRUS root water uptake model contains a database of crop water uptake parameters, including maize and wheat. Therefore, validation on a second crop allows for the evaluation of the robustness of the model. Outflows from the subsurface drain was compared with the free drainage flux at the bottom of the simulated soil column. Subsurface drain outflows was averaged over the twenty plots. The solute component of HYDRUS was used only for one maize growing season in 2009. The cumulative daily solute prediction outflow was compared with the mean of each treatment cumulative nitrate mass at five dates during the growing season (2009-06-03, 2009-06-29, 2009-07-06, 2009-10-16, and 2009-10-30). PEST (Model-Independent Parameter Estimation and Uncertainty Analysis; Nitrate movement was assumed to follow an equilibrium transport model. Nitrate dispersivity was set to 450 cm d All root solute uptake was considered to be passive, e.g. the solute is absorbed by the plant with the water movement ( The modeling period started with the fertilizer application and ended with the last water sampling. Therefore, the experiment lasted for a 175-day period in 2009, corresponding to the maize growing season in Québec and for a 77-day period for wheat in 2011. Previous year soil residual nitrogen content was neglected, considering preliminary simulations results. Based on the empirical model shown above, nitrate amounts were added throughout the season, on a daily basis, as a boundary condition for the solute modeling for the 2009 year. The boundary and initial conditions are shown in The upper boundary conditions were defined by daily potential evapotranspiration, precipitation and nitrate fertilization. Potential evapotranspiration was calculated with FAO 56 Penman–Monteith equation multiplied by crop coefficients adjusted for actual evapotranspiration ( The model evaluation criteria used for the soil water movement modeling was the Nash–Sutcliffe efficiency coefficient (NSE) and the coefficient of determination ( The HYDRUS water transport module was calibrated under the 2009 maize crop growing season and validated using the 2011 wheat-growing season. The total water drainage measured for 2009 and 2011 were, respectively, 16.87 and 12.49 m The solute modeling showed a large difference between N release patterns with a four-order magnitude difference in certain cases. As shown in Of the 300 release patterns, only 20 gave a Nash–Sutcliffe efficiency coefficient above 0.70. As shown in From From It is also observed from It is also observed in For an additional evaluation of the model goodness of fit, nitrogen plant uptake was estimated for each treatment using grain and stem analyses and estimate of root nitrogen partitioning ( The cumulative nitrogen plant uptake was slightly underestimated for the mineral treatment and the organic fertilizer treatments of 30 Mg, 60 Mg and 90 Mg, but was underestimated at the highest LSM application rate. This indicates that plant uptake parameters could have been optimized to enhance the model performance and could explain why modeled nitrate leaching was overestimated in the fall. In this study, only passive solute uptake was used, the difference observed between measurements and predictions could be linked to active solute uptake. Future works should include active nitrate uptake to enhance modeling accuracy. In this study, multiple ways of considering nitrate transformation and availability were compared. We used a combination of HYDRUS-1D and empirical nitrate production models and found the combination suitable to simulate nitrate leached into subsurface drains. The simulations showed that nitrate from mineral fertilizer and nitrate from organic fertilizer are not explained by the same N release function and soil nitrogen pool. Nitrate transport should be simulated differently whether the sources are organic or mineral. Six suitable N release patterns could be identified for mineral fertilizer. The N release patterns giving a Nash–Sutcliffe efficiency coefficient above 0.70 all use the 20-day constant dissolution for ammonium and the following pools and release functions: (1) the mass balance organic N pool and the Sbih organic N release function, (2) the mass balance organic N pool and the logistic equation with soil temperature as organic N release function, (3) the Giroux rotation organic N pool and the logistic equation with soil temperature and water content as organic N release function, (4) the mass balance organic N pool and the logistic equation with soil temperature and water content as organic N release function, (5) the Giroux rotation organic N pool and the Sbih organic N release function and, (6) the Giroux rotation organic N pool and the logistic equation with soil temperature as organic N release function. To use our model combination, three solute parameters are needed in HYDRUS, the culture rotation for the Giroux rotation organic pool or an empirical nitrate mass balance in soil to estimate the organic N pool and the soil water content and temperature for the organic N release function. To compare, doing this modeling using only HYDRUS require the use of three solutes, each using 20 parameters for a total of 60 parameters with soil column experiment to determine some parameters. Two N release patterns gave Nash–Sutcliffe efficiency coefficient above 0.70 for the three agronomic application rates of organic fertilizer, both of which used instant dissolution for ammonium, but differ in the organic N pool and organic N release function which were: (1) the mass balance organic N pool and the logistic equation with soil temperature and water content organic N release function and (2) the CRAAQ 2010 organic N pool and the Sbih organic N release function. The N release patterns framework for simulating nitrate leaching is based on easily available atmospheric, soil content or crop data and could be used to improve the models or the tools used to describe the nitrate losses from cropland. Computer simulations were done with increasing organic fertilizer application rates. They showed that the masses of nitrate leached are closely related to the rate of nitrogen applied. The simulations also showed that as the organic fertilizer application rate increases, the soil organic nitrogen contribution tends to decrease, which decreases the efficiency of the fertilization and consequently contributes to the rise of agricultural nitrate discharges into subsurface drains. In this study, the nitrate leaching was overestimated by some of the adapted equation to evaluate organic nitrogen pools (stable nitrogen pool based on agroclimatic variable (Stable N0) and stable nitrogen pool plus easily mineralizable organic nitrogen pool (stable N0 + Pool I)) and some N release function (Gasser equation). The field specific parameter used and the estimation of certain variables could explain the overestimation. The water fluxes modeling was judged satisfactory with a Nash–Sutcliffe efficiency coefficient of 0.67 and This study was done using an exploratory approach oriented on nitrate leaching. We progressed from 300 possible N release patterns to 10 probable N release patterns. Now that some N release patterns have been identified, future work should take into account the different molecular forms of organic nitrogen in organic fertilizer and soil. This approach could enhance model accuracy. Future work should also include the plant active uptake of nitrate to verify the validity of the passive plant uptake hypothesis used in modeling and probably enhance the plant solute uptake accuracy. The authors wish to thank the technicians involved in the project for their field and laboratory works. The authors also wish to thank Denis Côté for the establishment of the long-term experiment. A special thanks for the precious contribution of Jacynthe Dessureault-Rompré for the mineralization aspect of the modeling. This work was financially supported by the “InnovAction agroalimentaire” program from the