Retrofit process design can be seen as a multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) problem aiming at selecting the best alternative for improving the performance of a chemical process. There is a growing consensus that environmental considerations, including the environmental impact associated with all life cycle stages of materials, should be integrated in chemical process design. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a technique that allows quantification of those impacts. However, implementing this technique would increase the decision-making complexity and thus would necessitate systematic tools and methods. The analogy between LCA and MCDM has been recognized, but the systematic evaluation of LCA methodological choices and interpretation in this context is rarely discussed. The importance of those is demonstrated in this paper using a case study involving the implementation of de-inked pulp capacity and cogeneration and an integrated newsprint mill.Additional DIP production through new equipment only: less recycled fiber required for the same amount of pulp, less sludge Cogeneration using mainly wood wastes Additional DIP production through new equipment only, less recycled fiber required for the same amount of pulp, less sludge Cogeneration using mainly wood wastes Retrofit process design consists of modifying an existing process in order to improve its performance. For instance, reasons for retrofitting a process could be to use different feedstock, to improve process economics by reducing the amount of energy or feedstock used or to reduce environmental impacts. Retrofit process design aims at selecting the best alternatives from a set of feasible ones based on multiple criteria. Nowadays, the consideration of environmental considerations in chemical process design is increasingly important and there is a growing consensus that all life cycle stages of materials need to be considered Attempting to integrate multiple dimensions and, more specifically, a broad range of environmental considerations into process design decision-making highly increases complexity and thus necessitates systematic multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) tools. MCDM is an iterative process that can be summarized in four steps: 1) problem structuring, 2) evaluation of the alternatives' performance, 3) elicitation of decision-makers preferences, and 4) problem resolution. The first step consists of specifying the decision objectives and related attributes (indicators). The second step is to assess the performance of each alternative based on each attribute. Then, the preferences of the decision-makers are elicited: 1) the decision-makers' preferences for different levels of a given attribute are expressed (normalization) and, 2) the relative importance of the attributes is evaluated (weighting). Finally, alternatives are compared and sensitivity analyses are performed in order to identify the alternative that represents the best compromise between the different objectives. The main objective of this paper is to demonstrate the importance of systematically addressing LCA methodological choices and interpretation elements when used for multi-criteria process design applications. This will be performed using a quantitative process design case study aiming at selecting the preferable alternative for implementing de-inked pulp (DIP) capacity and cogeneration at an integrated newsprint mill. The analogy between the LCA and MCDM methodologies as well as the description of LCA as an MCDM problem aiming at resolving the trade-offs between multiple environmental objectives has been discussed by several authors (for instance see Refs. On the other hand, the integration of LCA considerations into multiple objectives process design is increasingly discussed in the literature LCA methodology consists of four steps: goal and scope definition, life cycle inventory, impact assessment, and interpretation. Methodological choices are encountered in each of those steps, as discussed next. Functional unit definition is a source of methodological uncertainty. However, in LCA aimed at improving processes, the functional unit is often defined as a certain production level and the methodological uncertainty is low. One of the LCA methodological choices which may have the most dramatic effect on the result is the establishment of relevant system boundaries and related allocation procedures. It was shown by some authors that the selection of an appropriate boundary is essential in revealing the difference between compared alternatives While the choice of the system boundary and of the characterization method will affect the results because of fundamental differences in modeling, the choice of a normalization reference aims at better interpreting the results, which is critical if LCA is to be used for practical decision-making. Norris Weighting is another important interpretation parameter. Case studies aiming at comparing different weighting approaches are more available In LCA, it is often necessary to make assumptions due to a lack of knowledge about the studied system behavior. Information about relevant aspects of the studied system and effects of a modification to the system on other systems is often missing In summary, while LCA is being increasingly recognized as an important tool for more sustainable process design, very few efforts were made in order to better understand the implications of LCA methodological choices and assumptions on decision-making. A recent survey of utilizations of LCA in the pulp and paper industry Before illustrating the implications of choices and interpretation in LCA for multi-criteria process design, it is important to understand the interrelations between those two methodologies. Thus, the potential use of LCA within a generic MCDM process is illustrated in The first task of the decision-making problem consists of defining the objectives to be achieved with the decision, and the set of attributes (criteria) to measure them. Existing LCA characterization methods are suitable for this because they are general enough to help the decision-makers define their environmental concerns. Characterization methods can be classified into two categories Once the general objectives of the process design are defined, it is possible to generate a set of alternatives that respond to these objectives. The MCDM science proposed a variety of methods to perform this task, which will not be discussed in this paper. Process synthesis and integration can also provide a convenient framework for generating alternatives (see for instance In order to assess the performance of alternatives on LCA indicators, it is necessary to set the system boundary. Two main approaches exist in the LCA literature for setting the system boundary As mentioned previously, knowledge of the studied system behaviour in response to modifications is often missing, especially if the system boundary is expanded to account for indirect effects in the background system. In these cases, modeling different scenarios may be required. In order to propose scenarios, it is necessary to identify which flows in the foreground will be affected by the decision and what are the implications for the background system. Multiple scenarios may be required for flows with high uncertainty regarding how they are affected. Once the system boundary is specified and the scenarios defined, it is possible to compile a final inventory and to characterize the environmental impacts associated with each alternative. For this, a characterization method must be selected. In order for the impact information to be useful for decision-making, it must satisfy two criteria. First, it should cover all the decision-makers' concerns. Second, it should allow them to distinguish between alternatives. At this point, it is recommended that several characterization methods be compared so that the most relevant one can be selected. This must be consistent with the objectives set for the decision. It is important that the selected normalization method reflect the decision-makers' concerns. On one hand, internal normalization references express the significance of impact results in comparison with one the alternatives or with a base case. Using this approach, no external information will be brought to the decision-making process. On the other hand, external normalization assesses the significance of the impacts based on how an external reference performs. However, information regarding external references is not always readily available and the information given is not necessarily the best suited for process design applications. As a first step, the decision-makers' general concerns were used to generate the alternatives. At this point, it is important to select the indicators that will help identifying which of the proposed alternatives represents the best compromise. In this context, Roy The first step in elucidating the decision-makers' preferences consists in selecting an appropriate MCDM technique. Guidelines for that are available Then, the preferences of the decision-makers for different levels of the same indicator (intra-criterion evaluation, normalization) can be evaluated using the selected technique. Whereas in LCA, normalization mainly aims to relate the magnitude of the impacts in the different impact categories to reference values in order to assess their significance, in decision analysis, the purpose is to convert the different scales of the attributes to the same range. Normalization in LCA also reaches this later objective. However, the preference of the decision-maker for different scales of a given impact category is not directly assessed, but rather inherent to the method and assumed to be linear. Finally, the relative importance of different indicators is evaluated (weighting) in order to aggregate the total performance of each alternative. Note that some methods do not involve any direct normalization or weighting in order to select alternatives. In LCA, weighting is optional The last step of the decision-making process is to perform a final comparison of the alternatives in order to decide which one is the most preferable. This step corresponds to the life cycle interpretation step of LCA. At this point, the robustness of the selection is tested through sensitivity analysis and, if possible, uncertainty analysis. In the context of evaluating the implications of choice and interpretation in LCA for multi-criteria process design a case study is defined. The system under investigation consists of an integrated newsprint mill located in Ontario (Canada). The paper is produced from thermomechanical pulp (TMP) at 81% and de-inked pulp (DIP) at 19%. The TMP is produced from wood chips supplied by sawmills (by-product of lumber production) in the vicinity. Recovered paper is transported from urban locations as well as from smaller communities near the mill location. Although the mill already respects all emission standards fixed by the federal government, it would benefit from optimization and an increase in the overall energy efficiency of the operations. Four process alternatives were investigated in order to increase the cogenerated electricity (from 2.5% up to 95%) and the recycled fiber content of newsprint (from 20% to 50% or 100%). The process alternatives are combinations of three increased recycled fiber content scenarios and two cogeneration scenarios as presented in The problem consists of finding the process alternative which represents the best environmental trade-off given a set of relevant indicators. No specific characterization method is selected at this point, although some will be compared later on. How to generate the alternatives presented in Selecting the system boundaries can be an important source of uncertainty and thus, this task should be performed carefully. As discussed previously, two approaches can be taken regarding system boundary selection. The two approaches were compared for this specific case study and the results are presented elsewhere The two different system boundaries employed in this case study are depicted in The second boundary is set in order to account for any indirect consequences that would result from implementing the process alternatives. It is necessary to identify how changes in the foreground system cascade into other systems. Implementing the proposed alternatives would have an effect on the consumption of chips, recovered paper market, electricity, wood wastes, natural gas, and some chemicals. Initial assumptions regarding the effects of implementing alternatives on the background system are summarized in The outcome of a decision can highly depend on the modeling of the consequences of the alternatives on the background system. The manner in which the background system is affected in consequence of a change in the foreground system is not always obvious. For this reason, it is a good idea to establish different scenarios regarding these changes. In this case study, scenarios are established for chips, recovered paper, and electricity production and are summarized in Once the system boundary is set, inventory can be compiled for the base case and the alternatives. Foreground processes are modeled using primary data, while background processes are estimated using the Once the inventory is compiled, it is possible to characterize and normalize the environmental impact. A comparison of different normalization references using the When normalizing by the base case or the best option, it can be seen that a similar profile is obtained for almost all impact categories, meaning that alternatives 2 and 3 (100% DIP) generally outperform alternatives 1 and 4 (50% DIP). On the other hand, it seems that normalizing by the best option can bring some distortion by magnifying some differences that were very small a priori, such as illustrated by the case of the ozone depletion indicator. This result is obtained because the best alternative is forced to a given normalized value (here −1). Some confusion can also arise because the normalization reference can change for each impact category (the best alternative is not always the same, depending on the impact category). The utilization of two external normalization approaches is also depicted in The BAT normalization will be used from this point on because it expresses the results in terms of feasible improvement, which seems a good starting point for process design. The method most adapted to the geographical context is often selected intuitively. However, it is possible that the available method does not cover everything judged important. Therefore, it is useful to compare different methods before selecting the final set of indicators to be used. The results from the The first observation that can be made is that a different range of impact categories are considered by each of the methods. Unlike It is also possible that other indicators may be of concern for the decision-makers. A water consumption indicator (built from the inventory data) and a land occupation indicator (from the The results from the different scenarios presented in In Scenario 2, it is assumed that the mill is taking advantage of the reduction of chip consumption to produce a value-added product from wood, bio-ethanol. This scenario produces a significant difference in the OD, AC, EU, and HHNC indicators. In Scenario 0, there was no potential OD benefit from implementing the BAT. However, when considering that bio-ethanol is produced and displaces gasoline, there is. Indeed, the reduction in gasoline production results in a decreased emission of ozone depleting substances. The implementation of the BAT mill would have a negative impact on the AC indicator due to the levels of ammonia emitted by the bio-ethanol process according to the model used Scenario 3 assumes that all additional recovered paper consumed by the process is deviated from landfill instead of partly from other usages also. The main effects observed concern the EU and human health indicators (HHC & HHNC). Both the difference between the alternatives and the BAT mill and the difference between alternatives consuming 50% and 100% DIP are increased by this scenario. This is due to avoided emissions from waste paper landfill. Scenario 4 considers that the power technology affected by a reduction in consumption and an increased production to be sold to the grid is natural gas combustion, rather than the coal combustion. Using this assumption, the benefits from implementing the BAT and the differences between alternatives for the OD indicator are greater than for Scenario 0. This is explained by the avoidance of ozone depleting emissions from natural gas combustion. It can also be observed that there is no potential benefit for the AC indicator and thus, all alternatives perform the same. In Scenario 0, benefits were observed for this indicator. The difference is due to the fact that coal combustion produces significantly higher sulphur dioxide emissions. All these results show that the effect of a process modification on other systems (background) is often difficult to predict and that the potential effect on the decision outcome can be significant. Thus, it is important to consider the full range of possible environmental consequences that can arise from implementing process modifications. In order to streamline the set of indicators to be more manageable for decision-making, only those that enable distinguishing between alternatives should be considered. However, in order to gauge whether there is a sufficient difference between the indicators, it is useful to know about data uncertainty. No systematic uncertainty analysis was performed for this case study. Nonetheless, for illustration purposes, a fictional uncertainty threshold of 1 (normalized results) was used. Using this threshold, the HHNC indicator is the only one for which it is possible to distinguish between alternatives for all scenarios. The GW, AC, EU, and HHC indicators are also useful indicators under certain scenarios. Once the final family of criteria for decision-making is established, it is possible to elucidate the decision-making preferences. In this paper, for illustration purposes, it is assumed that the preference of the decision-makers varies linearly with the normalized LCA results, and sensitivity analyses on the relative importance of the different criteria are executed. In the case of Scenario 0, only the EU and HHNC indicators allow for a clear distinction between alternatives ( The results are not as clear for Scenario 2. Indeed, the two indicators allowing to distinguish between the alternatives (AC and HHNC) show different behaviours. While the acidification indicator promotes the alternative producing less bio-ethanol (Base Case, Alternatives 1 and 4), Alternatives 2 and 3 are better for the HHNC indicator. Hence, in this case, it would be necessary to assess the relative importance of these two indicators (weighting) to reach a decision. By performing a sensitivity analysis on the weights the conclusions presented in The usefulness of LCA for decision-making has been recognized. LCA is a well framed and systematic methodology with transparence requirements. Furthermore, it allows for an environmental analysis of different process design alternatives based on most known environmental problems. LCA also expands the scope of the assessment to encompass direct and indirect effects outside the fences of the facility where process modifications are implemented, yielding a broader view of the environmental consequences of the decision to be made. The analogy between LCA and MCDM methodological elements has been made several times A comparison of different characterization methods was performed. It was shown that aggregating the results to broader endpoint indicators could make it difficult to differentiate the alternatives. It was also demonstrated that two different methods can lead to different results for the same indicator, as illustrated by the HHNC (NCAR) indicator from the Existing pulp and paper case studies did not assess the environmental consequences of a set of process modifications on the background system. The uncertainty regarding these consequences was discussed and the potential effects on the decision were demonstrated. Indeed, while most scenarios showed that alternatives with 100% de-inking would be the most preferable, this was not the case for the scenario assuming that bio-ethanol would be produced from available chips. A direct link between impact categories and decision criteria is often made. In this paper, it was demonstrated that, although LCA results can be classified into many impact categories or inventory results, only a few of those results will effectively be useful for decision-making. Once the performance of alternatives was assessed for all scenarios, it was then possible to establish the family of criteria for decision-making. This family should represent the complete range of decision-makers' preferences, but should also be manageable. The option of including additional indicators (i.e., land occupation and water consumption) to a selected method in order to achieve the completeness requirement was discussed. Also, to make a set of indicators more practical to use, a method based on the discriminating power of indicators was proposed. It is important to note that a data uncertainty threshold was used in this method. If the uncertainty could be minimized, it would be interesting to use another threshold value to determine whether or not an indicator is discriminating enough to be kept in the indicator family. The link between normalization in LCA and in MCDM has also been made The elicitation of the decision-makers' preferences was not the focus of this paper. However, for illustration purposes, it was considered that the decision-makers' preferences for different levels of the same indicator vary linearly with the normalized LCA results. It was demonstrated that weighting would not be always necessary to achieve a decision. Also, it is not a given that the decision-makers' preferences for different levels of a same indicator will vary linearly with the LCA normalized value. However, the LCA normalization results can be useful for the decision-makers when assessing the relative importance of different impact categories. For instance, in this case study, it was illustrated that the HHNC indicator was the most significant for both external normalization references. This information could be used to assign more weight to this indicator compared to the others. Finally, discussing the importance of the stakeholders' involvement was not a specific goal of this paper. Nevertheless, while their obvious role is to select the decision criteria and express their preferences, they also have an essential role to play in modeling the consequences of the alternatives. More specifically, experts can give good insight regarding the consequences on other systems of implementing the different alternatives. Also, in cases where different scenarios will lead to different conclusions, experts should be involved in assessing the probability of occurrence of those scenarios in order to arrive at a final decision. An example was the different conclusion which was be obtained by assuming that bio-ethanol is produced from available chips when compared to the other scenarios. Thus, it is important to implicate both decision-makers and experts at all steps of the process. In this paper, choices and interpretation in LCA were discussed in the context of their importance for decision-making. It is demonstrated that transparent and comprehensive LCA decision criteria should not only be defined, but also carefully interpreted by the decision-making panel from the early stages and throughout the decision process in order to greatly improve the quality of the outcome. For instance, in this case study, it was shown that, for Scenario 0, only eutrophication and human health non-cancer indicators had sufficient discriminating power to be useful for decision-making. For those indicators showing no trade-offs, no weighting was necessary to reach a decision regarding which process alternative to implement. A counter example is the scenario assuming that chips made available by reducing TMP production would be used for manufacturing bio-ethanol. In this scenario, two criteria were also used for decision-making, but weighting was necessary to resolve the trade-off between these. This project was supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version, at