The proceedings of the first and third days of the Paris Industrial Minerals Congress (21–24 April 2002) were reviewed in the previous issue (See ‘Focus on Pigments’, May 2002, 1–3). The afternoon of the second day was particularly interesting for observers and commentators on the paper industry. The session’s opening presentation by Mr Todd Harris and Mr Mark de Decker (of the Kline consultancy group) set a rather sombre tone. They said: “Many raw material suppliers to the paper industry found their sales and margins were squeezed last year, in many cases to the point where it became difficult to support the underlying business. Unfortunately, the outlook for 2002 and beyond, at least in North America, is for a slow rebound in the health of the paper industry, which will continue to make it difficult for some suppliers to get their businesses back to an acceptable level of profitability. In the printing and writing papers sector, there has been a pronounced shift away from kaolin (especially hydrous and delaminated grades) towards the use of ground and precipitated calcium carbonates (GCC and PCC). Not surprisingly, this has led to considerable restructuring within the kaolin industry. About half the kaolin companies that were actively serving the North American paper sector in 1980 have either quit the business or have merged with another supplier. In early 2001, Imerys reduced its hydrous kaolin capacity in middle Georgia by about 800,000 tonnes/y, representing 35% of the company’s total North American capacity. (See also ‘Focus on Pigments’, Feb 2001, 6). Engelhard redeployed certain of its kaolin manufacturing assets so as to move away from serving the paper industry and enabling it to devote more capacity to the production of higher value-added catalysts for petroleum refining, without a major infusion of new capital investment. During 4Q 2001, most major kaolin and carbonate suppliers pushed for price increases for their paper pigments, of the order of 5–7%. For several years now, there has been a steady decline in real prices paid for paper pigments. Mr Harris and Mr de Decker stated: “Historically, the challenge (for the paper pigment suppliers) was to get their customers to accept the need to support higher prices to justify the ongoing operational costs associated with these businesses, not to mention the need for funding research and new product development. The fact of the matter is that, based on last year’s financial results, few of these supplier companies are barely recovering their cost of capital. Even if the recent spate of price increases is successful, at best it will only add a small percentage gain in revenues, since nearly half the business of most major suppliers is under long-term contract.” For many suppliers, the key to survival is differentiating their products and services from “run-of-the-mill suppliers.” The Kline consultants noted: “The availability of some of the newer Brazilian kaolins from Imerys and Para Pigmentos (PPSA) will provide some differentiation due to their unique rheological properties and brightness levels. The task for these suppliers will be to extract the value that these products can offer papermakers and not sell them at commodity-grade prices.” They also observed: “Another area of growth for pigment suppliers results from the continuing trend to high-speed metering size presses (MSP) for lightweight coated (LWC) paper production. In the next year, an estimated 500,000 tonnes/y of new MSP-based LWC paper production will be introduced in the US, which is expected to create opportunities for the further use of narrow particle size, engineered kaolin pigments. These products offer better sheet and print gloss, coverage and smoothness, compared to standard LWC coating pigments.” Mr Graham Whiteley (of Luzenac) adopted a much longer time perspective, quoting from a standard work on the history of the industry: “Minerals began seriously to be used in the mid-19th Century by Belgian papermakers and later on in Germany, producing papers strongly loaded with mineral matters. These papers were soon greatly in demand.” European papermakers are still at the forefront in their usage of minerals. Nowadays, the average mineral content is 40–50% for coated woodfree papers; 30–35% for coated and uncoated mechanical papers; 20–30% for uncoated woodfree papers; and up to 15% for newsprint. The two main regions of talc production in Europe at the end of the 19th Century were the Pyrenees (Southwest France) and Styria (in Austria-Hungary). French talc production increased from 828 tonnes in 1888 to 20,000 tonnes in 1905; 50,000 tonnes in 1914; 100,000 tonnes in 1950; and 200,000 tonnes in 1965. Commercial-scale talc production in Styria began much earlier and the major Rabenwald deposit was opened in 1822. However, the evolution of demand for talc from this source developed more slowly. Production was just under 60,000 tonnes/y in 1950 and it increased to 75,000 tonnes/y by 1965. Between 1965 and 1985, Mr Whiteley observed: “The paper industry and particularly the coated paper sector grew spectacularly. The paper industry’s demand for minerals (including notably talc and kaolin) increased from just over 1 M tonnes/y to more than 4 M tonnes/y. At the beginning of the 1970s, all papermaking was done under acid conditions, but companies were making developments in producing paper at neutral or higher pHs. This major breakthrough allowed the use of large quantities of calcium carbonate for the very first time. The introduction of a cheaper brighter product hit the talc and kaolin markets particularly hard. From the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s, filler talc sales dropped by one-third!” However, there has subsequently been a resurgence in the paper industry’s talc consumption, partly thanks to the use of talc for pitch control with products such as In the paper which came next, Mr Dick Williams (of Kernow Consultancy, High Wycombe) addressed the issue of enhancing evaluation procedures for paper pigments. He began by saying: “The pore structure of paper may be modified by internal filling or by surface coating. The pore restructuring function of a mineral is founded on the considerable size difference between papermaking fibres and a typical mineral particle. The pores created in an unfilled paper are too large for most applications and the function of the mineral is to create a multitude of smaller pores within the fibrous structure. In coating paper, the mineral similarly provides a surface comprised of finer-sized pores, but also one that is more level.” On the concept of opacity, Mr Williams made several thought-provoking remarks: “Opacity, in suppressing the printed image showing through the paper, is the property most often employed to specify an acceptable sheet-weight for a particular printing paper application. But the real importance of opacity improvement is its potential for considerable cost reduction. An unfilled paper of maintained opacity would need to be 45% heavier, consume 80% more fibre and be 75% costlier in raw materials than a regular 80 gsm (grams/square metre) xerox paper containing 20% filler. Other important gains include lower distribution costs and environmental benefits. The widespread belief that mineral filler opacifies thanks to its refractive index is generally untrue (except for expensive speciality pigments, such as TiO On the concept of print quality, Mr Williams said: “Unhelpfully, the optimum pore size to satisfy the respective needs of opacification and print quality differs. In densifying a paper’s structure by calendering to improve its ink receptivity, opacity is simultaneously reduced. But, with the use of multi-layer coating operations and by employing carefully formulated precoats, opacity loss can be minimised without any sacrifice in print quality. These two features — opacification and print quality — comprise the entire indispensable functions of mineral use in paper manufacture. All other claimed benefits for coating and filling — including brightness and gloss — are essentially of secondary importance, inaccurate or cosmetic!” Standard evaluation procedures for a mineral include measurements of particle size, reflectance, brightness, yellowness, abrasivity, viscosity, morphology and surface area. Mr Williams ended his presentation on a cautionary note: “Because of pore structure disparity, the traditional procedures for evaluating mineral properties quite fail to represent how a mineral is likely to perform in paper! However, by supplementing the findings from traditional procedures with results from other judiciously appropriate analysis, a trustworthy interpretation of a mineral’s likely utility and performance in paper can be beneficially derived very early in the exploration process.” The last two papers of this session described two potentially new sources of paper pigments — ground calcium carbonate from Ruschita (Romania) and the synthetic Mr Adriean Videanu (President and Chief Executive of Titan Mar-Mar) and Mr Ian Wilson (the company’s UK-based consultant) were co-authors of the paper on Ruschita. Titan Mar-Mar was established in 1994 to develop the Ruschita marble decorative stone business established in 1883. In 1997, it became the main shareholder of Marmosim (the former State-owned marble producer). Together, Titan Mar-Mar and Marmosim control 14 quarries of marble, limestone and travertine in Romania. According to Mr Wilson: “The Ruschita marble compares favourably with the deposits of Carrara (Italy) and Almeria (Spain) and represents a new resource of high-brightness marble for the European GCC market. The production of high-quality GCC in Europe is currently about 15 M tonnes/y, of which 10 M tonnes/y is based on crystalline marble, the remainder being based on chalk and limestone. With the trend towards higher brightness GCC products, the Ruschita deposit is well placed to become an important source of marble for all applications in the future.” Dr Isaac Yaniv presented his company’s new The full set of papers from the conference IM-15 are available from: Metal Bulletin Conferences, Park House, Park Terrace, Worcester Park KT4 7HY, England. Tel: +44 (0)20 7827 9977. Fax: +44 (0)20 8335 3994