Semiconductor thick film gas sensors based on tin oxide are fabricated and their gas response characteristics are examined for four simulant gases of chemical warfare agent (CWA)s. The sensing materials are prepared in three different sets such as impregnation, physical mixing (ball-milling) and co-precipitation method. Surface morphology, particle size, and specific surface area of fabricated sensing films are performed by the SEM, XRD and BET, respectively. Response characteristics are examined for test gases with temperature in the range 200–400°C, with different gas concentrations. Test gases are dimethyl methyl phosphonate (DMMP), dipropylene glycol methyl ether (DPGME), acetonitrile, and dichloromethane which are used simulant gases of chemical warfare agents. These sensors showed sensitivities higher than 50% in 500ppb of test gases and also good repetition behaviour. Four sensing materials are selected with good sensitivity and stability and are fabricated as a sensor array. And then, principal component analysis (PCA) is adapted to classify objective gas among the four simulant gases. The thick film array sensor shows high sensitivity to CWA gases and four CWA gases are classified by using a sensor array composed of four sensing devices through PCA.Chemical warfare agents (CWAs) are very dangerous for health because of its colorlessness and toxicity. Therefore, fast and correct detection of CWAs is essential to protect human beings. They are divided into four types such as blood, nerve, vesicant, and choking agent In general, semiconductor gas sensor has many advantages like high sensitivity at low level concentration, good stability against environmental change and low price In this study, semiconductor thick film sensors based on tin oxide are fabricated and their responses to four simulant gases are examined with different amounts of added materials, with different operating temperatures and with different gas concentrations. Materials are characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and specific surface area analyzer (BET) analysis. From the above results, four different sensing materials are selected which have good sensitivity and stability to gases and fabricated as a sensor array. A sensor array was examined to test gases with different operating temperatures and with different gas concentrations, and pattern was extracted from acquired data. Finally, principal component analysis (PCA) that was one of the statistical classification method was conducted to classify four test gases  Pt sensing electrode is deposited with 1000  Four simulant gases are liquid phase; therefore; vapor pressures are calculated to control the injected gas concentration. Acetonitrile and dichloromethane adapt Antoine equation as shown in Eq.  Prepared materials were characterized by SEM (Hitachi Co., Japan) for surface morphology and thickness, XRD (Rigaku Co., Japan) for crystallite size and BET for specific surface area. Surface morphologies of the materials were comparatively uniform Response properties for four simulant gases are examined with sensing films with different operating temperatures and gas concentrations. The results of response characteristics of test gases are shown in  Sensitivity graphs at different operating temperatures are shown in PCA results are shown in A gas sensor array with devices based on tin oxide was fabricated. Sensing materials were analyzed by XRD, SEM and BET and response characteristics were examined for test gases. Metal and metal oxide-added samples gave much higher sensitivity than the SnO The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Confrontation to Chemical and Biological Terror and National Research Laboratory Program of the Ministry of Science & Technology.