Previous analyses of the masticatory apparatus have demonstrated that the shape of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is functionally and adaptively linked to variation in feeding behavior and diet in primates. Building on previous research, this study presents an analysis of the link between diet and TMJ morphology in the context of functional and dietary differences among New World primates. To evaluate this proposed relationship, I used three-dimensional morphometric methods to quantify TMJ shape across a sample of 13 platyrrhine species. A broad interspecific analysis of this sample found strong relationships among TMJ size, TMJ shape, and diet, suggesting that both size and diet are significant factors influencing TMJ morphology in New World primates. However, it is likely that at least some of these differences are related to a division of dietary categories along clade lines.
                  A series of hypotheses related to load resistance capabilities and range of motion in the TMJ were then tested among small groups of closely related taxa with documented dietary differences. These pairwise analyses indicate that some aspects of TMJ morphology can be used to differentiate among closely related species with different diets. However, not all of my predictions were upheld. The anteroposterior dimensions of the TMJ were most strongly consistent with hypothesized differences in ingestive/masticatory behaviors and jaw gape, whereas the predictions generated for variation in entoglenoid and articular tubercle height were not upheld. These results imply that while some features can be reliably associated with increased load resistance and facilitation of wider jaw gapes in the masticatory apparatus, other features are less strongly correlated with masticatory function.Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) form has been documented to vary both within humans ( Following on this research, it is the goal of this study to examine variation in TMJ morphology in the context of functional and dietary differences among New World primates. Platyrrhines are an excellent group to test this proposed association between feeding behavior and TMJ morphology for a number of reasons. Taxa within this clade vary considerably in their feeding behavior and body size, ranging from an annual fruit intake of as little as 8% in Theoretical and experimental analyses of masticatory function have demonstrated that the magnitude of the joint reaction force varies depending upon the position of the bite point, the magnitude and position of the muscle resultant force, position of the TMJ in relation to the tooth row, as well as the overall geometry of the masticatory apparatus (e.g., Bony morphology may also help to facilitate or limit movements at the joint. These movements primarily occur in the anteroposterior and mediolateral planes and include rotation and translation of the condyle, or a combination of these two movements. During simple opening and closing movements of the mandible (as would occur with social display behaviors or incision, as well as at the beginning or end of a gape cycle during mastication), motion of the right and left condyles should be roughly equal, and is typically comprised of a combination of translation and rotation in primates (i.e., sagittal sliding). Cineradiographic analyses conducted by Although there are many factors that are likely to affect both force and range of motion at the TMJ, this study focuses on three (non-mutually exclusive) influences: food material properties, location of the bite point, and gape requirements. First, the material property of a food item influences the amount of muscle force required to process the food, which, in turn, influences the magnitude of the joint reaction force at the TMJ (e.g., The surface area of the mandibular condyle should be relatively larger in taxa that masticate more resistant food objects and/or use their anterior dentition extensively for food processing. Increased joint reaction forces at the TMJ (as a consequence of increased muscle resultant forces and/or use of the anterior dentition) should necessitate relatively larger joint surface areas in order to improve the load resistance capabilities of the TMJ by increasing the area over which force is applied ( The anteroposterior length of the TMJ will vary in association with the frequency of ingestive behavior. Taxa that use their anterior teeth extensively for ingestive behaviors (particularly large object feeders that must also generate large jaw gapes) should have a relatively anteroposteriorly elongated cranial articular surface (e.g., the glenoid should be anteroposteriorly longer in relation to condylar length so that more sagittal sliding can occur at the joint) ( The mediolateral width of the TMJ will vary as a consequence of the frequency of masticatory behaviors. Studies of joint remodeling and dysfunction have suggested that the lateral aspect of the TMJ experiences higher stresses than other portions of the joint ( Analyses of TMJ shape were performed by examining three sets of closely related taxa with different feeding behaviors and diets: atelines, cebines, and pitheciines. This approach allows for multiple pairwise comparisons of TMJ morphology among closely related taxa in a single clade, thereby minimizing the effects of phylogeny on shape differences. The following section outlines the dietary ecology of the members of each of the comparative groups, reviews previous morphological findings for these species, and lays out the expected variation in TMJ morphology in each clade. These predictions rely heavily on previous descriptions of the dietary ecology of these species, and particularly on available data regarding food material properties (e.g., Five ateline species were studied in the pairwise analysis: Morphological differences in the masticatory apparatus of the atelines have also been extensively evaluated. The more folivorous Given the ecological and morphological data, when compared with the relatively more gracile Three species of Numerous morphological analyses of cebine masticatory morphology are consistent with the finding that Given these data,  These data suggest that To examine TMJ shape variation in the sample and to test the predictions, three-dimensional (3D) coordinate data describing the shape of the glenoid fossa and mandibular condyle were collected on females and males from 13 platyrrhine species ( Following registration of the 3D coordinate data using Generalized Procrustes Analysis (GPA), a principal components analysis (PCA) was performed to summarize and evaluate variation in the 3D datasets. The resulting principal component (PC) axes were interpreted as shape changes around a mean form, or consensus configuration, and the distribution of taxa along these axes then summarizes information regarding shape variation within the sample ( Analyses of shape variation in the entire sample of 13 species included examining the extent to which shape variation is correlated with diet and/or TMJ size. These analyses were performed for females and males separately. To assess the relationship between TMJ shape and size, Procrustes distance matrices describing shape were compared to size matrices that calculated the absolute difference in centroid size among groups using a Mantel test ( Where shape was significantly correlated with both size and diet, partial Mantel tests were used to examine the correlation between shape and size while controlling for diet, and the correlation between shape and diet while controlling for size. Partial Mantel tests were performed in the free program zt.exe ( For each of the clades for which pairwise comparisons were performed, 3D geometric morphometric analyses first assisted in describing the variation in each clade and its correlation to size. Further analyses of shape variation in the sample were performed using linear measurements extracted from the coordinate data using the programs MacMorph ( Differences in these univariate measurements were analyzed using a one-tailed Student’s In the geometric morphometric analysis of the entire sample ( TMJ shape and diet are significantly correlated in both sexes, but only when seeds and leaves were summed separately and incorporated into the dietary matrix ( PC1 1 accounts for 29% of the sample variation and is significantly correlated with centroid size ( Several trends are apparent from the pairwise comparisons of relative differences in TMJ shape ( The PC analysis for the cebine glenoid configuration separates In contrast to the geometric morphometric analyses, most pairwise comparisons between For both glenoid and condylar morphologies, PC analysis of the 3D landmarks failed to significantly distinguish among Analysis of TMJ variation across the platyrrhine sample highlights the wide range of variation in glenoid shape present in this clade. Importantly, this analysis found a relationship between size and shape of the TMJ and diet, particularly when seeds and leaves are considered separately. Assuming that dietary categories bear some relationship to food material properties, the results of this study further suggest that differentiating between seeds and leaves may be important for understanding functional differences in TMJ shape. However, one caveat regarding the dietary analyses that should be addressed is the imperfection of the data used to create the dietary matrices. The ideal dataset for this analysis would include the food material properties for each food item ingested by the species included in this analysis. This type of analysis (see One reason for the increased resolution in the dietary signal of the TMJ when the percentage of seeds and leaves in the diets of these taxa are analyzed separately may be that these dietary categories separate along clade lines. For example, pitheciines are seed predators whereas the atelines and cebines have relatively larger percentages of leaves and fruit pulp, respectively, in their diets (e.g., The size and relative dimensions of the glenoid and condylar articular surfaces were predicted to differ among taxa that masticate more resistant food objects and/or use their anterior or posterior teeth during food processing or mastication. Resistant-object feeders, as well as taxa that utilize their anterior dentition extensively, were expected to have relatively larger condylar joint surface areas to improve the load resistance capabilities of the TMJ. However, this prediction was only supported in the pitheciine sample, and to a much lesser extent, the atelines. Thus, these data do not support an overwhelming pattern of differences in TMJ shape within cebines or atelines related to force production. This result is curious in light of food material property data for these species ( Taxa were also predicted to differ significantly in the relative anteroposterior and mediolateral dimensions of the joint surfaces, depending on whether they rely more extensively on their anterior vs. posterior teeth for processing foods. Taxa that repetitively masticate tougher food items (e.g., leaves) on their posterior teeth were expected to have relatively mediolaterally wider joints than taxa that use their anterior teeth more extensively to process food items ( Some significant differences in anteroposterior TMJ length were also found in the pitheciines. In the females, both glenoid and condylar length were larger in  No significant differences in mediolateral width were found in the atelines, which ran counter to the expectation that The relative size of the entoglenoid process and articular tubercle were expected to vary as a function of joint reaction forces and range of motion at the TMJ. It was predicted that the relative size of both of these features would increase with increased joint reaction forces (i.e., to increase joint surface area of the joint), and/or with increased range of motion (i.e., to guide movement of the condyle and counteract tensile forces at the joint). Thus, in resistant-object feeders and taxa that extensively use their postcanine dentition, the entoglenoid process and articular tubercle should be relatively larger than in taxa that masticate relatively softer food objects and/or do not extensively use their postcanine dentition. Again, results were mixed. The more resistant-object feeders among the atelines (e.g., Some of the observed variation in entoglenoid (and possibly articular tubercle) height may be related to the need for some of these taxa to generate relatively high jaw forces at relatively wide jaw gapes. In The TMJ is one portion of the much larger masticatory apparatus. Examining the functional morphology of the TMJ is informative, but only to the extent that functional variation in the masticatory apparatus is reflected in this joint. Here I examined morphology of the TMJ as it is assumed to be related to differences in force production and range of motion in the masticatory apparatus as a whole, and these data suggest that form of the TMJ does vary as a consequence of feeding behavior. Some features of the TMJ can be linked to hypothesized differences in joint reaction forces as well as movement at the joint, and these features should be taken into consideration in future evaluations of the masticatory apparatus in living and extinct primates. For example, this study provides further (albeit indirect) evidence that the anteroposterior dimensions of the joint are linked to gape capacity ( The inferences that can be made using only TMJ morphology are limited, however. Large joint surface areas may imply relatively improved load resisting ability, but cannot be used to infer whether joint forces are of infrequent but high magnitude, or high frequency and low magnitude. This is of particular importance in considerations of critical function and fallback foods (e.g., Just as inferences from the TMJ regarding forces in the masticatory apparatus are limited, so are inferences regarding gape capacity. The data presented here suggest that some taxa have increased the extent to which sagittal sliding can occur at the joint, and these morphological differences are likely the be linked to differences in these taxa’s ability to generate wide jaw gapes (e.g., The data presented here suggest mixed correlations between feeding behavior and the morphology of the TMJ in platyrrhine primates. The correlations observed among the shape, size, and dietary matrices suggest relationships among all of these datasets, and demonstrate that both size and diet are significant factors influencing TMJ morphology in New World primates. Analyses of 3D TMJ shape variation in each of the three comparative groups further indicated that some aspects of TMJ morphology can be used to differentiate among closely related species with different diets. Subsequent univariate analyses of TMJ shape demonstrated statistically significant differences in multiple aspects of TMJ shape in each of these comparative groups. Results for some of these analyses were consistent with the predictions outlined at the outset of this study, while others were not. The anteroposterior dimensions of the TMJ were most strongly consistent with these initial predictions, whereas the predictions generated for variation in entoglenoid and articular tubercle height were not upheld. These results imply that while some features can be reliably associated with increased load resistance and facilitation of wider jaw gapes in the masticatory apparatus, other features are less strongly correlated with masticatory function. Further analyses, particularly regarding the articular tubercle and entoglenoid process are necessary to fully understand the functions of these specific features. One major way in which we will be able to further evaluate TMJ function is through a better understanding of the functional implications of anterior vs. posterior tooth use. The comparative groups examined here present a mixture of taxa that use their posterior teeth extensively for the repetitive mastication of food objects, as well as some taxa that use their anterior teeth for initial food processing, but still likely need to generate high magnitude bite forces on their posterior dentition. This distinction is particularly important because the significance of high bite force magnitudes vs. high bite force frequencies is poorly understood (e.g., In sum, these data indicate that TMJ shape is influenced by the function of the masticatory apparatus, including variation in the use of foods with presumably different material properties, use of the dentition, and jaw gape. These findings correspond well to previous analyses of other aspects of the masticatory apparatus in many of the same taxa examined here. Together, these data can provide important insight into the adaptive response of the masticatory apparatus in New World primates. Further analyses will explore these relationships in cercopithecoids and hominoids and will seek to draw further links between TMJ morphology and masticatory function. Thanks go to all of the individuals and institutions that made collections available for this research: American Museum of Natural History, the Department of Primatology at the State Collection of Anthropology and Paleoantomy, the National Museum of Natural History, the Field Museum, and the Royal Museum for Central Africa. Valuable feedback was received from Bill Kimbel, Gary Schwartz, Mark Spencer, Andrea Taylor, Christine Wall, Chris Vinyard, David Begun and two anonymous reviewers. Any faults remaining are my own. This research was supported by funding from the