Ganglion cysts frequently occur on the dorsal side of the carpal joints, but rarely involve the temporomandibular joint. We encountered a 64-year-old woman with a chief complaint of swelling in the right cheek. Lipoma was observed in the right cheek on magnetic resonance imaging, along with a cystic lesion in the left temporomandibular joint. The cyst in the left temporomandibular joint was extracted under general anesthesia. Histological diagnosis was ganglion cyst. We report our experience with a case of ganglion cysts occurring on the temporomandibular joint with reference to the literature.Ganglion cyst is a cystic disease that occurs on tendons as well as in the vicinity of synovial joints, and must be distinguished from synovial cyst, as a similar cystic disease in which the cavity becomes lined with synoviocytes. Ganglion cysts frequently occur on the dorsal side of the carpal joints, but rarely involve the temporomandibular joint The patient was a 64-year-old woman with a chief complaint of swelling in the right cheek. She had been aware of increasing swelling in the right cheek since June 2012 and had observed its progress, finally consulting the Department of Plastic Surgery at another hospital when no improvement was observed. She was subsequently referred to the Department of Oral Surgery of the same hospital for examination in December 2012. Lipoma was observed in the right cheek on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), along with a cystic lesion in the left temporomandibular joint, so she was referred to our department for treatment of the right temporomandibular joint. Her medical history included pyelonephritis. The patient was in good general condition, with mild swelling observed in the right cheek. No tenderness or clear mass was observed in the right temporomandibular joint on palpation. She was able to open her mouth unaided to a maximum of 38 No deformation was observed in either mandibular condyle on panoramic radiography and no abnormalities were apparent in the vicinity of the temporomandibular joint ( A 10-mm, well-defined, oval mass was observed in the left anterior mandibular condyle on MRI. The mass was hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging ( In April 2013, the cyst in the left temporomandibular joint was extirpated under general anesthesia. Skin incision was followed by temporomandibular joint endoscopy. A pre-articular approach to the cyst using the “AL-KAYAT” method was made from the superior articular cavity and a slightly translucent synovial cyst was observed on the anterior side of the articular disk. The cyst was exfoliated from the lateral pterygoid muscle, but mucoid contents leaked during extraction and the cyst self-destructed, and so was extirpated with some of the lateral pterygoid muscle ( Histopathologically, a cystic lesion was observed ( No trismus or facial palsy was observed following surgery, no relapse was seen on MRI 3 years postoperatively, and no recurrence has since been observed ( Ganglion cysts are cystic lesions containing hyaluronic acid, and frequently occur on the dorsal side of the carpal joints. The underlying mechanisms are unknown, but are considered likely to involve joint capsule and a thecal collagen-like myxomatosis or cyst-like softening Our search of the literature identified 26 cases of ganglion cyst since 2000 The most patient became aware of symptoms including pain and/or swelling in the temporomandibular joint. Painless swelling was the most common, observed in 13 cases (50.0%), followed by painful swelling in 7 cases (26.9%), and pain alone in 4 cases (15.4%). Also present were clicking, paresthesia of the auricle, high-pitched noise, deviation of the mandible and malocclusion, hearing loss, ear infection, acute facial palsy, pain on protrusion, divergence in the skin of mental area, and the like. In many cases, one or several symptoms were observed, with 2 cases (7.7%) reporting no subjective symptoms. Lesion size was around 10–20 MRI was the most common imaging modality used for preoperative diagnosis, in 17 cases (65.4%), while CT was carried out in 12 cases (46.2%). Plain radiography was used for 7 cases (26.9%). Ultrasound examination was used in 6 cases (23.1%). Regarding imaging findings, although signal hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging and signal hypointensity on T1-weighted imaging were usually seen with MRI, results were not always consistent. Ultrasound examination displayed the cystic lesion in the low or high echo domain depending on the condition of the lesion, again showing some inconsistency; use of several imaging modalities is thus recommended when making a diagnosis. Clear differences between synovial and ganglion cysts are not observed from these findings, making accurate preoperative diagnosis. Definitive diagnosis thus requires postoperative histopathological examination. The present case showed substantially the same radiological findings as past reports. However, our case was atypical in that subjective symptoms were not observed. A definitive diagnosis was reached by confirming the pathological findings following surgery. Treatment methods include mechanical comminution, fine-needle aspiration/dissection, and surgical removal. The recurrence rate following treatment has been reported as ≥50% with mechanical comminution, compared to 80% with fine-needle aspiration/dissection, and only 1 case of recurrence following successful surgical removal has been described The authors have no financial interests to disclose. This study had no funding sources.