The main problem of utilization of ceramic nanopowders consists in their tendency to form hard agglomerates. The inter-agglomerate space forms pores surrounded by numerous elementary particles (crystallites). Such pores cannot be easily removed from the system during pressureless sintering. So, the obvious strategy for a technologist is to eliminate such pores at the level of shaping operations. Dry pressing is a frequently applied shaping technique of ceramic materials. That is why mechanical strength of agglomerates should be as low as possible. It enables the elimination of inter-agglomerate pores to occur under moderate pressures, applied during the shaping process. This problem will be illustrated using the really nanometric (below 10nm) zirconia-yttria solid solution powder. The methods of effecting agglomerate strength will be shown. One of the elaborated powder preparation rout results in extremely soft agglomerates.Numerous measurements indicate that the grain boundary surface energy is essentially lower than the energy of free surface of grains. Since surface energy is a part of free enthalpy of a system, the indicated difference is, from a thermodynamic point of view, the driving force of sintering of a powder compact. Capillary forces are responsible for the mass transfer during sintering. These two factors indicate that the finer is a ceramic powder the higher is thermodynamic tendency and the higher are capillary forces operating during densification of a powder compact. That is why a ceramic nano-powder, i.e. a powder of particle sizes about 10 There are two ways of producing of fine ceramic powders; one is based on the breaking down solid grains by their comminution. The other way consists in the build-up (crystallization) process. Particle sizes, manufactured by the former method, are limited to 0.1–1 Small particle (crystallite) sizes are not the only feature of the particles prepared by the crystallization process. Another one is the narrow particle size distribution, important for the powder processing behaviour. This can be illustrated by the plots of the particle size distribution, presented in the Rosin-Rammler coordinates ( The main problem in application of such fine powders (H) as the one shown in According to Kingery's and Francoise Basing on the thermodynamic calculations by Kellet and Lange Dry compaction is the frequently used method of the green body shaping. Therefore mechanical strength of agglomerates is of the utmost importance for the final material microstructure build up. In the case of ceramic nanopowders the problem is especially acute, since agglomerate strength is strongly dependent on the crystallite sizes which form agglomerates. According to Rumpf Our studies are based on the application of really nanometric 8  Routes 2 and 3 were based on our experience on the crystallization of zirconia solid solutions under hydrothermal conditions The X-ray diffraction analysis (Empyrean, PANalytical) allowed us to determine the powders phase composition and powder crystallite sizes on the basis of the X-ray (111) line broadening of the cubic phase. CuK Dilatometric measurements (NETSCH DIL 402 The well-established powder characteristic's method is based on the observation of its behaviour vs. compaction pressure. In one of the first publications on this problem The load-density response of the powders prepared along route 1 and 2 are shown in From the point of view of Rumpf's equation a further decrease of this pressure is possible if the volume fraction of intra-agglomerate porosity is increased. It was achieved by freeze drying of diluted (8 Cumulative curves in As it was pointed out previously, porosity of agglomerates could be assessed on the basis of the pore size distribution curves in the powder compacts. This is shown in   Really nanometric powders can be manufactured by the bottom-up techniques. Such powders are characterized not only by the nanometric particle (crystallite) sizes but also by the very narrow particle size distribution. Strength of agglomerates is the key problem in application of nanometric powders. It depends on the nature of the inter-crystalline bonds, porosity of agglomerates and on particle sizes. Freeze drying of the diluted powder suspension allowed us to receive powder composed of agglomerates of about 80% porosity whose de-cohesion starts under pressure as low as <1 A strong effect of the pore size distribution in the powder compact on density and microstructure of the sintered material is evident. The analysis of the pore size distribution shows its shift towards higher pore sizes. However, distribution of pore sizes becomes narrow within the investigated system densification. The work was financially supported by the