The processing of Ti–25Nb–3Mo–3Zr–2Sn tubes with outside diameters of 5.6–8.0mm and wall-thicknesses of 0.7–1.0mm were investigated in order to study the evolution of microstructure and mechanical properties and their impact on the processing of the tubes. The annealed small tubes with single β phase microstructures exhibit double yielding during tensile tests. The onset of martensitic phase transformation was observed to occur after the lowest point of the strain hardening. Cold rolling also activates the formation of the stress induced martensitic α″ phase. Its volume fraction increased with increasing ε. The rate of strain hardening and the modulus of the tubes are related to the stress induced transformation of the β phase to the α″ phase. The stress induced α″ slightly improves the yield strength of the tubes at low levels of strain. However, larger strains result in grain growth during annealing, which diminishes the mechanical properties.Metastable β-titanium alloys are receiving extensive attention for a wide range of biomedical applications because of their excellent toughness, corrosion resistance and biocompatibility ( The metastable β alloy can deform by plastic slip, formation of stress induced martensite (SIM), deformation twinning, or any combination of these processes ( Typically, in the fabrication of mini-tubes from titanium alloys, cycles of cold rolling and annealing are conducted to form the fine tubes which are then cold drawn. In the present study, the cold rolling and annealing behaviours of Ti–25Nb–3Mo–3Zr–2Sn tubes were investigated for the fabrication of β-Ti biomedical stents. The Ti–25Nb–3Mo–3Zr–2Sn alloy has a low β phase stability and is readily transformed into a partially reversible, stress induced martensitic α″ phase ( As-rolled Ti–25Nb–3Mo–3Zr–2Sn tubes were received with an outside diameter (OD) of 8.0 Uniaxial tensile tests were conducted for all of the cold rolled and annealed samples. Samples for tensile testing were cut by wire-electrode cutting machining from the tubes with their axis aligned with the axial direction ( A series of tensile stress–strain curves for cold rolled and annealed samples are shown in  The results shown in The initial portion of the stress–strain curve shown in During the tensile tests, double yielding occurs in the annealed samples as shown in In order to investigate the SIM transformation during tensile tests of the annealed tubes, samples from N4A were subjected to interrupted tensile testing up to true strains of 1.2%, 2.4% and 3.5%, respectively. The strain values were selected on the basis of the different regions of the strain hardening rate—true strain curve in The SIM transformation plays an important role in the tensile properties of the annealed Ti–25Nb–3Mo–3Zr–2Sn tubes. The XRD spectra in When the However, the remarkable reduction of yield strength in the tubes with the strain of 51% cannot be explained by the above. The value of yield strength can be influenced by several factors, the internal elastic energy stored in the matrix, the reverse formation of SIM α″, the grain sizes and the fraction of low-angle grain boundaries (LAG) and high-angle grain boundaries (HAG).  The formation of high angle grain boundaries in the β-titanium tubes is primarily related to the complex stress state and dislocation configurations induced by martensitic transformation ( In this study the effects of cold rolling and annealing on the mechanical properties of biomedical Ti–25Nb–3Zr–3Mo–2Sn small tubes were investigated. The main results are summarized as follows: For annealed tubes, double yielding occurs during tensile tests. The onset of martensitic phase transformation occurs after the lowest point of strain hardening. The SIM α″ phase was formed and increased the strain hardening rate. The yield strength was enhanced at low levels of Cold rolled tubes were composed of the β phase and SIM α″. The fraction of SIM α″ phase increased with increasing The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the