We envision the use of human fetal bone cells for engineered regeneration of adult skeletal tissue. A description of their cellular function is then necessary. To our knowledge, there is no description of human primary fetal bone cells treated with differentiation factors. The characterization of fetal bone cells is particularly important as the pattern of secreted proteins from osteoblasts has been shown to change during aging. In the first part of this work, human primary fetal bone cells were compared to adult bone cells and mesenchymal stem cells for their ability to proliferate and to differentiate into osteoblasts in vitro. Cell proliferation, gene expression of bone markers, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, and mineralization were analyzed during a time-course study. In the second part of this paper, bone fetal cells behavior exposed to osteogenic factors is further detailed. The doubling time of fetal bone cells was comparable to mesenchymal stem cells but significantly shorter than for adult bone cells. Gene expression of cbfa-1, ALP, α1 chain of type I collagen, and osteocalcin were upregulated in fetal bone cells after 12 days of treatment, with higher inductions than for adult and mesenchymal stem cells. The increase of ALP enzymatic activity was stronger for fetal than for adult bone cells reaching a maximum at day 10, but lower than for mesenchymal stem cells. Importantly, the mineralization process of bone fetal cells started earlier than adult bone and mesenchymal stem cells. Proliferation of fetal and adult bone cells was increased by dexamethasone, whereas 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 did not show any proliferative effect. Mineralization studies clearly demonstrated the presence of calcium deposits in the extracellular matrix of fetal bone cells. Nodule formation and calcification were strongly increased by the differentiation treatment, especially by dexamethasone. This study shows for the first time that human primary fetal bone cells could be of great interest for bone research, due to their fast growth rate and their ability to differentiate into mature osteoblasts. They represent an interesting and promising potential for therapeutic use in bone tissue engineering.To address the need of an increasing number of patients who require bone for skeletal reconstruction, surgeons can overcome the disadvantages linked to auto- or allo-bone grafts by choosing the tissue engineering approach This strategy consists of three necessary elements: (1) cells with a high osteogenic potential, easy to obtain and to handle under standardized conditions, (2) osteogenic growth factors, and (3) a synthetic three-dimensional scaffold which gives the construct sufficient mechanical properties for loading and facilitates vascularization. The cell origin and type are essential aspects in bone tissue engineering. This has been recapitulated by different articles, particularly in the field concerning bone marrow-derived stem cells Periosteal cells have been widely used in bone tissue engineering by isolating osteoprogenitor cells from the patient's periosteum and seeding them into bioresorbable scaffolds Fetal-associated tissues such as placenta, amniotic liquid, or umbilical cord are described to be potential source of cells for tissue engineering Age-dependent biology of osteoblasts is generally accepted Osteoblast development follows three main phases: proliferation, matrix synthesis, and mineralization The aim of this work was to study the characteristics of human primary fetal bone cells for a better comprehension of their biology in vitro and to evaluate their potential use for tissue engineering in comparison to adult bone cells and mesenchymal stem cells. In the first part of this paper, fetal bone cells, adult bone cells, and mesenchymal stem cells are compared for their self-renewal capacity and their osteogenic induction when treated with differentiation mix. Their osteoblastic phenotype is presented at the gene expression level, such as the core binding factor alpha 1 (cbfa-1), a critical transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation and function Human fetal and adult bone cells were obtained from our bank of bone cells comprising 32 adult donors (18 females and 14 males) and 4 fetal donors (1 female and 3 males) at the end of March 2004. More than 250 primary total hip replacements with potentially interesting orthopedic tissue samples were performed during the year 2002 at the Hôpital Orthopédique de la Suisse Romande. Documents relative to the patients were consulted to assure no major disease, medications, or alcohol consumption. Bone samples were extensively collected, and care was taken to obtain healthy bone samples. In particular, the selected adult bone cells are coming from donors without bone necrosis. In this study, human trabecular bone biopsies at femoral locations obtained from 31-, 50-, and 60-year-old adult women subsequent to orthopedic surgery and from fetus of 13, 14, and 16 weeks' gestational age following voluntary interruption of pregnancy were used. Biopsies were obtained in accordance with the Ethics Committee of University Hospital in Lausanne (Ethical Protocol 51/01). Primary osteoblast cultures were established by rinsing the tissue first with PBS (containing penicillin and streptomycin). Afterwards, bone samples were mechanically dissociated with a scalpel blade and transferred to 10-cm culture grade plates where cell outgrowth was seen within 2 to 5 days under normal culture conditions : DMEM Glutamax (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), 10% FCS (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) Fetal and adult bone cells were maintained in culture by passaging once a week and culturing at 37°C in an humidified, 5% CO For the comparison between fetal bone cells, adult bone cells, and mesenchymal stem cells, 1α,25-(OH) To determine their doubling time, cells were seeded at a density of 440,000 cells/T75 flask. Every day, up to 10 days, triplicates were washed twice with PBS, and cells were detached using trypsin–EDTA (Invitrogen). Subsequently, the cell number was determined in a counting chamber (Marienfeld GmbH & Co. KG, Lauda-Koenigshofen, Germany). The growth constant and the generation time were determined during the exponential cell growth To evaluate the effects of osteogenic factors on proliferation, cells were seeded at 5000 cells/well in 96-well plates and incubated for 24 h at 37°C in a humidified, 5% CO Briefly, 20 μl of the reagent solution was added to each well, including three wells containing only medium for background subtraction. After incubation for 90 min at 37°C, the absorbance was recorded at 490 nm using a Wallac 1420 VICTOR Cells were seeded in 6-cm Petri dishes at a density of 300,000 cells/dish. Treatment began 24 h later, with culture media changed every second day. At the same time points, samples were removed for gene expression analysis. RNA isolation and purification procedures were performed using Nucleospin For each sample, 5 μl of total RNA was reverse-transcribed using the Taqman Universal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) reagents with random hexamers (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Reaction volumes were fixed at 50 μl according to the protocol provided by the supplier. The thermal cycler PCT-0100 (MJ Research, Waltham, MA) was programmed as follows: 25°C 10 min, 48°C 30 min, and 95°C 5 min. Specific primers for cbfa-1, α1 chain of type I collagen, osteocalcin, ALP, and for the housekeeping 18S RNA were designed with the Primer Express Cells were seeded at 5000 cells/well in 96-well plates and incubated for 24 h at 37°C in a humidified, 5% CO Cells were seeded at the same density as for the alkaline phosphatase activity assay, and same treatments were applied. At each time point, cells were rinsed twice with PBS, and the total protein was determined in cell lysates using the Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Measurements were performed in triplicates for each time point. Total protein values were quantified using a standard curve obtained with a serial dilutions of bovine serum albumin contained in the Bio-Rad Protein Assay Standard II (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Cells were seeded at 5000 cells/well in 96-well plates and incubated for 24 h at 37°C in a humidified, 5% CO Fetal bone cells were seeded at 100,000 cells/well in 6-well plates and treated during 6 weeks under the same conditions as described for the mineralization assay. Subsequently, cells were fixed with glutaraldehyde, followed by a dehydration procedure in ethanol. The sample surfaces were gold-coated during 2 min under 1 kV and observed using a scanning electron microscope Philips XL30 (FEI, Hillsboro, OR) at a voltage of 5 kV. Data were analyzed using the two-way ANOVA to determine the difference between cells behaviors (XLSTAT, Addinsoft, Brooklyn, NY). The Fisher LSD test was used to determine statistical significance between sample sets. A value of Growth curves obtained for human primary fetal and adult bone cells show that the former proliferated considerably more rapidly than mature cells which displayed a much slower and clearly age-dependent doubling time. For fetal bone cells, it was determined by cell counting to vary between 23 and 27 h, depending on the donor ( The induction of proliferation with the full differentiation mix was significantly higher for the fetal bone cells than for the adult bone cells starting from day (d) 6 until the end of the experiment ( Dexamethasone had a positive effect on proliferation of fetal bone cells ( Results of relative gene expression obtained by real-time RT–PCR for cbfa-1, α1 chain of type I collagen, ALP, and osteocalcin are shown in The induction of ALP enzymatic activity with the full differentiation mix was significantly higher for the mesenchymal stems cells than for the fetal and the adult bone cells starting from day 4 until the end of the experiment ( First positive Von Kossa staining of fetal bone cells was obtained after 2 weeks of treatment with the full differentiation mix ( The aim of this work was to investigate the osteoblastic potential of human primary fetal bone cells in vitro and to evaluate their possible use for tissue engineering. We first compared the behavior of bone fetal cells to adult bone and mesenchymal stem cells for their responsiveness to osteogenic factors. Then we characterized fetal bone cells in more details for their ability to be induced into the bone pathway. A key finding was the observation of spontaneous bone-like nodule formation after only 2 weeks and before adult cells and mesenchymal stem cells. Additionally, fetal bone cells showed a strong response to differentiation factors. The growth rate of fetal bone cells was similar to mesenchymal stem cells, but faster than the growth rate of bone cells from a 31-year-old donor. The proliferative ability was even slower with cells obtained from older donors ( During this proliferative sequence, genes involved in the production and deposition of extracellular matrix started to be expressed which denotes a strong osteogenic potential of primary fetal bone cells compared to adult and mesenchymal stem cells. The induction of cbfa-1 gene expression observed is essential for osteoblast function and differentiation. It is also a critical gene involved in bone matrix deposition Osteocalcin, one of the most abundant noncollagenous proteins in bone, was also upregulated at the gene expression level, first in adult bone cells, and later in fetal bone cells. This was not observed with mesenchymal stem cells during the first 12 days of treatment, indicating that their extracellular matrix maturation was not as advanced as fetal cells. The delayed mineralization observed with mesenchymal stem cells in comparison with fetal cells could be due to their less differentiated phenotype. Corroborating this observation, osteocalcin gene expression is controlled by cbfa-1 Furthermore, characterization of the mineralized bone nodules by scanning electron microscopy clearly demonstrated that they were made of osteoblasts, extracellular collagen fibrils, and crystal deposits. Detailed analysis of the crystals by energy dispersive x-rays spectroscopy showed that these structures were containing Ca and P elements. Such a substratum produced by differentiating osteoblasts was described as an anchorage for calcifying collagen fibers synthesized by the same cells in a rat model For this study, the number of passages was arbitrarily fixed to 3. Similar results concerning fetal bone cells proliferation rate, ALP activity, and in vitro mineralization were obtained at passage 6 (data not shown), demonstrating that the multilineage capability was maintained. In conclusion, our data support the idea that human primary fetal bone cells are able to differentiate into mature osteoblasts when stimulated. This full differentiation process displayed the appearance of specifically mineralized bone-like nodules. Due to their more rapid growing rate and their strong responsiveness to differentiation treatment compared with adult cells and mesenchymal stem cells, their use could be of great interest for fundamental research, pharmaceutical screenings, and especially for bone tissue engineering. We thank Arlette Kottelat from the Bone Bioengineering Group (EPFL-CRO) for excellent technical assistance, Laurence Mathieu from the Laboratory of Composite and Polymer Technology (EPFL-LTC) for her outstanding work, and the research center in electron microscopy (EPFL-CIME). This study was supported by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation (PNR 46), the Fondation Lémanique pour la Recherche sur le Tissu Osseux, and by the Lausanne Center for Bone Tissue Engineering.