This paper presents results of investigation on leaching of chalcopyrite in hydrochloric acid medium in the presence of deep-sea manganese nodules. The effects of temperature, acid concentration and charge composition were investigated. Chalcopyrite did not dissolve independently, but underwent oxidative leaching in the presence of deep-sea nodules containing manganese oxide mostly via chlorine gas liberated in reaction of manganese with HCl. Because zinc, nickel and cobalt as well as copper are present in deep-sea manganese nodules, also behaviour of these metals during leaching was studied. The metal recoveries of these metals were higher in case when mixture of nodules and chalcopyrite was used as an initial charge for leaching. After dissolution of both chalcopyrite and nodules, the metals pass into solution very quickly. Later on, the process begins to slow down or even stops and metal values vanish from the solution. This phenomenon occurs as a result of the change in the reversible oxidation potential followed by precipitation of some solid metallic compound.Chalcopyrite CuFeS Deep-sea manganese nodules are found on or just beneath the sea floor in parts of all the deep oceans of the world except the Arctic. They contain mainly two intimately mixed metal oxides, namely manganese dioxide and hydrated iron oxide. Besides, other valuable metals such as copper, nickel, cobalt, zinc, molybdenum, etc. are also present in them in appreciable quantities. The presence of these metal values has prompted the researchers to project these nodules as a future resource of these metals and to concentrate on metallurgical extraction of the same. Various processing routes have been identified for potential application ( Manganese oxide seems to be very a strong oxidant. Due to the fact that it is occurring in deep-sea nodules, it can be used as an oxidant in chalcopyrite acid oxidative leaching. Several works were done where the possibility of using deep-sea nodules as an oxidant was employed in chalcopyrite leaching in hydrochloric acid ( However, the deep-sea polymetallic nodules, as follows from their name, contain not only manganese and iron but also other valuable metals such as copper, nickel, cobalt, zinc, molybdenum, etc. These metals are extracted from nodules into solution during leaching of mixture consisting of chalcopyrite and nodules. That is why this paper presents the results of a laboratory investigation on oxidation leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate (Slovakia) in the presence of manganese polymetallic nodules (Clarion–Cliperton ore field) in a hydrochloric acid medium with special attention to copper, zinc, nickel and cobalt. The manganese nodule sample was collected from the Pacific Ocean by the Interoceanmetal Joint Organization (Szcezcin, Poland) ( Deep-sea manganese nodules of Clarion–Cliperton ore field from the site, characterised by co-ordinates 11° 02,6′ of north latitude and 119° 39,2′ of west longitude and chalcopyrite concentrate of Slovinky mine (Slovakia) were used for experiments ( Chemical and mineralogical composition of chalcopyrite used in the experiments is shown in The hydrochloric acid solutions in concentration range from 0.5 to 8 M HCl were used for leaching experiments carried out at temperatures between 20 and 70 °C. The charge composition for leaching was 20 g nodules+5 g chalcopyrite concentrate. Leaching experiments were carried out in the apparatus, which consisted of 800 mL glass reactor sealed with Teflon lid. The volume of leaching liquor in each experiment was 200 mL. Ten millilitres of liquid samples were taken for analysing of dissolved metals by AAS method at selected intervals. Deep-sea manganese nodules are used as an oxidant for chalcopyrite leaching in this case. On the other hand, these nodules contain appreciable amounts of metals such as Cu, Ni, Zn, Co which are in fact transferred into solution. In this way, the leaching efficiency of metals, which are present in chalcopyrite, is increasing. This is an additional advantage of using nodules in this process. The dissolution can be described by the following reactions: Iron enters into the solution from chalcopyrite as per reaction Most of the metal values from the nodules dissolve by direct leaching following the reactions:  It can be seen that the dissolution is relatively fast and after 60 min of leaching the kinetic curves level out and/or are on the decrease. The low concentrations of HCl are not effective for the leaching. The effect of concentration above 4 M HCl is not significantly different. That is why for the following experiments the 4 M HCl was used as an optimum concentration of the solution.  It seems that the effect of temperature is positive up to about 50 °C, whereas beyond this temperature it is negligible. The results obtained at concentration 4 M HCl are presented in It follows from theoretical calculation that 20 g of nodules and 5 g of chalcopyrite is the suitable ratio for leaching in 4 M HCl. However, other amounts of nodules in charge were tested in additional experiments with the aim to confirm this theoretical assumption. As seen from leaching kinetic curves, these have slightly unconventional shapes. The classical leaching curves are accelerating with leaching time copying linear, parabolic or exponential shape. In this case, the amount of dissolved metal is increasing up to a certain time, but approximately after 60 min it begins to drop. Under more extreme experimental conditions, i.e. at higher temperature and/or more concentrated solution, this abrupt change could be observed even after 10 min. This trend is characteristic and manifests itself in each metal investigated in this study. At the same time, the curves become steeper with growing temperature and/or increasing concentration. Also, results of other works (  In order to get a better picture of the process the same leaching curves at marginal hydrochloric acid concentrations are presented in This leaching behaviour is very interesting and needs deeper investigation. Most probable explanation at this stage of research is that the leaching process is the function of the reversible redox potential. It follows from the thermodynamic study that some metal sulphides could be formed under certain conditions and subsequently precipitated from the leaching solution ( The following conclusions may be drawn from this study: Chalcopyrite dissolves effectively in the presence of deep polymetallic manganese nodules in HCl, while it does not dissolve independently in the same solution. Amount of copper dissolved is highest after the same leaching time in comparison with the results of other investigations dedicated to acid oxidative leaching of chalcopyrite. Oxidation of chalcopyrite takes place mostly through the action of chlorine gas generated in the reaction of MnO 4 M HCl seems to be an optimum concentration for leaching. The ratio 4:1 (nodules:chalcopyrite) seems to be an optimum one. Other metals, Zn, Ni, Co, which occurred in deep-sea polymetallic nodules are also effectively transferred into solution. The authors wish to express their gratitude to Interocean Joint Organization and Slovak Grant Agency VEGA (Grant 1/9379/02) for financial support.