When With regard to improved casting techniques which can reduce or even eliminate the usual vast populations of bifilms in our metals, I have always been aware of the potential benefit of contact pouring, but had completely underestimated its effects. It achieves miraculous improvements to castings by eliminating the 50% air mixing step. Contact pouring is strongly recommended in this volume as a major but low-cost step forward. The ultimate step forward is countergravity casting which should always be targeted if possible. However, although I discuss the traditional pumping techniques, I present here for the first time my new pneumatic pump. It is another low-cost, reliable technique which enjoys uniquely low turbulence and might allow a rapid takeup of this unique technology. Turning to the seriousness of the current position in casting, and in metallurgical engineering as a whole, the fact that most current metals can fail by cracking should alert us to the glaring inconsistency in our metallurgical thinking because many of our metals and alloys are ductile, so failure by cracking should be impossible. In a ductile metal an attempt to propagate a crack should merely result in the crack tip blunting, preventing propagation. In the absence of any other viable alternative mechanism, that metals do crack is a strong indication that cracks pre-exist in metals in the form of bifilms formed in the liquid state during pouring of the metal to make a casting. The poor practice is almost universally associated with pouring methods which ensure that the molten metal is mixed and emulsified with at least 50 volume % of air during its journey into the mould. I defy anyone to make a respectable casting from such a disgracefully inappropriate and inept technique. This book presents the case that this need not be so; metals need not contain bifilms, and thus need not contain those Griffith cracks which can initiate failure by cracking. To achieve this, we simply have to improve our casting technology. It remains the case that bifilms are still lamentably researched, so that this book has to resort to sifting through inconclusive and fragmentary evidence from researchers who were not looking for bifilms. Unfortunately, researchers up until now have not been aware of their presence, and certainly did not suspect their overwhelming influence on their results. Although a welcome start is being made by a few workers, I remain impatient for more definitive research to be carried out. In the meantime, while researchers slowly get around to proving the background theory, founders need not wait for answers. Practical low bifilm casting techniques have already been developed and are described here. They promise the quality improvement and cost reduction that the casting industry so badly needs.