The primary goal in the treatment of pelvic fractures is the restoration of haemodynamic stability. The secondary goal is the reconstruction of stability and symmetry of the pelvic ring. Percutaneous reconstruction can only be accepted if these goals are met. The type of definitive surgery is dependent of the degree of instability of the anterior and posterior pelvic ring. Retrograde transpubic screw fixation of pubic rami fractures is a good alternative to external fixation or plate and screw osteosynthesis. The technique of screw placement and image intensifier control is explained. Internal fixation of pure sacroiliac dislocations, fracture–dislocations of the sacroiliac joint and sacral fractures can be fixed with sacroiliac screws, placed percutaneously. Reduction of the fracture or dislocation is performed closed, or open if anatomy cannot be restored in a closed manner.
                  The primary goal in the treatment of acetabular fractures is to restore anatomy. Reduction comes before fixation. The goal of minimising approaches cannot be more important. In most cases open reduction will be necessary to achieve anatomical reconstruction. Only the experienced acetabular surgeon will be able to decide when and how he can restore anatomy through a less invasive approach or with a percutaneous procedure. The anterior column screw can be inserted through a separate incision in addition to a Kocher–Langenbeck approach. It is the same screw as the retrograde transpubic screw but placed in the opposite direction. The posterior column screw is placed percutaneously from the lateral cortex of the ilium in the direction of the posterior column. Techniques of placement of both screws are demonstrated.
                  Open reduction and internal fixation remains the standard of care in stabilisation of pelvic and acetabular fractures. Only the experienced surgeon will be able to judge if percutaneous procedures can be an alternative or a useful additive to conventional techniques.Pathophysiology and pathomorphology of pelvic and acetabular fractures has been better understood since the important contributions of Pennal and Tile, The fear of complications and the complexity of treatment explain the reluctance to treat more challenging articular lesions surgically, such as the calcaneus, the pelvic ring and the acetabulum. For these injuries, adequate surgical management is also convincing in terms of excellent and good long-term functional results, The pelvis is not a long bone, pelvic ring disruptions are more than articular lesions. Can the above-mentioned principles of treatment for long bone fractures be transferred to the pelvic ring? Certainly not directly, but some principles may be adapted or can be similar. “The pelvic ring bleeds to death”. This statement already shows us that the primary goal of treatment is not to restore anatomy or stability, but to stop bleeding, which originates in the bony and soft tissue structures of the small pelvis. A pelvic binder, a C-clamp and external fixation are different means of obtaining provisional stability. They are used in the preclinical setting, in the emergency room or in the early operation phase as an additional, yet important measure of resuscitation. They are not used for definitive fixation. Once the patient has survived the critical early posttraumatic phase, definitive surgical treatment of the pelvic ring is planned. The goal is completely different from the primary one: to restore a stable and symmetrical pelvis, which enables direct load transfer from the lumbar vertebral column to both lower extremities and gives the mechanical basis for normal walking. The techniques of fixation will be dependent on the type of instability (external or internal rotation and/or vertical displacement of one or both hemipelvis, which also forms the basis for fracture classification), soft tissue damage and contamination, concomitant lesions of intrapelvic organs, delay after primary treatment, personality of the patient, and surgical equipment and possibilities of the hospital and its team. To restore a stable and symmetrical pelvis, sometimes anterior fixation only, now and then anterior and posterior fixation of pelvic ring lesions will be needed. As we know from biomechanical studies, a force of 2000 up to 10,000 Anatomical reconstruction and stable fixation will enable early functional after treatment, just as in long bone fractures. Many of these patients are polytraumatised and are not suitable for early mobilisation, but they certainly profit from less pain, early passive and active-assisted movements in bed or even from changes of body position when still attached to the ventilator in the intensive care unit. Can we achieve better results in the management of pelvic fractures or disruptions when performing a “biological osteosynthesis”, less invasive surgery with more attention to the soft tissues, as recommended in the treatment of long bone fractures? To answer this question, we need a differentiated picture of the problem of pelvic instability and we always need to refer to our most important goals, which are restoration of stability and reconstruction of anatomy. My first general feeling is that approaches and techniques for open reduction and internal fixation, and types of osteosynthesis are not sufficiently known. This is related to the low number of pelvic ring disruptions and their different primary picture of hemodynamical instability on the one hand, and to the complexity of the pelvic anatomy and the severity of possible complications of surgical treatment on the other hand. Pelvic courses and national or international working groups on pelvic trauma can enhance knowledge in this field. Thorough knowledge of the anatomy of the intact and broken pelvis together with the classical approaches for exposure of the sacrum, the sacroiliac joint, the ileum and iliac wing and the pubis or pubic rami are indispensable for safe surgery. My second thought is that only experience with the “classical” surgical techniques for open reduction and internal fixation of pelvic ring lesions allows the surgeon to make the step towards less invasive approaches or percutaneous techniques. In this sense, reduced invasive pelvic surgery can only be an addition to the classical techniques. As we will see later on, in exceptional cases, the percutaneous technique will be the best option. When a surgeon wants to understand the different steps of pelvic reconstruction, he has to explore, expose and débride the areas of instability, feel the amount of resistance given by the soft tissues during reduction manoeuvres, experience the utility of different reduction instruments and see with his own eyes where and how implants can be brought in to fix this reduction. He also has to identify landmarks on the pelvic bones, which can be seen or felt, and control their position on different image intensifier views in order to confirm anatomical reduction or analyse the amount and direction of reduction which is still needed. All this requires preoperative planning and the choice of the correct approach. Large incisions do not necessarily mean more invasive, non-biological surgery. When the approach is chosen properly, with meticulous soft tissue dissection and careful reduction manoeuvres, the surgical procedure can do less harm than in a surgical procedure with smaller incisions but long-lasting, repetitive blunt soft tissue manipulations and closed indirect reduction, which is continuously controlled by image intensification. We distinguish different types of instability in pelvic trauma, which may exist in isolation or in combination: transsymphyseal, transpubic, transiliac, transsacroiliac and transsacral. Consequently, different types of implants and techniques for stabilisation will be needed. In the following, we will analyse all these areas and see if percutaneous procedures can play a role for stabilisation.     In case of a fracture–dislocation of the sacroiliac joint (crescent fracture), a piece of the dorsal iliac wing still is attached to the joint. In general, the fracture plane is nearly vertical with the fracture line crossing the iliac crest very dorsally. To enhance stability of the sacroiliac fixation, a separate screw is used along the iliac crest to fix the iliac wing fracture. A closed anatomical reduction of this fracture is not usually possible, limited open reduction of the iliac wing fracture and percutaneous sacroiliac screw placement can be combined here.  “Acetabular fractures limp to death”. This statement emphasises the main problem of acetabular reconstruction. The acetabulum is one part of the very strong and mobile hip joint which enables standing and walking as its most important functions. Its articular surface is situated between the anterior and posterior pelvis, very deep and well protected in the pelvic ring. The anatomy of the acetabulum is complex, diagnosis and classification difficult, and surgery challenging. Vital structures, which ensure vascular as well as neurological integrity of the lower extremities, run along the hip joint and they have to be protected during the reconstructive procedure. Complications of surgery of the acetabulum may be serious, dangerous and disabling. Acetabular fractures are less frequent than many other articular lesions. It follows that personal experience with this type of surgery is limited and the learning curve long. Above all, the acetabulum is a non-forgiving joint. Fractures of the acetabulum, especially those running through the weight bearing dome, must be reduced anatomically. Long-term results after treatment of these lesions show the same evidence as in other articular lesions. The better the articular reconstruction, the better the long-term functional outcome. Anatomical reconstruction of the joint is the main goal of treatment. There cannot be any discussion on the validity of this goal. This means that we cannot put less invasive surgery, biological osteosynthesis or percutaneous procedures in the place of this principle goal while accepting compromise in the quality of reduction. We cannot replace open reduction and internal fixation by closed or semi-open fixation and forget about reduction. As a surgeon, my first question can never be “can I place this screw or plate percutaneously?”, but must be “can I reduce this fracture percutaneously?”. In the vast majority of fractures, the answer will be “no”. As with other articular fractures, meticulous reconstruction, obtaining an articular surface without gaps or steps above 2 As in pelvic trauma surgery, it is my feeling that conventional surgery of the acetabulum is not widely known. The rarity of the lesion, complexity of surgical anatomy, and dangers of the surgery are reasons not to operate on the patient personally, but to refer him or her to a larger trauma unit. The slogan “percutaneous reconstruction” may give the surgeon the false impression that he can achieve the same goals with minimally invasive surgery, which may lower his threshold to operate on the patient himself. When percutaneous procedures are performed more frequently by surgeons with little experience in conventional acetabular fracture surgery, the amount of poor long-term results will increase significantly. Conventional approaches and techniques for reduction have to be learned first, no pelvic and acetabular courses with cadaver labs and hands-on workshops on artificial bone are very useful. Guidelines and directives for state of the art treatment of acetabular fractures also need to be worked out. This is a nice task for national and international societies and working groups on acetabular fractures. The role of percutaneous reconstruction must be defined in this context. It cannot be a primary one, but rather is in addition to the conventional techniques for reduction and fixation. As the main fracture must be reduced and fixed directly, associated fractures may be reduced and fixed indirectly. An associated fracture of the anterior column cannot be reduced under direct view, if the Kocher–Langenbeck approach is used for reduction and fixation of a fracture involving the posterior wall and/or column. An associated fracture of the posterior column cannot or can only partially be reduced and fixed directly if an ilioinguinal approach is used for reduction and fixation of a fracture involving the anterior wall and/or column. In both situations, percutaneous placement of additional screws can add to the stability of the whole construct. A special set of instruments is available to make correct screw placement easier and more reproducible. It is most important to find the correct entry portal for screw insertion, so image intensifier views of the pelvic bone in ap, inlet and outlet, ala and obturator must be available. A combination of these views is often used. The “anterior column screw” is inserted from the body of the iliac bone towards the symphysis pubis. It passes the acetabular cavity on its medial side and runs inside the superior ramus of the pubis. It may have a length of more than 100 The “posterior column screw” is placed above the acetabulum from lateral to medial. It starts at the lateral cortex of the iliac body and perforates the inner cortex of the posterior column in the pelvis at different levels, depending on the localisation of the fracture line separating the posterior from the anterior column. When it has a good bone purchase, the screw prevents medial displacement of the reduced posterior column. The skin incision is situated at the level of inferior anterior iliac spine, but more posterior to it. The entry portal is localised two finger breadths above the lateral superior edge of the acetabulum. Depending on the fracture configuration, the screw is directed more horizontally or obliquely. The length of the screw is between 45 and 60 Other additional screws may be placed for stabilisation of acetabular fractures, but they all are inserted through the surgical exposure of the Kocher–Langenbeck or ilioinguinal approach. Conventional techniques of open reduction and internal fixation remain the standard of care for definitive treatment of pelvic ring and acetabular fractures. As these are not frequent lesions, recommendations for treatment and surgical techniques must be taught consequently. Anatomic reduction of articular lesions (sacroiliac joint, acetabulum) is the primary goal, adequate stabilisation the following. Only the experienced pelvic and acetabular surgeon is able to decide if it is possible to achieve these goals through smaller incisions or even with a percutaneous procedure. In my view, minimally invasive procedures can never completely replace conventional techniques for treatment of these lesions, if we do not want to accept compromises in obtaining anatomic reduction. As a consequence, percutaneous fixation is a complementary possibility for distinct fracture patterns, almost never a first choice procedure. The only exception may be the sacroiliac joint screw fixation.