Nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH) batteries which generally contain nearly 55–60% Ni and 4–6% Co along with a few other metals may be considered an important resource for recycling and supply of these metals. In this study, leaching kinetics of nickel and cobalt, and other base metals from the spent Ni–MH batteries in sulfuric acid solutions have been investigated with an emphasis on the process characterization at different stages of the treatment. The maximum dissolution of nickel, cobalt, iron, manganese and zinc was found to be 91.6, 97.8, 65.5, 93.5 and 99.2%, respectively in a single stage under the optimum conditions comprising of 2M H2SO4, 100g/L pulp density and 348K temperature after 120min of leaching. Kinetic data for the dissolution of all the metals including the rare earths (as a group) showed the best fit to the chemical control shrinking core model. The activation energy of 8.7, 6.8, 7.12, 6.7 and 7.9kJ/mol was determined for the leaching of base metals viz., nickel, cobalt, iron, manganese and zinc, respectively in the temperature range 305–348K. With the help of the XRD phase analysis and the change in morphological features along with the elemental mapping in the leach residues with time and the untreated electrode material by SEM-EDS, the leaching mechanism was established. The process characterization corroborated the kinetic model for the leaching of metals which progressed through the chemical reaction of the lixiviant on the surface of the spherical particles of electrode powder. The XRD analysis of the residue showed the presence of metallic nickel which required stringent conditions for improved recovery of this metal.The nickel metal hydride (Ni–MH) batteries are widely used in portable electrical and electronic appliances, hybrid electric vehicles (HEV), etc. because of the associated advantages such as high energy density, fewer environmental problems and lesser resource concerns ( Several studies have been carried out to recover valuable metals from the spent Ni–MH batteries by pyrometallurgical (  In view of above, a process based on the sulfuric acid leaching has been investigated to recover nickel, cobalt, iron, manganese and zinc from the electrode material of the spent Ni–MH secondary batteries. The study encompasses the details of steps such as dismantling and physical–mechanical separation of the electrode material (a black powder), and optimizing the parameters for the leaching of base metals from the material. While evaluating the leaching kinetics of the base metals the process characterization has particularly been stressed upon with the aim of understanding the mechanism of metal dissolution at different stages. The spent Ni–MH batteries (average wt. 57 To obtain the battery material for leaching, the components of Ni–MH batteries were subjected to physical separation by crushing. The batteries consist of steel case, battery electrode as well as nylon separator and each material has different characteristics such as particle size and specific gravity. The batteries were agitated and crushed by scutter crusher in water. Heavy particles mainly the steel case settled down and the nylon separator being lighter floated out, leaving the electrode material dispersed in the water. After scrubbing, floating material was first removed from water. The suspended fraction contained black powder which was separated by wet screening using a sieve of 20 Leaching of metals from the electrode material of spent batteries was carried out in a 500 The electrode powder of spent batteries ( The effect of H The sulfuric acid leaching of REs present in the spent batteries may follow Eq. It is apparent that the leaching of metals increased gradually with the increase in initial H The effect of time on leaching of metals was examined under the conditions mentioned in The effect of pulp density (25–150 The effect of temperature in the range 305–348 Effect of varying the temperature with time on the leaching of metals is illustrated in The leaching pattern of each metal at varying temperatures with time was examined using the standard shrinking core models. The shrinking core mechanisms are generally represented by the diffusion, chemical and mixed control models. Assuming that the electrode powder particles have a spherical geometry and the process is controlled by the diffusion through the existing ash layer or the product layer formed as a result of the reaction, the integrated equation of the shrinking core model can be expressed as ( On the other hand when the process is chemically controlled, the integrated equation of the shrinking core model can take the form ( The leaching results from this study over the first 120 The values of the apparent rate constants (k The electrode powder of the spent batteries was characterized by XRD and SEM-EDS before and after the acid leaching. As mentioned above ( The SEM image of the untreated sample ( Based on the XRD phase identification and the SEM-EDS studies of the feed material and leach residues, it may be concluded that the leaching of these metals was controlled by the chemical reaction of the lixiviant, sulphuric acid proceeding on the surface of the particles of electrode material. As discussed above the kinetic data for the leaching of all the metals were best fitted to the chemical control model. The process characterization studies have further corroborated the applicability of the chemical reaction controlled model for the dissolution of these metals. Leaching with sulfuric acid has been found to be efficient for the dissolution of metals present in the spent Ni–MH batteries. The most suitable leaching conditions are: 348 The authors are thankful to the Director, CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, India for giving permission to publish the paper and for providing the financial assistance under the