When a coronal fracture affects the capitellum and the trochlea, the Kocher lateral approach may be inadequate for the correct visualisation, reduction and fixation of the fracture. In such cases an associated medial elbow approach may be required, or a posterior transolecranon approach may be preferred. The anterior limited approach to the elbow (ALAE) could be a valid option when treating these types of fracture, as it does not involve the detachment of any muscle group or ligament, thereby facilitating the recovery process. We can also treat associated injuries such as fractures of the radial head or coronoid process with this approach.
                  We describe the surgical technique and the functional outcome of eight patients with a mean of 66 years of age (range, 53–76) who where treated with open reduction and internal fixation for capitellar and trochlear fractures through the ALAE. Patient outcomes were assessed with physical and radiological evaluation, range-of-motion measurements with a follow-up from 24 to 60 months. Two different quality of life questionnaires were carried out: the EuroQol Five Dimensions Questionnaire (EQ-5D) and the patient-answered questionnnaire of the Liverpool Elbow Score patient (PAQ-LES).
                  Four fractures involved the capitellum, one involved the capitellum with the lateral ridge of the trochlea, and three involved the capitellum and trochlea as separate fragments. The patients presented a favorable clinical evolution at a median of 33 months (range, 24–60), with an average of motion of 10–138°. Four patients presented a fracture of the head of the radius (Mason type 2) and 3 fractures of the coronoid (Bryan-Morrey Type 1) associated. All the patients presented radiological consolidation without signs of osteonecrosis, being the average EQ-5D 0.857 (range, 0.36–1.0) and the PAQ-LES of 35 (range 17 to 36).
                  Patients with isolated capitellar fractures had better results than those with trochlear involvement. The presence of associated fractures does not seem to worsen the results. We believe that the ALAE is a technical option to consider for the open surgical treatment of a capitellar fracture with or without involvement of the trochlea.
               
                  Level of Evidenceis
                  Therapeutic Level IIICoronal fractures of the distal part of the humerus involving the capitellum and the trochlea are complex injuries. These fractures may be associated with others lesions like a radial head fracture or a coronoid fracture In addition, whether an extended Kocher approach is performed or an osteotomy of the olecranon, the dissection and detachment of the periosteum of the posterior aspect of the capitellum may compromise the vascularisation of the capitellum ( In addition, we would like to mention that although Dubberley classifies fractures according to the absence (type A) or presence of posterior condylar comminution (B) in his work, we have found in our patients that the comminution rather than posterior, is located distally. It is true that the comminution when it exists, it is in a distal and posterior plane with respect to the trochlea and the capitellum, but the posterior aspect of the humerus (the columns) are usually intact ( In some cases total or partial arthroplasty is an option to take into account given the technical difficulty for the open reduction and fixation of these fractures. However, for patients with high functional demands, such as manual workers or very young patients, elbow arthroplasty, elbow arthroplasty is not a good option because we know that the components are loosened early when the limb is subjected to intense physical activity The purpose of this current study was to describe a limited anterior approach for open reduction and fixation of a displaced capitellar and trochlear fracture and to perform an evaluation of the clinical outcomes and complications of this technique. The average time between injury and surgery was 3.0 days (range, 2–5). The plane formed between the two epicondyles is of paramount importance as a reference guide during the surgery, and must be maintained perfectly parallel to the table in order to maintain a stable relationship between anatomical structures We position two retractors, one that retracts the mobile wad of Henry laterally (including the radial nerve and the recurrent radial artery) and the other retracts the brachialis muscle and the biceps tendon medially. Once the joint capsule is open, the capitellum is exposed, and with the elbow in a position of full extension, it usually is self-reduced to its approximate anatomical position. After the reduction, we fix the fragment in position with 2 or 3 Kirschner wires, using fluoroscopy to check and measure the depth of screw to use ( The second step, is to expose the trochlea, once we have opened the fascia, we place two retractors (preferably wide-blade) superficially, one that retracts the biceps tendon laterally and the other retracting the neurovascular bundle medially. We must keep in mind that the branches from the median nerve that innervate the flexo-pronator muscles run from the medial side of the nerve to the muscles, so, we must perform the dissection always laterally to the median nerve ( An error may be to fix the capitellum after its initial reduction, without being sure of the correct reduction of the trochlea, since the lack of medial references to the capitellum can cause a defect of poor rotation of the same, which we will detect when trying to reduce the trochlea. After reduction, we fix the fragments with headless screws, checking with the fluoroscopy that the screws are correctly positioned and the range of movement of the elbow without restrictions. In fractures of capitellum and trochlea, we can find comminution in the most distal area of ​​the humerus (Dubberley type B), however, the posterior aspect of the external and internal columns of the distal humerus is usually entire ( In such cases we must take care when mobilising the elbow once the fracture has been reduced and fixed, because the radial head can impact and displace the fracture. To flex the elbow, we prefer to do so slowly with the index finger controlling the capitellum, and making sure in every moment that the radial head passes above the capitellum. Therefore we recommend leaving the elbow flexed once we have checked on fluoroscopy that the profile is correct. The assistant must maintain the elbow flexed (between 80° to 90°); subcutaneous closure is with absorbable 4–0 sutures, and skin closure is with 4–0 monofilament. Next, and without extending the elbow, we proceed to its immobilisation with a long arm posterior splint for two weeks. The elbow was immobilized at 90° for 2 weeks and then an articulated elbow brace was used, with the extension limited until 45°. Therapy was started, and the patient was encouraged to perform elbow flexion and extension exercises (against resistance) every 2 or 3 h. Two weeks later the restriction for a complete extension of the elbow was suspended. According to the classification of Dubberley, there were 3 patients with a type 1A fracture (fracture of the capitellum without comminution); 1 patient with a type 1B fracture (fracture of the capitellum with comminution); and 3 patients with a type 3B fracture (consisting of fractures of both, the capitellum and the trochlea as separate fragments with comminution) Eight patients were independently evaluated with use of questionnaires, physical and radiographic examinations, Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the elbow were made to assess the presence of osteonecrosis, heterotopic ossification, and posttraumatic osteoarthritis. Arthritis was graded as described by Broberg and Morrey Two different final quality of life evaluation questionnaires were performed: the EuroQol Five Dimensions Questionnaire (EQ-5D) and the patient answered questionnaire portion of the Liverpool Elbow Score (PAQ-LES). Fracture classifications are summarised in Subsequent surgical procedures were not required. A diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome was made in one patient, which improved after management by the pain unit during 4 months. Radiographs of the operative side were assessed for hardware loosening, heterotopic ossification, posttraumatic arthritis, and osteonecrosis. Neither patient had a back out screw, nor any had a screw that appeared to be impinging on the joint. Minor periarticular calcification was present in two patients. No patients had posttraumatic arthritis classified according to the system of Broberg and Morrey. All fractures healed and no residual elbow instability was noted. All the patients presented radiological consolidation without signs of osteonecrosis of the capitellum or trochlea, being the average EQ-5D 0.857 and the PAQ-LES 35, which represents a clinical situation of minimal pain and disability. All employed patients returned to their previous occupation. The anterior (Henry) approach to the elbow has been widely used in upper limb surgery. It has been described as a valuable choice in the synthesis of proximal radius fractures, reinsertion of the distal biceps tendon, excision of anterior elbow tumors and debridement in case of soft tissue infections In this paper, we present an alternative to Henry's anterior approach, which involves an inter-nervous window bypassing the major vasculo-nervous structures of the anterior surface of the elbow and thus allows access to the anterior plane of the elbow (capitellum, trochlea, radial head and coronoid processes), albeit in a very limited space. We recognise that this approach is technically demanding but it may be a valid alternative in complex lesions of the elbow in which access via classical routes is limited In fractures of the distal humerus, the position of the limb in extension during surgery facilitates the reduction of the articular fragments that are attached to the humerus by means of a proximal periosteal flap responsible for its vascularization. The other hypothetical advantage of approaching these fractures via the anterior route is the possibility of implanting the screws in an anteroposterior position in a plane that is truly perpendicular to the fracture. Elkowitz et al., found that fixation by the headless screws was significantly more stable than posteroanterior cancellous screws at 2000 cycles. When the capitellum is approached in the classic way using a Kocher approach, despite the detachment of the origins of the lateral collateral ligament and the extensor supinator muscle the lack of space forces the implantation of the screws from lateral to medial, with a considerable inclination with respect to the plane of the fracture. Other authors have performed internal reduction and fixation by arthroscopy There are few references to this approach in the bibliography although radial nerve lesions have been reported in the approach for the radius, but we stress that the approach described here is more proximal to the one required, for example, for biceps reinsertion As fractures of the capitellum rarely occur, larger case series report only up to 30 patients treated with different fixation devices However, there is a concern about the use of screws through the cartilage. Intra-articular screws are used for internal fixation of osteochondral fragments in fractures (scaphoid, radial head, capitellum, distal femur, talus) and in chronic joint disorders such as osteochondritis dissecans even though we know that this will cause damage to the cartilage The other option is the posteroanterior fixation of the screws; for this technique we need to detach and expose the posterior area of the lateral column. Nevertheless, the local vascular supplies to the capitellum and lateral aspect of the trochlea came from posterior condylar perforating vessels Our patients have presented a satisfactory evolution from the clinical point of view (both functional and aesthetic), from the radiological point of view, and quality of life. The patients presented a favorable clinical evolution reaching a postoperative range of motion in extension and flexion averaged 124°, as well as a pronosupination of 174.6°. The results have varied depending on the type of fracture that patients presented. The best results were obtained in the group of patients with a Dubberley type 1 fracture, with a flexoextension of 141° and a pronosupination of 176°. However, the results were worse in the group of 3 patients with a Dubberley type 3B fracture, with a flexoextension of 108.3° and a pronosupination of 173.2° ( All the patients in our series had radiological consolidation without signs of osteonecrosis, with the EQ-5D reaching 0.885 and PAQ-LES 35.1. No patient had residual elbow instability or weakness. Additional injuries of the elbow joint reach an incidence of up to 50%, especially prevalent in the case of radial head fracture, present in 25% of cases We are aware that the data we show, is insufficient, given the few cases that we present to ensure that we are facing a proven superior approach. This is a small series of 8 cases treated by elbow surgeons in a reference centre, which may not be representative of all fractures of capitellum and trochlea. We are aware of the technical difficulty of the approach described here, but with an anatomical knowledge of the area and careful dissection, the possibility of injuring the anterior neurovascular structures is minimised. Another concern is about the use of screws through the cartilage, which cause a zone of cell death. However, the type and degree of cartilage injury created from insertion of screws and K-wires has not been characterised at all. In this study we describe the anatomy and technique of the anterior approach to the elbow for the management of fractures affecting the anterior plane of the distal humerus: the capitellum and the trochlea. It can also be used to treat associated lesions of the radial head and the coronoid processes. These lesions have classically been treated via the Kocher approach or via transolecranon osteotomy. Technically we think that it has advantages in terms of accessibility, correct reduction of the fracture, placement of the implants, and postoperative recovery and disadvantages in terms of the need for a careful surgical technique. Our patients have presented a satisfactory evolution from the clinical point of view (both functional and aesthetic), from the radiological point of view, and quality of life, similar to other series. However, comparative studies are needed to assess the merits of this approach with respect to the classical techniques in order to draw further conclusions about its superiority and safety. All authors have made substantive contributions to the study, and all authors endorse the data and conclusions. The authors state that ethics committee approval was obtained for the study by the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona. The authors have received no financial assistance in the preparation of this paper. The authors have also signed no agreement to receive benefits or fees from any commercial entity. No commercial entity has paid or will pay any foundations, educational institutions or other non-profit organisations with which the authors have affiliations.