Many correlations have been developed between water split (ratio of water reporting through underflow and overflow) and process as well as design variables in a hydrocyclone. However, majority of them use cone ratio (ratio of spigot and vortex finder diameter) as one of the variables. In this article, it is explained why the use of cone ratio as a model parameter may sometimes be misleading. An attempt has, therefore, been made to develop an improved correlation to predict water split in a hydrocyclone using spigot diameter and vortex finder diameter as individual variables. Feed pressure has also been used as a model parameter. The model has been developed based on regression analyses of systematic data generated and has been validated with random experimental data.spigot diameter in meter vortex finder diameter in meter constants value of exponents feed inlet pressure in psi water split Despite several advantages associated with hydrocyclones, the inability to classify particles at a given cut size consistently is the major disadvantage with them. The inefficiency is mainly due to the misplacement of significant amount of fine particles through underflow. It is evident from the review of literature on water split in a hydrocyclone that majority of the models developed so far use cone ratio as one of the variable parameters. Use of cone ratio as a variable may be sometimes misleading because the ratio may be kept constant by changing appropriate dimensions of spigot and vortex finder diameter but their effects are bound to be different. The following example will elaborate this point further: Suppose we carry out two tests in a 76 Experiments were carried out in a laboratory scale 76 The effect of vortex finder diameter on water split is shown in On the basis of correlations developed to relate individual variables with water split, an attempt has been made to derive an empirical correlation to quantify the combined effect of different variables on water split. This has the following form: To check the validity of the developed model, 24 individual experiments were carried out at random within the range of the variables selected. The random experimental data generated are then compared with the predicted water split data at identical operating conditions. The comparative plot is shown in Following conclusions may be drawn based on the above discussions: Spigot and vortex finder diameters should be used as independent variables while modelling hydrocyclones. From the coefficients of the individual models developed, it is evident that the vortex finder diameter has more pronounced effect on water split than the spigot diameter and feed pressure. Water split model of the following form has been developed.