Automated mineralogy instrumentation (QEMSCAN, MLA, TIMA) is routinely used for materials characterization in the mining industry. All current techniques identify minerals based on a combination of backscattered electron and chemical (energy-dispersive spectroscopy) signals read from the sample. Boundary zones, where two or more minerals are touching, yield signals that reflect a mix of the characteristics of multiple minerals and that may or may not match anything in the mineral database. These phase boundaries, varying in width, are known to cause errors in automated mineralogy analyses, but what mineral and boundary characteristics affect phase boundary width and how much error phase boundaries can cause remain poorly understood.
                  New Monte Carlo modeling of electron-sample interactions at and near phase boundaries shows that the width of the zone of mixed signals, and hence the amount of error, depends on the grain size and texture of the sample; the densities of the minerals and the ionization potentials of their constituent elements; and the position and orientation of the boundary between the minerals, as well as various instrumental factors such as beam accelerating voltage. Error induced by phase boundaries is high when a high accelerating voltage is used to examine fine-grained samples with complex (intergrowth, exsolution) textures that involve low-density minerals with low-ionization-potential elements. Error is low when the sample is coarse-grained, lacks complex textural relationships that create boundary area, and consists of high-density minerals with high-ionization-potential elements, which have a higher electron stopping power and prevent the beam from spreading out as much. Where low- and high-density minerals are in contact at an angled boundary, the width of the boundary zone is low when the high-density mineral is on top and high when the low-density phase is on top.
                  Calculations based on these simulations indicate that the amount of area that could fall within phase boundary zones depends strongly on grain size, shape, and width of boundary zone. Boundary phases may contribute significantly to overall analytical error for fine-grained minerals with low densities and composed of elements with low ionization potentials, but for most samples the boundary phase area is likely to be <5% of the total surface area and the error relatively small. Errors induced by boundary phases will probably continue to annoy geometallurgists for some time, but with proper laboratory procedures for validating and cross-checking automated mineralogy results, they should not be a major component of error for most samples.The computer revolution of the last several decades has contributed to a large increase in the use of automated mineralogy, particularly in the mining industry. Automated mineralogy is a family of analytical techniques based on scanning electron microscopy (SEM), with the addition of a sophisticated computer that processes the images obtained and automatically identifies minerals based on backscattered electron (BSE) and energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) signals. The outputs from automated mineralogy vary, but generally include modal abundances of minerals, chemical compositions calculated therefrom, grain sizes, ore liberation percentages, and some textural information. While this is largely the same information obtained from traditional optical microscopy, automated mineralogy has the advantages of being more quantitative, more precise, better able to handle fine-grained and trace minerals, and less labor-intensive than petrographic methods of acquiring the same data ( Each of these instruments differs in detail, but all have the same general procedure for analysis (reviewed by The BSE and EDS measurements, calibrated against standards, are then compared to a mineral list or database ( The matched minerals are visualized on the computer by color-coding pixels in the image according to mineralogy to produce images like Traditional SEM operation, and use of the results, have always relied to a large extent on experienced operators to detect and mitigate error. Most modern labs in the mining or mineral processing industry, however, are designed to minimize human input ( Among these is the problem of boundary phases. These are spurious “minerals” that may appear, to an automated mineral analyzer, at the zone where two different minerals are in contact. Thanks to the spreading out of beam electrons as they collide with sample atoms/ions, both minerals contribute to the EDS, and possibly to the BSE, measurements ( Resolving boundary phases is a complex issue. One option is to loosen the fit criteria to the mineral list, but this adds considerable error to automated mineralogy results. A second option is to use one of the common software functions in automated mineralogy instruments that helps to reduce the number of boundary phases, generally by assigning boundary phase pixels the mineralogical identity of the most common identified neighboring pixels. This approach can be adequate for samples with relatively simple textures and coarse grain sizes, but among geological materials this is not always the case. A third option successfully applied to finer-grained, more complex samples is enhancing the mineral list with synthetic reference species tailored to the characteristics of the likeliest boundary phases and atypical mineral compositions ( Numerous free and commercial software packages can simulate electron trajectories and electron-sample interactions in three dimensions with high computational and visual sophistication. However, implementing phase boundaries in most of these packages is difficult, so in this project the single-scattering model developed by These simulations used a MATLAB routine modified from the Monte Carlo single-scattering program of L. Gontard, which in turn was based on a Pascal routine presented by The minerals for each simulation were chosen based on the geological plausibility of finding them together and on the values of the relevant properties (density, average The location of the incoming electron beam was fixed at x = 0 for all simulations. Boundaries between minerals were represented as straight lines slicing from the top to the bottom of the sample at a specified angle. In each group of simulations, the boundary began at a position far away from the electron beam, so that effects from only the first phase were detected. Subsequent simulations stepped the boundary position through The width of the boundary zone, considered as the length over which both minerals contribute significantly to BSE and EDS measurements, depends strongly on the minerals’ densities, on the density contrast between the minerals, and on the ionization potentials of their constituent elements. At contacts between two minerals with disparate properties (native copper and quartz), the simulation results showed a potentially broad boundary phase developing, particularly when quartz was on top ( Boundary zones between phases with similarly high densities and high-ionization potential elements are more symmetrical and much narrower. In the case of covellite and pyrite ( The amount of error generated by a boundary phase, considered as the proportion of total grain area that can fall within a boundary zone, is shown in The results of the simulations presented here are consistent with the findings of previous Monte Carlo studies of electron-sample interactions, as well as with previous work on boundary phase error in automated mineralogy. The principal existing source on Monte Carlo simulations of electron-sample interactions at phase boundaries is a paper by Boundary phases were one component of the MLA error studied by Because of the simplifying assumptions associated with the single-scattering Monte Carlo approach (detailed in the Methods section above), these simulations provide approximate rather than exact models of boundary phase width and characteristics. An exact model of boundary phase behavior was not the objective of this research. Rather, the modeling exercise is intended as the basis for a preliminary quantification that can show whether boundary phases are a major problem, or a minor vexation, for automated mineralogy in practice. Although they represent highly simplified versions of reality, the simulations presented here provide some insight into that question. Except in unusual situations, in which a low-density mineral composed of low-ionization potential elements overlies another mineral at a shallow angle, boundary phases are probably no more than 5–10 μm wide at reasonable instrument operating parameters, including accelerating voltages up to 30 kV. For materials with coarse crystals (1–2 mm), only an insignificant part of the scan area would be likely to sit in the boundary zone ( Depending on the nature of the minerals and the accuracy of the boundary phase-eliminating software functions employed, then, wide boundary zones and small grain sizes could cause serious errors (although the potential error still pales in comparison with the fundamental sampling error associated with the small sample sizes used in automated mineralogy; From the geometallurgist’s perspective, the implications of this are mixed. Not all mineralogical details are a concern for mining and milling operations. For example, all the copper ore minerals in the mixed sulfide grain in Nevertheless, for most industrial geometallurgy labs boundary phases are likely to be more a nuisance than a problem for two reasons. The first is engineered redundancy: it is rare, and inadvisable, to rely solely on automated mineralogy for a chemical or mineralogical characterization of samples ( New Monte Carlo modeling of phase boundaries between common minerals provides some preliminary constraints on the potential extent of boundary phase effects and the magnitude of the error they can cause for automated mineralogy. For common minerals, operating conditions, and boundary angles, the scattering of beam electrons through the sample leads to X-ray generation from both sides of the boundary in a zone that can range from 1 to over 10 μm wide. The width depends strongly on the minerals’ densities, on the ionization potentials of the elements they are composed of, and on the orientation of the boundary between them. Dense minerals made of elements with high ionization potentials prevent incident electrons from spreading out, limiting the width of the zone where multiple minerals contribute to BSE and EDS signals to <4 μm for the copper and iron sulfides simulated. Electrons travel further through low-density minerals made of elements with low ionization potentials, such as quartz, leading to wider boundary zones. The proportion of a grain included in the boundary phase area, and hence the potential error, is minimal for samples with grain sizes >1 mm. However, for fine-grained samples with complex textures, a large proportion (10s of %) of the sample area scanned could in theory be identified as a boundary phase and the potential error is significant. In practice, cross-checking automated mineralogy results against data from other analytical techniques, and using a well-established mineral list specific to the sampled site, can probably keep boundary phases from being a serious issue in most geometallurgical labs in the mining industry.  The author declares that she has no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Many thanks to Veronica Alejandro, Rodney Saulters, and Martin Lyders of Freeport-McMoRan Inc.’s Process Technology Center and to Mark Barton of the University of Arizona for helpful discussion of automated mineralogy and boundary phases, and to an anonymous reviewer for comments that greatly improved the work. This work was indirectly supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: