This study presents a calibration process of three-dimensional particle flow code (PFC3D) simulation of intact and fissured granite samples. First, laboratory stress–strain response from triaxial testing of intact and fissured granite samples is recalled. Then, PFC3D is introduced, with focus on the bonded particle models (BPM). After that, we present previous studies where intact rock is simulated by means of flat-joint approaches, and how improved accuracy was gained with the help of parametric studies. Then, models of the pre-fissured rock specimens were generated, including modeled fissures in the form of “smooth joint” type contacts. Finally, triaxial testing simulations of 1 + 2 and 2 + 3 jointed rock specimens were performed. Results show that both elastic behavior and the peak strength levels are closely matched, without any additional fine tuning of micro-mechanical parameters. Concerning the post-failure behavior, models reproduce the trends of decreasing dilation with increasing confinement and plasticity. However, the dilation values simulated are larger than those observed in practice. This is attributed to the difficulty in modeling some phenomena of fissured rock behaviors, such as rock piece corner crushing with dust production and interactions between newly formed shear bands or axial splitting cracks with pre-existing joints.Reliably estimating the mechanical properties of rocks and rock masses under compression is a challenging issue in rock mechanics. This behavior can be studied by laboratory compression tests and numerical simulations. The authors reviewed a large number of standard triaxial compression tests on intact and fissured Blanco Mera granite samples in the laboratory of the University of Vigo as the database for forward modeling. According to the results of these tests, simulations with a three-dimensional (3D) particle flow code (PFC3D) were carried out. This code was chosen due to two features: (1) its capability to reliably model the stress–strain response of intact rock by means of the bonded particle model (BPM) as defined by     One of the first important attempts to model rock behavior by means of 3D particle codes was developed by BPMs should fit rock behavior under different conditions; however, when calibrating the uniaxial strength, the tensile strength is typically overestimated. For instance, One of the significant improvements developed for the original BPM was the flat-joint contact model ( There are also a number of particle code simulations focusing on the behavior of rough joints (e.g. The main focus of this study is the calibration of the numerical models for intact and fissured rocks based on the flat-joint model. The study does not only account for elastic and strength parameters, but also analyze rock sample post-failure behavior, a topic that has not yet been dealt with sufficiently. The modeling exercise presented in this paper is founded in two previous studies carried out by the authors ( In the rock mechanics laboratory at the University of Vigo, a number of studies have been carried out to characterize the pre- and post-peak behaviors of intact and fissured rock samples of Blanco Mera granite – a hard granitic rock from Galicia (Spain). In the present study, tests on intact samples and two types of artificially fissured samples were considered to compare the modeling results. The fissured samples include one type with 1 sub-vertical joint and 2 sub-horizontal joints (1 + 2) and other type with 2 sub-vertical joints and 3 sub-horizontal joints (2 + 3), as depicted in The volume change derived from shear distortion of a material is known as dilatancy. As such, dilatancy can be straight-forwardly implemented in the theory of plasticity, which was the only parameter in terms of plastic potential. The material obeys a normality rule if dilatancy coincides with friction angle. In this case, many complex mathematical problems on plasticity theory can be solved in an easier way, but this does not hold in practice ( Accordingly, dilatancy is the ratio between the plastic volumetric strain rate and a plastic parameter that controls the evolution of plasticity such as  One can see that lower dilatancy is observed for samples with increasing jointing (see The results of the above-mentioned laboratory research are compiled in the work of The obtained results in this context indicate that the stress–strain response of a rock mass is significantly controlled by its structure. Therefore, a continuous behavior can be obtained from a complete stress–strain curve, as shown in After carrying out the laboratory investigation, the next step was to simulate the behavior of this well-known rock. Previous attempts to model intact rock behavior by means of continuous methods were made showing moderately accurate results ( In the study of The final micro-mechanical inputs obtained in this first step of the numerical study were reported in Although the results were deemed to be reasonably representative, we decided to perform a sensitivity analysis with the objective of fine tuning these parameters and also focusing on the influence of input micro-parameters on resulting outputs. Around 30 sets of parameters were used in this intact rock model and ten simulations (i.e. ten random particle packing realizations) were run for each sample to obtain the average results. The main variations of the parameters are briefly described in this section, which were reported in Micro-parameter stiffness ratio ( Based on the results of the two recent studies ( The sample size resolution ( For a visual interpretation of the results, the complete stress–strain curves equivalent to those obtained in the previous study ( From these results, it can be concluded that the flat-joint contact model is able to represent in a reasonable way the stress–strain behavior obtained in the laboratory for a wide range of confining pressures. However, the post-peak behavior at high confining pressure is not represented realistically. This discrepancy can be caused by the packing parameters; thus it could be interesting to make a sensitivity analysis of these parameters in relation to the material responses. A more detailed interpretation of these results is presented below together with that of the fissured samples. To create the fissured sample models, the SRM approach ( To simulate the behavior of the joints, the smooth-joint contact model was chosen. After consulting different bibliographic resources ( In the triaxial compression models, the sample is loaded axially in a single cylindrical wall, in which the upper and lower flat walls serve as loading plates. The velocity of the radial wall is servo-controlled to keep a predefined constant confining pressure. With the micro-properties for the intact rock presented in  Additionally, the decreasing dilation with confining pressure and fracturing is also deducible, based on the variations of the volumetric strain-axial strain curves in the right lower quarter of each graph. For each row in In order to interpret the results in more detail, the outputs derived from numerical simulations and laboratory tests for intact and artificially fissured samples are interpreted altogether. Young's modulus was obtained as the slope of the axial strain-axial stress curve between 30% and 60% of the peak stress. The calculated values of Young's modulus were plotted in relation to confining pressures ( Poisson's ratio was calculated as the ratio of the radial to axial deformation, between 20% and 40% of the peak stress. It showed that the Poisson's ratios of the intact samples tested in the laboratory kept almost constant. However, Poisson's ratios of the artificially fissured samples decreased significantly when the confining pressure increased ( The peak strength (  The results of residual strength obtained from numerical simulations are similar to those obtained from laboratory tests, as shown in Although the first attempt is to fit the Hoek–Brown (H–B) failure criterion directly with the purpose of obtaining strength results, it is clear that the results of the fissured samples do not adapt to the H–B criterion for intact rock ( To apply the generalized H–B criterion, the H–B criterion ( Eq. As observed in When comparing the residual strengths ( In The results of residual strengths show equivalent GSI values of 37–57, and apparently the residual strengths are similar for all laboratory tests and numerical simulations. This is possible evidence that once broken after deformation, all the samples behave in a similar way at a certain strength level. Similar results were obtained by Another curious observation is that in all laboratory and numerical cases, the residual strengths under low confining pressures (2–4 MPa) are below the fitting line, whereas they are above this line for larger confining pressures (10 MPa or more). This effect seems to be clearer for the numerical cases ( The simulated residual strengths are considered reasonably representative of those observed in the laboratory, although some aspects of the simulation could be fine-tuned in order to improve the models. It is noted, however, that the observed residual strengths are the results of a number of complex failure mechanisms interacting among them (shear-band and axial splitting occurrence interacting with pre-existing fractures, rock piece corner crushing and rock piece movement, etc.), thus the variability observed can be rated as acceptable. As shown in Numerical models were able to show a reasonably realistic representation of some of the micro-mechanisms that lead to ultimate failure of samples. In the case of intact rock samples, failure is produced in the laboratory tests, especially for the most confined cases, associated with the formation of a shear band. In less confined cases, failure is originated by axial splitting phenomena. In the numerical models performed, it has been observed that the numerical simulations represent only the breakage of the contacts by shear stress. In On the other hand, for the case of pre-fissured samples, failure tends to partially follow pre-existing joints. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to clearly identify these mechanisms due to material deterioration in the laboratory. However, it is generally observed that failure tends to mainly follow pre-existing fissure planes, typically in the less confined cases. On the other hand, the failure surface typically combines newly formed shear bands with pre-existing fissures in the more confined cases. Similar trends can be derived from the PFC3D models. In general, for 1 + 2 fissured samples, failure tends to follow the pre-existing joints for the less confined cases and the occurrence of shear bands is observed in the more confined cases. In For the 2 + 3 fissured samples, in Due to difficulties in removing the broken samples from the plastic sleeve, sometimes the failure mechanism cannot be clearly identified. It has also been observed that broken samples of the same rock under the same confining pressure present different failure patterns. These make it difficult to rigorously interpret the results. However, general observations of failure mechanisms from laboratory tests and numerical simulations are consistent. Moreover, results of the presented numerical models are more realistic than those of other continuous simulation methodologies. PFC is capable of simulating the dependency of the macro-properties of intact and fissured rock samples on confining pressure. From the presented results, it is evident that the behavior of a rock mass is controlled to a large extent by its structure. The fitting of the elastic and peak parameters is quite good. The residual strength is not so accurate in line with other approaches. Therefore, although the development of these simulations is time-consuming in preparation and calculation, these results show that PFC3D is a simulation tool with capacities greater than other existing tools to simulate this rock behavior. The post-failure behavior of fractured rock samples is complex and influenced by various aspects, such as formation of shear bands and tensile cracks, the interactions of these with pre-existing cracks, as well as the crushing of corners of rock blocks and the formation of dust material that in turn interacts with the previous phenomena ( The decreasing trend to dilate with the level of jointing of the rock sample is also reflected in different models performed, in the same way as it was observed in the laboratory, and in line with The main object of this study was to model the behavior of artificially fissured samples tested in the laboratory. To carry out these simulations, intact samples were first simulated with the flat-joint contact model. After that, the artificially fissured samples were modeled, based on the flat-joint contact model as the base material, and the smooth-joint contact model to simulate the joints. Once the fissured models were calibrated, the results of intact and artificially fissured samples obtained both in laboratory tests and numerical simulations were interpreted and compared. The results show that the obtained results for the pre-peak behavior of the laboratory tests and simulations are quite similar. The observed numerical parameters represent rock mass trends well. This suggests that PFC3D models are able to represent the dependence of the elastic and strength parameters on the confining pressure. As for intact rocks, adjustment of the peak strength levels is rather good and those of residual strength are reasonably adjusted. The modeling results match well with the averages obtained in the laboratory and are completely within the range of the observed values. However, there are certain discrepancies in the behavior of the post-failure volumetric deformation. Indeed, the volumetric strain obtained from numerical simulations is typically larger than that observed in laboratory tests. For this, the study has proposed an improvement in the capabilities available for more accurately modeling the laboratory stress–strain response of intact and fissured rock samples. The peak strength and elastic parameters obtained in laboratory tests and numerical simulations match well with each other. It is likely that these parameters tend to be the most relevant ones in the design of many actual rock engineering projects. Moreover, this is the first particle-based numerical study where post-failure evolution branches have been carefully presented for intact and fissured rock samples and for a wide range of confining pressures. These branches have shown to follow the same trends as those observed in practice, although there is room for further improvement. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Itasca Consulting Group is acknowledged by the authors for inviting the first author in their Itasca Education Partnership Program, who additionally provided her with the license of PFC3D. The University of Vigo is acknowledged for financing part of the first author's PhD studies. The second author thanks the