This paper develops a little-known methodology using spreadsheets for modeling, simulating, analyzing and optimizing separation networks for the mineral, chemical, powder and other process industries. The methodology is for the spreadsheet solution of processing networks performing separations. With the methodology developed here a spreadsheet grid is used to represent networks with and without recycle loops. It can be used to calculate the performance of a network given the network stage separation factors. In addition, it may be used to solve the inverse problem — given the grid to determine the condensed network topology. Networks are formed of stages composed of one or more unit operations spatially arranged to perform a better separation than may be done in a single unit operation. Improved process economies require, among other things, optimization. Product upgrading entails separating out the by-products, contaminants and inerts using networks of unit operations. Modeling mineral engineering networks is a rapid, easy, cost-effective way to solve engineering problems ( Presently there are many available computer programs for use ( Computer programs use many methods to simulate processing networks, such as tear methods (sequential modular simulation) and equation-solving methods for simultaneous nonlinear dynamic or algebraic equations (Newton–Raphson procedures). Optimization strategies, such as nonlinear programming, are combined with these methods to obtain optimal designs.  Spreadsheets, which are ideally suited for engineering problems, have been used in solving problems in (1) mine ventilation, (2) network design and optimization of dense media, flotation, and screens, (3) shaking tables, (4) Humphrey spirals, (5) channel flow, (6) locked particle and liberation problems, (7) cascadograhy, (8) flow in porous media, and (9) sheet flotation ( A separation network consists of two or more stages; moreover, the network as well as each of its stages have feed, product and waste streams. In other words, the network has inputs and outputs (feeds and products), as well as various stages composed of such unit operations as cyclones, extractors, filters, impactors, reactors, classifiers, flotation cells and comminution units (crushers, mills and attriters). In the network, these unit operations normally perform solid–solid, solid–liquid, gas–solid and even liquid–liquid, gas–gas, etc. separations. Models for individual unit operations in the stages may be developed having various degrees of complexity. For multi-phase, multi-component network inputs and outputs, distributed parameter models, incorporating conservation of mass, momentum and energy in three dimensions, provide detailed descriptions of the network's steady-state behavior. These steady-state and dynamic descriptions take the mathematical form of systems of coupled, nonlinear differential equations together with other supporting or constitutive equations ( All possible, steady-state models for a given stage ultimately relate conserved quantity inputs, such as mass, momentum and energy, to outputs, using transfer functions. A stage transfer function is a mathematical expression relating the amount of a conserved quantity or component, The stages of countercurrent networks have only two outputs — a product and a waste stream. For mathematical simplicity, all stages are assumed to behave linearly about a set point and are assumed identical, i.e., have the same stage stochastic transfer functions, The methodology presented may be used with multicomponent, transfer function distributions by forming single or multiple integral equations where the transfer function distribution is a function of a property or properties. In addition, the property may be distributed over a mass or number distribution. The resulting population balance equations may be integrated over both the mass or number and property distributions. With spreadsheets, nonlinearities in the transfer functions are easily handled. Both dynamic and steady-state simulation are possible with the appropriate transfer functions. A grid is composed of nodes and connections between nodes. There is an x if there is no separation unit at a node, whereas o represents a separation unit at the node. Grid sinks are denoted by P (product) and W (waste or tailings). Connections between nodes are indicated by dashed lines. Grid sources are noted by F (feed). The grid in The grid method can be used to analyze the so-called ramification networks ( The coefficients to the expansion exponents in the Once the path numbers for the nodes preceding a given node have been determined, the path number for that node can be determined. The number of possible paths from F to a node is the sum of those of the numbers for the node(s) connecting to that node. For example, the path number of the node in row 4, column 3 is 5 since the numbers of the two nodes connecting to the node are 3 and 2 ( Graph theory may be applied to the separation networks to obtain the network transfer function (yield or recovery), The formulation of the grid representation of common networks is demonstrated in For each case the grid representation is also shown. The grid representation has been truncated here to a 5×5 grid representation for ease of demonstration. The grid representations actually extend infinitely to the right and down for networks containing recycle loops. The larger the grid, the more accurate the grid representation. It is the use of recycle loops that causes the grid representation to become infinite. The network transfer function (yield or recovery), Patterns immediately form for each type of network. As more stages and recycle streams are added, more of the grid is filled in what are perfectly predictable patterns. It can easily be seen that as more stages are added to the common countercurrent network, more of the grid is filled in. It also can be seen that adding stages to the left of the feed in a network results in the filling of the upper left part of the grids while adding stages to the right of the feed to a network results in the filling of the lower right left part of the grids. The separation network transfer function (yield or recovery),