The response of the yield stress of suspensions of zirconia to changes in temperature was investigated using direct measurement with the vane technique. The objective of the study was to both probe the nature and origins of the temperature-related changes in the static structure present in the suspensions. The measurements showed that the yield stress of zirconia increased by up to 50% with an increase in temperature from 298 to 318 K. The yield stress-temperature data was modelled using a theoretical framework incorporating interparticle force considerations. In contrast to the experimental data, the model indicated that only a very small increase in yield stress with temperature would be expected. However, the analysis of the model inputs implied that the yield stress increase could most likely be attributed to a very small change in interparticle spacing from 26.5 to 23.5 Å over the temperature range studied. The physical likelihood of such a change is discussed.The response of the yield stress of suspensions to changes in temperature is of great practical importance in many mineral processing applications which operate at above-ambient temperatures which frequently vary throughout the process. For example, in the Bayer process for extraction of alumina from bauxite or the high pressure acid leaching of nickel laterites, temperatures can range from above 100 °C down to ambient temperature. In the design and operation of pumping systems for such applications, the importance of designing based on the viscosity and shear yield stress of particulate suspensions is well known. Knowledge of the yield stress is particularly significant from the perspective of ensuring the pumping system can be started-up successfully from a static, shut-down condition. The impact of temperature fluctuations on the viscosity of suspensions is routinely accounted for in pumping system design, yet in spite of its importance, the true response of the yield stress to a temperature change remains largely untested. There is often a general assumption by industrial practitioners that, as the viscosity of a suspension generally decreases with increasing temperature due to the decrease in the carrier fluid viscosity, the yield stress will also decrease. This logic is flawed, as the yield stress is a static quantity predominantly governed by interparticle forces and network structural considerations, therefore it should have little or no direct relationship to the carrier fluid viscosity. That said, it is has been also implied that the interparticle force will decrease with increasing temperature A review of literature concerning the effect of temperature on Of the studies listed above, a notable characteristic of those which observed a decrease in Clearly, to have any confidence in the conclusions of an investigation into the effect of temperature on suspension yield stress, a direct measurement technique such as the vane technique However, even discounting literature results garnered via extrapolative approaches, significant uncertainty remains over the effect of temperature on yield stress. It is likely that the true effect of temperature on yield stress is highly system specific, making in depth fundamental investigation of complex multi-component systems challenging. Therefore the focus of this study is to investigate the effect of temperature on a well-characterised, metal oxide suspension, zirconia, via direct measurement using the vane technique. These experimental results will be considered in conjunction with the theoretical influence of temperature predicted by a structural model for the yield stress of suspensions developed by Scales et al. From a theoretical standpoint, only limited investigation of the effect of temperature on the yield stress has been completed. In their investigation of the temperature dependence of the rheology of titanium dioxide suspensions, Yang et al. The approach of Yang et al. In this paper, a similar DLVO-based approach will be employed using a structural model for the yield stress of flocculated suspensions developed by Scales et al. As detailed in Scales et al. The model presented in Eq. In Eq. The inverse Debye length also has an explicit dependency on temperature: In addition to the variability in the key quantities above, uncertainty surrounds the impact of temperature on the structure of the network itself and the interparticle spacing. The application of the Scales et al. As a final note, Scales et al. The material used in all tests was a zirconia supplied by Millennium Performance Chemicals, Rockingham, Western Australia ( The shear yield stress ( The zeta potential of 2% (v/v) zirconia suspensions was measured as a function of pH and temperature using a Colloidal Dynamics AcoustoSizer In order to apply the model of Scales et al. The calculated variation in the Hamaker constant was determined using Eq.  It is interesting to note that the IEP for the zirconia, as identified by the maxima in the yield stress versus pH curves, appears to decrease from around 6.55 to 6.1 as the temperature is increased. Such a change in the IEP has been observed in other metal oxide systems Also of note in As discussed earlier, there are a number of quantities that are likely to change with temperature for which we have no The experimental normalised yield stress behaviour as a function of temperature is presented in Notably, the normalised yield stress calculations in With an increase in temperature, a reduction in the mean distance of closest approach might reasonably be expected and clearly the impact of this would be to broaden the shape of the yield stress–pH curve as the impact of van der Waals attraction is increased. Comparing the calculated with experimental results, indicates a drop in the value of As the absolute values of the yield stress will be highly sensitive to the interparticle separation employed, the true test of the soundness of the With the value of  Based on the reasonable success of the model at capturing the fundamental mechanics of the effects of surface chemistry and poly-dispersity of a range of colloidal systems Across the relatively narrow temperature range and volume fractions of interest in this study, significant changes in the coordination number and crowding factor with increasing temperature would not be expected. By definition the coordination number is based on particle geometric packing considerations which would not be expected to change without significant changes in particle (not to be confused with floc) size distribution. The crowding factor may be expected to be more variant as it should reflect the state of aggregation of the system. However whilst a change in At this point a comment is also required about the relative thermal expansion coefficients of the two materials which, if taken into account over the temperatures from 288 to 318 K, would result in a The sensitivity of the actual magnitude of the predicted yield stress at 318 K to the value of Within the literature, little experimental information is available investigating the dependency of minimum interparticle separation on temperature therefore the dependency here needs to be justified on qualitative grounds. A change in the distance of closest approach could result from a change in either of two key phenomena—the overall kinetic energy of particles or the adsorbed water layer on the particle surface. Realistically, over the moderate range of temperature change of interest in this study, on energetic grounds a change in the adsorbed water layer is unlikely due to its high solvation energy. Furthermore, the required changes in interparticle spacing of around 3 Å indicated by the model would require the complete loss of a layer of water molecule from the surface. A more likely explanation in the context of the required magnitude of the change in It is possible that the simplistic form we have assumed for the variation of the Hamaker constant may not have fully accounted for its true changes with temperature, however detailed treatment of this issue was beyond the scope of this work. That said, given the low level of sensitivity of the model to changes in Hamaker constant, it is unlikely that this is the source of major error. Furthermore, the magnitude of the increases in Hamaker constant required account for the observed yield stress changes are unrealistic and would cause significant broadening of the yield stress–pH parabola in disagreement with observed results. In view of the uncertainty in this area, an atomic force microscopic investigation of the variation of the interparticle force with temperature is warranted. Finally, the treatment of the zirconia system as mono-dispersed may also have implications with respect to the model predicted changes in yield stress with temperature. Zhou et al. This work has shown that the assumption that the yield stress of colloidal suspensions decreases in concert with the viscosity as temperature increases is unequivocally flawed. This has been demonstrated experimentally and explored theoretically using an approximate form of a yield stress model developed previously. As the model predicted only a slight increase in yield stress with temperature using the accepted temperature dependence of the key physical quantities which it employs, it was postulated that the assumption of fixed mean interparticle separation with temperature may not hold. By allowing for a reduction in interparticle separation from 26.5 to 23.5 Å between 288 and 318 K the model was able to describe the observed changes in both the magnitude and form of the yield stress–pH curves with temperature. Whilst some uncertainty existed due to the effect of other factors such as the influence of system poly-dispersity on the model predictions, a change in interparticle spacing with temperature appeared to be the most reasonable explanation of the observed results. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Particulate Fluids Processing Centre, a Special Research Centre of the Australian Research Council and Professor Tom Healy for helpful suggestions during the preparation of this manuscript.