Traumatic bony fractures are an infrequent complication of pregnancy. When fractures of the pelvis are involved, treatment decisions are complicated by considerations pertaining to the immediate maternal needs, long-term maternal outcome, and impact on the fetus. We report herein the case of a gravida in the first trimester of pregnancy who sustained an unstable pelvic fracture from a motor vehicle accident and the available treatment options. Based on our experience and review of the literature, it is our recommendation that the most conservative treatment measures are instituted with involvement of the orthopedic surgeon, perinatologist, and anesthesiologist. A 31-year-old primigravida who was 13 weeks pregnant complained of pain and swelling of the left hip after being hit by a car while she was riding a motorcycle. She was taken to a local clinic where a computed tomogram had been obtained, revealing widely displaced pelvic and acetabular fractures with left pubic rami, ischial, and iliac involvement ( Unstable, widely displaced pelvis and acetabular fractures involving the weight-bearing surface of the acetabulum require open reduction and internal fixation to achieve satisfactory results and reduce the possibility of early traumatic osteoarthritis of the joint. Treatment of the gravida in the first or second trimester of pregnancy involves a number of complex issues. Potential causes of fetal death include direct injury to the placenta, uterus, or fetus, maternal hemorrhage, In conclusion, when the treatment of choice for unstable and widely displaced pelvic and acetabular fractures, a closed reduction, fails to achieve acceptable reduction in a gravida, the alternative treatment, open reduction and internal fixation, may be safe, effective, and well-tolerated. However, a surgical procedure in gravidas has more potential risks and uncertainty for both the mother and the fetus. Therefore, the proper time of surgery should be chosen by careful evaluation of the medical condition of the mother and fetus by a team including an orthopedic surgeon, a perinatologist, and an anesthesiologist. The surgical goals for gravidas with these fractures include adequate fixation, maternal safety, avoidance of intrauterine fetal asphyxia, and prevention of preterm labor.