The ac electrical conductivity of mixed alkali LiF-KF-Al(PO3)3 glasses has been investigated using the complex conductivity formalism. For the first time, a mixed alkali effect has been detected in the ac conductivity of glasses which also exhibit the classical mixed alkali effect in the dc conductivity. The observed conductivity relaxations have been analyzed using three and four parameter functions. Jonscher’s universal dielectric response yields the best description of the experimental data.The mixed alkali effect (MAE) refers to the non-linear variations of physical properties of glasses. The most celebrated case is the so-called ‘mixed alkali’ effect in which mixing of two alkali oxide glasses (silicate, borate, phosphate etc.) of comparable dc conductivities, results in a glass with a dc conductivity orders of magnitude lower than either of the binary end-member glasses In this paper, we investigate the variation of ac conductivity of mixed alkali glasses and for the first time provide evidence for a mixed alkali effect in the ac conductivity of glasses which exhibit MAE in the dc conductivity. We extract the ac conductivity from the complex conductivity and compare the composition variation of both the ac and the dc conductivity. For a proper comparison with reported data we have chosen the commonly used frequency range. 20 The ac electrical data, in principle, can be analyzed in terms of complex modulus, conductivity, admittance or complex dielectric constant. Ionically conducting glasses have been studied using both modulus and power-law formalisms although the use of the former is quite widespread. In recent years, there has been a debate regarding the most appropriate formalism to explain ac conductivity/relaxation in glasses There are some reports, on conductivity relaxation and its dependence on composition (including MAE glasses), using the complex modulus formalism. The variation of the stretched exponential parameter High ionic conductivity has been reported in LiF-Al(PO Nine glasses, whose batch compositions are given in We have analyzed the frequency dependence of conductivity for all the glasses as isotherms in the log–log plots. At very low temperatures, only ac conductivity was observed. As the temperature was increased, the dynamic conductivity showed a typical behavior: a frequency independent plateau and a power-law increase at high frequencies. The dc conductivity ( Let us now turn our attention to seeing how the ac conductivity varies with composition for these glasses at a fixed temperature. In order to explore this effect further, we have studied the temperature dependence of the ac conductivity. The ac conductivity was defined at l0 Finally, we show some results from an analysis of our data within the modulus formalism. A typical modulus spectrum for one of the compositions (close to minimum conductivity) is shown in In conclusion, we have shown that the celebrated mixed alkali effect which is well documented for the dc conductivity of glasses also occurs in the ac conductivity. The complex conductivity formalism gives the best description of the electrical relaxation. The maximum in the exponent One of us (ARK) acknowledges the Alexander Von Humbodt foundation for the research fellowship to carry out this work.