Parametric pumping with variation of the pH is an innovative ion-exchange process which allows heavy metals from mixed waste solutions to be recovered as single components and, therefore, to be recycled. The process is based on the addition of complexing agents to a mixture, on its separation into two half volumes and a periodic contact of an ion exchanger with both liquid phases. Optimum conditions for the separation with respect to the kind of complexing agent, its amount relative to the concentration of heavy metals and to the amount of ion exchanger material have been deduced in preliminary investigations. Using citric acid as complexing agent the separation of binary mixtures of divalent/divalent and trivalent/divalent metal ions has been investigated. The kinds of metal species forming more stable complexes are concentrated in the high-pH solution, the other ones in the low-pH solution. Separation is more successful the greater the difference of the ratio of non-complexed metal cations at the two operating pH values becomes. As a consequence, systems with copper as one component can be well separated. Less effective separations were found for mixtures of other divalent metals. The separation can be emphasized by applying a second separation step to the two half volumes.The separation of heavy metals from liquid streams has become more and more important. Separation is required for industrial waste waters containing toxic heavy metals like copper, nickel, zinc, or cadmium. To maintain legislative regulations such waters have to be treated prior to their discharge into sewers and/or bodies of water A second important area in which separation processes are required is hydrometallurgy. Elution of ores usually leads to a mixture of dissolve metals which have to be recovered as separate components. Usual methods are electrolytic recovery or conventional ion-exchange processes although in some cases not very efficient Application of selective exchangers is a common way for recovery of heavy metals. The respective resins allow an efficient uptake of metal species in many cases even in the presence of much larger concentrations of other cations. This selective separation, however, leads to the consumption of considerable amounts of chemicals during recovery by regeneration. Parametric Pumping is an alternative ion-exchange process for the separation and recovery of heavy metals from either metallurgical waste effluents or from raw solutions of hydrometallurgy. Its principle consists of dividing an original solution into at least two (half) volumes which are contacted with a sorbent, usually an ion-exchange resin, in periodic change. Separation effects are achieved by adjusting a thermodynamic parameter affecting the equilibrium between liquid and solid phase in both half volumes to two different values. In every contact with the other liquid phase non-equilibrium conditions exist and the system strives to the exchange equilibrium in the respective half volume. If the parameter values are adjusted in a favourable way, one or several components are transported (pumped) from solution 1 to solution 2 or vice versa. Complete adjustment of the exchange equilibrium in each step is not required. The most important property of parametric pumping is the fact that it is a regenerant-free separation process. Possible thermodynamic parameters for parametric pumping are temperature, ionic strength or the pH which affect ion-exchange equilibria with different efficiency. From the classical point of view temperature has the strongest influence and, consequently, is designated as a strong parameter, whereas ionic strength and pH value are weak parameters. Thermal parametric pumping was first developed in 1966 by Wilhelm et al. Compared to the temperature-based separation Parametric Pumping with variation of pH would offer an economic advantage because there is no need to heat up water. It has first been investigated by Sabadell and Sweed The separation of mixtures by means of pH induced parametric pumping is promising only if the variation of pH has a substantial influence on the sorption equilibrium. For separation of a pure mixture of heavy metals by means of a strong acid exchanger, pH has almost no influence. Protons are non-preferred species and have almost no effect on the exchange equilibrium. In such a direct mode operation pH is a weak parameter for such systems. However, this problem can be overcome by adding a complexing agent to the liquid phase. By this means, part of the heavy metal cations are converted to complex species which are either neutral or even anionic. Due to the pH dependent degree of the complexation and to its differences for different metal ions the influence of pH changes can strongly be emphasised. In such an indirect mode it can be expected that the pH value is changed to a strong parameter in parametric pumping which allows a satisfactory separation. For theoretical consideration of pH influenced Parametric Pumping a system is considered which contains two divalent cations A Any Parametric Pumping separation using cation exchangers necessarily requires the presence of free cations at both pH values. As a consequence, both the individual properties of the complexing agent and the amount of complexing agent relative to the total amount of metal ions The task of the cation exchanger in parametric pumping is the transport (pumping) of ions, however, not any kind of selective uptake. No particular selectivity for one of the components should occur. As a consequence, standard strongly acidic exchangers exhibit optimum properties whereas heavy metal-selective resins cannot be applied. Because of their dissociation properties weakly acidic resins are also not applicable. The amount of cation exchanger relative to the maximum sum of equivalents of metal cations has to be limited and must not allow the complete uptake of all metals. Otherwise, no transport can occur. As a consequence the relative amount of resin material in the system expressed by For separation the original solution is separated into two half volumes. Two different pH values are adjusted in the half volumes by addition of an acid (HCl or H The exchanger is assumed to be initially loaded with A The development of liquid and resin phase compositions can graphically be represented only in a dimensionless square equilibrium diagram and in a qualitative way. For simplicity the following assumptions are made:  only 1:1 complexes occur no complexation at low pH, therefore at the higher pH 90% of A and 10% of B are complexed, therefore the total cation concentration is half of that at the low pH and the equivalent fractions are The resin exhibits no preferred uptake of either A  In half cycle #3 the resin with this composition is again contacted with the low-pH solution of the equilibrium concentration of half cycle #1. Again the exchange follows an ordinary operating line from H The development of the separation shows that the relative concentration of A From the graphical representation it becomes also obvious that the separation becomes more effective the greater the differences of the free cation concentrations at the two pH values are. Addition of a complexing agent converts metals species to complex anions. The degree of complexation depends on the type of complexing agent, its amount relative to the concentration of heavy metals and on pH. Calculation of the speciation of complex systems was based on the solution of a system of mass balances for each constituent, the condition of electroneutrality in the liquid phase and the formation of the various compounds from the respective constitutents. Formation constants were be taken from literature For a system with 5 mmol/l total concentrations of copper, nickel, and citric acid the calculated dimensionless concentrations of the free, uncomplexed cations are shown in At equal concentrations the system nickel–cadmium–citric acid exhibits a completely different development. In this case the complexation of both cations with citric acid develops rather similar. Therefore, there is only a slight change of the ratio of free cations. In this case the ratio All experiments were carried out using the commercially available gel-type strongly acidic cation exchanger Purolite C100E. Data of the resin presented by the manufacturer is compiled in For removal of monomers and traces of heavy metals from the manufacturing process the exchanger material was three times treated with 1 molar HCl and 1 molar NaCl and rinsed with deionised water between each step. For measurement of exchange capacities in different metal forms resin material was converted to the respective metal form by means of 0.5 molar metal chloride solutions. Capacities were determined by means of column experiments For any experiment the exchanger material was centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 20 min before weighing the desired amounts. For separation experiments a laboratory scale device has been used. The installation consisted of two vessels each containing 1.5 l solution, a basket stirrer of 5 cm diameter for storing the resin material and a pH controlling system with a pH control unit (Dulcometer D1C), a pH electrode (Schott N65) and two dosage pumps (Prominent GG4b) for adding acid or base from corresponding storage vessels into the solution. The experimental set-up is schematically shown in As can be demonstrated an optimum development of the separation is achieved if the initial resin phase composition corresponds to that of the final system equilibrium. Therefore, each experiment consisted of a conditioning step to adjust this equilibrium approximately prior to the real separation. In the conditioning step the resin Purolite C100E in the sodium form was subjected to several cycles using an original solution of the same composition as in the following separation experiment. In both parts the total volume amounted to 3 l. In each half cycle of both the conditioning and separation parts of each experiment the stirrer rotated in the respective solution for 30 min. Since the rate of exchange is generally fast with strongly acidic exchangers it can be assumed that the exchange equilibrium is attained at the end of each half cycle. The stirrer is then moved out of the solution and rotated at the highest possible number of revolutions for another 10 min. This is necessary to remove the adhering solution and to avoid cross-contaminations of the half volumes. By means of the exchanger conditioned in this way the main separation experiment was started. This main experiment included twelve cycles until no further change of the compositions in the two half volumes could be observed. Samples of 200 μl were taken from the original solution and after each half cycle. The samples were diluted to 20 ml and acidified by means of HNO Optimum conditions for the separation with respect to suitable complexing agents and relative amounts of both complexing agent and resin material had to be found in three series of preliminary experiments. Selection of a suitable complexing agent is essential for the separation process. The complexing agent has to form complexes of different stability with both cations. However, these complexes should not be too stable to allow an easy decomplexation. The first series of experiments, therefore, comprised the separation of identical mixtures of 5 mmol/l CuCl  The results clearly reveal that the best separation effects are obtained by means of citric acid and tartaric acid. The application of gluconic acid led to a significantly poorer separation effect, whereas, the use of NTA did not allow any significant separation of nickel and copper. This is due to the high stability of the NTA chelates. The influence of the pH-value on the NTA speciation within this pH-range is too poor to allow a separation. Based on these results citric acid was chosen for all further experiments. The second series of preliminary experiments concentrated on the problem of suitable amounts of complexing agent for a given separation problem. As described earlier, there should be no practically complete complexation of both metals at the higher pH value. The influence of the amount of complexing agent was studied for the system copper–nickel–citric acid. The results reveal a clear dependence of the separation effect on In the third part of these preliminary experiments the influence of the amount of ion-exchange material was studied. As mentioned before, there should be no complete sorption of all metal cations by the exchanger at the low pH value. As a consequence, the quantity of resin has to be selected in a way that the total capacity is smaller than the sum of metal equivalents in their non-complexed state. Again the system copper–nickel–citric acid was used. Results from experiments with The experiments have shown that an increasing amount of resin material increases the number of cycles in the conditioning step which starts with a resin in the Na Without automatic pH adjustment the pH of the low-pH solution tends to increase and that of the high-pH solution to decrease as described before. This is predominantly due to the transport of small amounts of solution adhering to the exchanger material from one half solution into the other which cannot be suppressed completely. These changes of pH which deteriorate the separation effect are balanced by the automatic adjustment. The respective amounts of acid/base were small and have not been measured. There is a certain uptake of sodium ions by the resins although not being a species preferred over the divalent metal ions. The influence of this sorption on the separation is negligible. In systems with copper as on component the separation of binary systems is dominated by the stability of copper complexes which is considerably higher than that of other heavy metals. As a consequence, the results from separation experiments with nickel, zinc or other divalent heavy metals are very similar. However, a considerable increase/decrease of the concentration of both components are found which are caused by the strong differences of the ratio of free cations at both pH values. Due to these differences by far less effective separations were found for binary systems with two weakly complexing metal components.   The systems considered so far contained both components at equal initial concentrations. However, technical solutions may have non-equimolar metal contents. The separation of such solutions has been studied for the system copper/nickel/citric acid. Two experiments were carried out with initial concentration ratios of These experiments can be considered also from another point of view: For the system copper/nickel/citric acid with equal metal concentrations in the original solution the separation leads to a decrease of the copper concentration in the low-pH solution to about 25% of the original concentration. A further separation would require a second separation step in which the half volumes of the first step are in turn divided into two half volumes, each and treated in a similar way ( The progression of the heavy metal concentrations during the pH parametric pumping process is described in The principle development is the same as in the preceding cases with copper being pumped into the high-pH solution and nickel vice versa. With respect to the initial concentrations, however, a further separation of copper and nickel is only achieved in one of the two half volumes. In the experiment with a ratio of initial concentrations of The results of the investigations have demonstrated the following: Addition of a complexing agent to a mixture of heavy metals allows an efficient separation by means of pH-influenced Parametric Pumping. Under these conditions pH becomes a strong parameter. Automatic pH adjustment during the adjustment of exchange equilibria in each solution improves the separation effect. The relative amount of the complexing agent has to be selected in a way that free metal cations exist in non-negligible amounts at both pH values. There is no separation if all metal ions are present in the form of neutral or anionic complexes. Cation exchangers with no preference for either of the components exhibit optimum transport properties. The amount of ion exchanger material must not allow the sorption of the entire amount of metal ions. For the systems investigated citric acid and also tartaric acid exhibited optimum properties. Separation becomes the more effective the greater the differences between the ratios of free cations at the two selected pH values are. As a consequence, divalent metals can well be separated from copper. By application of a second separation step almost copper-free metal solutions can be generated. In mixtures of other metals (e.g. nickel, zinc, cadmium, cobalt) poorer separation effects are found. The component which forms complexes of higher stability is always pumped into the high-pH solution, the other one into the low-pH solution.  concentration, mmol/l initial concentration of component concentration of component ‘ sum of concentrations of relative amount of complexing agent, relative amount of ion-exchanger equivalents, mass of complexing agent, g molecular weight of complexing agent, g/mol number of components resin loading, meq/g initial resin loading, meq/g resin loading with component total exchanger capacity, meq/g mass of centrifuged ion exchanger, g volume, l equivalent fraction of ‘ equivalent fraction of ‘ equivalent fraction of ‘ initial equivalent fraction of ions ‘ valency of component binary separation factor for the exchange of ‘ concentration ratio of non-complexed metal cations, mol/mol The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the European Union through the Brite-Euram III Project BRCR-CT96-0158. Furthermore, they want to thank Purolite International Ltd., Cowbridge Road, Pontyclun, Mid Glamorgan, Wales, for the delivery of the resin material.