‘AQW’ is the signature technical symposium of the global alumina industry. Held once every three years, it has grown from the first ‘Alumina Quality Workshop’ in 1988 to become a major international event that covers all aspects of the production of alumina from bauxite. “Innovation: Refining Our Future” was chosen as the theme for the 10 Innovation has always underpinned the success of the alumina industry. We operate in an increasingly complex and competitive world of shrinking economic margins and ballooning environmental, social and legislative demands. The list of alternative materials grows as carbon fibre and other composites add to the traditional rivals - steel, magnesium, titanium and plastics. So now more than ever we must continually challenge the fundamentals and embrace the new; not just to prosper, but to survive. The Conference Organising Committee set out to encourage contributions from disciplines beyond those usually associated with alumina refining. The result was a great success. An eclectic mix of high-quality papers was led by a keynote speech from a leading medical scientist. It included contributions from microbiologists and soil scientists as well as the more familiar chemists and chemical engineers, metallurgists and environmental scientists. The articles chosen for this Special Issue of Hydrometallurgy were selected from over 70 conference papers to best represent the breadth and quality of research and innovation presented. They show that improvements to core processes including digestion, desilication and precipitation control remain vital; but now we also see the importance of novel engineering to reduce energy consumption and erosive wear; the detection and control of emissions to air, water and ground; and the manufacture of new products from waste materials. We trust that this selection of papers will be of interest to technologists involved in all aspects of the alumina industry, from researchers within refining companies, universities and research institutes, to practitioners, suppliers, and representatives of governments and communities.