Introduction
                  The purpose of this national study was to audit the weight-bearing practice of orthopaedic services in the National Health Service (NHS) in the treatment of operatively and non-operatively treated ankle fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A multicentre prospective two-week audit of all adult ankle fractures was conducted between July 3rd 2017 and July 17th 2017. Fractures were classified using the AO/OTA classification. Fractures fixed with syndesmosis screws or unstable fractures (>1 malleolus fractured or talar shift present) treated conservatively were excluded. No outcome data were collected. In line with NICE (The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence) criteria, “early” weight-bearing was defined as unrestricted weight-bearing on the affected leg within 3 weeks of injury or surgery and “delayed” weight-bearing as unrestricted weight-bearing permitted after 3 weeks.
               
                  Results
                  251 collaborators from 81 NHS hospitals collected data: 531 patients were managed non-operatively and 276 operatively. The mean age was 52.6 years and 50.5 respectively. 81% of non-operatively managed patients were instructed for early weight-bearing as recommended by NICE. In contrast, only 21% of operatively managed patients were instructed for early weight-bearing.
               
                  Discussion
                  The majority of patients with uni-malleolar ankle fractures which are managed non-operatively are treated in accordance with NICE guidance. There is notable variability amongst and within NHS hospitals in the weight-bearing instructions given to patients with operatively managed ankle fractures.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study demonstrates community equipoise and suggests that the randomized study to determine the most effective strategy for postoperative weight-bearing in ankle fractures described in the NICE research recommendation is feasible.Each day approximately 200 patients sustain an ankle fracture in the United Kingdom (UK) A multicentre, prospective two-week audit of all adult ankle fractures was conducted between July 3rd 2017 and July 17th 2017. Collaborators were recruited and coordinated via the online British Orthopaedic Network Enviroment (BONE) on behalf of the In line with NICE definitions, “early” weight-bearing was defined as unrestricted weight-bearing on the affected leg within 3 weeks of injury or surgery and “delayed” weight-bearing as unrestricted weight-bearing permitted after 3 weeks Fractures were classified by AO/OTA classification ( Data were collected on patient demographics, method of treatment, time to surgery, time to unrestricted weight-bearing, form of immobilisation, time and method of repeat radiographic assessment if stability was uncertain. Time to unrestricted weight-bearing was recorded both from date of injury and from date from first review by orthopedic services. Patient factors including documented diabetes, osteoporosis, peripheral neuropathy or mobility concerns (e.g. previously requiring mobility aids or assistance, or sustaining multiple injuries limiting mobility) were recorded. In addition, injury factors including open fracture, gross comminution or soft tissue compromise documented on the operation note were recorded. No outcome data were collected. Count data were summarised as absolute numbers and proportions; continuous data as means and ranges. Data were analysed using IBM SPSS Statistics v.21 (IBM, Armonk. New York). No inferential statistical analyses were performed. 251 collaborators from 81 NHS hospitals provided data from 996 adults with 996 ankle fractures before application of the exclusion criteria. A participant flow diagram is presented at Data from 531 patients with a mean age of 52.6 311 (59%) patients had a check radiograph within 2 weeks to confirm stability, of which 131 (42%) were weight-bearing radiographs. 80 (61%) of those that had a weight-bearing radiograph had them whilst in their respective form of immobilisation; 51 (39%) had no immobilisation whilst having their radiograph taken. Data from 276 patients. The mean age was 50.2 The clinical and economic impacts of delayed weight-bearing are not fully understood A variety of factors may influence a clinician’s weight-bearing decision when treating fractures conservatively: clinical examination, medial tenderness, gravity stress and supination-external rotation stress views have all been used A 2012 Cochrane review Kheir et al. Recent qualitative studies have shed light on the psychosocial effects of ankle fractures with patients having to “endure” a period of non-weight bearing. While some patients adjust, many find the experience “terrifying” and put their life on hold, even avoiding showering or bathing altogether until allowed to weight-bear This study has a number of limitations. It reports only the decisions of the treating clinicians; it did not collect data on patient outcomes, complications or cross over from the conservative into the operative group. It is not known if patients adhered to their weight-bearing instructions or if they were allowed to exercise their ankle. We used the AO/OTA classification as it has better intraobserver and interobserver reliability than the Lauge-Hansen classification This study is the first to prospectively look at weight-bearing decisions. A previous American survey of clinicians views towards postoperative ankle fractures found a preferred average time non-weight-bearing of 4.9 weeks in young healthy patients, increasing to 7.6 weeks in older, comorbid patients with complex fractures This study demonstrates the willingness of clinicians to allow early weight-bearing in conservatively managed AO44A1 fractures, the relative uncertainty in AO44B1 fractures and the reluctance to weight-bear early in operatively treated adult malleolar ankle fractures. It is unclear if early or delayed weight-bearing influences late functional outcome. The economic and social cost may emerge as the key argument in the weight-bearing debate.  The standard of care for weight-bearing after ankle fracture was previously unknown. 81% of non-operatively managed patients with uni-malleolar fractures are advised early weight-bearing. 21% of operatively managed patients are advised early weight-bearing. There is community equipoise and a randomized study examining weight-bearing in ankle fractures is feasible. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 