As part of the evolution of ore sorting technology for large-scale production operations, Bulk Ore Sorting (BOS) is applied to projects that mine tens of millions of tons per year. BOS systems aim to remove as much non-economic material as possible prior to milling. Mass recovery, metallurgical recovery and consequently plant throughput fluctuate according to deposit characteristics, mining method, equipment efficiency and the cut-off grade applied at both the mine and BOS stage. This case study presents a calculation methodology which determines cut-off grade combinations for the mine and BOS to maximize the financial return for both brownfield and greenfield projects. From this information it is possible to calculate the mass balance, including the BOS stage, in a new process flow sheet. The assumptions made, and production data used (such as volumes, costs and grades) for this case study were those realized in 2014 by Phu Kham Mining, a world-class copper and gold operation situated in Laos.As part of the evaluation of Bulk Ore Sorting (BOS) at the Phu Kham operation, this paper describes the analysis used to predict optimum cut-off grades for the mine and bulk ore sorter to maximize economic results. The objective was to present a methodology which could be applied to brownfield and greenfield projects by estimating the operational and economic benefit of implementing BOS at the Phu Kham Mine. The methodology predicts the grade distribution of the product from the primary crusher conveyor, using geostatistics. This is then used to determine the ideal mass and grade balance required to maximize economic results, considering sorting efficiency and the actual results obtained for material mined in 2014. Phu Kham Mine is a copper-gold operation situated 140 km northeast of the Laotian capital. Due to the weathering, alteration, faulting and folding of the area, the geology is extremely heterogeneous. The deposits consist of complex horizons of copper-gold stockwork and skarn mineralization. The gold is associated with the copper ore which is predominantly contained in chalcopyrite but other copper minerals, such as chalcocite, covellite, bornite and tennantite, are also present ( Bulk Ore Sorting is a suitable design solution for sensor based, pre-concentration for large operations; for example, treating 3600 t/h of plant throughput on a plant feed or mobile in-pit conveyor. A fast and penetrative sensor or combination of sensors A control system to interpret data and make an ‘accept’ or ‘reject’ decision A diversion system, such as a diverter gate, to separate valuable ‘segments’ of ore from waste A BOS system treats the full process stream (i.e. all particle sizes) on a fully loaded conveyor belt. Separation is based on the grade as measured or inferred from a sensor measurement. For Phu Kham pre-analysis, we would consider either Prompt-gamma neutron activation analysis (PGNAA), Magnetic Resonance (MR), or a combination of both to track the copper cut-off grade ( The proposed methodology has four main phases, which will be described below: Dispersion variance calculation Recovered mass and grade Sorter separation Economic evaluation The PanAust and Phu Kham provided all the necessary inputs, with the main data being: Costs Block model (blocks mined in 2014) Variograms Plant recovery For the economic evaluation, the assumptions were as follows: 2014 Mined material Mine cut-off grades: 0.10%; 0.15% and 0.20% Cu BOS cut-off grades: 0.10%; 0.15% and 0.20% Cu Primary crusher capacity: 20 Mtpa Mining, processing and overhead costs as 2014 per ton costs Additional BOS operating costs ($0.4 per tonne sorted) and for removal of the material rejected by the sorter ($1.6 per tonne rejected) Ore sorter availability and efficiency Processing plant recovery was calculated as a function of feed grade based on regression analysis of the Phu Kham plant data from 2014 Copper selling price USD $5500.00/t (copper price USD $6000.00/t as per February 2017) Effective separation depends on sorter feed grade variability on the conveyor belt. The “in-situ” deposit variability is degraded by ore handling during blasting, mining and crushing operations. Dispersion variance is a geostatistical tool that can estimate grade variability by considering the semivariogram ϒ for each lithology and the geometry of the block from the mine model. A variogram is a function that describes the degree of spatial dependence on a mineralized space. Dispersion variance of blocks (v) centred in y, inside a regular block (V) centred in x, is the difference between the average semivariogram values calculated for V and v ( The BOS system measures the grade of the smaller batches compared to the regular block volume (V) in a mine block model. The grade of the smaller batches (as seen by the BOS system) can be determined using the volume of those batches (v). However, as there will be some loss of “in situ” heterogeneity due to mining operations, the volume (v) should be increased to compensate. Dispersion variance is inversely proportional to the volume (v), so the smaller batches will demonstrate higher variability. The short-term, block model dimensions in the mine block model are 10 × 10 × 10 m with an approximate mass of 2700 tonnes. The MR sensor supplier indicates that it is possible to measure and integrate material on the primary crusher product belt at 20 s intervals with (0.01% Cu) precision. For Phu Kham, this is equivalent to approximately 20 tonnes. To keep the study conservative, a block size of 5 × 5 × 5 m was selected, which avoids overestimating the BOS benefit while providing adequate operational homogenization. This equates to approximately 340 tonnes of ore. Considering Eq. D D D(5,10) = 0.27 A computing process from Datamine Studio3 was used to determine the total tonnage and grade of material above a specified mine cut-off grade. The process considered the distribution of small blocks (v) within each model cell. The inputs were a Kriged grade estimate, the dispersion variance value, the volume (v), and variogram file. The outputs were the mass and grades recovered. The study considered three mine cut-off grades: 0.10%; 0.15%; 0.20% Cu; these numbers are operationally feasible. The current mine cut-off grade is 0.20% Cu, which is restricted by grade control limitations and crusher capacity. Considering sensor precision, the BOS cut-off grade can vary by 0.05% Cu. The sorter cut-off grades considered were the same as the mine cut-off grade: i.e. 0.10%; 0.15%; 0.20% Cu. The proportion of mass and grade accepted and rejected by the BOS was estimated for each pair of cut-off grades (mine and BOS) evaluated. An availability of 90% was assumed for the BOS. The efficiency index was calculated using Eqs. where     where  To illustrate the use of Eqs.   D – 90% TL – 20 s TD – 3 s      Implementation of BOS would change the mass balance and there would be some additional operating costs associated with sorting and reject handling. Thus, an economic comparison was conducted to evaluate its overall impact and determine the ideal pair of cut-off grades (cut-off grade at mine and cut-off grade at the BOS).  Comparison of economic scenarios shows that a mine cut-off grade of 0.15% Cu gives the greatest increase in inferred cash flow.  This paper presented a methodology for simulating grade distribution on the primary crusher product conveyor and determining the optimum cut-off grades for both the mine and sorter to maximize the economic benefits of BOS. The related methodology can be applied to projects that are already in operation or currently under development. Furthermore, it provides a solution for production and beneficiation scaling by generating an expected mass balance. Using the presented methodology, the economic evaluation at Phu Kham shows that 0.15% Cu and 0.10% Cu are the ideal cut-off grades for the mine and BOS respectively, for the given conditions. The mass and grade balance incorporate some very important aspects into the analysis. On one hand, BOS has the potential to increase the amount of metal product recovered and, consequently, increase the inferred cash flow. For this case, the estimated cash flow may increase by up to 20%. However, operational improvements are necessary. To achieve processing plant and mine production rates for the ideal scenario, the primary crusher circuit needs to be de-bottlenecked; two suitable solutions are optimizing the blast fragmentation and changing the crusher setting. Furthermore, precise mine grade control must be conducted to avoid losing metal to waste and, increasing costs associated with crushing, sorting and rehandling material due to dilution. Thus, the achieved results show that a mass and grade balance study is an essential part of evaluating the potential benefits of the implementation of BOS. It is necessary to determine the adjustments and improvements required to be made to the available infrastructure to maximize BOS operational and economic benefits. The authors acknowledge