The advancing water contact angles of 17 different iron ores have been measured. The primary constituents of the ores were hematite and goethite and compositions varied from 98% hematite through to 87% goethite. The measured ore contact angles ranged from 0° to 74°. An approximately linear correlation was found between the contact angle and the ore composition given by, θ=45x+8 (±10°), where θ is the contact angle (°) and x is the volume fraction of hematite in the ore. Hence, the hydrophobic character of the ore was observed to increase with increasing hematite and decreasing goethite content. These results are important for mineral processing operations such as pelletising and flotation. In both cases, water contact angles play a critical role. For pelletising of porous iron ore fines, the contact angle influences the amount of liquid absorbed into the pores and also the amount of interparticle liquid required to promote granulation.The contact angle of iron ores is an important parameter in mineral processing, particularly for operations such as granulation and flotation. In the steel industry, wet granulation is routinely used to prepare a mix of iron ore fines (<8 mm), fluxes, and coke breeze for sintering in order to form a feed suitable for use in a blast furnace. The granulation process is typically performed in a rotary drum using water as the binder liquid. Minimisation of the volume of water used during the granulation step is of vital economic importance due to the associated energy costs of evaporation in the sintering step The wettability of particles, inferred from the contact angle, is one of the critical parameters that determine the amount of water needed during granulation. It is well accepted that an increasing contact angle makes particles more difficult to agglomerate because it decreases the strength of the liquid bridges holding particles together (e.g., However, for porous particles, such as iron ore, the contact angle will also influence the rate at which water is absorbed into the pores of the individual particles Hence, the net effect of contact angle on the granulation of porous material is uncertain. Lowering the contact angle (better wetting) means that less interparticle moisture is required to form granules. However, lowering the contact angle will increase the amount of liquid that soaks into the pores of porous particles. This means that less of the added liquid remains at the surface to aid granulation. Therefore, there may in fact be a nonzero optimum contact angle Sinter preparation in the iron ore industry is routinely performed using a blend of different ores. This is usually done to ensure an optimum sinter performance in the blast furnace. However, there is little regard for how this may be affecting the granulation performance. This is particularly important for iron ore samples where significant differences in surface chemistry may be expected to alter substantially the water contact angle. A typical Australian iron ore sample is a complex mixture of different types of iron oxides. Oxides of iron can exist in a number of different forms, with the distinctions being both chemical and structural. The two main classes of material are known as oxides and oxy–hydroxides. There are many examples of both types, including magnetite, haematite, goethite, and hydrogoethite. In Australian ores, haematite (Fe In a pure form, any of the iron oxide minerals may be expected to have a unique value of the contact angle at the air–water–solid contact line. This will depend upon things such as the density of surface hydroxyl species and the relative number of oxide bridges between surface metal atoms. For example, it has been observed previously that the contact angle of silica surfaces can be altered from <5° to >30° simply by heating the silica at 1000 °C for 2 h The contact angle of pure hematite (Fe We previously reported the contact angles of three iron ores with hematite fractions ranging from 20 to 93 vol.% The ore samples were prepared and provided by the BHP Newcastle Research Laboratories (PO Box 188, Wallsend NSW 2287, Australia). Ore compositions were determined using a point counting technique on a polished surface of each ore. An individual measurement consisted of using a grid (grid lines at 10-μm intervals) of 400 or more intersection points, noting if the surface is a haematite, goethite, quartz, or clay material at each point. The ores were then jaw-crushed and wet-sieved to give a size fraction of 53–150 μm for the contact–angle tests. The particles were then oven-dried at 110 °C in atmospheric air for between 6 and 24 h. The apparent density of the particles was determined by volumetric displacement of cyclohexane in a specific gravity bottle. Scanning electron micrographs of Ore E, Q, and R particles have been presented previously A variety of methods are available for measuring the contact angle of powders. These include: measuring the height of a liquid drop on the surface of a presaturated compressed cake of the powder; measuring the rate of capillary-driven flow of liquid through a powder bed; measuring the equilibrium height that a liquid rises up a packed powder bed; and measurement of the air pressure required to halt the capillary flow of liquid up a powder bed The capillary pressure difference (Δ If Δ For a liquid to perfectly wet a substrate, it must have a lower surface energy than the difference between the vapour–solid and liquid–solid interfacial energies. Hence, solid surfaces have a critical surface tension of wetting, such that all liquids with surface tensions below that value will perfectly wet the surface. For instance, the critical values for polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon) and PVC are 0.018 and 0.040 N/m, respectively The particles were packed into a 7-mm internal diameter and 19-cm-long glass column. Powder was added in several stages and tapped down until the column was filled approximately halfway. At its base, the column narrowed to 2 mm capillary where a small wad of glass wool and then a thin layer of diatomaceous earth were used. The wad of glass wool prevents the powder from falling through. The fine pores in the layer of diatomaceous earth provide a high capillary pressure barrier which prevents the backflow of air down the sides of the column The column was connected by a Quick Fit™ ball joint to a reservoir of the wetting liquid through a 5-mm I.D. glass tube. A schematic of the equipment is shown in From three to five experiments were carried out on each ore with both water and cyclohexane. The uncertainties of the determined contact angles are reported as the 95% confidence intervals on the mean, based on the variations in the measured pressures for duplicate runs. Full details of the apparatus and technique are given in The measured composition, density, and contact angle of the 17 ores studied are presented in   Despite the large uncertainty in the contact angle data, there is a clear trend of increasing contact angle with increasing hematite content (or decreasing goethite content). This confirms the preliminary finding of  The results presented here indicate a strong correlation between the hematite/goethite composition ratio and the contact angle. In general, all natural iron ore samples originated from materials that were originally high in magnetite (Fe The measured values of the iron ore contact angles given here are most probably not influenced by variations in the particle porosity between the samples. In the measurements performed here, a pore network can only influence the capillary pressure if it is continuous throughout the particle bed. As a result of the considerable particle roughness, it is unlikely that individual particles could come into intimate enough contact to allow a network of internal pores to be established. Thus, although each particle may be porous, and despite the fact that the pore network within these particles may be finer than that between the particles, it is only the latter network that is continuous, and hence, it controls the wetting of the bed. Surface roughness is also thought not to have a strong influence on the measured contact angles. Typically, for iron ore samples, it is assumed that a rougher surface will wet better than a smooth one. Thus, a material rich in goethite, which is highly weathered and rough, will wet better than magnetite, which is glassy and smooth. It should be noted here that all the ores tested had a very rough appearance, and no obvious differences were apparent from SEM micrographs. It seems unlikely, therefore, that surface roughness is a major contributor to the differences seen in the contact angles. The increase in the measured contact angles with an increase in the amount of hematite is most probably related to differences in the surface chemistry between oxide and oxy–hydroxide samples. It has previously been reported that the contact angle of pure silica surfaces can be altered from <5° to >30° simply by heating the silica at 1000 °C for 2 h. The effect of this heating is a reduction in the number of surface hydroxyl species through the condensation of neighboring groups and the formation of oxide bridges. Such a surface is thought to have a reduced capacity for favourable H-bonding with water, and so the contact angle rises. The goethitic ores may be expected, as oxy–hydroxides, to have a higher density of surface hydroxyl groups when compared to hematite-rich samples, and hence, a lower contact angle. The wide variation in iron ore contact angle found in this study has great potential significance in the mineral processing industries. In flotation operations, for instance, the greater hydrophobicity of hematite-rich ores will make them easier to separate, and hence, they may not require as much comminution as goethite-rich ores. In particular, for pelletising and sintering operations, the ore contact angle affects both the amount of liquid absorbed into the pores of the particles and the amount of liquid required to successfully bond the particles together. Liquid-bound powders must attain a certain minimum strength in order to successfully form granules. For coarse powders in the funicular and capillary state, the theory of However, the initial extent of pore filling in porous particles is given by: Hence, the variations in contact angle with ore composition need to be considered carefully when blending different iron ores. Currently, blending is done only on the basis of optimising the ratios and amounts of various impurities in the sinter going to the blast furnace. However, blending will also affect the total liquid requirements, and hence, the energy costs for sintering. For iron ore powders containing 95%+ of hematite and goethite components, the advancing contact angle increases with increasing hematite content and decreasing goethite content according to the expression: The authors wish to thank BHP Newcastle Research laboratories for funding this work, preparing, characterising, and supplying the iron ore samples studied, and for permission to publish the results. S.M. Iveson is partially funded by an Australian Research Council Postdoctoral Fellowship (F89918124).