Based on two reactions with different behaviour, a comparative study between batch and semibatch reactors performance has been carried out in a glass-jacketed reactor of 5l provided with the measuring, data acquiring and controlling system. The reactions chosen were an acid–base reaction (ethyl acetate saponification), and an oxidation–reduction reaction with a high reaction heat (thiosulfate-peroxide reaction). A first difference was in the method used to establish the kinetic equation. For the acid–base reaction was used an isothermal method based on the conductivity profiles of the solution. For the oxidation reaction was used an adiabatic method based on the measurement of temperatures.
                  This work focuses in the interest to obtain the concentrations of the species in the reactor, by measuring experimentally with different sensors (pH, temperature, etc.) the needed values to get the concentration profiles. For the acid–base reaction it was possible to convert the pH measurements of the reaction solution to concentration values. In the case of the oxidation reaction, the concentration profiles were obtained by measuring only reactor temperature for the adiabatic batch mode of operation, and by simulation in the semibatch mode of operation. The mathematical model was previously validated with temperature profiles obtained experimentally.stoichiometric factor of reactant A inside heat-transfer area (m outside heat-transfer area (m stoichiometric factor of reactant B concentration of reactant A (NaOH or H initial concentration of reactant A (kmol initial concentration of reactant A in tank (kmol concentration of reactant B (kmol initial concentration of reactant B (kmol initial concentration of reactant B in tank (kmol concentration of products (kmol heat capacity of jacket fluid (kJ heat capacity of reactants (kJ heat capacity of wall (kJ activation energy (kJ jacket fluid stream (m addition flow (m inside heat-transfer coefficient (kJ outside heat-transfer coefficient (kJ heat of reaction (kJ rate constant (m specific rate constant (m heat generated (kJ outside heat-transfer rate (kJ inside heat-transfer rate (kJ rate of reaction (kmol constant of gases (kJ time (s) reactor temperature (K) jacket temperature (K) wall temperature (K) temperature of H inside jacket fluid temperature (K) set-point temperature (K) initial temperature in adiabatic experiments (K) increment of adiabatic temperature (K) volume of reaction mass (m jacket volume (m wall volume (m conversion density of reacting mass (kg density of jacket fluid (kg density of wall (kg The extraordinary flexibility of batch processes is well known. Batch processes are used in the domains of speciality chemicals, polymers and biotechnology. Batch processes are generally employed to obtain products with high added value. They are strongly governed by the chemistry of the reactions, which can be complex, and with kinetics poorly known. The kinetic analysis of chemical reactions frequently takes place in a homogeneous liquid phase under isothermal conditions (Levenspiel In this work the kinetic equation can be derived from data obtained in a series of runs in which the initial reagent concentrations is held constant and the initial temperature is varied. The method used is similar to the one presented by Cohen and Spencer The thermal behaviour of batch and semibatch reactors has been investigated by Rafalimanana et al. In this work, for the acid–base reaction, the in situ concentration of the species present in the reactor was determined by measuring the pH of the solution. For the oxidation–reduction reaction the voltage profile of the reaction was obtained experimentally, but its conversion into a concentration profile was found to be very difficult. In this case, concentration profiles were obtained by simulation. A dynamic mathematical model was developed to predict both the thermal behaviour of batch reactors and the evolution of the concentration of reactants and products during the reaction. For this reaction, it has been possible to obtain the concentration profiles experimentally, only in the case of adiabatic operation. In this mode of operation it is possible to follow the concentration evolution by only measuring the reaction temperature. For the acid–base reaction (with a low reaction heat), where the reactor temperature would be kept controlled, two modes of operation (batch or semibatch) are possible. In the case of the thiosulfate reaction (very exothermic reaction) temperature control is only feasible for the semibatch reactor. In this case, when a set-point is selected for the reaction mass temperature, it is possible to control the reaction by manipulating the feed rate of one of the reactants, maintaining the inlet jacket temperature at a prefixed value. Thus, this mode of operation can be used to control the reaction, and it is particularly useful for highly exothermic processes where safety is a major concern. In this sense, the works of Steensma and Westertep The paper is mainly scoped to the simulation of the concentration profiles from pH and temperature data, and then to predict the experimental behaviour of the control. Therefore, a key contribution of the present work focuses in a comparative study of the behaviour of two homogeneous reactions, carried out in batch and semibatch reactors. These reactions can be reproduced experimentally to get, using sensors of pH, temperature or potential, substantial amount of data that allow to obtain appropriate information to compare the behaviour of batch and semibatch reactor modes of operation. Usually, this comparison is made only using temperature measurements. This work gives special importance to obtain concentration profiles (through pH or temperature experimental measures), which show better the different behaviour between the two modes of operation. In this way, the study leads to an inferential way to control batch and semibatch reactors. Moreover, the simple reactions used have been chosen in particular because, even in the development of the kinetic expression, the method used is different, making it possible to compare the behaviour of an isothermal reactor and an adiabatic reactor. The interest of the work consists also in comparing two reactions of very different reaction rate and thermal behaviour. The two reactions considered can be represented, in a general way, as: The conductivity profile of the solution at different temperatures is obtained. Thus, a set of values of Taking into account that the energy balance equation is solely referred to the reaction mass, the following expression is obtained: The dynamic behaviour of the batch and semibatch reactors could be described by a set of differential equations resulting from mass and energy balances of the reaction mixture, the energy balance of the jacket wall and the circulating fluid inside the jacket. The overall mass balance of batch reactor: For the oxidation reaction and the adiabatic batch reactor, from the The energy balance for batch reactor: The experimental measures of pH, conductivity, voltage and temperature have been obtained in a pilot scale reactor ( The flow rate of the circulating fluid in the jacket may be prefixed or controlled by differential on–off valves, providing an alternative heating–cooling fluid (hot water or cold water). All physically available analogue inputs and outputs as well as all virtual channels are automatically monitored and process values are stored. It is also possible to obtain on-line configured curves on the display screen. Preliminary experiments to obtain the kinetic expression were carried out at different conditions for each reaction and in batch mode of operation. Then, the two reactions indicated were carried out in the two modes of operation: batch and semibatch. For all the experiments, the jacket was filled with water circulating at a flow of 1.37×10 The Arrhenius equation was obtained for the saponification and oxidation reactions. These results show a good agreement with those found by other investigators (Ortiz et al. To compare the behaviour of the batch and semibatch mode of operation, the temperature profiles are shown in To follow the concentration evolution of reactants, for the saponifaction reaction the pH was measured. Using Concentration profiles for the oxidation reaction using experimental data were obtained only for the adiabatic mode of operation. Using Experiments 5 and 6 were carried out without changes in the jacket fluid, and without controlling the reactor temperature. When the set-point temperature was fixed (at 313 For the same operating conditions (semibatch reactor) it was carried out an exhaustive study of the reaction between thiosulfate and hydrogen peroxide in a previous work (Grau et al. Batch reactor operation has been compared with semibatch reactor operation for an acid–base low exothermic reaction, which was followed by pH measurement and for a very exothermic oxidation reaction. The results obtained show that for the saponification reaction it is possible to operate the reactor in both modes of operation (batch and semibatch). In the case of the oxidation reaction it is impossible to control the reaction temperature in batch mode, and only when the concentrations are very diluted it is possible to operate in semibatch mode by controlling the reaction temperature with the jacket fluid. In this case, when the reactants are more concentrated and the addition flow of peroxide is higher, it is necessary to use another parameter to control the reaction temperature: the addition flow of peroxide, because the heat-transfer is insufficient to remove the heat generated by the reaction. In all cases, the experimental results show a good agreement with the results obtained by simulation. Concentration profiles are obtained for two reactions using different techniques. For the saponification reaction the concentration evolution with time of the different components has been obtained by means of experimental measures of the solution pH. In the case of oxidation reaction, only for the adiabatic mode of operation has been possible to obtain concentration profiles using experimental temperature profiles. A good agreement with the simulation results has been obtained, making it possible to validate the mathematical models developed. The knowledge of the concentration profiles is very interesting to understand the reaction behaviour. The methodology described provides an useful way for operation and control of batch and semibatch reactors, easy to implement in industrial practice. Financial support received from CICYT is thankfully acknowledged (Project QUI99-1091).