The exfoliation characteristics of Karakoç phlogopite (KP), Phalaborwa phlogopite (PP) and Phalaborwa vermiculite (PV) with hydrogen peroxide were investigated. A series of swelling tests were done to obtain comparative data in order to determine the effects of hydrogen peroxide concentration (1–50 wt.%) and reaction time (1–30 h) that were determined to be the main parameters with solid/liquid ratio being of minor importance. Experimental results show that Karakoç sample has higher exfoliation rate and Phalaborwa samples show a steep increase in exfoliation rate when hydrogen peroxide concentration exceeds 30%. Maximum swelling values of 103-, 90- and 118-fold were reached at 50% H2O2 concentration in 30 h for KP, PP and PV samples, respectively. Exfoliation mechanism was explained in terms of crystal water contents, released cations and change of pH values of solutions.Upon heating quickly at elevated temperatures (870–1100 °C) vermiculite exfoliates and the bulk volume increases by 8–12 times ( The expansion was related to the separation of the layers due to sudden release of water, the highest expansion was shown by samples containing mica or mica-vermiculite interstratifications and the presence of interstratifications produced thermal effects at lower temperatures compared to pure vermiculites ( Chemical processes utilizing hydrogen peroxide, weak acids and some electrolytes can also be used to exfoliate or chemically activate 2:1 phyllosilicates ( The purpose of this study is to obtain comparative data on the hydrogen peroxide exfoliation characteristics of Karakoç phlogopite (KP), Phalaborwa phlogopite (PP) and Phalaborwa vermiculite (PV) with the aim of revealing the exfoliation mechanism. KP samples were blackish in colour with an average size of 3×5 cm and a thickness between 0.1 and 0.5 cm. Crude samples of PP and PV with an average size of 15×10 cm and a thickness between 0.3 and 0.7 cm were supplied by Mandoval Ltd. In the experimental work, square shaped samples were prepared with an average size of 2 cm and a thickness of 0.2 cm was used. Samples were placed in a 150-cm The chemical compositions of the samples were determined by X-ray fluorescence analysis (Philips PW 1480 spectrometer) and the results are given in Mineralogical compositions of the samples were determined by X-ray diffraction analysis (Philips PW 3710) and the patterns of the samples are given in TG/DTA analyses were done between 25 and 1100 °C on the raw materials using Rigaku Model no: 2.22E2 analyser and the related data is given in The changes in thickness of the samples were observed with respect to hydrogen peroxide concentration (1–50 wt.%) and reaction time (1–30 h) that were already determined to be the main parameters that directly affect the chemical exfoliation characteristics with solid/liquid ratio being of minor importance. The exfoliation characteristics of the samples related to hydrogen peroxide concentration and reaction time, in terms of increase in thickness are given in Considering the industrially accepted value of 15-fold swelling, this value was reached in 10% H Experimental results show that the Karakoç sample has a higher exfoliation rate but the Phalaborwa samples show a steep increase in exfoliation rate when the hydrogen peroxide concentration exceeds 30%. The higher exfoliation rate in the Karakoç sample may be attributed to higher dissolution of dissolved and/or exchanged amounts of Na, Fe, Mg, Ca and K cations from the sample at H The solution pH values in the swelling tests were determined for each sample and the results are given in Fluoride anions dissolved from the structure and the oxygen gas evolved by the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide are also expected to increase the solution pH values. In order to determine the effect of fluoride ions on the acidity of solutions, pH measurements were done at H XRD patterns were obtained for a swelling time of 30 h at H The hydrogen peroxide molecules penetrate into the interlayer spaces of phlogopite and due to exchange with water molecules decompose with evolution of atomic oxygen that after combining with oxygen molecules separates the silicate layers from each other in accordance with the proposal of Since, exfoliation occurs due to the decomposition of H Although abrupt changes occurring above 30% H The authors wish to acknowledge Mr. M.C. Darling (Mandoval Ltd.) for the supply of Phalaborwa phlogopite and vermiculite samples.