The premise for reconstruction of a malunited ankle fracture is joint preservation. Frequently, the joint may appear to be irreparable, with articular wear and erosive changes on the medial or lateral plafond. Even with these more advanced changes, however, restoring the alignment of the ankle is worthwhile. Most of these cases involve a malunion or a nonunion, or both, of the fibula. Occasionally, the medial malleolus or the posterior tibia also is involved in this malunited fracture, necessitating simultaneous correction. Lateral weight-bearing radiographs and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the ankle are helpful to plan the reconstruction. The CT scan does aid in determining the required degree of rotation of the fibula, syndesmotic malalignment, posterior malleolar involvement, and presence of articular impaction. It is always worth the effort to attempt a reconstruction of the malunited ankle fracture, except in the case of severe ankle arthrosis. If this fails, an arthrodesis and joint replacement are still options. The results with osteotomy of the fibula or the tibia, or both, are excellent even in ankles with considerable deformity and arthritis. In some situations, a reconstruction simply cannot be performed for technical reasons, and an arthrodesis is the best alternative. An important point in this context, however, is that an arthrodesis is not the only treatment option after severe trauma.The premise for reconstruction of a malunited ankle fracture is joint preservation. Frequently, the joint may appear to be irreparable, with articular wear and erosive changes on the medial or lateral plafond. Even with these more advanced changes, however, restoring the alignment of the ankle is worthwhile. Most of these cases involve a malunion or a nonunion, or both, of the fibula. Occasionally, the medial malleolus or the posterior tibia is also involved in this malunited fracture, necessitating simultaneous correction. Lateral weight-bearing radiographs and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the ankle are helpful to plan the reconstruction. The CT scan does aid in determining the degree of malrotation of the fibula, syndesmotic malalignment, posterior malleolar involvement, and presence of articular impaction. It is always worth the effort to attempt a reconstruction of the malunited ankle fracture, except in the case of severe ankle arthrosis. If this fails, an arthrodesis and joint replacement are still options. The results with osteotomy of the fibula or the tibia, or both, are excellent even in ankles with considerable deformity and arthritis ( A decision needs to be made whether arthroscopic debridement of the joint is to be performed simultaneously. Arthroscopic evaluation of the joint is very helpful in these cases to document and stage the extent of ankle arthritis. In particular, arthroscopy is indicated for evaluation of a suspected posterior and inaccessible chondral defect that would not be visible with anterolateral arthrotomy. The hypertrophic tissue between the medial malleolus and the talus must be excised from the medial gutter for the reposition of the talus. Surprisingly small amounts of tissue in the medial gutter can actually block the correct medial shift of the talus back into the mortise ( For this procedure, a vertical incision is made medial to the anterior tibial tendon directly over the anterior notch of the medial ankle over a 2-cm length. Alternatively, if the deltoid ligament is to be imbricated, an incision can be made directly over the medial malleolus extending distally to the deltoid. The incision based off the deltoid is more useful if the deltoid is to be imbricated. The incision is deepened through the joint. Then the capsule is incised, and the hypertrophic synovium, capsule, and scar are excised completely from the medial gutter. The insertion of a rongeur is useful; it should be turned around 180 degrees to ensure that the medial gutter is completely free and that the talus is mobile. The medial gutter will again be checked subsequently for correction of the fibular malunion as the talus is pushed over medially. In the cases of fibular malunion without medial malleolar fracture, the deltoid ligament has by definition healed in an elongated and incompetent position. Therefore the deltoid should be imbricated to restore the ligament to a functional length. We perform this by elevating the origin of the deltoid off the medial malleolus leaving a 1- to 2-mm cuff of tissue. Either suture anchors or drill holes can be placed within the medial malleolus as an anchor point. In similarity to a Brostrom procedure, the deltoid is then imbricated with the knots on the distal aspect of the ligament to avoid soft tissue prominence. Further stability is then gained by using number 0 absorbable suture in figure-of-eight fashion for the ligament, incorporating the proximal cuff of tissue ( The fibula is commonly shortened and externally rotated in a malunion, although only one of these may be present, determining the type of osteotomy and bone graft. Ideally, it should not be necessary to strip the entire syndesmosis to lengthen the fibula. In cases in which the syndesmosis must be included in the procedure, such as arthrodesis requiring creation of a tibia pro fibula, the syndesmosis should be taken down completely ( An extensile excision is made laterally directly over the fibula, frequently corresponding to the original incision. Existing hardware is removed. The key to this operation is to obtain the correct length and rotation of the distal fibula. These parameters are easy to judge by virtue of the bimalleolar axis, which should be measured out and planned preoperatively by comparison with the contralateral normal ankle. Correction of the external rotation, which is usually present, is not as easy. If healing of the fibula is complete, then an osteotomy has to be performed. This should be done at a level that permits application of adequate fixation distally (see The plane of the fibular osteotomy can be either exactly transverse or oblique. The advantage of a transverse osteotomy is that adequate lengthening of the fibula is far easier to obtain with this type of osteotomy. This is particularly the case if the fibula is short and needs to be lengthened with a laminar spreader. If a transverse osteotomy in the fibula is made, structural interpositional bone graft should be used, provided, of course, that shortening of the fibula is present. Occasionally, external rotation of the fibula is present without shortening, and an internal rotational osteotomy is performed without lengthening (see The alternative is to lengthen the fibula with an oblique osteotomy and to slide the fibula more distally. The better bone contact may obviate the need for an interpositional bone graft, as seen in The position of the fibula is then checked fluoroscopically. Axial lengthening is easier to obtain without internal rotation, but some rotation is usually required. For control of the length and rotation, a bone reduction clamp should be applied to the distal fibula while it is lengthened with the laminar spreader. Then the clamp should be internally rotated to facilitate insertion of the guide pins into the fibula to hold it in position. If an oblique osteotomy is preferred, the plane of the osteotomy should be made over a length of approximately 2 cm, with the cut beginning proximal lateral, then going to distal and medial, and ending proximal to the joint. The fibula is stripped of soft tissues in the same manner, and then the plate is applied to the distal fibula. With the plate in position, a screw is then inserted into the fibula, proximal to the plate, and then a laminar spreader is positioned between this screw and either the plate or one of the more distal screws to facilitate the lengthening. Internal rotation is performed in a similar manner with a bone reduction clamp, and then the fibula needs to be held in position with guide pins. As noted, this type of lengthening does not always require a structural or interpositional bone graft. Nonetheless, the plane of the osteotomy is such that once the distal fibula is internally rotated, apposition of the osteotomy site is not perfect, and some form of cancellous grafting may be required. The fibula may shorten and deform not as a result of a traumatic injury but a chronic stress fracture. This is typically from lateral subfibular impingement producing overload as a result of a chronic valgus hindfoot deformity. The hindfoot is not able to compensate because of a rigid deformity and the fibula takes up the load and fractures. With continued load, the fibula will shorten and the distal fibula starts to tilt into valgus along with the hindfoot. When correcting this deformity, one must take into consideration the position of the hindfoot as well as the midfoot ( One variant of malunion of the fibula is associated with compression of the lateral plafond and valgus tilting of the ankle mortise. As outlined previously, such cases may be amenable to management by osteotomy of the fibula in addition to a closing wedge osteotomy of the medial tibia to realign the ankle. Another option is to perform an opening wedge osteotomy of the distal lateral tibia (a plafond-plasty) to achieve a plantigrade ankle. The deformity is typically the result of a crushing-type injury to the lateral ankle and plafond, and regardless of the realignment and fixation of the fibula, if the lateral plafond remains depressed, deformity and arthritis will be the result. Through a lateral incision, the fibula is exposed and the osteotomy is performed if necessary. It is easier to expose the lateral tibia if the syndesmosis is taken down completely and the fibula rotated on its distal soft tissue pedicle. Once the osteotomy of the fibula is complete, under fluoroscopic guidance, the osteotomy of the tibia is made approximately 1 cm proximal to the joint line but not completed medially. The osteotomy cut should terminate at approximately two-thirds of the width of the tibia and then should be opened gradually by plastic deformation of the distal lateral tibia. The defect is then filled with cancellous bone graft. Depending on the magnitude of the defect, the graft can be cancellous or structural, in which case a triangular graft is used ( The medial malleolus is generally involved as part of a more global ankle problem, and it is unusual to find an isolated problem on the medial aspect of the ankle. Malunion can occur of course and must be treated along with any additional deformity ( Realignment and stabilization of the syndesmosis for management of chronic ankle joint pain are necessary if it can be demonstrated that the syndesmosis is the source of pain. Often after ankle fracture, patients report vague ankle soreness, and it is not easy to determine the source of the problem. However, in some cases, the evidence for a missed syndesmotic injury is quite clear, with widening of the medial clear space and the tibiofibular clear space (  Correction of malunion is worth the effort despite marked deformity. The ankle seems to be forgiving with respect to deformity in some patients, and corrective osteotomy provides pain relief despite the appearance of arthritis. The length of the fibula and its rotation must be restored. Internal rotation is usually necessary to correct malunion of the fibula. Rarely, if the deformity is significant, then a slight medial closing wedge osteotomy of the tibia may be performed, in addition to the lengthening osteotomy of the fibula. If a malunion of the medial malleolus is present, it needs to be addressed specifically. Thus in addition to the fibular osteotomy, either an ostectomy or an osteotomy of the medial malleolus may be necessary. The ostectomy usually detaches the superficial deltoid ligament, which can be reattached through Kirschner wire holes in the malleolus. Rarely will the deep deltoid ligament be disrupted with this ostectomy. If the deformity of the medial joint cannot be corrected, the lateral aspect of the ankle should be corrected, particularly if a nonunion is present. Some injuries necessitate an osteotomy of the medial malleolus, the fibula, or even the anterior distal tibia. These osteotomies are covered in the approaches to the ankle in the section on osteochondral injury. Of relevance here, a window can be removed from the distal tibia to perform the bone grafting in patients who have avascular necrosis of a segment of the distal tibia. The window can be made in a number of ways, preserving the articular surface or incorporating the articular segment into the window. The window is made large enough, however, that the bone can be replaced with screws. Most of this chapter has dealt with injuries of the plafond or fibula and the effect of the latter on the rest of the foot and ankle. There are injuries that affect the distal tibia, and while most of the corrective procedures are discussed in the chapter on osteotomy of the tibia, a case is presented here with anterior compartment arthritis of the ankle, associated with marked limitation of range of motion and jamming of the ankle in dorsiflexion. This is an extremely difficult problem to treat and other than arthrodesis in the young patient, a closing wedge osteotomy of the distal tibia combined with cheilectomy will improve function. It may improve the range of motion of the ankle as well, but this is less predictable ( Syndesmotic arthrodesis can occur, resulting in recurrent deformity. In these cases, a repeat arthrodesis can be performed; however, we feel that an allograft reconstruction may be more reliable as the stability is not inherent on obtaining another solid arthrodesis in an already compromised area (