Background
                  Ankle fractures represents the third most frequent fracture in elderly patients. There is a current tendency to fix long bones fractures with locking plates. However, we rarely find published accounts about the use of locking plates in distal fibula fractures, except for biomechanical ones, studying human cadaveric fibula.
               
                  Objectives
                  The main objective was to compare radiographic bone union rates at 6 and 12 weeks of follow up, then wound complications and hardware removal rates, and construct cost.
               
                  Study Design & Methods
                  We retrospectively analyzed 105 patients who underwent surgery with locking plates or non-locking plates over a two-year period, out of which 42 patients were treated with non-locking plates (VIVES™ - StrykerⓇ) and 63 with locking plates (VariAx™ - StrykerⓇ,). We analyzed bone union on anterior posterior and lateral X-rays of the ankle. We collected data of wound complications and hardware removal from patient records. Multiple linear regression techniques were performed after identifying dependent variables.
               
                  Results
                  There was no significant difference between non-locking and locking plates in the radiographic bone union rate of distal fibula, respectively at 6 and 12 post-operative weeks (85.71% vs. 81%; p = 0.525 and 97.62% vs. 96.83%; p = 1). No significant difference was found in the wound complication rate between the two groups (11.9% vs. 11.12%; p = 0.9). No significant differences were found in the hardware removal rate, either with or without operative site's infection (respectively: 30.95% vs. 39.68%; p = 0.361 and 21.42% vs. 38.09%; p = 0.071). Cost efficiency is in the favor of non-locking plates.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Non-locking constructs are as effective as locking constructs in the treatment of displaced distal fibula fractures at a substantially lower cost. High-quality randomized controlled trials are needed in the future to verify the finding of this study.Ankle fractures are frequent in traumatology. Their incidence of 122 to 184 per 100,000 people/year Several cadaveric studies biomechanically comparing locking plates (LP) and non-locking plates (NLP) have been conducted The primary outcome of our study was to assess radiographic bone union rates in distal fibula fractures of a NLP (VIVES™, Stryker We retrospectively reviewed a consecutive cohort of patients who underwent surgical fixation of closed malleolar fractures of the ankle between January 2012 and December 2013. We included patients above 18, with displaced isolated distal fibula, bi malleolar or tri malleolar fractures, treated surgically with either a LP or NLP, with a minimal 3 months follow-up period. Open ankle fractures, pilon or diaphyseal associated fractures and injuries treated with another type of osteosynthesis (isolated medial malleolar fracture treated with screws, fractures treated with external fixators, fractures treated with krischner wires, fractures treated with isolated syndesmotic screws) were excluded. After excluding non-eligible patients, we have sent a memorandum notifying concerned patients about their participation. The memo defines the purpose of the study and its execution, in addition to their right of objection and withdrawal regarding the use of their personal information Data was collected from patient charts and electronic records of the department of orthopedic surgery and traumatology of our institution. The fracture type was defined on preoperative anterior-posterior and lateral radiographs according to AO classification All procedures were performed in a supine position under general or spinal anesthesia. All patients benefited from the use of a tourniquet at top of thigh and received antibiotic prophylaxis according to the institute protocol. After fracture reduction, the use of lag screws as well as the plate's thickness was left to the discretion of the operation surgeon. Then a locking or non-locking plate was placed on the lateral aspect of the fibula. Surgeons had no choice in the type of plate they would use: In 2012, there was only NLP available in our institute and as of January 2013, they were replaced with LP. The NLP used, Vives™ (Stryker Statistical analysis was performed using « R-Studio®» version 3.4.2 for Windows® (Boston, USA). Descriptive statistics were performed to summarize demographic and clinical variables and to evaluate distributional characteristics. Continuous variables were evaluated using Student and Wilcoxon tests, and were expressed with means ± standard deviation and range. Categorical data were evaluated using Chi-square or Fisher tests, and expresses as percentages. We used simple linear analysis studying the direct relation between the variable and the primary outcome. Multiple linear regression techniques were performed after identifying dependent variables. Data was expressed as odds ratios with their ninety-five percent confidence intervals and p-values defined at 5% (statistical significance was defined at A total of 198 ankle fractures were assessed between January 2012 and December 2013. After applying exclusion criteria, there was left 128 distal fibulas that underwent fixation with a lateral plate. Twenty-two patients were lost during follow-up. After inclusion, one patient expressed his opposition to the use of his personal data by a written letter. A hundred and five patients were analyzed: 42 received a NLP and 63 received a LP ( The mean age of the population at surgery was fifty years [17; 84] and 60% of patients were female. Mean body mass index (BMI) was 26, 7 Kg/m Bone union rate is detailed in Complication rates are detailed in The overall HR rate was 36.19% (  When a closed and displaced distal fibula fractures occurs, it is essential to regain the length of the fibula and maintain the stability of the ankle joint. Surgical treatment is a standard practice in the young and active population which demands a quick return to their activities. In elderly patients (over 60) with unstable ankle fractures, a recent randomized clinical trial with blinded outcome assessors have showed that the use of close contact casting compared with surgery resulted in similar functional outcomes Herrera-Pérez & al. have retrospectively compared locking versus non-locking one-third tubular plates for treating osteoporotic distal fibula fractures. No statistically significant difference in time to radiographic bony union was reported between the two groups (average time of 15.27 weeks [11–16] in LP group vs. 12.58 weeks [9–13] in NLP group – Likewise, while retrospectively reviewing a consecutive cohort of 145 patients, Lyle & al. have not detected significant differences in the radiographic time to bony union among three plate groups including one locked plate In contrast, in a retrospective cohort of 147 patients, Huang & al. On the one hand, some authors have reported the possibility of fixing distal fibula fractures with isolated anterior posterior lag screws, associated with a 6-weeks immobilization period, and ended up having the same results functionally and radiographically [ The multivariable analysis of this study has found a statistically significant longer time to bone union in sub-type 44-B3 comparing to sub-type-B2 at 6 weeks postoperatively, independently of age, gender and construct type (locking or non-locking). Concerning bone union at 12 weeks, multiple linear regression analysis has showed a statistically significant delay in bone union in case of initial or secondary skin blisters. These findings are in line with those reported by Bhadra & al. in their meta-analysis about delayed union and nonunion of the fibula between 1950 and 2011. They found that initial fracture pattern, severity of comminution at the fracture site, degree of displacement of fracture fragments, and high-energy injury seemed to be related to the occurrence of delayed fibular union or frank nonunion The overall wound complication rate for the study (11.42%) was comparable to those described in the literature [ Scheppers & al. have compared one-third tubular low profile 1 mm thick NLP to High profile 2.8 mm and 3.3 mm thick LP. They have concluded to the augmentation of wound complication rates along with the thickness of the used plate Moss & al. have found a HR rate statistically higher in the thicker LP group It is clear that a low profile construct, whether it's Locking or non-Locking, induce a lower incidence of metal prominence, hence less wound complications and HR rates. In this study, the LP is a low profile pre-countered periarticular plate with a distal thickness of 1.3 mm, which is considerably thinner than other LP used in the mentioned studies, and slightly thinner than the periarticular NLP with a distal thickness of 1.8 mm. This could explain the similar outcomes in both wound complications and HR rates between locking and non-locking constructs in our study. Financially wise, a typical countered locking plate construct costs $800 more than a comparable one-third tubular plate construct in the USA. Based on a calculated estimate of 60,000 locking plates used annually, Moss & al. have found that a total of $50 million can be avoided annually Finally, the present retrospective study has limitations. The patients were not randomized for treatment with the two types of fixations. However the choice of the period of the study is linked to the fact that we have always used NLP for distal fibula fractures, until the end of 2012 when our department started using the LP. This was in the purpose of decreasing selection bias! The overall number of patients was relatively small. No significant differences were found between groups in all variables except for the AO fracture type. Sub-types A and C couldn't be integrated in a multiple linear regression analysis because of their small numbers. Sub-type B had to be analyzed alone, which generated a selection bias. The use of lag screws in conjunction with the plate was not comparable between groups, which constituted a confounding factor. Further studies with improved design to account for these different biases are needed. Locking plates are increasingly used for fractures of distal fibula and are associated with significantly augmented costs. Bone union rates appear to be similar in both locking and non-locking constructs of the distal fibula, especially in case of an associated immobilization. Locking plates are an interesting option in comminuted and/or osteoporotic fractures. The thickness of the plate appears to be correlated to the onset of wound complications. Measures to increase surgeons’ awareness about cost-reduction programs are needed. High-quality randomized controlled trials are needed in the future to verify the finding of this study. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This research did not receive any specific funding from organizations in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.