Washburn Method (WM) as a typical contact angle measurement (θ) method can be used for assessment of powder wettability (especially representative particle size range for flotation separation). However, as an indirect method, WM has several limitations. This investigation is going to introduce an Enhanced Washburn Method (EWM), which fills the gap of those WM obstacles, and can be applied for the meaningful indirect θ measurement of powders. For such a purpose, the wettability of quartz powders (d80: 62 μm) was measured in the absence and in the presence of the cationic surfactant Flotigam®EDA at pH 10. EWM by using pre-conditioning of hydrophobized particles via unblock capillaries measured the θ of powders in different conditions. Statistical evaluations indicated that EWM could quite accurately measure θ of the hydrophobized powders, where there is a significant coefficient of determination (R2 above 0.96) between EWM outcomes and other examined direct θ measurement methods (the captive bubble and sessile drop methods).Contact angle measurement (θ) as a method for assessing the wettability of powders is important for many production processes such as froth flotation, oil recovery, ceramics, pharmaceutical, food, and paint industry As long as θ is the angle formed by the solid surface versus the gaseous phase, and depicted across the aqueous medium ( There are indirect techniques that can be considered for determining the wettability of powders (immersion calorimetry Despite the advantages of WM The main objective of this work is to introduce a practical approach based on the pre-conditioning of hydrophobized particles via unblock capillaries to improve the contact angle measurement of hydrophobic particles using the WM. A process which can be called “Enhanced Washburn Method (EWM)”. For such a purpose, the contact angle of the quartz powders, in the presence of a long chain cationic surfactant (Flotigam®EDA) at basic medium (pH ~ 10) would be measured to find a meaningful relationship between the data obtained using this method and the CBM and SDM. The results would be statistically assessed for validation purposes. A high pure (greater than99%) quartz sample from Descalvado-SP (Brazil) was prepared for this investigation. Large pieces of the pristine sample were selected by visual surveys regarding the absence of cracks and impurities. They considered for further cutting, polishing, and preparation of flat plates (diameter: 30.0 mm) and used for the direct θ measurements by SDM and CBM. The rest of the sample crushed by a hand-hammer, and pulverized by a porcelain mortar. Wet screening (-75 + 25 μm) yielded the particle size fraction used for the θ measurements by WM. The mean of quartz particle size (d A commercial-grade of Ether amine 50% neutralized by acetic acid (Flotigam®EDA) and was used to render the surface of powder hydrophobic. An analytical grade of hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were prepared at the concentration of 1% (w/w) and used for the pH adjustment. A mixture composed (analytical grade of nitric acid plus hydrochloric acid, in a molar ratio of 1:3 ( Before beginning the experiment, the quartz plate was washed by acetone and water, put in contact with diluted (25%) Goniometer DSA25 (supplied by Kruss, Germany) was adopted to carry out θ measurements by SDM or CBM at 22 ± 1 °C. DSA25 is able to control the θ measurements from −30 to 400 °C. With the software-controlled variant, the dosing dynamics can be adjusted accurately, which can be lead to exact measurements of advancing and receding angles. For the θ measurement, a water droplet (SDM) or air bubble (CBM) was gently placed on the surface of the quartz plate by a glass syringe endowed with a needle of diameter 0.510 and 0.487 mm for SDM and CBM, respectively. When CBM was carried out, the goniometer DSA25 sequentially measures θ versus time. Typical output (for bare quartz) is depicted in Suspension composed of quartz particles (solid/liquid ratio = 0.02, 0.04 and 0.37) and solutions of Flotigam®EDA (from 0.0 to 75.0 mg/dm θ measurements by WM was performed at 22 ± 1 °C by measuring time (t) against the mass (m) of liquid (water or n-hexane), which penetrated a bed composed of 2.0 g of quartz particles (-75 + 25 μm). It was carefully compacted in a standard volume of 1,256.0 mm Results of θ measurements for pure samples (in the absence of surfactants) are reported in It has been documented that SDM typically yields less accurate θ measurements for bare quartz (θ ≥ 14°) Results of θ measurements by SDM and CBM for the samples conditioned by Flotigam®EDA (0.0 to 30.0 mg/dm As it was illustrated in  WM results indicate at low solid/liquid ratios (s/l))0.02 and 0.04(, all θ values are almost above 60°, which are significantly higher than those yielded by CBM or SDM. For instance: at 30.0 mg/dm The discrepantly of higher values for θ yielded by WM versus CBM or SDM may be caused by the way quartz particles were dewatered after conditioning with Flotigam®EDA. After conditioning the quartz particles with the surfactant, the slurry was filtered, dried (at 40 °C), and eventually submitted to the determination of θ by WM. During the process of filtering, the aqueous medium surrounding solid particles changes from the slurry state ( For exploring such a possibility, after conditioning the quartz particles with 5.0 and 30.0 mg/dm Considering the results of θ obtained by EWM (under experimental condition B) in Contact angle measurement (θ) of pure quartz powders by different methods, Sessile Drop Method (SDM), Captive Bubble Method (CBM) and Washburn Method (WM), indicated that regardless of the adopted method, the θ value increased steadily with increasing the concentration of Flotigam®EDA (0.0 to 75.0 mg/dm The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the Vale Institute of Technology (ITV) for providing financial support for this work. The first author also wishes to thank Dr. Flavia Silvas and Rahbar Farayand Arya Co. (RFACo) for their help.