Investigators dealing with a relatively small number of patients with posterior wall fractures have found unsatisfactory clinical outcomes, estimated to be approximately 30%. Consequently, conventional wisdom has professed that these fractures do poorly relative to other acetabular fracture types and are somehow different. The main questions to be answered in the treatment of these injuries include: (1) how can the need for operative versus non-operative treatment best be determined, (2) can the fixation of comminuted and marginally impacted fracture fragments be improved, (3) what are the risk factors for an adverse outcome after operative fracture fixation, and (4) what are the expected clinical and functional outcomes after operative treatment?
                  A review of my long-term body of work investigating posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum, published over an extended period of time, was conducted to address these questions. Answers to the proposed questions are as follows: (1) dynamic stress examination under anaesthesia is the only reliable way to determine hip joint stability; (2) fixation of comminuted and marginally impacted fracture fragments can be improved by using a two-level fixation construct, as well as a non-traditional surgical approach for certain fracture patterns; (3) delayed reduction of hip dislocation and comminuted fractures in older patients are associated with poor clinical outcome and the accuracy of surgical reduction is highly predictive of clinical outcome; and (4) good-to-excellent hip function should be expected in a high percentage of these patients. However, residual functional deficits may still remain.Posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum are common and comprise approximately 20–30% of all acetabulum fractures. Most of knowledge regarding the operative treatment of acetabular fractures can be attributed to the works of Letournel and Judet. The purpose of this manuscript is to present my long-term body of work investigating the evaluation, treatment and outcomes of posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum. The main questions to be answered include: How can the need for operative versus non-operative treatment best be determined? Can the fixation of comminuted and marginally impacted fracture fragments be improved? What are the risk factors for an adverse outcome after operative treatment? What are the expected clinical and functional outcomes after operative treatment? A review of my long-term body of work investigating posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum, published over an extended period of time, was conducted to address these questions. Posterior wall fragment size, as measured on a two-dimensional computed tomography (CT) scan, has been a commonly used predictor of the status of hip joint stability and the need for operative intervention. In 2010, Grimshaw and Moed described the method of a dynamic stress fluoroscopic examination under general anaesthesia (EUA) and showed that hip joint stability determined by EUA after posterior wall acetabular fracture is predictive of maintained hip joint congruity, excellent radiographic outcome and a good-to-excellent clinical outcome with non-operative treatment. Therefore, there must be important factors in addition to the fragment size that determine dynamic hip stability status. One suspected factor is the status of the hip capsule. Dislocation of the femoral head is considered to be a clinical marker for an incompetent posterior capsule, either by the actual tearing of the capsule itself or by virtue of the displacement of the posterior wall fracture fragment with the capsule attached. In summary, EUA ( Satisfactory ORIF is predicated on adequate visualization of the fracture, as well as the joint surface. This visualization has been particularly difficult for fractures involving the posterosuperior aspect of the acetabular wall. We found the modified Gibson surgical approach Osteochondral free fragments and marginally impacted fragments must be sequentially reduced (assuming there is sufficient attached cancellous bone to allow fragment healing), usually using the femoral head as a template. First, the marginal impaction is elevated, leaving a void underneath from the impacted cancellous bone. In summary, fixation of comminuted and marginally impacted fracture fragments can be improved by using a two-level fixation construct ( Although a number of risk factors have been suggested to be important in contributing to an adverse outcome, we are the only investigators to have presented data from a large series of patients exclusively evaluating the posterior wall. Previous studies, including some of our own, have suggested that a subset of acetabular fractures exists that is better treated by primary total hip arthroplasty (THA) rather than ORIF. In summary, reduction of an associated hip dislocation within twelve hours after the injury is imperative, and fractures in older patients and those with extensive comminution are more likely to have a poor clinical outcome. However, whether to proceed with ORIF versus THA remains a decision based on a complete assessment by an experienced treating clinician that has no easy answer. In addition, the accuracy of surgical reduction as assessed on postoperative computed tomography is highly predictive of the clinical outcome. Therefore, fracture reduction must include aggressive repositioning of free and marginally impacted fragments as well as the accurate reduction of the main fragments of the posterior wall. A modified version of the Merle d'Aubigné clinical hip score is currently the most generally accepted grading system for evaluating clinical outcomes after acetabular fractures. Regarding clinical outcomes, Letournel and Judet reported on 492 patients who were treated within 3 weeks of injury and followed for 1–33 years. Of these patients, 117 had fractures of the posterior wall. The authors found good-to-excellent clinical results in 82% of patients. Other investigators, however, reporting on a relatively small number of posterior wall fractures, have reported higher unsatisfactory patient outcomes of approximately 30%. Unfortunately, the functional outcome is not so clear cut. In our study of 46 patients with posterior wall fractures who were evaluated with the MFA, the patient scores were significantly worse than the normative reference values. In summary, we have shown that good-to-excellent hip function should be expected in a high percentage of posterior wall fracture patients. However, residual functional deficits may still remain and research should be directed toward the identification and potential treatment interventions of these other determinants of functional outcome. After the urgent and timely reduction of an associated hip dislocation, the most important intervention the treating physician can make is determining the stability of the hip joint. Operating on a posterior wall acetabular fracture inherently carries with it the morbidity of a major surgical procedure. Therefore, it is not desirable to operate on a stable hip that could be satisfactorily treated non-operatively. Nevertheless, this unnecessary surgery on a posterior wall fracture should still result in an overall good prognosis, as is generally described for open reduction and internal fixation. However, a patient with a small posterior wall fragment assumed to have a stable hip joint but who actually has a dynamically unstable hip joint would be at great risk for recurrent dislocation and a disastrous clinical outcome. When in doubt, open reduction and internal fixation is a much safer course of treatment. Having a diagnostic examination that can define hip stability status is much more desirable. Our EUA technique appears to fill this role; fractures involving more than 50% of the posterior wall can be assumed to be unstable and those involving less than or equal to 50% require an EUA. Fractures in older patients and those with extensive comminution are more likely to have poor clinical results. These findings are no doubt directly related to the fact that a satisfactory clinical result is predicated on an accurate reduction of the fracture; an accurate reduction of the fracture is more difficult to perform in a comminuted fracture, and fracture comminution is more common in older patients. Despite reports to the contrary, as with other acetabular fracture types (and all intra-articular fractures in general), a high percentage of long-term good-to-excellent clinical results should be expected following anatomic reduction and internal fixation of fractures of the posterior wall. These findings are predicated on a number of factors under the treating physician's control, which include the timely reduction of an associated hip dislocation and a meticulous surgical technique. Fracture reduction must include aggressive repositioning of free and marginally impacted fragments as well as the accurate reduction of the main fragments of the posterior wall. Every effort should be expended in an attempt to anatomically reduce the joint surface. Overall functional outcome is an area that requires further study. Despite all of the information available, a number of questions remain unanswered. Currently, the surgeon's practice experience and expertise remain the most useful tools in making these determinations. All components of this study involving humans, human material or data, or animals were approved by the appropriate institutional ethics committee and therefore have been performed in accordance with the ethical standards in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki. The Author testifies that he has checked the article for plagiarism. He has critically reviewed and approved the final draft and is responsible for the content and similarity index of the manuscript. The author certifies that he has no commercial associations (e.g., consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest, patent/licensing arrangements, etc.) that might pose a conflict of interest in connection with the submitted article.