Objective
                  Diplopia is a common complaint following zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fractures. The present study was conducted to evaluate the prevalence of post-traumatic as well as port-operative diplopia, and the improvement of diplopia over time before and after surgery.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective case series of diplopia associated with ZMC fractures was conducted to address the research purpose. Only subjects with isolated unilateral ZMC fractures were included. Demographic variables included age and gender of the patients. The primary outcome variable of this study was the presence of diplopia during different periods before and after surgery. Descriptive statistics were conducted for all variables studied. Analytical statistics were performed to measure the significance of change in the outcome variable during different stages of treatment.
               
                  Results
                  In total, 231 patients were included, with a mean age of 23.78 (±5.11) years. Post-traumatic diplopia was diagnosed in 59% of patients. Only 13% of cases had pre-operative diplopia. Post-surgical diplopia was reported in 37% of cases. Post-operative follow-up diplopia showed a significant improvement over time with only 1 patient having residual diplopia 6 months after surgery.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Traumatic diplopia in unilateral ZMC fractures is common. However, a significant resolution of diplopia over time should be expected. Residual diplopia is an unlikely outcome.Road traffic accidents are the most common cause of maxillofacial trauma worldwide, with the exception of North America and Europe, where assaults and falls have recently become more important There are several signs and symptoms of ZMC fractures, such as flattening of the cheek, swelling, nasal bleeding, trismus, and ocular complications Ocular complications in ZMC fractures may include subconjunctival hemorrhage, diplopia, enophthalmos, commotio retinae, reduced visual acuity, retinal hemorrhage, retinal detachment, corneal laceration or abrasion, traumatic mydriasis, hyphema, angle recession, canthal laceration, and ruptured globe Diplopia, in particular, is a common finding in midfacial trauma, especially with orbital Another significant aspect is post-operative (iatrogenic) diplopia, which can complicate ophthalmic as well as non-ophthalmic surgeries. Neurological and orbital surgeries are major causes The purpose of this study was to investigate diplopia associated with unilateral middle- to high-energy ZMC fractures. The aims of the current study were to measure the prevalence of post-traumatic as well as post-operative diplopia among ZMC fracture patients, and to evaluate the improvement of diplopia over time before and after surgery. A retrospective case series was conducted to address the research purpose. The study was approved by the research center of the Riyadh Colleges of Dentistry and Pharmacy. The study population was composed of all patients admitted at King Saud Medical City, Saudi Arabia, for management of ZMC fractures in the last ten years (2007–2017). Patients with isolated unilateral middle- or high-energy ZMC fractures were included in this study. The following patients were excluded as study subjects: low-energy non-displaced ZMC fractures; bilateral ZMC fractures; young children (<15 The primary outcome variable of this study was the presence of diplopia during different stages before and after surgery, with two possible values: “yes” or “no”. The diagnosis of diplopia was based on the positive finding of troublesome double vision during examination as documented in the patients’ records. The original recording of diplopia was made by the treating maxillofacial surgeon based on a “broad H” test, where examiner asked the patient to follow an object held around 30 Demographic variables included age and gender of the patients. The side of the fracture was recorded. In addition, the classification of the fracture, based on Manson et al. Clinical data in the retrieved files were reviewed, along with the CT scan records, ophthalmic consultations, and neurological findings. CT scans were already taken in all patients as found in the patients’ electronic files. All of the CT scan records were re-evaluated by one of the researchers to confirm the diagnosis of a unilateral middle- or high-energy ZMC fracture per subject. The ZMC fracture was considered as middle-energy if there was separation of all four articulations with mild to moderate displacement. Fractures that showed comminution in lateral orbit or lateral displacement with segmentation of the zygomatic arch were classified as high-energy. The subjects were distributed into two groups, middle-energy group and high-energy group. The patient’s age and gender, along with the side of the ZMC fracture were also documented. The admission note for each patient was checked for the presence of post-traumatic diplopia (PTD) at the time of initial presentation. The presence of pre-operative diplopia (POD) at the end of the preoperative observation period, immediately before surgery, was documented. The operation notes of each case were reviewed to document whether orbital exploration (OE) was performed. The post-operative notes were checked to record the presence of immediate post-surgical diplopia (PSD) after full recovery. The follow-up notes were reviewed to document the presence of post-operative follow-up diplopia (PFD) in the weekly recall visits for 3 weeks and in the 3rd postoperative month recall. The PFD was documented as 1st week PFD, 2nd week PFD, 3rd week PFD, and 3rd month PFD. Patients with persistent diplopia after 6 months of surgery were documented as having residual diplopia (RD). The data were analyzed using IBM Overall, 231 patients were included in our study. All patients were admitted and surgically treated for isolated unilateral middle- to high-energy ZMC fractures. Surgeries were performed by oral and maxillofacial surgeons within 10 The surgical approaches for each case varied, including intraoral incision (to expose and fix the zygomatico-maxillary suture); lateral eye brow incision (to expose and fix the frontozygomatic suture); Gillies approach (to elevate a depressed zygomatic arch, if any); subtarsal stepped incision (if OE was performed) for infraorbital rim fixation, with orbital reconstruction using a titanium mesh Most of the patients were males (80%). The age range was 15–51 years, with a mean age of 23.78 years ( PTD was diagnosed in 137 patients (59%). The prevalence of PTD in patients with high-energy fractures was 100%, while 57% of the middle-energy cases had PTD. POD, following the observation period and immediately before surgery, was positive in 13% of patients. Only 22% of PTD cases continued to have POD. The related-samples McNemar test showed a highly significant change ( OE was performed in 170 patients (74%). All patients with POD had OE, while OE was performed in 70% of patients without POD. In a similar fashion, all subjects with high-energy fractures underwent OE, and 72% of the middle-energy class had OE. PSD was found in 86 patients (37%). PSD was reported in only 34% of the middle-energy ZMC fractures, compared with 100% of the high-energy fractures. Patients who did not undergo OE had no PSD after the surgery (0%). In comparison, 51% of patients who underwent OE had PSD. Approximately, 35% of patients with PSD had POD before surgery. Patients who did not have POD and underwent OE developed PSD in 40% of cases ( Only 16 patients (7%) had PFD by the end of the first post-operative week. The PFD prevalence was approximately 5% by the 2nd week, 2% by the 3rd week, and 1% by the 3rd month. Ophthalmic referral for follow-up and charting was done in all patients with diplopia in the primary or downward gaze after 2–3 weeks of the surgery. Almost 81% of the patients with PSD had no PFD on week 1. Approximately 31% of patients with 1st week PFD had no 2nd week PFD, and 55% of patients with 2nd week PFD had no 3rd week PFD. Of the 5 patients with 3rd week PFD, two patients returned to single binocular vision by the 3rd post-operative month. One patient underwent a second orbital exploration with reconstruction (re-operated) around 3 months after the first surgery. This patient reported no diplopia after 2 months of the 2nd surgery. In patients with no POD, only 1% had 1st week PFD, and none had 2nd week or later PFD. The distribution of diplopia in patients who had no POD but had OE during the different post-operative periods is illustrated in The overall analysis of diplopia in all observed post-operative periods from the PSD to the RD showed a statistically significant change, This paper investigated the prevalence of diplopia and its clinical course before and after treatment in unilateral middle- to high-energy ZMC fractures. In addition, the study evaluated some of the important factors related to diplopia and its outcome in such injuries. Patients with isolated low-energy fractures, who were not admitted, were considered to be complication-free and were excluded. Most of the patients with ZMC fractures in this study were males, with a M/F ratio of 4:1. The patients were generally young. Middle-energy fractures were much more prevalent than high-energy fractures. Post-traumatic diplopia was diagnosed in 59% of the patients. All the cases with a high-energy fracture underwent OE. Similarly, OE was performed in all the cases with POD. The incidence of post-surgical diplopia was 37%. The analysis of the follow-up weeks after the surgery showed a significant improvement of diplopia, with a resolution rate of 83% by the first postoperative week. Not all ZMC fractures cause functional and/or cosmetic problems. Therefore, many ZMC fractures can be treated conservatively without surgical intervention The incidence of diplopia in midfacial injuries varies widely within the literature. One study reported an incidence of 19.8% in midfacial fractures and 58% in orbital blow-outs The high prevalence of traumatic diplopia presented in this paper can be explained by the exclusion of the non-displaced low-energy ZMC fractures, and the method of diagnosis of diplopia. The response when asked about diplopia can be tricky because the patient may confuse diplopia with decreased visual acuity, after images, image distortion, hemianopia, or other visual field defects The etiology behind acute binocular diplopia, secondary to trauma, can be restrictive or paretic in nature. Causes may include muscle entrapment, nerve damage, muscle edema/hematoma In this study, post-traumatic diplopia was more prevalent in the high-energy group. Similar finding was also reported in a recent study Despite orbital involvement, not all patients underwent orbital surgical exploration, although many did. Orbital exploration decision was taken in case of positive forced-duction test, enophthalmos, persistent diplopia after the observation period, CT scan evidence of a displaced orbital floor and/or herniation. The PTD resolution was much less in the high-energy fractures as we discussed earlier, which means that more patients had POD in this group by the time of surgery. Orbital reconstruction was performed using titanium mesh with bone graft as needed. A review study in 2012 showed that the postoperative rates of diplopia varied significantly according to the reconstruction material/implant used In this study, the incidence of post-surgical diplopia was high compared with that in another investigation (9.3%) The overall improvement rate showed that most of the cases of PSD resolved by weeks 1 and 3. Eye exercises may explain the improvement as well as the resolution of any residual edema or adhesions. No significant further improvements after the 3rd post-operative week were noticed, despite the very low prevalence of diplopia by the 3rd month. One case needed a 2nd surgery. In this patient, there was a CT evidence of ‘herniation’ of the orbital tissue below the titanium mesh. This indicated an inadequate orbital reconstruction in the 1st surgery; therefore, the decision of re-operation was taken. No later RD was reported in this patient. The presence of RD after 6 months of surgery was reported in a patient who had experienced high-energy ZMC fractures and POD before the surgery. One study showed that inferior rectus muscle (and other periorbital musculature) entrapment, globe position abnormality, degree of inflammation, and type of graft were significantly associated with residual diplopia after orbital blow-out surgery This study included a reasonable sample and a convenient follow up data. Most of published research did not emphasize on the course of diplopia in ZMC fractures as this investigation did. However, the retrospective nature of the study limited the control over some of the possibly significant factors that may affect diplopia and its regression. Surgeries were performed by different surgeons with different surgical approaches used as needed. In addition, the variation in the orbital reconstruction method and the orbital implant applied could have an impact on the post-operative sequalae including diplopia. When interpreting the results of this research, one has to bear in mind these surgical variables that were not included as outcome predictors. Another possible limitation was the exclusion of the bilateral cases and wither bilateral orbital exploration could have a different outcome. Traumatic diplopia in unilateral middle- and high-energy ZMC fractures is common. It is more prevalent in high-energy fractures. Most of the diplopia will disappear within 10 Follow-up diplopia after the surgery will likely show a significant improvement by post-operative weeks 1 and 3. Arguably, patients who still have diplopia by week 3 will likely continue to have diplopia for extended periods, and ophthalmic referral as well as radiological re-assessment for these cases is prudent. Residual diplopia is highly unlikely. Diplopia in ZMC fractures, as a significant perioperative complaint, still lacks well-controlled research. A prospective study with a standardized method for the diagnosis of diplopia is recommended. Further research to investigate the relationship between diplopia and other ocular injuries, such as enophthalmos, and the orbital reconstruction material in ZMC fractures is suggested. The study was approved by the research center of the Riyadh Colleges of Dentistry and Pharmacy. Due to the retrospective nature of the study, informed consents were not required. The authors declared no conflict of interest.