A simple theoretical model of magnetic–hydrophobic coagulation considering the total interaction potential energy between two spheres exposed to an external magnetic field as a sum of the van der Waals, electrostatic, magnetic, and hydrophobic components is proposed. The model was used to interpret experiments on coagulation of fine siderite particles in distilled water and 10−2 M KCl, hydrophobized by sodium oleate. In the experiments, a relative extent of the coagulation/stability equilibrium of the siderite suspension was evaluated photoelectrically. To estimate the model parameters, the ζ-potential and hydrophobicity of siderite particles were measured.
                  A qualitative agreement was obtained between the model predictions (energy maximum and secondary minimum) and the experimental results (voltage changes after a selected interval of sedimentation) of the siderite suspensions. Moreover, a statistically significant correlation was found between the experimental voltages and the calculated energy maximum (a crucial factor of theories on the fine particle coagulation kinetics), which can be represented by a linear regression equation with the correlation coefficient of 0.979.Magnetic coagulation or flocculation of weakly magnetic mineral particles dispersed in aqueous solutions has been of particular interest from early 1980s. The recent introduction of high-temperature superconductors in magnetic separation makes the coagulation applications more practical and competitive. However, despite several attempts to derive theoretical models of the magnetic-field-induced coagulation of quasicolloidal paramagnetic and diamagnetic mineral particles, experimental verifications of these models have only been of qualitative character so far. The argument is that only some of the model parameters (preferably the strength of the magnetic field) have been obviously pursued. As a result, coagulation criteria have been rather developed and ascertained. A substantial progress in the understanding of the interaction forces operating between “lyophobic” colloidal particles has been made since the introduction of the DLVO theory, in which the interaction potential energy (or simply the interaction potential) between two spheres, expressed as a function of their separation distance Later, The computations led to the establishment of criteria and principles that were used to predict the stability of the oxide suspensions. The magnetic-field-induced coagulation of hematite ( Apparently, to examine the effect of the magnetic interaction component, it is needed to apply a magnetic field in a well-defined disperse system. In the model of The quantitative model predictions, considering only the primary minimum coagulation, underestimated the coagulation effect observed experimentally in the system of synthetized (almost monodisperse) submicrometer Fe Earlier, To interpret the experimental results, the total interaction potential profile between the particle and the substrate was calculated in which the magnetic interaction potential was also included. Both the magnetic moments of particles and beads were not constant due to the magnetization by the external field and the combined external-bead field magnetization, respectively. Particles were expected to be accumulated in the secondary minimum by convective diffusion since the barrier was still present under the influence of the magnetic field and, hence, the transfer of the particles into the primary minimum was considered to be rather infrequent. This conclusion was corroborated by the detachment experiments: in the absence of the magnetic field, the particles were deposited irreversibly (in the primary minimum) as only 30% of the particles was released if they were deposited without the influence of the magnetic field, but if the magnetic field of above 0.2 T was applied in the course of deposition, all attached particles were released instantly once the field was turned off. As seen, the mechanism of the particle adhesion in the well-defined disperse system was explained qualitatively. In the next article, Summarizing the above research on the magnetically induced coagulation or adhesion of weakly magnetic particles in their aqueous dispersions, we can state that a satisfactory agreement of quantitative theoretical predictions of models based on the total interaction potential with experimental results has not been demonstrated yet. Interestingly, Along with the magnetic coagulation experiments, a new kind of the hydrophobically induced coagulation in ultrafine particle dispersions has been intensively studied theoretically and experimentally. In a fundamental article of More recently, There are other papers on the hydrophobic coagulation as well that cannot be described in detail here Since fine mineral particles can be effectively hydrophobized by surfactants or they are naturally hydrophobic in their dispersions, the hydrophobic coagulation can be expected to interfere with the magnetic coagulation under the influence of the magnetic field. However, the combined role of the hydrophobic and magnetic components in a model of combined magnetic–hydrophobic coagulation (considering four interaction components) has not been studied adequately. In fact, the influence of hydrophobicity and the corresponding attractive hydrophobic interaction of fine paramagnetic siderite and rhodochrosite particles ( In two articles by In the present communication, we report a correlation of theoretical predictions after a simple model with the former experimental results of the combined hydrophobic–magnetic coagulation of natural suspension of siderite particles, hydrophobized to various degrees by the addition of chemisorbed anionic surfactant (sodium oleate), in the presence and absence of indifferent electrolyte (KCl). In the extended DLVO model used, a short-range exponential formula was adopted to express the hydrophobic interaction potential in which the hydrophobicity (evaluated by the contact angle measurements) of the studied particles was accounted through the solid/liquid interfacial tension. To convert the contact angle data to the tension ones, Neumann's equation of state for interfacial tensions was used instead of the van Oss' AB concept. Zeta potentials were also determined systematically and were considered in the model calculations. In our theoretical model of hydrophobic–magnetic coagulation, the interaction between two spheres exposed to an external magnetic field is considered as a function of separation distance between the spheres' surfaces. The total interaction potential vs. separation function The electrostatic interaction potential is expressed by the linear approximation of the Poisson–Boltzmann equation in the form The magnetostatic interaction potential between two spheres Finally, based on the SFA measurements between (macroscopic) hydrophobized mica surfaces in aqueous solutions as well as on theoretical assumptions, the hydrophobic interaction potential is approximated by the exponential In this work, To relatively evaluate the degree of magnetic–hydrophobic coagulation (or stability) by a sedimentation analysis, 10 g of a fine fraction of siderite (−5 μm) from Rudňany (Slovakia) was dispersed in 1 l of doubly distilled and deionized water (conductance of 17 μS m As a measure of hydrophobicity, the contact angle of water droplets positioned on the surface of a disc formed by dry siderite particles (pressed together under a suitable load) was determined. Prior to the compacting, the suspension was prepared and treated with NaOl under the same conditions as in the settling analysis. Subsequently, the particles were filtered off and dried. It was observed that the water contact angle did not vary with time, at least for moderately and strongly hydrophobic siderite. Three values of independent determinations of the contact angle were averaged. The zeta potential of siderite particles was measured with the Zeta-Plus apparatus (Brookhaven Instruments), utilizing the laser-Doppler electrophoretic light scattering (ELS) technique. In order to evaluate the effect of the siderite content on the zeta potential, the measurements were made for suspensions of various solid/liquid ratios (0.1, 0.5, and 0.25 g l The time-dependent voltage records taken for siderite suspensions in the presence of increasing concentration of sodium oleate NaOl ( The photodiode voltage detected after a 7-min period of sedimentation of siderite particles in distilled water as a function of the NaOl concentration is depicted in A little bit different pattern can be seen in In The influence of NaOl on pH and the electric conductance of siderite suspensions is shown in Hydrophobicity of siderite, evaluated by the contact angle The complex effect of sodium oleate on the coagulation/stability equilibrium of siderite suspension, described in In order to explain the intricate effect of the hydrophobicity, The values of the maximum and secondary minimum obtained from the calculated total interaction potential profile (normalized by the kT unit) between siderite spheres of the radius of 2×10 The dependence of these values on For an illustration, The model apparently fails to explain the observed slowdown of the magnetized siderite suspension when Anyway, based on the encouraging qualitative agreement between the model predictions and the experimental results, we tried to find a relationship between the voltage and the height of the energy maximum. An absence of quantitative agreement between experimental parameters reflecting the extent of magnetic or hydrophobic coagulation and the theoretical model predictions was revealed by the thorough literature survey. The same is true for the combined magnetic–hydrophobic coagulation. At least partly, the problem is a consequence of the inadequacy to derive an accurate analytical expression for the hydrophobic component of the total interaction potential between two model objects (spheres). A single exponential was introduced, approximating the so-called short-range hydrophobic interaction, earlier proposed for two ideal macroscopic (mica) surfaces hydrophobized with cationic surfactants (by other researchers). Moreover, in order to calculate the hydrophobic potential in dependence on the surface hydrophobicity, a simple equation of state for interfacial tensions was adopted. To verify the simple model, a series of experimental tests of the magnetic–hydrophobic coagulation of fine siderite particles in an aqueous solution of KCl, stimulated gradually by the sodium oleate surfactant, was performed. The model parameters (zeta potential and hydrophobicity) were determined experimentally. A satisfactory ( Financial support from the VEGA (Grant No. 1/7599/20) is acknowledged.