In this work, a lightweight and efficient supercapacitor on a flexible paper has been developed. Flexible electrodes of bismuth ferrite (BFO)/graphene nanocomposite have been fabricated by a simple drop casting method. The mechanical stability of the electrodes was tested by bending the supercapacitor. The BFO/graphene electrode with its porous structure has more electrolyte accessibility and the graphene nanosheets act as an effective conductive pathway for charge transportation between the electrode material and the current collector. The electrode exhibited excellent electrochemical performance in terms of specific capacitance and cycle stability. The electrode demonstrated specific capacitance of 9 mF/cm2determined from cyclic voltammetry test at a scan rate of 10 mV/s in the potential window of 0–0.9 V. It can deliver specific power of 0.5–3.5 kW/kg with moderate energy density. The electrode retains 98% capacitance over 1000 cycles and 95% after 5000 cycles. The BFO/graphene nanocomposite electrode demonstrated good mechanical stability towards flexible supercapacitor application. X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, and field emission scanning electron microscopic analyses revealed the formation of BFO/graphene nanocomposite. The electrochemical results such as cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charging/discharging suggested that BFO/graphene nanocomposite electrode has a significant potential for flexible energy storage system.Supercapacitor has been considered as one of the most promising candidate because of its significant merits such as high power density along with other properties such as much lower maintenance cost, simple geometry and eco-friendly nature [ Electrode materials are categorized into two types according to their charge storage process, 1) electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) [ Many transition metal oxides such as MnO In literature, there have been reported two main strategies to improve the capacitive properties of BFO electrodes. The first one is to develop the BFO nanostructures with large surface area. In this context, C. D. Lokhande et al. [ In the second approach, the supercapacitor performance was improved by developing BFO based composites with high conductive materials [ Increasing the power capability of a supercapacitor without losing its energy density and long term cycle stability is a challenge [ In the present work, flexible electrodes of BFO/graphene nanocomposite have been fabricated by a facile and low temperature synthesis process. First, a sol-gel chemical route was used to synthesize BFO nanoparticles. After that, drop casting method was used to deposit BFO/graphene on a flexible substrate. The graphene sheets would give the flexibility for BFO film on a flexible substrate. The capacitive behavior was investigated in two electrodes configuration in 1 M Na Sol-gel combustion method was used to prepare BFO nanoparticles [ BFO/graphene electrode for supercapacitor was fabricated by drop casting method, which is relatively simple, one step and room temperature process. First, the freshly prepared BFO nanoparticles were dissolved in DI water and a small amount of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) was also added to get a well dispersed solution of BFO. The binder (PVA) usually increases the adhesion between the electrode material and the substrate. The solution was heated at 60 °C under constant magnetic stirring. The graphene sheets were added to the solution in a fixed ratio of 1:4. This solution was used for the preparation of electrodes on two filter papers of size 2 cm × 2 cm each ( The supercapacitor was fabricated in symmetric configuration ( The XRD spectrum of BFO/graphene composite film prepared on a filter paper is shown in To further characterize the structure of BFO/graphene nanocomposite, Raman spectroscopy was performed and shown in  The microstructure of the BFO/graphene composite was further studied using TEM as shown in The electrochemical properties of the BFO/graphene composite electrodes were studied by using the cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge/discharge methods in two electrode system. The specific capacitance of the electrodes was determined with the following equation [ The BFO/graphene nanocomposite exhibits a specific capacitance of ∼18 mF/cm The scan rate was further varied from 10 mV/sec to 1 V/sec ( The specific capacitance determined from CV curves is found to be dependent on scan rates ( To further study the electrochemical performance of BFO/graphene composite, the device was charged and discharged with different current density as shown in Ragone plot of BFO/graphene based flexible supercapacitor is represented in The flexible supercapacitor must be folded and twisted without losing the capacitive properties and destroying the structural integrity of the device [ The recorded response at bent mode is shown in The long term cycle stability is another important factor in order to meet its requirement of long term usage. The cycling performance stability of the BFO/graphene flexible supercapacitor was measured by repeating the CV curves for 5000 cycles ( BFO/graphene nanocomposite has been synthesized for flexible supercapacitor application. The composite of BFO/graphene was directly deposited on a filter paper via a simple and cost-effective process. The BFO/graphene nanocomposite electrode exhibited a specific capacitance of 9 mF/cm We would like to thank Prof. V. S. Raja, Dept. of ME and MS, IIT Bombay, for providing the electrochemical measurement facility in his laboratory. We also acknowledge University of Rajasthan for SEM characterization. Dept. of physics, Siksha O Anusandhan, Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar is also acknowledged for providing electrodes preparation facility.