Tavares and King [Tavares, L.M., and King, R.P., A Useful Model for the Calculation of the Performance of Batch and Continuous Jigs, Coal Preparation, 15, 99–128, 1995.] have proposed an elegant equilibrium stratification model for stratification of feed particles in gravity concentrators namely, the pinched sluice, the Reichert cone and the jig to account for particle segregation in the bed in order to aid particle separation. The model considers feed distributed in particle density but strictly of monosize particles to evaluate partition coefficients of separation, product distributions in terms of particle density as well as mass yield of solids at various cut heights of the stratified bed for both batch and continuous operations. This paper extends this model to incorporate the particle size effects along with particle density effects, by considering a bivariate feed distribution that gets stratified in the operating unit. It is shown by the simulation studies that the bivariate partition functions obtained numerically at various bed cut heights from the stratification model are qualitatively matching to the nature of partition surfaces normally found in literature for gravity concentrators.Particle separation in gravity concentrators is influenced by particle size as well as particle density (  A brief introduction to the stratification model and the model structure is dealt with in this section as this paper extends it by incorporating particle size effects. where   where After obtaining the solution to the above equations, the mass yield of solids to the float stream by slicing the bed at a relative height The recovery of density component Eqs. where After obtaining the solution, the mass yield of solids to the float stream for a continuous separator, by slicing the bed sharply at a relative height The recovery of density component The density distribution by volume of the float stream, by slicing the stratified bed sharply at a relative height  where Substituting the value of For a batch separation process Eq.   The solution to Eq. Similar to Eqs.  Eqs. Similar to Eqs.  The bivariate size-density distribution by volume of the float stream for both batch and continuous operations, by slicing the stratified bed sharply at a relative height In the absence of availability of any real experimental data from literature on segregation of feed particles in size and density attributes, which is required for the validation of the proposed method at various cut heights of the bed, the present method has been restricted to simulations of bivariate partition surfaces and verifying the nature of partition surface generated at various cut height of the bed by this approach. The concentration profiles of the stratified bed for the 36 bivariate species of  Suppose we estimate the model parameters by matching the experimentally determined partition surface at a specified cut height of the segregated bed for a given bivariate feed distribution, then this model is able to reveal all other partition surfaces along the bed height. Consequently, this helps to optimize the cut height desired for a better product distribution.  Finally, the importance of considering bivariate distribution for segregation model is highlighted. A marginal distribution in particle size (or particle density) will not reveal the distribution of particles in the other attribute, namely particle density (or particle size). In other words, there will be many a size-density distributions that give the same marginal distribution in terms of particle density (or particle size). It is absence of consideration of this aspect of feed distribution in the conventional models that depend on marginal distributions, which affects product quality under same operating conditions depending on how apart are the bivariate distributions that give the same marginal distributions. This paper extends the stratification model proposed by The author is grateful to late Prof. R.P. King, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah for providing the feed washability data as well as for providing useful suggestions in the implementation of the numerical solution scheme for the optimization of the average density profile. The author also acknowledges Mr. Shivaram Kamat and Dr. Phanibhushan Sistu, EIS, TCSL, Pune for their encouragement in this work.