The selective chlorination of reduced limonitic laterite for the extraction of nickel and cobalt was investigated. Reduced ore samples were obtained from the reduction roasting of a limonitic laterite. The extraction of nickel and cobalt from the reduced ore was conducted by selective chlorination in the temperature range of 300–500°C using aluminum chloride hexahydrate as the chlorination agent, and followed by water leaching at 80°C. The reduced ore was partly chlorinated by hydrogen chloride generated from the thermal decomposition of AlCl3·6H2O. Then the oxydrolysis of ferrous chloride re-generated hydrogen chloride which was used to further the chlorination. In this way, iron was mostly rejected as hematite, while nickel and cobalt were selectively chlorinated and dissolved during the water leaching process. Various parameters were studied including aluminum chloride addition, chlorination temperature, chlorination time, and the degree of reduction of ore. Under the optimum experimental conditions, 91%Ni, 90%Co and <4%Fe were extracted by water leaching.Nickel laterite ores can be simply divided in two types, silicate-rich and limonite. The former can be processed effectively by a pyrometallurgical process in which the ferronickel product or a low grade nickel matte is produced from which nickel can be further refined ( The limonitic laterite is rich in iron in the form of goethite and has low contents of magnesium, aluminum, silicon, and other elements. Goethite is the main nickel-bearing mineral in the laterite ( To overcome the problems of HPAL and Caron processes, a sulphation roast–leaching process has been investigated for the extraction of nickel and cobalt from limonitic laterite ( In this work, a new reductive roasting–selective chlorination–water leaching process for the extraction of nickel and cobalt is presented for the first time. Firstly, limonitic laterite ore is roasted under reducing conditions. In the reduced ore, the main phases are iron alloys and wustite which contained nickel and cobalt. Then a selective chlorination is conducted in an air and hydrogen chloride atmosphere. The iron alloys and wustite are chlorinated by hydrogen chloride. Simultaneously, iron rejection is performed by the oxydrolysis of ferrous chloride, which re-generates hydrogen chloride used to further the chlorination. In this way, iron is mostly rejected as hematite while nickel and cobalt are selectively chlorinated and water leached. The process can be simply described by the following reactions. Numerous research papers about the reduction roasting of nickel laterite have been published ( The chlorination process temperature range is selected as 300–500 thermodynamically preferred chlorination of the reduced ore through Eqs. favorable hydrogen chloride gas recycle and reduced environmental effect with a lower temperature; assurance of iron rejection through Eq. However, common solid chloride agents for chlorination roasting, such as sodium chloride and calcium chloride, need a higher decomposition temperature for hydrogen chloride generation. Thus for the convenience of a laboratory study, aluminum chloride hexahydrate was used as solid chlorinating agent due to its low decomposition temperature. This preliminary investigation mainly focuses on metal value extraction from a limonitic laterite ore and iron rejection during the selective chlorination process. Various parameters were studied including aluminum chloride addition, chlorination temperature, chlorination time and the degree of reduction of the ore. A limonitic laterite ore ( The ore mixed with activated carbon was pelletized with the diameter range of 6–10 The reduced ores (R1–R5) were used as raw materials for selective chlorination. Aluminum chloride hexahydrate (AlCl The selective chlorination of the reduced limonitic laterite was carried out in a muffle electric furnace. As an experimental procedure, 10.00 The contents of iron, nickel and cobalt in the leach solution and the residue were analyzed by AAS. Based on the mass balance principle, the metal extractions were calculated. The phase composition of the chlorinated ores was characterized by XRD. To determine the phase transformation during the selective chlorination process, a series of chlorination experiments were carried out. Reduced ore samples (R4) mixed with 40%wt. AlCl Ferrous chloride is relatively stable until it contacts with oxygen when the oxydrolysis of ferrous chloride occurs according to Eq. From the XRD patterns after 120 To study the effect of AlCl As mentioned above, the thermal decomposition of AlCl In the selective chlorination process, temperature plays an important role. Experiments to investigate the chlorination temperature effect were carried out in temperature range of 300–500  As mentioned above, under the experimental conditions of the selective chlorination, goethite, magnetite and hematite could not be chlorinated and the metal values in these matrixes could not be chemically released by hydrogen chloride. Based on this principle, the extractions of nickel and cobalt are highly dependent upon the reduction degree which is related to the content of magnetite in reduced ores. Thus experiments were carried out with five reduced ore samples under the standard reaction parameters mentioned in the experimental section. The effect of degree of reduction on metal extractions is shown in A novel application of a selective chlorination–water leaching process for the extraction of nickel and cobalt from reduced limonitic laterite ore containing iron alloys and wustite has been investigated using AlCl The project was sponsored by the