Theoretical and experimental work was carried out in this investigation to study the effect of the electrode configuration of an electrochemical flotation cell on sulfide mineral flotation and the optimum configuration of the electrodes. The factors that may affect the efficiency of the externally applied potential were discussed. The results of this study illustrate that both the value of the potential and the distribution of electrical current in the pulp are crucial for effective control of mineral flotation.There are basically two methods to control the pulp potential during sulfide flotation. One is the addition of chemical reagents and the other is use of an external potentiostat. Study on externally applied potentials to control the pulp potential has been carried out on both laboratory and industrial scales ( The purpose of applying an external potential is to control some electrochemical reactions in the pulp system. The reactions happening autogenously in the pulp will always reduce the energy level of the system. In order to control some electrochemical reactions in it, energy is required to put into the pulp system through the applied potential. At a certain point within the system, the energy input from the external potential used to control a certain reaction can be expressed: At a certain point in the pulp,  In order to produce a uniform current distribution in the flotation chamber of the electrochemical flotation cell, the configuration of electrodes shown in Plane ABKN is the working electrode. Plane EFGR is the counter electrode. Column ABCDONKJ is the flotation chamber. Column CDEFGROJ is the electrolyte chamber. Column STUVXYba is the chamber for reference electrode. Plane CDOJ is a diaphragm which allows the free transfer of ions in the solutions surrounding it. Chamber IJKLMNOP is the aeration chamber with the plane JKNO being the aeration diaphragm. The advantages of the above cell are: The current in the flotation chamber is uniform. The mineral particles are always under the control of the applied potential during their floating process. The preciseness of the potential range can be adjusted by the ratio between the length of AD and DE. The cell shown in Many factors will affect the efficiency of the externally applied potentials. The obvious ones are the configuration of the cell and the electrodes and the properties of the electrode materials. The composition of the aqueous phase should play an important role in determining the efficiency of the externally applied potential. From an electro-kinetic point of view, the direct electrical charge transfer between the mineral particles and the working electrode could be very slow or even impossible considering the number of the particles in the pulp and their chance to hit the electrode surface. The ions in the aqueous phase which can act as an electrical charge carrier are much more abundant, and calculations indicate that the ratio between the number of Cl The role of the electrical charge carriers, which work together with their counter parts of their redox pairs, is to pass electrons between the mineral particles and the working electrode ( High purity natural chalcopyrite was used in the flotation tests, and was supplied by Ward’s. X-ray diffraction of the sample showed no impurity peaks. The chemical assay of the sample can be found in a previous publication ( A modified Hallimond tube was used for the electrochemical flotation ( The procedures for sample preparation and for carrying out a chemical-controlled-pulp-potential microflotation were described in detail in a previous publication ( To carry out an external potential controlled microflotation: A gold working electrode was put on the aeration diaphragm of the flotation cell. Then a certain amount of pH 10 buffer solution was transferred into the chambers of the cell and the oxygen in the solutions was removed. After the washed chalcopyrite sample (1 g) was transferred to the flotation chamber, the reference electrode was inserted into the reference electrode chamber and the counter electrode was inserted on the top of the flotation chamber. A fixed potential was applied to the working electrode to condition the mineral bed for 10 min. PAX was added and the mineral bed was conditioned for another 2 min. The counter and working electrodes were taken out after the conditioning was done and the mineral was floated with nitrogen air for 2 min. Chemical-controlled-pulp-potential flotation and external potential controlled pulp potential flotation were conducted in 7  Chalcopyrite only floated in the potential range of −0.25 to +0.18 V vs. SCE if the pulp potential was adjusted by chemicals while it floated well in the potential range of −0.05 to +1.5 V vs. SCE if the pulp potential was controlled by potentiostat. The inefficiency of the external potential in controlling the flotation of chalcopyrite was due to the Faraday cage effect. The electrical charges transferred to a chalcopyrite particle bed will have a tendency to stay at the surface of the bed. The outer layers of the particle bed will be over affected and the inner part of the particle bed will be less or unaffected, which led to an unselective floatation. Two configuration were tested using the same floatation cell. One configuration (refered as configuration I) was the same as described in the test procedure above. The second configuration (refered as configuration II) used the same gold electrode on top of the aeration diaphragm as working electrode, but the counter electrode was inserted into to the bottom of the counter electrode chamber, which was on the same level of the working electrode, instead on top of the flotation chamber. The flotation results are shown in  Both the value of the external potential and the distribution of the electrical current in the pulp are crucial for effective control of mineral flotation. The external potential was not as effective as the chemical adjusted pulp potential in controlling chalcopyrite flotation. The electrode configuration of an electrochemical flotation cell had remarkable effect on the efficiency of the external potential for controlling the chalcopyrite floatability. The authors wish to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for financial support.