We retrospectively reviewed outcomes of 79 patients with periprosthetic hip fractures around cemented tapered polished stem (CTPS) implants treated with osteosynthesis between January 1997 and July 2011. All patients underwent open reduction and fixation using a broad dynamic compression plate (DCP).
                  Seventy two (91%) of fractures united. There were seven (9%) non-unions with failure of metal work, three (4%) as a result of infection and four (5%) due to mechanical failure. Significant subsidence (>5mm) of the implant was seen in seven (9%) of cases. Ten (13%) cases developed post-operative infection. Non-anatomic reduction and infection were identified as predictors of poor outcome.
                  This is the largest series of a very specific group of periprosthetic fractures treated with osteosynthesis. Open reduction internal fixation with a broad dynamic compression plate for patients with periprosthetic hip fractures around the tip of cemented tapered polished stems is a suitable treatment provided there is no bone loss and the fracture can be precisely, anatomically, reduced and adequately fixed.The dilemma when treating periprosthetic femoral fractures around hip arthroplasty prostheses is deciding between osteosynthesis and revision arthroplasty. The Vancouver Classification, The Vancouver classification We retrospectively identified patients who were treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) for Vancouver Type B fractures around a cemented tapered polished stem between January 1997 and July 2011. The decision to fix or revise was made by the operating surgeon. Patients with pathological fractures and those with femoral lysis or bone loss (that would have traditionally been classified as Vancouver Type B3) were not treated with ORIF and therefore there were no such cases included. Patient details were obtained by searching our electronic hospital records. Of 95 patients that met inclusion criteria follow up data was obtained for 79 (83%) which formed the final study cohort, All patients were given a single dose of prophylactic antibiotics at induction of anaesthesia, as per local antimicrobial prescribing policy. All were operated in the lateral position using the lateral subvastus approach. The fracture was reduced under direct vision and held with bone-holding clamps. The plate was then either applied directly or primarily held with lag screws or two to three cerclage wires in addition to the reduction clamp prior to plate fixation (we have come to believe cerclage wiring prior to fixation is the technique of choice). In all cases a broad 4.5 Patients were followed up at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 Patients were operated by 15 different consultants or by a trainee under their direct supervision. The average number of screws proximal to the fracture was 5 (range 2–9, SD 1.1) and distal to the fracture was 6 (range 3–9, SD1.2). The average duration of operation was 94 Mean time to follow up was 27 months (range 0–108 months, SD28). See Three patients developed infected non-unions. One case was a fracture around a revision prosthesis (revision for recurrent dislocation done 3 months prior to fracture), the failed ORIF was revised to a proximal femoral replacement at 3 months and the patient died 10 months after primary fixation. The other two involved primary implants, both were revised to proximal femoral replacement. At final follow up both patients remained on oral suppressive antibiotic therapy, neither had undergone further surgery. All four cases of the mechanical failure occurred within three months of primary fixation. Three were not anatomically reduced at time of surgery. Two of these were treated with revision plating following anatomic reduction (one with bone graft, one without) and one was revised with an uncemented long stem prosthesis, all went on to unite. One was reduced anatomically at time of primary surgery and following failure had revision plating with a longer plate and went on to unite. Significant subsidence (>5 There were a total of 10 (13%) cases of post-operative infection. There were three cases of infected non-union that failed as described above. In three cases the fractures united despite infection and patients remained on long term suppressive antibiotics. The final 4 patients died within 10 months of primary fixation, all were treated with suppressive antibiotics and washouts but without revision of fixation. Fifteen (19%) patients died within one year of periprosthetic fracture, 10 (13%) of these were within the first 6 months. The mobility status of the patients at their final follow up has been shown in The results of this study indicate that plating of periprosthetic fractures around the tip of cemented tapered polished stems is an effective treatment. It is an option that can be considered in fractures where the bone cement interface looks satisfactory and it is though that the fracture can be anatomically reduced. The indication for use of plating may be extended in frail elderly patients with some early loosening at bone cement interface if the patient is judged to be unfit for a more major surgical intervention. In this study 91% of factures united following open reduction internal fixation. Predictors of poor outcome were non-anatomical reduction and infection. Of the 12 cases with non-anatomical reduction 4 had significant subsided and 3 went on to non-union and fixation failure. 75% of all mechanical failures were non-anatomically reduced at time of surgery. Of the 10 (9%) cases that developed postoperative infection 3 went on to non-union and failure of fixation and 5 died with in 1 This is the largest study of a cohort of patients with periprosthetic fractures around cemented tapered polished stems. A uniform surgical technique and the same hip prosthesis was used in the majority of cases. There are currently no other published studies that report the results of a series of periprosthetic fractures around this specific type of implant using this fixation technique. A number of studies: Lindahl et al. This study was limited by being retrospective. Patients with Vancouver B fractures were selected for ORIF on a case by case basis at the operating surgeon’s discretion. Some of the more displaced and comminuted fractures during this time period may have undergone revision arthroplasty. We acknowledge this as a potential source of bias. Preoperative hip scores were not collected at the time of the fracture and recording of ongoing pain was inconsistent. We therefore had to rely on mobility grades as a representation of functional outcome. Intra operative blood loss data was limited by errors in reporting in anaesthetic charts and loss of data. Vancouver Type B fractures are the most common periprosthetic fractures around a hip replacement. Lindahl et al. The fact that there is no bond between stem and cement in CTPSs is often considered a relative contraindication to open reduction internal fixation. Lindahl et al. We emphasise the need for an absolutely anatomical reduction in all cases. We believe this can be aided by the use of cerclage wires to hold the initial reduction prior to plating. Many of these fractures have a spiral geometry, cerclage wires allow a degree of adjustment that is more difficult with a lag screw technique. Positioning a lag screw perpendicular to the fracture and around the stem of the prosthesis is difficult and may not be possible. If the lag screw is not perpendicular to the fracture this will result in displacement of the fracture and non-anatomical reduction. Proximal fragment fixation is another area where a variety of methods are used. In a cadaveric study Harry et al. Periprosthetic hip fractures around a polished tapered stem can be treated successfully by open reduction and internal fixation in cases where the bone cement interface is intact. Failure of fixation is predictable and largely preventable with anatomical fracture reduction and avoidance of infection. If there is a failure to achieve anatomical reduction intra-operatively, revision arthroplasty should be considered. No authors involved in this paper have any financial and/or personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence (bias) this work.