Mobile LiDAR surveying is currently one of the most popular topics in road inspections. This non-destructive technology is suitable for collecting infrastructure inspection data related to 3D geometry and radiometry. Ground penetrating radar (GPR) is traditionally used to measure pavement thickness, though this technique requires reference data (cores) when surveying in a ground-coupled configuration.
                  Within this work, a new alternative method to GPR has been studied for determining pavement layer thicknesses and volumes. We analyze the performance of mobile LiDAR technology in this scope and test its accuracy compared to the results obtained with a ground-coupled 2.3-GHz GPR antenna. The findings presented here are based on field data collected from the Ourense–Celanova highway, in Northwestern Galicia. The results showed the potential of the Lynx Mobile Mapper to obtain the designed pavement thickness of newly constructed roadways with errors that are always less than 1.5cm.Road surface maintenance has been a constant concern for the Spanish Road Directorate. The pavement life-cycle is not only affected by the number of heavy load repetitions applied, but also by the layer thickness. Layer thickness is a vital factor defining the quality of pavement since deficiencies in thickness reduce its life During the last few years, ground penetrating radar (GPR) has been used for engineering and geophysical surveys. GPR uses radio waves with a frequency between 100 Thanks to its high-frequency, vehicle-mounted antennas, GPR technology can be used to find voids or cracks under pavement or monitor quality control on new asphalt overlays. But above all, measuring pavement layer thickness is one of the most common applications of GPR Depending on the way antennas are used, GPR systems are classified as air-coupled (launched) or ground-coupled systems. In air-coupled systems, the antennas are typically 400–500 On the other hand, mobile surveying is a quick, safe, and information-rich way to capture physical information The stretch selected for this study is situated between KP. 0+100 and KP. 0+300 on the Ourense–Celanova highway. This new motorway is expected to be, after its inauguration in February 2013, one of the main roads of inland Galicia (Spain) that will result in a quick connection route to the cities of Northern Portugal. This motorway is projected as a public–private partnership between the regional Transport Administration (Xunta de Galicia) and the construction companies Copasa SA and Extraco SA. The site, consisting of newly constructed pavement, was surveyed during the summer of 2012. The section tested contains two lanes. The pavement is composed of different types of layers, following the instructions contained in the Regulation 6.1 IC Road surface sections, from the Spanish Ministry of Public Works. The theoretical layer thicknesses are shown in Data collection was carried out in a series of short, longitudinal strips as the Lynx Mobile Mapper vehicle from Optech ( Each strip was collected at a different epoch, just after the layer was paved. Every survey line contains point cloud data acquired at the maximum values for pulse repetition frequency (PRF) and scan frequency of the scanners (500 Every mobile LiDAR survey began and finished with the acquisition of 5 The Lynx's spatial resolution (or interval) is dependent on four parameters: PRF, scan frequency (or lines per second, LPS), distance from the instrument ( The synchronization of data from multiple sensors of the mobile unit is achieved using the time stamp and the PPS of the GPS/INS system The data processing is performed using specific commercial software programs. A powerful GNSS/Inertial processing software combines the DGPS trajectory with the observations from the inertial navigation system (INS) and the distance measurement indicator (DMI) using a Kalman filter to obtain a best estimate of the vehicle trajectory Then, a fully featured processing suite for airborne and mobile LiDAR data combines the range and angle information obtained from the scanners with the trajectory information. The resulting point cloud was then exported to a terrestrial 3D LiDAR processing software, as it appears in Although the strips were initially georegistered, their precision (4 The control point′s method consists of finding corresponding control points (minimum of three) in two different range data determining transformation parameters which minimize the sum of squared distances (SSD) among all the point pairs. Then, a multistation adjustment can be performed based on the ICP method  The GPR surveys were conducted with a GPR ProEx system, and the antenna with a central frequency of 2.3-GHz was selected due to its appropriate compromise between penetration and resolution for estimating bituminous pavement thicknesses (approximately 15 Two GPR profiles were acquired with a ground-coupled configuration ( The GPR data collected was treated with a GPR processing software As an example, This particular GPR software allowed the extraction of the longitudinal profile of the thickness for each layer. For each layer, the phase follower pick in time application was used to obtain the profile of the wave travel-time distance (Δ The radar-wave velocity was determined for each type of bituminous asphalt concrete. The velocity was calculated from Eq. This section introduces an algorithm to compute the thickness and volume of pavement layers from scanned data obtained by the Lynx system. To accomplish this, the pavement layers must initially be co-registered all together in the same reference frame. The proposed algorithm was designed as follows and is completed in two steps: (1) thickness calculation and (2) volume estimation. It uses the geometric information from two consecutive pavement layers in Matlab. The applicability of this algorithm is checked through tests using rectangular pairs of layers whose dimensions are 10 The algorithm makes use of interpolation functions for scattered data ( The next step is to calculate the difference between the For the volume estimation, we need to first create a rectangular grid superimposed over both layers. The spatial resolution, determined by the distance between grid cells, was set to 0.1 We then calculate the interpolated Finally, in order to calculate the layer volume, we multiply each grid area (0.01 The proposed algorithm was applied to the pavement scanning data and the results obtained are presented in To verify the above experimental results, a comparison with GPR data was performed. This non-destructive testing method was used at the test site and a total of two profiles of 10  In this paper, we have presented a novel method to evaluate pavement layer thicknesses and volumes. The mobile LiDAR method offers important advantages to this purpose, because it can provide the complete 3D geometry of newly constructed roadways. With the use of the geometric information extracted from laser scanning data, four pavement layers were analyzed as part of this study. Based upon the acquired data, the developed algorithm allowed not only to conduct both punctual and average thickness measurements, but furthermore to measure the volume of the layers. The numerical assessment of the layer thickness accuracy was evaluated using two 2D longitudinal profiles acquired with a 2.3-GHz GPR antenna. The 2.3-GHz frequency provided the identification of the two shallowest interfaces (intermediate-base and base/soil-cement interfaces). For that reason, only the intermediate and base layers were compared. These results, with errors that are always less than 1.5 Authors thank