Objective
                  Expression of a large number of genes during differentiation of undifferentiated pulp cells into odontoblastic cells is still unknown, hence the aim of this investigation was to compare undifferentiated pulp cells (OD-21) and odontoblast-like cells (MDPC-23) through the assessment of cell stimulation and gene expression profiling.
               
                  Design
                  The cells were cultured and after the experimental periods, there were evaluated cell proliferation and viability as well as alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP) and mineralization nodules. To evaluate gene expression it was used fluorescence cDNA microarray technology in addition to bioinformatics programmes such as SAM (significance analysis of microarrays). Gene expression was validated by Real Time PCR (qPCR).
               
                  Results
                  The results showed that viability was above 80% in both cells, cell proliferation and ALP activity was higher in MDPC-23 cells and mineralization nodules were present only in the cultures of odontoblast-like cells. There were observed genes associated to odontogenesis with similar behaviour in both cell types, such as Il10, Traf6, Lef1 and Hspa8. Regions of the heatmap showed differences in induction and repression of genes such as Jak2 and Fas.
               
                  Conclusion
                  OD-21 cells share many genes with similar behaviour to MDPC-23 cells, suggesting their potential to differentiate into odontoblasts.In dentistry, studies of tissue engineering have been growing with the aim of developing techniques for manipulating stem cells and restorative treatments of oral tissues and organs. Tissue engineering studies the functional and physiological regeneration of lost tissue and it is based on three basic principles of tissue biology: progenitor stem cells, scaffold and substances that induce growth and cellular differentiation. Undifferentiated pulp stem cells in the adult have the capacity to proliferate and differentiate into odontoblastic cells responsible for dentine formation and maintenance of its integrity. Former investigations have shown that pulp cells from a murine cell line (OD-21), when chemically induced during cell culture, may present similar characteristics to odontoblast-like murine cells (MDPC-23), like higher ALP activity and production of mineralized nodules, Other studies have shown that even some materials can influence and stimulate the odontogenic differentiation of DPSCs, like for example MTA, which is known to up-regulate genes such as Bmp-6, Bmp-2, and Nox-4, associated to the formation of bone, cartilage and connective tissues. Despite DNA microarray technology being able to simultaneously monitor the expression of thousands of genes, it is hard to estimate which mechanisms are responsible for cell differentiation. Thus, the understanding of cell behaviour as well as regulatory relationships of genes can be achieved by inferring genetic network architecture from high-throughput experimental technologies, for instance cDNA microarray. The purpose of this study was to characterize the behaviour of undifferentiated pulp cells and odontoblast-like cells through biochemical assays as well as evaluate the transcriptional profile by means of Two murine immortalized cell lines were used: undifferentiated pulp cells (OD-21) and odontoblast-like cells (MDPC-23). The cells were cultured in D-MEM, 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS), 10,000 units/mL of penicillin and 10,000 For assessment of proliferation and viability, cells were cultured for 3, 7 and 10 days, and then enzymatically (1 Alkaline phosphatase activity was assayed as the release of thymolphthalein from thymolphthalein monophosphate using a commercial kit (Labest Diagnostica, MG, Brazil). Briefly, 50 Mineralized matrix formation was detected at day 17 by Alizarin Red S (Sigma–Aldrich) that stains areas rich in calcium. Attached cells were fixed in 10% formalin for 2 After subconfluence, total RNA from each culture was extracted using mirVana kit Gene expression was assessed using glass slide   A complete file including all of the sequences present in the microarrays used in this study, as well as the experimental conditions, is available online in the MIAME public database (  The Primer3 web tool ( All real time PCR experiments were conducted in triplicate. One-way ANOVA statistical test using the statistical software GraphPad Prism 4.00. ( Cell proliferation ( It was observed an increase in alkaline phosphatase activity along the days ( Qualitative analysis mineralized nodule formation was held on day 17 and revealed differences in the amount, form and distribution of nodules between groups. We observed that pulp stem cells did not form visible mineralization nodules. On the other hand, odontoblast-like cells formed mineralization nodules, especially at the periphery of wells. Quantification of Alizarin Red S showed that there were differences in the amount of calcium deposition between the two groups, with odontoblast-like cells showing a higher amount of calcium than undifferentiated pulp cells ( From the set of 4500 cDNA sequences present in the microarray, which were used to trace the differential gene expression profiling, 297 genes were differentially expressed according to statistical analysis of SAM (FDR Undifferentiated pulp and odontoblastic cell lines have been widely used to study new techniques for growing organs and tissues, seeking methods to regenerate lost dental tissue and even the formation of new teeth. In the present study it can be seen that the pulp stem cell line showed lower cell proliferation than odontoblast-like cells, but in spite of this result, the cell viability of both cells was greater than 80%. The activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in odontoblast-like cells was higher than undifferentiated cells in all periods. This result is related to the mineralization nodule formation and calcium deposition in most cells differentiated into odontoblasts, since ALP stimulation of mineralization is considered a marker of odontoblast differentiation. Among the genes shown in the heatmap, it was observed that some were associated with several odontogenic functions, being similarly expressed in both cells. It was observed that differentiating odontoblasts possess receptors for Il10 (interleukin-10), which is associated to early dentinogenesis. Abe et al. It is suggested that Traf6 (TNF receptor-associated factor 6) is involved in the molar cuspid formation, indicating its essential role in tooth morphogenesis. The gene that codes Lef1 protein (lymphocyte enhancer-binding factor 1), induced in both cells, has an essential role in odontoblastic differentiation through regulation of mRNA for osteocalcin and dentine sialoprotein (DSP), both present during mineralization of collagen fibres of extracellular matrix. Genes that code heat shock proteins family (HSPs) exhibit high expression during odontogenesis, mainly in cells from enamel organ and dental papillae, which will later differentiate into ameloblasts and odontoblasts. On the other hand, differential expression was seen in a few genes, like Jak2, which seems to be involved in enamel formation. The pairing of microarray and qPCR is common in gene expression studies. However, the two methods require and utilize vastly different normalization procedures, and some investigations show both the utility and the limitations of qPCR as a validation tool for oligonucleotide microarray studies. OD-21 cells, although undifferentiated, share many genes with similar behaviour to MDPC-23 odontoblast-like cells. It appears that both studied cells show similarities in gene expression associated to odontogenesis, evidentiating the odontoblast differentiation potential of undifferentiated pulp cells, suggesting their application in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. This research was supported by FAPESP (São Paulo Research Foundation – process 08/53937-1) None declared. Not required. The MDPC-23 and OD-21 cell lines used in the present study were donated by Professor Jacques Nör, University of Michigan Dental School, Ann Arbor, MI. This research was supported by