For those of us who have devoted a significant portion of our career to the exploration of the deep sea, there are a few “icons” in the field …. Dr. Peter A. Rona is one of those and this special volume is a tribute to him from those of us who knew and deeply respected the man. Peter was a treasured friend of over 40 years and one of the finest and most honorable gentlemen I have known. His contributions to deep-sea science have been immense, from the first discovery of deep-sea hydrothermal vents, black smokers, massive sulfide deposits and abundant vent endemic biota in the Atlantic ( Peter received an A.B in Geology from Brown University in1956 and a M.S. in Geology from Yale University in 1957. From 1957 to 1959, he worked as an Exploration Geologist for the Standard Oil Company, exploring the American Southwest for oil resources. He went back to school, doing research on oceanographic gear at Columbia University, and in 1967, he received a Ph.D. in marine geology and geophysics from Yale University under the supervision of Dr. Karl K. Turekian. Dr. Rona served as senior research geophysicist with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and Adjunct Professor at the University of Miami׳s Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science for 25 years before joining Rutgers University in 1994 as Professor in both the Department of Marine and Coastal Sciences and the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences. He was former associate editor for the The vast majority of Peter׳s research over the years was focused on the investigation of ocean ridges and continental margins using geophysical and geological methods. Between 1960 and 1972, he worked on the structure and stratigraphy of the eastern North American and northwestern African continental margins using seismic, bathymetric and magnetic methods. After 1972, his work focused on ocean ridge crest processes with emphasis on the role of seafloor hydrothermal systems (thermal and chemical fluxes and mineralization). Peter initiated and directed multiple projects, including the Trans-Atlantic Geotraverse (TAG) and organized and directed numerous multidisciplinary, multi-institutional, international research teams. He served as chief or co-chief scientist on research cruises with ships and submersibles almost every year since 1960. Over the past decade, his research efforts were concentrated on a diversity of themes including the following: Exploration of ocean ridges to advance understanding of their structure, dynamics and mineralization processes, with extensive work on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the Carlsberg Ridge and the East Pacific Rise. Study of marine mineral resources with emphasis on hydrothermal mineralization. Development and application of innovative acoustic methods to image and quantify the flow from seafloor hydrothermal vents, applied to monitor hydrothermal flow off northwestern North America as part of the first cabled seafloor observatory on an ocean ridge. Exploration of Hudson Canyon, a submarine extension of the Hudson River into the deep ocean basin, with emphasis on the role of gas hydrates in canyon ecosystems and in slope instability. Pursuit of Selected publications that Peter would frequently list on short versions of his extensive curriculum vitae include: Rona, P.A., Klinkhammer, G., Nelsen, T.A., Trefry, J.H., Elderfield, H., 1986. Black smokers, massive sulfides, and vent biota at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Nature 321, 33–37. Rona, P.A., 1992. Deep-sea geysers of the Atlantic. National Geographic 182, 105–109. Rona, P.A., Bemis, K.G., D. Silver, Jones, C.D., 2002. Acoustic imaging, visualization and quantification of buoyant hydrothermal plumes in the ocean. Marine Geophysical Reseraches 23, 147–168. Lowell, R.P., Rona, P.A., 2002, Seafloor hydrothermal systems driven by serpentinization of peridotite. Geophysical Research Letters 29, doi:10.1029/2001GL014411. Rona, P.A., 2003. Resources of the sea floor. Science 299, 673–674. Rona, P.A., 2008, The changing vision of marine minerals, Ore Geology Reviews 33, 618–666. Rona, P.A., Jones, C.D., 2008. Acoustic scintillation thermography. In: Steele, J.H., Turekian, K.K., Thorpe, S.A. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences, Elsevier, pp. 3340–3433. Rona, P.A., Seilacher, A., de Vargas, C., Gooday, A.J., Bernhard, J.M., Bowser, S., Vetriani, C. Wirsen, C.O. Mullineaux, L. Sherrell, R., Grassle, J.F., Low, S., Lutz, R.A., 2009. Rona, P.A., Devey, C.W., Dyment., J., Murton, B.J., Editors, 2010, Diversity of Hydrothermal Systems on Slow Spreading Ocean Ridges, American Geophysical Union, Geophysical Monograph Series, vol. 188, 440 pp. The discovery of deep-sea hydrothermal vents is typically traced back to a specturm of articles published between 1977 and 1979 that focused on hydrothermal plumes, seafloor thermal springs and suspension-feeding macrobenthos along the Galapagos Rift Spreading Center ( We have lost one of the true giants in the field …. Peter, you will be sorely missed. Funding for this volume has been provided by the