Introduction
                  No objective criteria exist to help surgeons choose between IM nailing and plate fixation for 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus. The goal of this study was to identify radiological criteria that would make one technique a better choice than the other.
               
                  Material and methods
                  This was a comparative, multicentre, retrospective study of 54 cases of antegrade nailing and 53 cases of plating performed between 1st January 2009 and 31 December 2011 for 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus. All patients had a minimum radiological and clinical follow-up of 18 months. The functional outcomes were evaluated using the weighted Constant score; a poor result was defined as a weighted Constant score<70%. The following radiological criteria were evaluated during the preoperative assessment and at the last follow-up: initial displacement and reduction of humeral head and tuberosities; morphology of the medial column (i.e. calcar comminution, posteromedial hinge, size of metaphyseal head extension); occurrence of avascular necrosis (AVN).
               
                  Results
                  After an average follow-up of 42 months, the weighted Constant scores and rate of poor outcomes were 77% and 48% in the nail group and 81% and 38% in the plate group, respectively (ns). The humeral head was reduced into an anatomical position, valgus or varus in 57%, 30% and 13% of cases in the nail group, and 58%, 29% and 13% in the plate group, respectively. The tuberosities healed in an anatomical position in 72% of nail cases and 70% of plate cases (ns). Only the presence of a medial hinge preoperatively had an effect on the functional outcomes in the nail and plate groups: the weighted Constant scores (P
                     =0.05) and rate of poor outcomes (P
                     =0.02) were 82% and 52% in the nail group and 97% and 9% in the plate group, respectively. The complication rates were comparable: the rates of AVN and articular screw penetration were 17% and 11% in the nail group, and 15% and 11% in the plate group, respectively. The surgical revision rate was 18.5% in the nail group and 30% in the plate group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  If the medial hinge is preserved, we recommend locking plate fixation. In other cases, either technique can be used as long as the general rules of internal fixation are applied: reduction of the tuberosities, varus correction and stabilization of the calcar area.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, retrospective study.In 4-part fractures, except for stable valgus-impacted fractures, the risk of head avascular necrosis (AVN) after fixation ranges from 9% to 42% no matter the internal fixation device used humeral head in varus; unstable calcar; poor tuberosity reduction Arterial vascularization of the humeral head is mainly provided by the anterior circumflex artery, which passes by the superior edge of the bicipital groove on the lateral side of lesser tuberosity preoperative: calcar comminution, posteromedial hinge, size of metaphyseal head extension postoperative: calcar restoration, calcar stability, humeral head varus Locked plates and intramedullary nailing are the two most commonly used fixation methods for 4-part fractures The literature on fixation of proximal humeral head fractures does not identify objective criteria for choosing between locked plates and IM nailing in cases of displaced or unstable fractures We did a retrospective study of two cohorts of patients treated with either IM nailing and locking plates for 4-part fractures of the humeral head. Our objective was to compare in these two groups the functional outcomes, the radiographic results and the complications as a function of preoperative radiological criteria. We hypothesized that radiological landmarks exist that favour one type of fixation method over the other and could guide the choice between locking plates and IM nailing. This was a comparative, multicentre, retrospective study of 107 cases of internal fixation for 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus performed between 1st January 2009 and 31 December 2011. Two types of fixation methods were used: IM nails and plates. IM nailing was used in 54 cases (nail group): 27 Telegraph™ (FH Inclusion criteria were a displaced or non-displaced 4-part fracture that was at least 3 weeks old in non-diseased bone. The preoperative images (standard X-rays or CT scan) were controlled by two independent observers. All patients had a minimum radiological and clinical follow-up of 18 months. To be included in the functional outcomes evaluation, the patients needed to have a clinical assessment at the last follow-up consisting of a weighted Constant score, AP and lateral X-rays of the shoulder performed preoperatively and after at least 18 months’ follow-up. Patients who underwent surgical revision for arthroplasty were included in the analysis of postoperative complications but were excluded from the functional outcomes if the clinical follow-up with the fracture fixation hardware was less than 18 months. If the fracture fixation hardware was removed, the functional outcomes were analysed at the last follow-up without the hardware. Any internal fixation cases performed in the context of surgical revision were excluded. All patients were reviewed clinically during 2013 and 2014 based on three aspects: clinical review with determination of functional scores: Constant and weighted Constant related to age and gender, Simple Shoulder Value (SSV) and QuickDASH. The functional outcome was considered poor if the weighted Constant was a standardized radiological review preoperatively and at the last follow-up evaluating the displacement and reduction of the humeral head on an AP view (α angle) and lateral Lamy view (γ angle) ( review of postoperative complications, particularly the occurrence of AVN ( In all, there were 69 nail cases and 67 plate cases in the database. Twenty-nine patients were excluded: 15 nail cases and 12 plate cases were classified as lost to follow-up because they had less than 18 months of radiological and clinical follow-up, along with 2 plate cases that did not have a Constant score, although they had more than 18 months radiological and clinical follow-up. Of the remaining 107 patients, 7 were revised with a prosthesis in the first 18 months and were not included in the evaluation of postoperative complications. Finally, 50 cases of IM nailing and 50 cases of plate fixation were included in the study of functional outcomes. The results were divided by fixation type. A first analysis was performed with the open statistical software R, published under the GNU-GPL licence. The Chi the type of fixation and occurrence of complications (yes/no); the type of fixation and reduction of tuberosities (yes/no). In both cases, the residual of the analysis of variance was normally distributed, allowing for parametric analysis. Eleven hospitals in France participated in the study. The average radiological and clinical follow-up was 42 months. In the nail group and the plate group, the average follow-up was 41 months (8–64) and 42 months (12–64), the average age at the time of surgery was 64 years (33–90) and 57 years (25–85) ( Some of the clinical outcomes ( In the plate group, the hardware was removed in 9 of the 50 cases. The passive forward flexion was greater in nine patients in which the plate was removed (163°), than in patients in which the plate was left in place (141°) ( In the nail group, there was a trend in the favour of straight nails (Aequalis™ and Telegraph™) as opposed to angled nails (T2™): 33% of patients receiving the Aequalis™ nail and 44% of those receiving the Telegraph™ nail had poor outcomes, versus 67% of those who received the T2™ nail ( There were no significant differences between the two groups in terms of complications ( In all, there were 26 surgical revisions (25% of patients). There were 10 revisions in the nail group: five for arthroplasty due to total AVN including three with articular epiphyseal screw penetration (three reverse arthroplasty, one anatomical shoulder arthroplasty and one hemiarthroplasty), two for nail removal due to stiffness including one with articular screw penetration, two for screw removal due to migration (one epiphyseal screw and one diaphyseal screw) and one for a nail change due to nonunion. There were 16 revisions in the plate group: four for arthroplasty due to total AVN including two with articular epiphyseal screw penetration (three reverse arthroplasty and one hemiarthroplasty), one for reverse shoulder arthroplasty due to nonunion, nine for plate removal (six without documented complications, two complex regional pain syndrome and one stiffness) and two for removal of epiphyseal screw due to joint penetration. In the entire study population, the following radiological parameters significantly impacted the functional outcomes: humeral head reduction ( The functional outcomes were comparable between the two groups for all the other radiological parameters. The findings were the same for the radiological parameters at the last follow-up. The distribution of the weighted Constant scores by fixation type was analysed graphically. Poor functional outcomes were observed in cases with no preoperative hinge ( In the entire population, two radiological factors were identified as risk factors for total AVN: preoperative calcar comminution ( This study found that when a hinge is present preoperatively, the functional outcomes – as measured by the weighted Constant score – are significantly better with plate fixation. The functional outcomes were comparable between plate fixation and IM nailing for all the other preoperative and postoperative radiological parameters. In our study, the patient population in the plate group was significantly younger and included more men. This means that the higher raw Constant scores in the plate group cannot be interpreted correctly. All the other functional scores are comparable between the plate and nail groups. Our study confirms published findings of no difference in the functional outcomes between nailing and plating of 4-part proximal humerus fractures As for the preoperative radiological parameters, contrary to published findings, the functional outcomes in our study were not affected by preoperative varus To explain this finding, we need to review the mechanism of proximal humerus fractures on which the posteromedial hinge concept is based Conversely, when the inferomedial column was unstable preoperatively (no hinge, calcar comminution), our study could not conclude that one fixation method was better than the other. While there was a trend to a higher risk of secondary varus deformity in the nail group when the hinge is missing preoperatively ( The rate of anatomical humeral head reduction in our study (58%) was comparable to published data reporting 40% to 50% insufficient reduction No matter which type of internal fixation is used, the fixation of complex proximal humerus fractures is associated with a high complication rate Another widely reported risk factor for AVN is devascularization caused by the surgical approach As for joint penetration of the epiphyseal screws, the second most common complications during internal fixation The main limitations of our study are the usual ones, related to its design: retrospective nature, non-randomized, observational, and multicentre. The radiological analysis of proximal humerus fractures is particularly complex in 2D, especially for the inferomedial support and evaluation of α-angle No matter which fixation method is selected, the functional outcomes appear to depend on the quality of the reduction, with the type of fixation being less important than mastering the surgical technique itself. Nevertheless, if the medial hinge is preserved, we recommend locking plate fixation. In the other cases, either technique can be used as long as the general rules of internal fixation are applied: tuberosity reduction, varus correction and stabilization of the calcar area. Pascal Boileau – Tornier (designer of the Aequalis™ nail). Christian Cuny – FH Orthopedics (designer of the Telegraph™ nail). The other authors declare that they have no competing interest. The authors wish to thank: P. Clavert, L. Doursounian, L. Obert, P. Mansat, T. Fabre, X. Ohl – Co-investigators for the study; D. Block, R. Bouchet, C. Tournier, N. Bonnevialle – Symposium participants; Drs A. Berrichi, M.O. Gauci, J. Mayer, P. Mangin, C. Nérot, R. Saadnia, X. Clement, G. Dillmann, J. Chedal Bornu, G. Boudard, J. Lombard, Y. Knaffo, C. Goetz, L. Decroocq, Y. Bouju, J. Berhouet, G. Bacle, A. Erbland, B. Dunet, H. Demezon, J. Rigal, A. Adam, E. Jardin, T. Zapaterra, N. Gasse, S. Rochet, D. Ancelin, T. Trang, J. Lebon, B. Aisene, H. Coudane, D. Mainard – for their scientific contributions; Anne Fregeac and the AERCOT, N. Ramdane (Statistics Department, Lille CHU).