Current anode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) mainly suffer from poor electronic conductivity and large volume expansion upon cycling. Improving kinetics and designing good morphology structural stability of electrode materials can effectively enhance the lithium storage performances of LIBs. In this study, we successfully synthesized hierarchical carbon-coated cobalt oxide (C@CoO) porous spheres with improved kinetics and good structural stability, which were investigated by ex situ electrochemical impedance spectrometry, scanning electron microscopy, and powder X-ray diffraction. We also optimized the preparation conditions of the C@CoO porous spheres. The C@CoO350 porous spheres exhibited good electrochemical performances including the high 2nd specific capacity of 811mAhg−1 at 0.1Ag−1 and good rate property of 450mAhg−1 at 4Ag−1. Furthermore, it demonstrated an excellent cyclic stability with a high capacities of 669mAhg−1 after 400 cycles at 0.5Ag−1. Results demonstrated that C@CoO350 porous spheres are promising LIBs anodes.Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), which have a with high operating voltage, energy density and power density, have been predominantly used in the portable electronics and vehicle market over the past decades Carbon-coated technology could effectively improve the electronic conductivity of electrode materials due to the excellent mechanical stability, chemical stability and high electrical conductivity of the coating carbon In this work, we have successfully synthesized hierarchical carbon-coated CoO (C@CoO) porous spheres, which are composed of many carbon-coated nanoparticles. The coating carbon was confirmed by Raman spectrum, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) pattern, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and its content was 10.3 All chemicals were of analytical purity and used as received without further purification. In a typical synthesis, 300 The morphologies and sizes of the samples were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Nova NanoSEM230). The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were collected using a Rigaku D/max2500 powder diffractometer (Cu Kα, λ The electrochemical properties of CR2016 coin type cells were measured. The working electrodes were prepared by dispersing active materials, Super P and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder in The schematic of the synthesis process of C@CoO porous sphere is shown in The XRD patterns of C@CoO porous spheres and CoO particles are shown in The TEM images confirmed the carbon-coated CoO porous spheres. As shown in The electrochemical performances of the C@CoO porous spheres and the CoO particles were evaluated using a multichannel battery testing system (Land CT 2001A) in the voltage window of 0.01–3.0 A long life cycle plays a significant role in LIB applications. Therefore, the long-term cyclic performance of C@CoO porous sphere electrode was also investigated at 0.5 To account for the good electrochemical performances of the C@CoO350 porous spheres, the EIS of C@CoO350 ( Hierarchical carbon-coated CoO (C@CoO) porous spheres, which are composed of many carbon-coated nanoparticles, were successfully synthesized. Raman, TG, XPS, and TEM were conducted to determine the coating carbon and its weight content. Calcination temperature-controlled experiments were conducted to determine the optimization of preparation conditions. This work was financially supported by the