The identity of the cells and molecular events driving deleterious calcification of heart muscle remains elusive. In this issue of Cell Stem Cell, Pillai et al. (2017) report that cardiac fibroblasts respond to injury by adopting an osteogenic cell fate and creating damaging calcific deposits, which can be prevented by inhibiting the activated mineralization process.Ectopic calcification of soft tissue is a hallmark of many diseases and occurs when mineralizing cells accumulate calcium within their extracellular matrix (ECM), similar to the processes underlying bone formation ( Now in The authors of this study demonstrated the potential of CFs to convert to an osteogenic cell type starting with an in vitro cell culture system. Culturing mouse or human CFs, but not endothelial cells, in osteogenic cell culture conditions led to in vitro mineralization of their ECM, as well as their conversion to an osteogenic gene expression program even upon removal of the stimulating media. Importantly, the authors ruled out the possibility that either cardiac stem cells or pericytes were the predominant source of cells in the fibroblast pool that underwent osteogenic differentiation and calcification. Next, the authors moved to an in vivo system to test the ectopic calcification potential of CFs. Specific strains of mice, including C3H, undergo cardiac calcification upon damage caused by high-dose steroids, cryogenic injury, or coronary artery ligation, while other strains, such as B6, do not calcify in response to injury. Employing genetic lineage tracing of fibroblasts, the authors demonstrated that C3H mice undergo cardiac mineralization in response to these various types of injury and that the calcium hydroxyapatite deposits within these injured hearts are associated with fibrosis and contain genetically labeled CFs expressing the master osteogenic transcription factor, RUNX2, as well as other osteoblast markers. Importantly, since other strains of mice that do not undergo injury-induced calcification lacked osteogenic gene expression in labeled CFs, they critically linked CF adoption of an osteoblast-like fate directly to the calcific response. To establish a causal relationship, the authors then set out to test whether CFs harvested from calcified hearts could induce calcification in uninjured tissue. Again they used genetic labeling to purify CFs from control or calcified hearts. Remarkably, upon transplantation into the soft tissue of a new host mouse, CFs isolated from calcific hearts were sufficient to induce ectopic calcification, unlike CFs from healthy hearts. Further strengthening their causative role in the mineralization process, the labeled primary osteogenic fibroblasts could be recovered from calcific lesions. To address the molecular mechanisms underlying the CF mineralization, the authors compared gene expression from injured or uninjured C3H mouse hearts as well as injured or uninjured B6 mouse hearts. It was clear from this comparison that while both strains of mice respond to cryogenic insult by altering expression of a variety of expected injury response gene programs, the C3H mice exhibit more dramatic gene expression changes and uniquely upregulate an osteogenic gene program. Further, the authors identified Based on the known role of ENPP1 and its upregulation in calcific hearts, the authors tested whether ENPP1 inhibitors could prevent calcification upon cardiac injury. Indeed, two different chemical inhibitors, as well as a non-hydrolyzable ENPP1 substrate mimetic, etidronate ( Notably, etidronate delivery after the development of calcification had no effect in this model. This result is perhaps not surprising given that the approach targets an enzyme responsible for promoting mineralization. Nevertheless, given the insights that this work provides into the cellular and molecular events underlying cardiac calcification, it is not unreasonable to consider other related interventions that might have the potential to reverse calcification caused by conversion of CFs. However, a targeted approach that addresses the heart while sparing bone mineralization would be a critical consideration in developing such a therapy. In light of these new findings, it is also interesting to consider the potential for broader significance of ENPP1 in pathological calcification of tissues beyond the heart. Ectopic calcification of tissues throughout the body consistently results from deposition of the same mineral, calcium hydroxyapatite, regardless of the underlying etiology. If we consider it unlikely that different tissues utilize disparate pathways for synthesizing calcium hydroxyapatite, then we would hypothesize that ENPP1 activity is a key step toward pathological calcification in general and thus, its disruption could be a strategy to prevent ectopic calcification regardless of the underlying cause. In support of this idea, drugs such as etidronate are often administered to attenuate mineralization in conditions causing accelerated calcification such as calciphylaxis in patients with chronic kidney disease ( Kathryn N. Ivey is an employee and shareholder of Tenaya Therapeutics, Inc.