The novel nickel modified PbO2 electrodes were successfully prepared via electrodeposition in nitrate solution. The influence of nickel content on the physico-chemical properties and electrocatalytic performance of PbO2 electrodes was investigated. The electrodes were characterized by SEM, EDX and XRD techniques. A limited amount of doping nickel could produce a more compact PbO2 film and diminish the size of the crystal grains. The steady-state polarization curves and the cyclic voltammetry analysis showed that the 1% Ni–PbO2 electrode had the highest oxygen evolution potential and the optimal electrochemical oxidation ability. The cyclic voltammograms with various scan rates showed that the oxidation of aspirin on these PbO2 electrodes was a typical diffusion-controlled electrochemical process. Stability tests of different PbO2 electrodes showed that 1% Ni–PbO2 electrode had the highest electrochemical stability. In addition, nickel modified PbO2 electrodes were used to degradation aspirin in aqueous solution, which gave the direct evidence of the electrocatalytic capabilities of these electrodes. The results showed that 1% Ni–PbO2 electrode obtained the highest kinetic rate constant, chemical oxygen demand (COD) and total organic carbon (TOC) removals, which were 1.41, 1.22, 1.20times than those of undoped PbO2 electrode, respectively. Moreover, the energy required for the treatment of 1m3 aspirin solution significantly decreased and the hydroxyl radical utilization rate was enhanced after appropriate nickel doping. As a result, the 1% Ni–PbO2 electrode is a promising anode for the treatment of organic pollutants.Oxidative electrochemical technologies, providing high energy efficiency, ease of operation, a fast reaction rate and environmental compatibility, have developed for decades and have reached a promising stage to effectively degrade toxic or biorefractory organic pollutants The electrocatalytic properties of PbO In this study, a novel Ti/Sn–SbO Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) was selected as the model pollutant, and was obtained from Shanghai J&K Chemical Reagent (China) Co., Ltd. (purity 99%). The structure formula and general characteristics of aspirin are given in The detail procedure for the preparation of the Ti/Sn–SbO The surface morphology was observed using a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi-s570, Hitachi, Japan). X-ray diffractometer (XRD) patterns of samples were obtained with an X-ray diffraction (PANalytical, Netherlands), using Cu Kα radiation at 40 The electrochemical degradation experiments of aspirin were carried out by batch processes and the apparatus was mainly consisted of a DC power supply, a magnetic stirrer and a glass reactor. The self-made electrode was used as the anode accompanied with a titanium plate of the same size as the cathode at a spacing of 4 The concentration of aspirin was measured using a high performance liquid chromatography system (1200HPLC, Agilent Technologies, USA), equipped with an RP-C18 column (4.6 The related pseudo-first-order kinetic model is shown as The general current efficiency (GCE) was also investigated and calculated by the following equation The mineralization current efficiency (MCE) was another evaluation of the electrocatalytic ability and was calculated as The electrical efficiency per log order reduction (EE/O) for the electrochemical oxidation process was applied to evaluate the economic feasibility of this treatment technology and it can be calculated using the following equation The morphology of PbO The XRD spectrums of different PbO  The cyclic voltammograms of different PbO The effect of different scan rates on the voltammetric response for nickel doped PbO To check on the stabilities, accelerated life tests of different PbO To explore the electrochemical degradation activity of different electrodes, the degradation of aspirin was investigated using five PbO The COD reduction reflected the electrochemical capabilities of the different electrodes. Therefore, COD removals of aspirin solution by different PbO In order to investigate whether the pollutant was completely converted to CO The energy consumption estimation is very useful for evaluating application prospect of a technology. The hydroxyl radical played a key role in the degradation of organic substance in aqueous solution, and the degradation efficiency depended greatly on the amount of hydroxyl radical. Hence, quantitative determination of the concentrations and the generation rate of hydroxyl radicals in the electrochemical degradation process were necessary to be measured. The concentrations of hydroxyl radicals at the PbO According to the literature written by Martinez-Huitle and Ferro Letting And from Eqs. That is Therefore the value of ΔTOC/[ In this paper, nickel modified PbO In addition, nickel modified PbO There is no conflict of interest. The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by the