In this work, the evaluation of the stress intensity factor of a macrocrack in interaction with one or several microcracks in a material containing a geometrical defect was investigated. Several configurations were considered in order to apprehend the mechanisms induced by the interaction effect and in particular the effects of reduction and/or amplification of the stress field between macro and single or multiple microcracks. The obtained results show that, macro–microcrack spacing is an important parameter if the microscopic cracks is relatively close to the macrocrack tip. The macrocrack has the tendency to accelerate as it propagates towards the microcrack. When the relative distance characterizing this spacing is higher than 0.2, the interaction effect can be neglected and the stress intensity factor remains unchanged for both defect types. When this ratio is lower than 0.2, the interaction between the two defects becomes significant and the stress intensity factor at the macrocrack tip strongly increases. For an inclined microcrack configuration, the interaction becomes significant and cannot be neglected.The elastic behavior of materials is very affected by the presence of defects which can entail the weakening of the structure and cause its destruction. Strong stress concentrations arising from geometrical or metallurgical effects, may result in the appearance of microcracks. Indeed, fracture is the consequence of the various mechanisms related to the development of the damaged zones Microcracking generates microcracks which coalesce and eventually form a macrocrack which propagates until the collapse of the structure Many authors It would be interesting to study the relations which may exist between surface geometrical defects, bulk metallurgical defects and the ability of a material to resist crack propagation. Firstly the distribution of the stresses and the variation of the stress intensity factor of a crack emanating from a semicircular notch root is studied. Secondly, the behavior of a principal crack emanating from a notch and its interaction effect with a microcrack and multiple microcracks in three different positions is analysed. The first position of the microcrack coincides with that of the principal crack. The second direction of the microcrack is parallel to the macrocrack direction. In the final configuration, the microcrack is inclined to the main crack direction. In this study, a thin semi-circularly notched rectangular plate with length The considered plate was subjected to uniaxial tensile load in the vertical direction under a stress The singularity at the crack tip can be integrated in the solution by replacing the elements at the crack tip by special quarter-point elements The presence of stress concentrator leads to an increase of the stresses at the notch root to reach the required value for crack initiation. The notch is characterized by a stress concentration factor The first definition is given by the ratio of the maximum stress In the second definition the stress concentration factor, is defined by the ratio of the maximum stress to the applied stress The longitudinal stress For unnotched structures subjected to a uniform stress In the case of a crack emanating from the notch root, Eq.  According to Kujawski The values of the SIF obtained by using the finite element method for cracks emanating from the semicircular notch were compared with those obtained by the model of Kujawski The mesh at the notch and around the crack is well refined. The results obtained express the variation of the normalized SIF This figure shows that the SIF obtained by the finite element method is in good agreement with the analytical Eq. This paragraph highlights the effect of interaction between a main crack emanating from the semicircular notch ( The interaction effect between the defects in the structure for three cases according to the position of the microcrack relative to the main cracks was considered: microcrack located in the prolongation of the main crack; microcrack in the vicinity, but shifted vertically relative to the main crack; microcrack located in the vicinity of the main crack but inclined relative to the latter.   For the microcrack tip close to the main crack, the values of the normalized SIF are higher than those for the other tip. This is due to its position close to the macrocrack. The maximum values of the stress intensity factors are obtained when the ratio of the interdistance tends to a zero value ( The variation of the stress intensity factor To highlight the size effect of the microcrack on the propagation of the main crack, the normalized stress intensity factor in the crack tip as a function of the ratio  For better illustrating the magnitude of the effect of the microcrack located on the prolongation of the main crack, the variation of the dimensionless amplification factor of the stress intensity factor as a function of the ratio of the crack length to the macro–microcrack interdistance is represented in It can be noticed, according to the results of  Ouinas et al. Besides investigating the mutual macro–microcrack effect, one further need to know the amplification rate of the SIF of the microcrack located on the plate ligament. The variation of the dimensionless amplification factor of the SIF of the various microcrack sizes is represented as a function of the relative interdistance macro–microcracks. The amplification factor of the normalized SIF of the microcrack is defined by: It is noticed that whatever the microcrack size is, the amplification factor increases proportionally with the increase in the main crack size as it moves towards the microcrack. Factor To show the effect of multicracks on the behavior of the main crack, the normalized SIF of a macrocrack in the presence of a microcrack, occurring on the ligament is analysed for different interdistance  The effect of the microcrack interdistance When the distance In the same way as above, in The SIF A better comprehension of the mechanisms of interaction and propagation requires a good knowledge of the local stresses. For better illustrating the phenomena of interaction between the defects, it is shown in  The plastic zones at the main crack tip and the microcrack located on the ligament are strongly compressed and consequently influence the orientation of the other microcracks and their plastic zone. In this case, the stresses of interactions increase the effect and the size of the interaction zone and thereafter the opening of the microcracks induced by plasticity. These effects are responsible for the strong acceleration of the main crack propagation emanating from semicircular notch. Initially, before the fracture of a structure, defects occur in the most stressed zones, then these defects evolve or coalesce leading to the formation of a macrocrack. In this section, the effect of multimicrocracks placed on the plate ligament on the evolution of the SIF of the main crack is analysed. The microcracks in series on the ligament are separated by a small length  The SIF of the main crack is about 7.2 when it interacts with a microcrack. With the presence of the three identical microcracks in series and the distance  It is noted that in all cases, the normalized SIFs in mode II are negligible compared to those of mode I. Also, the SIFs in the case of the main crack and the first microcrack in series are more important than that of parallel microcracks. An opposite phenomenon occurs for the second and third microcracks where the SIF in the case of the parallel microcracks are more important than those of microcracks in series. The stress levels of the main crack and the microcracks in series are shown in The analysis shows clearly that the stress concentration factor at the main crack tip is about 54. These stress concentrations increase with crack size. Indeed, in the case of the presence of a semicircular notch, Ouinas et al. In order to highlight the effect of the vertical position of the microcrack with respect to the main crack, the variation of the stress intensity factor of the three crack tips as a function of the vertical microcrack–main crack interdistance is plotted in  It is noticed that the microcrack–crack interaction effect is sensitive when Ouinas et al.  The microcrack is supposed to exist in the very close vicinity of the main crack, but it is inclined at an angle  It can be noticed that the function This study aimed at studying the behavior of a notched plate under the effect of the presence of one or several microcracks close to a crack emanating from a notch. The analysis of the results given by the finite element method allowed the following conclusions: The normalized SIF of the main crack increases linearly when the interdistance is 10 times lower than crack size. Beyond this value a fast increase is observed. During the propagation of the main crack towards parallel multimicrocracks, the plastic zones are strongly compressed by modifying the stress fields of interaction in crack tips by producing an extension of the macrocrack. The effect of the interdistance During the propagation of the main crack towards the multi-microcrack in series, the damage mechanisms occur locally in the plastic crack zones in which the material undergoes plastic deformations, which widen with the interaction effects. In each tip of microcrack, an interacting microplasticity occurs and increases tensile-compressive stresses and propagation velocities. The mechanism of coalescence is determining. These results show that because of the interaction effect, the stress intensity factors at the crack tips increase when the cracks join up. This bringing together leads to a reduction in the effective surface and thus to the increase of the stress fields at the crack tips. The interaction of these stress fields causes the phenomenon of coalescence: the main crack coincides with it all microcracks located at its vicinity. The authors would like to thank the Rector of University of Mostaganem for funding this work and for supports that it brings to us.