In this investigation, MCM-41/N-(3-trimethoxysilyl)-propyl)diethylenetriamine (MCM-41/TMSPDETA) adsorbent was prepared via co-condensation method and characterized by FTIR, BET, XRD, TEM, SEM and DLS analytical techniques. Experiments were carried out to investigate the influence of different sorption parameters, such as pH, adsorbent dosage, contact time, initial concentration of heavy metal ions and solution temperature in a batch system. Optimum conditions of sorption experiments were obtained at 20°C with the pH of 6.0 and contact time of 60min for Pb(II) and 120min for Ni(II). The pseudo-first-order, the pseudo-second-order and intraparticle diffusion models have been used to analyze the sorption kinetic results. The sorption process was found to be well described by the pseudo-second-order rate model. The Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms have been used to describe the equilibrium sorption; the adsorption data obeyed the Langmuir isotherm. The maximum capacity of the nanosorbent was 77.52 and 58.47mgg−1 for Pb (II) and Ni (II) ions, respectively. In order to verify the nature of sorption processes as physical or chemical, the equilibrium data were also fitted to the Dubinin–Radushkevitch (D–R) model. Based on D–R isotherm results, the values of mean free energy were 13.36 and 9.13kJmol−1 for Pb(II) and Ni(II) sorption, respectively. These values of E (kJmol−1) indicating chemical sorption for both metal ions. The selectivity order of lead and nickel sorption onto the adsorbent was Pb(II)>Ni(II).A wide range of heavy metal contamination that can become a risk to human health are produced by industries such as battery manufacturing, electroplating, mining, tanneries, metal processing, petroleum refining, textile, pesticides, printing, paint and pigment manufacturing and photography ( Pure Si–MCM-41 cannot be directly applied to remove toxic heavy metals from wastewater because it does not have enough capability for sorption process ( Materials deployed in this study were analytical grade from either Aldrich or Merck Companies and were used without further purification. Hexadecyltrimethylammoniumbromide (CTAB) was used as structure directing agent; Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) and The synthesis of amino-functionalized MCM-41 via the co-condensation method was conducted as follows. CTAB (500 Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were recorded using a spectrometer (Shimadzo, FTIR4300 spectrophotometer) in the range of 400–4000 Batch sorption experiments of Pb (II) and Ni (II) ions were investigated by placing specific amount of nanosorbent of MCM-41/TMSPDETA in 50 The effect of The effect of temperature was studied in the range of 20–50 The effect of contact time was investigated by varying the time from 0 to 120 The The sorption isotherms were studied in various concentrations of heavy metal ion solutions from 10 to 70 where The removal efficiency (%) of the metal ion was calculated using: FT-IR patterns of the mesoporous silicas are shown in  The XRD patterns of MCM-41 and MCM-41/TMSPDETA are shown in A TEM microphotograph of the MCM-41/TMSPDETA is shown in  The results of particle size analysis using DLS technique are shown in Solution pH is an important factor that has a considerable effect on the sorption of heavy metals from aqueous solutions. This is mainly because of change in both chemical properties of sorbent and sorbate and ionization of solute ions which can lead to alter in the kinetic and equilibrium features of sorption process ( The effect of sorbent dosage on the amount of Pb(II) and Ni(II) sorption at equilibrium condition is shown in Eventually, the optimum sorbent dosage for Pb(II) and Ni(II) sorption were determined 1 The variations of Pb(II) and Ni(II) sorption amounts with contact time are presented in The effect of initial Pb(II) and Ni(II) concentrations was studied using solutions with different initial concentrations of 10, 30, 50, and 70 The temperature influence on the sorption capacities of lead and nickel at equilibrium is illustrated in The kinetics of sorption is very important in modeling and designing the sorption process in industry that describes the solute uptake rate governing the contact time of the sorption reaction. Hence, in the present study, the kinetics of Pb(II) and Ni(II) ions removal were determined to understand the sorption behavior of MCM-1/TMSPDETA. Various kinetic models were examined to evaluate the experimental data and thus elucidate the sorption kinetic process. The pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order, and intraparticle diffusion models were tested to interpret the experimental kinetic data and these models are defined as ( The parameters including rate constants Sorption isotherm data were further analyzed by the Langmuir, Freundlich, and D-R isotherm models. In general, there is no theoretical model to describe the sorption isotherms in liquid phase. The sorption isotherm models used in gas phase are always used to describe the sorption in liquid phase. Langmuir model is often used for monolayer sorption occurring on a homogeneous surface with identical sorption sites, which its linear form can be expressed by the following equation ( The empirical Freundlich model is appropriate for the sorption taking place on a heterogeneous surface, which in a linear form it can be expressed by the following equation ( In order to identify the nature of sorption processes as physical or chemical, the equilibrium data were also fitted to Dubbinin–Radushkevich (D–R) model. The linear form is expressed as follows ( D–R model parameter values are given in The sorption mechanism (physical or chemical) can be estimated from the E (kJ°mol  where b is the Langmuir constant and C Since the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms do not provide any information about the mechanism by which the sorption takes place, the Dubbinin–Radushkevich (D–R) isotherm was also studied. Accordingly, the sorption isotherm was well described by using the D–R equation with correlation coefficient higher than 0.99. The mean sorption energy was estimated as 13.36 and 9.13  The adsorption of both Pb(II) and Ni(II) ions onto MCM-41/TMSPDETA at different temperatures showed ( where To examine the performance of MCM-41/TMSPDETA for removing Pb(II) and Ni(II) in the presence of other cations, the sorbent was added into 50 After the sorption process, the Pb(II) and Ni(II) loaded MCM-41/TMSPDETA were separated and slightly washed with distilled water to remove unadsorbed metal ions on the nanostructured sorbent surface. Then the exhausted adsorbent was added into 250 A novel MCM-41/TMSPDETA nanosorbent was used for sorption of Ni (II) and Pb (II) ions from aqueous solutions. The FTIR spectra indicated that MCM-41/TMSPDETA sorbent was functionalized by amine group. The pore diameter and pore volume of the sorbent were 3.6 (nm) and 0.782 (cc/g), respectively utilizing BJH method and surface area of MCM-41/TMSPDETA adsorbent was 867