The porosity of anodic films formed in four major electrolytes, which was measured by pore-filling technique, decreases with increasing voltage. Comparing the porosity at an identical voltage, it increases in the order of the films formed in sulfuric acid, oxalic acid, chromic acid, and phosphoric acid solutions. When the voltage decreases down to lower than 10 V, the porosity increases remarkably, especially in the films formed in phosphoric acid. The pore diameter estimated from the porosity and cell diameter measured by pore-filling technique decreases with decreasing voltage down to 5 V. However, at the voltages lower than 5 V, the pore diameter increases while the cell diameter decreases. Pore and cell diameters of the films formed in the four electrolytes at an identical voltage increase in the order: sulfuric acid, oxalic acid, chromic acid, and phosphoric acid. These results are basically consistent with those reported in our previous TEM study, although the pore sizes are slightly larger than the latter's. The reason of the discrepancy between the methods is discussed.The importance of fine pore structure of anodically formed oxide films on aluminum is increasing in use of a membrane and nano-devices The purpose of the present study is to clarify how electrolysis conditions and types of electrolytes affect pore diameters and other cell parameters and to confirm on an easy method to evaluate pore diameters. Therefore, we have studied the relation between cell dimensions and formation voltage as well as the effects of different types of electrolytes on the cell parameters, evaluated by an electrochemical method called ‘pore-filling (re-anodizing) technique’ High purity (99.99%) aluminum sheets were degreased by dipping in a hot sodium hydroxide solution. Anodizing was performed at constant voltages for a sufficient time to develop a steady-state morphology in 1.5 mol At the condition of the present work, The cell diameter was measured by TEM observation of stripped anodic films obtained by dipping the specimen in a saturated mercury chloride solution. The relation between porosity α, cell diameter Voltage–time curves measured at re-anodizing of the films formed in oxalic acid at different voltages are shown in For the confirmation of pore diameters, the cell diameters were measured by TEM. The changes in the cell diameters with formation voltages and types of electrolytes are shown in Then, the pore diameters were calculated from the porosity and cell diameter following The changes in porosity, pore diameter and cell diameter with formation voltage of the films formed in oxalic acid solution are summarized in At first, the reason why the pore sizes of the films formed at lower than 5 V increases with decreasing voltage should be considered. This peculiar phenomenon at low voltage was observed at anodic film formation in all electrolytes. Possible explanations for the pore sizes formed at lower voltages are the low efficiency of film formation at low current density Next, the reason of the discrepancy obtained by the two methods will be discussed. The sizes measured by TEM might be smaller than the real values because the pore diameters of the outer surface of the films, which are formed at the early stage of anodizing, are smaller than those at pore bottom  The pore diameters of anodic films formed in the four major electrolytes are the smallest at formation voltage of 5 V. This result is consistent with that obtained by TEM observation, although the values are larger. The pore diameters formed at an identical voltage in different electrolytes are larger in the order: sulfuric acid<oxalic acid<chromic acid<phosphoric acid. Porosity increases remarkably when the voltage decreases lower than 10 V, suggesting that the ratio of pore diameter to cell diameter increases remarkably. Results obtained by pore-filling method are basically consistent with those obtained by TEM observation. The real pore diameters might be intermediate between the values measured by pore-filling technique and those measured by TEM observation.