A process of granulation by a colloidal method based on ceramic powder agglomeration makes it possible to produce millimetric spheres with a very homogeneous distribution in terms of shape and size. The starting suspension consists of a mixture of alumina submicrometer particles and silica nanoparticles such as mSiO2/mAl2O3
                     =1.1%. Heterocoagulation between the two oxides occurs forming a flocculated network the structure of which can be modified by a shear application. The outer appearance of the spheres is nearly perfect whereas the inner structure exhibits some defects (cracks and porosity). It has been shown that the green spheres are more porous as well as the grains of the starting suspension are less flocculated. During the drying step, the high mobility of these agglomerates increases the overall density on the surface and leads to the formation of a spherical empty cavity in the sphere centre.Powder granulation is a widely used process in many industries such as mineral processing, the pharmaceutical industry, foodstuffs, etc… The main interests of this shaping technique are to limit dust emission, to improve powder flowability and bulk density of pressed green parts. Two kinds of industrial processes, wet granulation and spray drying routinely leading to spherical final products can be considered. Wet granulation uses capillary and viscous forces of a binder sprayed on the powder bed to agglomerate the particles in a mixer. The liquid binds the particles together until more permanent bonds are established leading to the granules formation. Research works based on the influence of both formulation and granulation technique investigated on the granules behaviour, make it possible to achieve substantial progress in understanding and in quantifying the mechanisms that control granules attributes. Based on diluted suspensions, a new process of powder granulation was recently proposed to elaborate ceramic spheres directly in suspension. Powder agglomeration takes place via the electrostatic interactions occurring between the particles. For instance, a formulation based on a mixture of alumina ( To properly control the formation of the “primary agglomerates” and their coalescence, it is previously necessary to study the surface properties of the two raw materials in water and the adsorption properties of the silica nanoparticles on alumina. A high purity (99.9%) alumina powder (AKP30, Sumitomo, Japan) was used ( The mixed suspensions used to produce spheres were prepared with a solid loading of 3 To induce the growth of agglomerates and the formation of spheres, the mixture (50 As the spheres cohesion is sufficiently high, they can be easily transferred from the vessel to a large dish. The liquid was removed and the spheres were dried in a controlled oven in terms of temperature ( The grain or agglomerate size distribution of alumina in the suspensions was determined by laser granulometry with a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK). The Mastersizer monitors simultaneously the intensity of light scattered at a number of angles from 0° to 46°. These data are subsequently used to calculate the particle or aggregate sizes. The software of the equipment considers any scattering object as a solid sphere and not as a porous object. Anyway, one expects the observed trends in the change of particle size versus the method of homogeneisation to be still valid. With the data of the Mastersizer, fractal approach was also used. A plot of the logarithm of the scattered light intensity ( The agglomeration of the mixed system SiO SEM observations of the spheres were conducted with a stereoscan 260 (Cambridge Instrument, UK). To control the homogeneity in the bulk of the studied spheres, microhardness was measured with a three-sided diamond Berkovich indenter tip using a XP Nano Indenter (MTS Nano Instruments, USA). An XP Basic Tip Calibration method was employed. Hardness was deduced from the load–displacement curves by the calculation of the ratio between the maximum applied load and the overall contact area created by the tip. All measurements were carried out with the same identical load (500 Compression experimental tests (0.5 The influence of the homogeneisation method on the “primary agglomerates” compacity was studied with size distribution measurements ( The sediment with the higher density was obtained with a pure alumina suspension; a very low height (18 The log–log plot of scattered intensity ( For this oxides ratio, silica is totally adsorbed and is distributed among the alumina surface. The modification of the agglomerates network structure does not prevent their coalescence when the mixture is stirred under a rotational movement at a low speed. Spheres are formed but with a slowing down of the kinetic formation. Whatever the homogeneisation method, the spheres obtained after the granulation step exhibit a very homogeneous distribution in terms of shape and size. To determine the formation mechanism of the spherical cavity, spheres prepared with “method 2” were cut to optically analyse their internal structure during the drying and sintering steps ( For both systems, the granulation process occurs in the same way, the only difference concerns the kinetics of the sphere formation which is lower for “method 2”. Finally, spheres exhibit the same dimensions but their density and microstructure depend on the deagglomeration method. The volume of the spherical empty cavity represents 10% of the total sphere volume, this value corresponding to the difference in the sintered density. The crack formation from the centre of the sphere should be due to the evolution of the structure during the drying step. The liquid removal starts from the sphere surface that induces a moisture gradient into the sphere. The grains should be compacted on the sphere surface and form a rigid crown. Moreover during the water evaporation, as the green structure is porous, the grains probably migrate from the centre to the surface, which enhances the compacity of the sphere surface. The “free of solid” volumes coalesce in the sphere centre and initiate the cracks or the cavity for, respectively, low and high porosity. The shrinkage also induces circomferential compressive strength which emphasizes radial cracks. The structure rearranges itself during the drying step. The mechanism could be compared to what occurs during the formation of spray-dried granules. The average values of hardness measured by nanoindentation technique across the diameter of three alumina semi-spheres prepared with method 2 are reported on Through a convenient colloidal process which requires few and no costly equipment, an innovative method of liquid/solid separation is proposed in order to elaborate the objects directly in suspension. The suspension consolidation is based on the attractive interactions between the powder surfaces inducing the coalescence of the “primary agglomerates”. These phenomena take place when the alumina surface carries both positive charges due to the ionisation of the hydroxyl surface groups (Al–OH During the drying step, the cohesion between the agglomerates is not high enough to prevent crack formation due to green porosity and to grains migration toward the sphere surface. Cohesion is due to the interactions between alumina and silica surfaces and in particular to the bonds between hydroxyl surface groups. Silica nanoparticles act as “a binder” for alumina. It is not possible to add to the suspension formulation an organic binder or a salt which could improve cohesion inside the spheres because these additives would modify the oxides surface properties and it would poison the coalescence of the agglomerates. The study of parameters such as solid loading of the suspensions or mSiO The mechanical properties show that spheres produced by this granulation process cannot be used for grinding, attrition or surface treatment, because even though the sphere surface should withstand the abrasion, the compression strength of the overall sphere is too low. The formulation conditions are too restrictive to make it possible to produce dense spheres with similar mechanical properties at a lower cost than the processes of electrofusion or “oil drop”. For the granulation process using a colloidal route, the drawback is that ionic strength would have to be very low to allow electrostatic interactions between surface sites. Spheres are considered as “hollow” if the ratio between the wall thickness and the total diameter is lower than 0.1; Finally, this process of granulation by a colloidal method would be applied for powders with high specific areas for catalysis or filtration applications or for mixed systems of organic and mineral powders to elaborate spheres with a controlled porosity. The microstructure of millimetric spheres elaborated by colloidal granulation of agglomerates was investigated as a function of the flocculation state of the starting suspension. The addition of a very small amount of silica nanoparticles in a suspension of submicronic alumina particles leads to a very porous heteroagglomerates network which can, under high shear, rearrange itself to become more compact. The size and the structure of the heteroagglomerates influence the compacity of the green sphere and drying occurs in a way similar to that of spray-dried granules. Agglomeration of less flocculated particles forms a more porous green body and their relative mobility under the drag force of liquid evaporation during the drying step leads to spheres with a centred cavity. It would be of a great interest to study accurately the link between the structure of heteroagglomerates and the microstructure of the spheres with mixed systems of alumina and silica as a function of the size and mass ratio between the two oxides.