A comparison of petrofabric and strain in phyllitic rocks from Crete, Greece has been undertaken using Anisotropy of Magnetic Susceptibility (AMS) at room and low temperature, the Projected Dimension Strain method (PDS), and X-ray Texture Goniometry (XTG) of phyllosilicates. The magnetic (at room and low temperature) and strain fabrics show similar orientations, with the minimum axes of the AMS ellipsoid coincident with the flattening direction of a pronounced solution mass-transfer deformation (SMT). The k
                     max axes of the AMS and the maximum stretching axis of the deformation overlap in the NNE–SSW direction, parallel to the axes of macroscopic folds. The quantitative relationship between the absolute values of strain and AMS is unclear. Nevertheless, a degree of correlation is found between the Woodcock diagram values of AMS and strain. S
                     x values discriminate better the clustered samples of k
                     max whereas the girdled samples of k
                     max are better differentiated with the S
                     z values. The stacking of the octahedral layers in micas correlates with S
                     x in the clustered k
                     max axes fabrics. The lack of a clear quantitative relationship is probably related to the generation of new phyllosilicates during folding and SMT deformation.Since early work with Anisotropy of Magnetic Susceptibility (AMS) measurements at low field (e.g., The AMS ellipsoid is primarily sensitive to the degree of alignment of each contributing mineral phase (paramagnetic, ferromagnetic and diamagnetic). Consequently, the relationship between AMS and strain is strongly affected by sample mineralogy, such as the abundance of ferromagnetic grains (like magnetite, with high susceptibility values) or diamagnetic minerals (including quartz and calcite) ( In this work we investigate the relationship between the magnetic fabric ellipsoid (at room and low temperature) and the strain ellipsoid in siliciclastic rocks from Crete. Here, solution mass-transfer deformation has resulted in a widespread, sub-horizontal cleavage. The measurements obtained with the Projected Dimension Strain (PDS) method ( The Phyllite–Quartzite Unit (PQ) of Crete, Greece, is a package of Late Carboniferous to Late Triassic marine siliciclastics with minor limestones, gypsum, and volcanics ( The phyllites and quartzites of the PQ unit preserve extensive ductile deformation acquired during the HP–LT event and subsequent exhumation ( The measurement of the bulk magnetic susceptibility at low temperature (down to liquid nitrogen, i.e.: 77 Magnetic susceptibility is a physical property of solids and represents the capacity of the material to be magnetized in a given magnetic field. The magnetic susceptibility ( A total of 11 sites were investigated for the study of the AMS. All measurements (8 to 10 standard specimens per site) were performed on a susceptibility bridge, Kappabridge KLY-2.03 (Geofyzika Brno) at the University of Michigan, by measuring 15 directional susceptibilities with a frequency of 920 Low-temperature AMS (LT-AMS) analyses to separate the paramagnetic fabric were performed at the Magnetic Laboratory of the University of Zaragoza. The samples of four sites (2 sites from the girdle distribution and 2 sites from the cluster distribution of Because paramagnetic minerals follow the Curie–Weiss law ( The partial anhysteretic remanent magnetization (pARM) is acquired when a sample is placed in a large alternating field (AF) with decaying amplitude, in the absence of a DC bias field; the bias field is switched on when the AF amplitude reaches a value The microstructures of the PQ unit have been well-characterized but little work has been conducted to determine the magnitude and orientation of strain within the rocks ( X-ray Texture Goniometry analysis allows the determination of the crystallographic preferred orientation of phyllosilicates in relatively small regions (ca. 1 Following the method of Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) constrains the interpretations of X-ray data by providing images of the mineral assemblages and measured fabrics. SEM provides information about the mm to μm scale mineralogical distribution of mineral species within a sample. These data, combined with any crosscutting relationships observed in back-scattered electron (BSE) images, provide information about the mineralization processes and fabric development within the samples. Selected polished samples were cut perpendicular to the cleavage plane and parallel to its dip direction, and were coated with carbon. Back-scattered imaging and semiquantitative analyses of the mineral composition have been obtained using two SEM/EDX systems in the EMAL laboratory (SEM Hitachi S3200N; 20 The studied rocks are characterized by a low bulk magnetic susceptibility, with all sites but two having a bulk susceptibility lower than 100 The bulk magnetic susceptibility of the specimens ranges from 215 to − One way to quantify the relationship between strain and the AMS fabric is to control the degree of grouping of the different axes ( The orientation of the AMS ellipsoid axes is shown in The bulk magnetic susceptibility at low temperature of the four selected sites ranges between 799 and 60.1 Nonetheless, the orientation of the axes at room and at low temperature overlaps in both group samples ( Strain results are shown in Powder X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) indicates that all 11 sites investigated contain varying amounts of phyllosilicate (mostly mica and some chlorite). The XTG measurements of both minerals show strong fabrics, suggesting that they formed under similar conditions. Eight of the eleven sites produced high to significantly high m.r.d. values ranging between 5.25 and 11.3; in the other sites phyllosilicates could not be detected by XTG. The samples with higher m.r.d. values display a prolate fabric, whereas samples with lower m.r.d. values show mainly oblate projections ( A strong preferred orientation of these phyllosilicates (both mica and chlorite) is observed in the back-scattered electron (BSE) images ( The AMS ellipsoid within a cleavage domain is generally oriented with The Phyllite–Quartzite rocks show a good correspondence between the orientation of the stretching axes or strain ellipsoid and the AMS ellipsoid axes ( The In thin-sections cut parallel to the cleavage plane, individual quartz grains show neither shape-preferred orientation nor evidence for dissolution. Instead, fibrous quartz–mica overgrowths developed during SMT deformation radiate outwards from the undeformed detrital quartz grains, indicating radial extension occurs in all directions within the foliation plane ( The similarity of the AMS (phyllosilicates) and the strain (quartz) ellipsoids in these samples suggests that these features record the same deformational history. Since the quartz deformation record the SMT process, we infer the magnetic fabric is related to that process. This inference is supported by our observations of new mica growth during the SMT deformation (see A long-standing goal of AMS studies is to establish a quantitative relationship between magnetic fabric and finite strain ( In some studies ( The absolute values of the axes of the ellipsoids are apparently not comparable since the eigenvalues of Finally, the strength in the stacking of the octahedral layers of phylloslicates (m.r.d. values) correlates well with The study of phyllites from Crete allows a comparison of the magnetic fabrics at room and low temperature with strain. In addition, the stacking of the octahedral layers of phylloslicates is controlled by XTG. The different methods, each sensitive to different minerals, are used to investigate the development of a petrofabric in a complex structural setting. From our data we conclude: A qualitative correlation exists between the orientation of the magnetic (at room and low temperature) and strain ellipsoids. In both cases, the minimum axes ( The NNE–SSW direction is related to a fabric that pre-dates the development of a SMT fabric. The earlier fabric is related to the macroscopic stretching direction (NNE–SSW) that aligns with fold axes. Subsequent dissolution–precipitation developed with an elongation direction parallel to the pre-existing fold axes. The quantitative relationship between AMS and strain is elusive, probably due to the different processes that affect quartz (dissolution and precipitation) and phyllosilicates (recrystallization). Nevertheless, a weak correlation is discovered between the strain values in The Woodcock diagram for the grouping of k The m.r.d. XTG values correlates with the strain in the clustered type of AMS fabrics. This relationship is unclear in the girdle AMS fabrics. B.O.U. thanks a postdoctoral grant and Juan de la Cierva Program together with the projects CGL2006-05817 and CGL2009-08969 from