Rare earth elements (REEs) are used in various advanced materials including catalysts, alloys, magnets, optics, and lasers. REE resources are unevenly distributed around the world, which continues to cause geopolitical concerns. Thus, securing REE resources has become an important subject for the sustainable development of industry and society. In this study, we investigated ferromanganese (Fe-Mn) nodules and crusts as a REE resource because they contain high REE concentrations and are widely distributed on the seafloor in the Pacific Ocean. We examined recovery of REEs in Fe-Mn nodules by using Shewanella putrefaciens (Fe-reducing bacterium). In this method, Fe-Mn nodule decomposition and REE recovery were achieved simultaneously in a single solution system. Fe-Mn nodules were reductively decomposed in NaCl solution under anaerobic conditions with daily addition of sodium lactate as an electron donor. During the decomposition of Fe-Mn nodule, REEs released from the Fe-Mn nodule were adsorbed on bacterial cells. Light REEs had higher adsorption rates on bacterial cells than heavy REEs, which was possibly due to complexation with sodium lactate and carbonate produced by bacterial activity. Of the conditions studied here, the best REE adsorption rates were obtained with 0.5M NaCl solution at pH7 with daily addition of 1mmol sodium lactate. Most of the REEs adsorbed on the bacterial cells were recovered by leaching with 0.01M HCl. The reductive dissolution of Fe-Mn nodules using Fe-reducing bacteria is a promising environmentally friendly method for recovering REEs from Fe-Mn nodules and crusts.Rare earth elements (REEs), namely, Sc, Y, and lanthanides, have been used to produce various advanced materials and technologies such as catalysts, alloys, magnets, optics and lasers ( Here, we propose ferromanganese (Fe-Mn) nodules and crusts as a new REE resource. Fe-Mn nodules and crusts are ubiquitous in the Pacific Ocean, and nodules are widely distributed on seafloors and crusts on the slopes of seamounts ( The recovery process is divided into two steps. First, Fe-Mn nodules are decomposed and dissolved with acids such as HCl, HF, and HNO Bioleaching with Fe-oxidizing bacteria has been used for oxidative dissolution of metal sulfides in many studies ( Experimental steps are shown in Fe-Mn nodules are classified according to their origin as hydrogenetic (HG), diagenetic (DG), or hydrothermal (HT) ( We used The bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation, followed by washing three times with 0.01, 0.1, or 0.5 20 It was expected that REEs and other elements in the Fe-Mn nodule would be re-adsorbed on bacterial cells during the decomposition of the Fe-Mn nodule. Therefore, bacterial cells were collected on a 0.2  Cobalt, Ni, Cu, Zn, and Pb were also measured with a method similar to that for the REEs because they were enriched in Fe-Mn nodules and they are useful metal resources ( We examined the separation of REEs and other elements from the bacterial cells. After dissolving the Fe-Mn nodule, the bacterial cells were collected on a 0.2 We dissolved the Fe-Mn nodule in 0.01 and 0.1 The Fe and Mn concentrations in Fe-Mn nodule D535 were 12.7 and 12.8  The daily addition of sodium lactate increased the dissolution rate of Mn in 0.1 Reductive dissolution of the Fe-Mn nodule in the presence of sodium lactate was observed even without adding the Fe-reducing bacteria (Fig. S2, Supplementary information). However, the dissolution rates of Mn and Fe were much higher in the presence of bacteria, and did not reach 100% in the absence of bacteria. Therefore, the dissolution experiments demonstrated that microbial activity promoted the complete reductive dissolution of the Fe-Mn nodule ( Adsorption rates of REEs obtained from dissolution experiments are shown in The adsorption rates of REEs were higher in 0.5 REEs form the stable carbonate complexes, REECO Complexation of REEs with ligands would stabilize REEs in solution, resulting in less adsorption on the surface of bacteria. Lowering the solution pH was expected to suppress the formation of carbonate and lactate complexes. Thus, we also conducted experiments at pH Of the conditions studied here, the best REE adsorption rates were obtained using 0.5 Various metallic elements other than REEs are enriched in Fe-Mn nodules and crusts ( The low adsorption rate of Co indicates that most of the released Co was dissolved in solution ( The REEs and other elements were adsorbed on bacterial cells after dissolution of the Fe-Mn nodule ( Bioleaching of metal sulfides has been extensively investigated with Fe-oxidizing bacteria ( We dissolved Fe-Mn nodule powder in NaCl solution using This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors appreciate constructive comments by two anonymous reviewers.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at