Hydropyrolysis (hypy) as a fast means for preparing lignin concentrates for stable carbon isotope analysis was evaluated by performing hypy at different temperatures (200–500°C) on Klason lignin concentrates, cellulose, and wood samples followed by bulk stable carbon isotope analysis of the solid residues. The δ
                     13C values of cellulose, Klason lignin and their hypy residues revealed that hypy does not produce isotopic fractionation throughout the temperature range explored. The δ
                     13C of hypy residues from cellulose-Klason lignin physical mixtures obtained at 500°C were in the value range of the corresponding Klason lignin indicating that cellulose decomposed completely and that no major structural rearrangements, which could lead to carbon cross-linking between these two moieties are produced by hypy. The hypy residues obtained from wood samples at 500°C were consistently depleted in 13C by 0.8‰ and enriched by 1.6‰ relative to the original wood and Klason lignin, respectively. This finding results from polysaccharide derivatives remaining in the wood residue, with a percentage of polysaccharide derived carbon 1.9 and 3.7 times higher than expected at 300 and 350°C, respectively. It is concluded that the results presented here provide an indicator of the extent of cross-linking between lignin and polysaccharides (hemicellulose) in the native wood forming lignin–carbohydrate complexes.It has been demonstrated that catalytic hydropyrolysis (i.e., pyrolysis under high hydrogen pressure) can produce lignin-enriched residues from wood by achieving high pyrolytic decomposition of the polysaccharide fraction ( The stable carbon isotope composition ( Pyrolytic techniques have been widely used in lignin structural studies to dissociate lignin and lignocellulosic materials into lower molecular mass compounds that are suitable for chromatographic and/or spectroscopic analysis ( Another approach to lignin isotope studies is analysing bulk Having identified a potentially rapid catalytic hydropyrolysis (hypy) procedure to obtain lignin-enriched residues from fresh wood by achieving high levels of pyrolytic decomposition of polysaccharides ( A sample of English oak wood ( Samples of Ash ( Klason Lignin was selected as a model for the lignin fraction of wood because from a quantitative point of view it is the most representative of the wet chemical methods. It was prepared from the wood samples investigated using the method reported by Pure commercial cellulose (Sigma, cellulose microgranular) was used as a model for the polysaccharide fraction of wood. Physical mixtures of Klason lignin and cellulose were prepared by mixing pure cellulose and Klason lignin in proportions according to the lignin content determined during Klason lignin preparation ( Hydropyrolysis experiments were undertaken using the apparatus described previously ( Bulk stable carbon isotope analyses of wood samples, Klason lignin concentrates, cellulose and their mixtures, before and after hypy, were performed by on-line combustion in a Carlo Erba NA 1500 elemental analyser coupled via a Con-Flo II interface to a Thermo Finnigan Delta plus XP isotope ratio-mass spectrometer. Samples were run in triplicate and the reported values are the mean ±1 standard deviation relative to the Vienna PeeDee Belemnite (vPDB) standard. Accuracy and precision of the bulk measurements were evaluated by analysing a reference material of known isotopic composition (IAEA-CH-7 polyethylene, To evaluate if hypy causes any isotopic fractionation, the The initial The fact that the standard deviations for Klason lignin and its hypy residues are higher than those for the cellulose and the reference material may indicate a higher degree of isotopic heterogeneity. From the results shown in The The Having established that hypy does not produce either major isotopic fractionation or molecular rearrangements between physically mixed cellulose and Klason lignin that could affect the isotopic composition of hypy residues, it was necessary to explore changes in The theoretical points were calculated through an isotopic mass balance, considering that wood is a mixture of Klason lignin and polysaccharides, the latter represented by cellulose as a simplification (Eq. The initial difference between the The possible reason for this divergence may be related to slower pyrolytic decomposition of polysaccharides in the real wood sample, giving higher contributions to the hypy residue, consistent with the fact that cellulose is aromatised during hypy and contributes to the wood hypy residue ( These results indicate that the isotopic composition of the hypy residue depends on the relative proportions of lignin and cellulose hypy derivatives in the sample. By performing an isotopic mass balance (Eq. To explore further the possible causes of the higher contribution of polysaccharide-derived carbon to hypy residues, the same analyses were performed on samples of other types of wood. Bulk isotopic analyses of the hypy residues from ash, beech, poplar and silver birch wood samples, obtained at 350 and 500 Interestingly, the The differences between From results in Hypy produces neither major isotopic fractionation, nor cross-linking between physical mixtures of cellulose and Klason lignin. However, the isotopic composition of wood hypy residues does not reflect that of lignin due, presumably, to the presence of polysaccharide derivatives. This result may open a route towards a better understanding of wood structure as it strongly appears to be related to cross-linking between lignin and polysaccharides in native wood forming LCCs. To further understand the nature of the cross-linking process and to gain a better insight into wood and lignin structures, it would be relevant to perform hypy at different temperatures on lignin–carbohydrate model compounds. Although the level and type of interaction or cross-linking is poorly understood, several authors have proposed and synthesised lignin–carbohydrate model compounds involving ether and ester linkages ( Further, if The authors thank Dr. Christopher H. Vane from the British Geological Survey for providing the wood samples. Financial support and the scholarship from the Mexican Council for Science and Technology (CONACyT) for the PhD study of LE Beramendi-Orosco is gratefully acknowledged. Acknowledgement is also due to Dr. Pim van Bergen and an anonymous reviewer for constructive comments that helped to improve this manuscript.