Acetabular fractures with quadrilateral plate involvement form a heterogeneous group of fractures, which are not specifically defined by any current classification system. Their incidence is increasing due to the rising number of elderly osteoporotic fractures. They have always been notoriously difficult fractures to treat. We present a systematic review of conservative and operative management and their respective outcomes over the last century.Before the mid-twentieth century, no unified classification system existed for acetabular fractures. In 1958, Knight and Smith The quadrilateral plate refers to the medial wall of the acetabulum, Until the 1960s most acetabular fractures were treated non-operatively. Traction was first recommended by Cottloda in 1922 and represented the mainstay of management. It was the pioneering work of Judet and Letournel that resulted in operative treatment becoming the standard of care, as it is today. Quadrilateral plate fractures represent a heterogeneous group of acetabular fractures. Some can be reduced indirectly by reduction and stabilisation of column fractures. We present a review of the different treatment modalities and techniques used over the last century, and outcomes in these notoriously challenging central fracture dislocations with quadrilateral plate involvement. An internet search of MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane library databases using the search terms: ‘Acetabular Fracture’ and ‘Central Hip Dislocation’, in the English language was performed on 1st August 2012. References from the literature, including all identified studies, were screened in order to retrieve other relevant publications. Two authors (GW and OF) independently performed the screening and selection of studies to be included in this review. Exclusions included case reports, biomechanical, cadaveric studies, literature reviews, technical notes, letters to the editor, editorials and instructional course lectures. Only papers that specifically referred to acetabular fractures involving the quadrilateral plate or central dislocations were included in the study. All details regarding mechanism of injury, age, treatment, outcome, complications and duration of follow-up were recorded. The retrieved data were grouped and are presented based on the method of management, i.e. conservative versus operative treatment. The reviewed evidence of the last group was further divided depending on the different techniques that have been described by the authors. All studies are presented in each group in a chronological order. The literature search yielded 1573 studies out of which 16 met the inclusion criteria between the years 1956 and 2012. Closed treatment of displaced central acetabular fractures has ranged from bed rest alone, manipulation and immobilisation in a spica cast, skin and skeletal traction. Both longitudinal and lateral (a Steinmann pin placed through the greater trochanter) skeletal traction have been used. More specifically, Rowe and Lowell Eichenholtz and Stark Gothlin and Hindmarsh Larson Carnesale et al. However, a number of authors have been disappointed by the relatively high proportion of poor results and the rapid progress of post-traumatic degenerative changes following conservative treatment. Stewart and Milford Pearson and Hargadon Batra Reported techniques included traditional lag screws alone, percutaneous screws, plates and screws, cerclage wires and braided cables. These refer to 140 different cases as reported in 12 studies Okelberry Eichenholtz and Stark Larson Lind van Wijngaarden and Wittebol Mouhsine et al. Lately, Ruan et al. In their study of 1973 Lind van Wijngaarden and Wittebol Batra In 2011 Laflamme et al. Keel et al. Cerclage wires and cables have been used either alone, in conjunction with plates and screws or combined with acute arthroplasty to provide stable fixation of the acetabular component. In 2001 Chen et al. Farid THA may be performed either primarily in the acute setting or secondarily as a delayed procedure if post-traumatic osteoarthritis develops. There are no studies that specifically report on delayed arthroplasty for fractures involving the quadrilateral plate. One of the earliest studies to discuss results following acute arthroplasty for central fracture dislocations was Eichenholtz and Stark in 1964, Cornell Over the last 50 years, following the generalised adoption of principles defined by the founders of modern pelvic and acetabular reconstruction surgery, a significant evolution in the contemporary management of acetabular fractures has occurred. Direct comparison between studies is hampered by the definition of a satisfactory outcome, which has undoubtedly become more stringent over the years. A great variance was identified on the way fractures of the quadrilateral plate have been described, as well as on the reports of both radiological and functional outcomes. Also, the fact that the specific anatomical structure of the medial wall/quadrilateral plate is not considered separately in the gold standard classification scheme of Letournel, Only an indirect comparison of the outcomes of conservative treatment of central acetabular fracture dislocations to those of operative management can be made, as the first mostly predate the 1980s. Judet and Letournel attributed the unsatisfactory results of non-operative treatment not to the failure to reduce the dislocation but the inability to reduce and hold the acetabular fracture. Closed treatment of acetabular fractures remains applicable in some situations. Including certain fracture types, medical co-morbidities which preclude surgical treatment Open reduction and internal fixation is considered the standard of care for most displaced acetabular fractures. The aim is to anatomically restore the joint surface as it has been clearly shown as a key factor for its future prognosis. The surgical approach to quadrilateral plate fractures is dependent on the fracture pattern, whether the quadrilateral plate remains attached to one of the columns or is a separate displaced or comminuted fragment, the column or wall which appears mostly displaced, the planned method of fixation, as well as the surgical expertise and preference. Overall in those acetabular fractures where surgery is performed, development of local complications affects the outcome. More specifically, regarding the fixation options of the medial wall, failure to maintain fixation using pelvic brim screws, placed parallel to the quadrilateral plate into the posterior column, has limited their role only in simple fractures with a large fragment of dense bone, in the absence of significant comminution of the medial wall or osteoporosis. Inbetween the different techniques of plating of quadrilateral plate fractures, the use of pelvic brim plates with screws placed parallel to the quadrilateral plate has been introduced by Judet and Letournel. Spring plates contoured over the pelvic brim can be used to buttress the medial wall ( Infrapectineal plating ( The use of cerclage wiring using standard stainless steel wires ( Certain radiological features are predictive of a poor outcome following fixation, including osteoporosis and the ‘Gull sign’ indicating a superomedial dome impaction. Together with parameters as clear evidence of pre-existing osteoarthritis, associated femoral head and neck fracture, intra-articular comminution, full thickness abrasive loss of the articular cartilage, more than 40% impaction of the femoral head and acetabulum, extensive osteoporosis and advanced age may be relative indications for acute THA. Lately, there is growing interest in performing an initial limited ORIF and simultaneous acute THA. Delayed hip arthroplasty following acetabular fractures with central dislocation may follow either conservative, What is apparent is the changing management of these fractures over the past century. Early studies used predominantly conservative methods, which yielded a considerable number of poor results for displaced fractures of the quadrilateral plate. Initial operative techniques, particularly with screws and pins also failed to achieve a high percentage of satisfactory results due to failure to achieve adequate fixation. There has been renewed interest in the minimally invasive technique of percutaneous screw fixation, either alone or to provide column stabilisation for acute THA. Plating is currently the most frequently employed method, with various operative techniques, implants and approaches now described in an attempt to improve visualisation, reduction and fixation of these challenging fractures. Whilst alternatives such as cerclage wire and cable techniques have been used, they often require supplemental fixation and acetabular component migration has been frequently noted when they have been used in conjunction with acute THA. Improved results with both early and late THA have been reported with use of uncemented acetabular components. With experience and clearly defined indications both conservative and various operative techniques have a role in the management of quadrilateral plate fractures, although there is an increasing trend towards operative management with non-extensile approaches. With the number of these fractures expected to increase there is a clear need for prospective studies with accepted outcome measures and long term follow-up to be performed. None to declare. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Dr E. Frangakis and Dr S. Gudipati for the preparation of the images.