Cavitation and acoustic radiation force are two main effects of ultrasound. In this study, ultrasonic pretreatment (UPT) and simultaneous treatment (UST) methods were applied to coal flotation. The ultrasonic effects were analyzed by measuring changes in ash content and yield of concentrate with or without ultrasound treatment. The decrease in ash content after UPT or UST was due to the cleaning effect of ultrasound. This effect is generated by the collapse of tiny bubbles trapped on the rough coal surfaces, as seen in images obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). An improvement in recovery was only seen with the UST method. Properties of large bubbles, specifically their aggregation and shape, were influenced by ultrasound through the oscillation behavior and acoustic radiation force in the sound field, respectively. This work is expected to provide a novel perspective to the study of ultrasound-assisted flotation.Froth flotation is a common method for the separation of fine coal particles. Economic benefits are maximized from the high recovery and low ash content of flotation concentrates. However, some conditions, such as slime coatings and oxidation films, deteriorate the flotation results. Fine or ultra-fine slime is produced during mining and crushing processes. Slime adhering to the coal surface will impede the interaction between bubbles and coal particles, decreasing the flotation efficiency Over the past few decades, numerous studies have reported the favorable effects of ultrasound applied to flotation Although previous studies considered the cavitation effect as the main cause for these improvements, cavitation effect alone cannot sufficiently account for these results. Ultrasound effects can be divided into two types: cavitation effect and force effect. Cavitation is a behavior of nucleation, which usually includes three processes: oscillation, growth, and collapse In this study, we compare the effects of simultaneous treatment and pretreatment with ultrasound on coal flotation and discuss the resulting improvements in flotation recovery and ash content from the perspectives of cavitation and acoustic radiation force. As a result, we expect our work to guide ultrasound-assisted flotation. Bituminous coal samples were collected from the Yunhe Coal Preparation Plant in the Shandong province of China. The size fraction of <0.5 mm was obtained by screening using a wet vibrating sieve tester. The moisture content, ash content, volatile content, and fixed carbon content of these coal samples were 3.26%, 22.57%, 28.70%, and 45.47%, respectively. The coal samples were used for the flotation tests and SEM analysis. Flotation tests were performed in a 0.5 L flotation cell (RK/FD) with an impeller speed of 2100 r/min. The pulp density was 60 g/L, and the air flow rate was 3 L/min. 200 g/t kerosene and 100 g/t 2-Octanol were employed as the collector and frother, respectively. The ultrasound-assisted flotation tests were divided into two aspects, ultrasonic pretreatment (UPT) flotation, and ultrasonic simultaneous treatment (UST) flotation. The resonant frequency of the ultrasonic device (VCX 800, SONICS) was 20 kHz. Ultrasound power settings of 20 W, 110 W, and 200 W were selected for ultrasound-assisted flotation tests. During each flotation process, the ultrasonic probe was located at the same position in the flotation cell. A diagram of the UPT and UST procedures is shown in The particle size distribution of concentrates was analyzed to study the reasons of the increase in recovery and decrease in ash content. Flotation tests were conducted for 5 times without ultrasound, with UST, and with UPT at 110 W, respectively. The concentrates were mixed for the particle size distribution analysis by the wet sieving method. The fractions of different-sized concentrates collected from flotation feeds were calculated. The surface topography of raw coal particles was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Quanta 250, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) at 1200X and 5000X magnification. Coal samples of 0.25–0.125 mm were prepared by wet-screening and then cleaned with alcohol and air-dried for 12 h before being coated with a layer of gold for SEM measurements. The behaviors of bubbles in the flotation cell are difficult to observe during the agitation process. To investigate the effect of ultrasound on large bubbles during flotation, a flotation column ( Videos of bubble flow affected by ultrasound at 0 W, 20 W, 110 W, and 200 W were analyzed by ImageJ. The circularity and roundness were calculated to compare the changes in bubble shapes during ultrasound treatment. The expressions of circularity and roundness are given as follows: The bubble shape is close to a circle when the values of circularity or roundness approach 1. Two types of bubbles are not counted in the bubble shape analysis: 1) incomplete bubbles at the image boundaries and 2) overlapping bubbles. Bubble shape data were obtained from 500 images during ultrasound treatment.  In comparing the UPT method to the UST method, the ultrasonic treatment time was 3 min for both methods. However, the orders of the air inflation process were different. The ultrasonic treatment was conducted before the air inflation process in UPT flotation, meaning the ultrasound has less effect on the formation and motion of bubbles. For the UST method, the ultrasonic treatment was synchronized with the air inflation process. It is well known that the behavior of bubbles is significantly affected in the sound field  The surface topography of coal particles has a great relationship with the metamorphism grade and connecting structure, meaning the surface topographies of coal particles may be different. However, nearly all of the surface of coal particles in this study are rough, and hence two typical SEM images of the coal surfaces at different magnifications are shown in  The shapes of bubbles change under ultrasonic treatment as the bubbles rise. As shown in The effects of ultrasound on the bubbles during the flotation process is illustrated in From the results of flotation tests, the cleaning effect has no obvious influence on the recovery of coal. In comparing the UPT and UST methods, a significant improvement in concentrate yield is obtained by UST flotation. The effect of ultrasound on the air inflation process is the most significant difference between these two methods. During the air inflation process, millimeter-sized bubbles are formed, a size that is much larger than the resonance radius of bubbles at 20 kHz (150 μm) Additionally, aggregates of bubbles were formed during ultrasonic treatment, indicating that a force exists in the sound field to gather the bubbles. Ultrasonic waves are generated by the transducer and are reflected by the walls of the flotation cell. High-pressure and low-pressure regions are formed, resulting in pressure gradients. Primary Bjerknes forces are generated by the pressure gradients, which push the large bubbles toward the low-pressure regions (pressure nodes) Flotation tests were conducted using UPT and UST methods. A lower ash content of the concentrate is obtained by flotation with UPT than by flotation without ultrasound; however, no obvious difference was observed in the concentrate yield. In contrast, improvements in both ash content and recovery were seen with the UST method. Ash content decreases because of the cavitation behaviors of tiny bubbles trapped on the rough surface of the coal particles, which confers a cleaning effect on the particle surface after these tiny bubbles collapse. Furthermore, the recovery increase is mainly attributed to the effect of ultrasound on large bubbles. Bubbles appear to coalesce and aggregate due to the force effect of the ultrasound, and they maintain a more regular spherical shape due to oscillation. The change in bubbles by ultrasound is a reason for the improvement in recovery. As a result, the flotation of coal is improved by ultrasound through the combined effects of cavitation and acoustic radiation force. This work was supported by Outstanding Innovation Scholarship for Doctoral Candidate of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: