Several concentrate and tailing pipelines use leak detection systems to predict system ruptures and minimise response times in case of or before the occurrence of pipeline ruptures. Those of internal type compare a set of model predictions for pressure losses and flows with actual readings from the system. Input data including solids specific gravity, concentration by weight or rheology curves, obtained either from periodic measurement campaigns or from installed instrumentation, are used to define values for rheological parameters such as the viscosity to be considered for such computations of head losses. In the present paper, an analysis of propagation of different error sources on the rheology identification and eventually on the computation of the head losses is proposed to investigate the relevance of system instrumentation accuracy and indirect errors derived by lack of instrument parameter update. A simple model for the calculation of friction losses for homogeneous Bingham fluids in the hydraulically smooth turbulent flow, a common regime found in copper and iron slurries, was considered. Assuming standard models to link the solids volume concentration with viscosity, uncertainties between 7% and 12% on the latter parameter are predicted for various conditions and variants of the referred mixtures. This is predicted to propagate to values between 10% and 20% on unit head loss uncertainties, provided errors between 5% and 10% on flow metering. Results suggest the inconvenience of rheology inference when using indirect leak detection systems, in favour of online or very frequent rheometric measurement during the transport process.In most countries, mining operations are subject to strong environmental control and surveillance ( Although its not rigorous to tag a specific rheology to a settling slurry transported inside a pipeline, which could be prone to segregation due to gravity ( Mine material extracted from different areas can substantially change its mineralogy. As some of these variations could possibly include the requirement for different additive composition and/or dosing at the flotation stage, its physicochemical properties may vary ( The solid–liquid flows described above often belong or are near to the turbulent, hydrodynamically smooth regime. They are typically characterised by a Reynolds and Hedström number: The components  A natural question arising from Depending on the measurement technology and system maintenance, accuracy on the identification of the concentration may vary. However, looking at the results in In this paper, an error propagation analysis has been performed to identify the relevance of uncertainties on the determination of fluid and flow variables in the final prediction of unit head losses, by means of a set of computations based on a simple analytic model for pressure losses of homogeneous turbulent flows in smooth pipes, with no attempt to describe the dynamics of settling flows or hydrodynamically rough flow, a matter for which the present analysis was not focused. It is shown that there is a significant impact of uncertainties in specific gravity of solids and solids concentration by weight on solids concentration by volume predictions, thus impacting viscosity which, in conjunction with volume flow, directly influences head loss predictions. This is summarized in The possible success of using online or discrete, highly frequent rheology monitoring depends critically on the requirement of keeping the accuracy in flow determination within reasonable bounds. In particular, present results show that for flow measurement errors exceeding 10% the uncertainties on the determination of head losses depend strongly on the latter variable rather than viscosity. This is depicted analytically on the elliptic characteristic of The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the