Objectives
                  The aim of the present study was to evaluate results, including clinical and radiological outcomes and number of complications, following minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) of proximal humerus fractures, using the PHILOS® proximal humerus internal locking system (Synthes Holding AG, Solothurn, Switzerland).
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospectively evaluated were 31 patients treated with MIPO (12 male, 19 female; average age: 58.4 years). Four patients had 2-part fractures, 14 patients had 3-part fractures, and 13 patients had 4-part fractures, according to Neer classification. Healing, complications, and head-shaft angle (HSA) were radiographically evaluated. Clinical outcomes were assessed at 1-year follow-up with Constant score.
               
                  Results
                  Average Constant scores for fractured and normal shoulders were 73.2 ± 10.9 and 84.8 ± 5.1, respectively. Varus progression, fracture type, and age had no significant effect on functional outcome. Average postoperative and follow-up HSA's were 130.80 ± 7.70 and 128.80 ± 10.00, respectively. Significant varus progression was observed during follow-up (p = 0.01). Varus progression was more prominent in patients with postoperative HSA < 130° (p < 0.001). Inferomedial calcar screw usage, fracture type, and age had no significant effect on varus progression. Complications included 2 implant failures, 1 case of avascular necrosis (AVN), 1 primary screw cut-out, 1 axillary nerve injury, and 1 radial nerve injury (22.6% overall).
               
                  Conclusion
                  MIPO is a safe and effective option for the treatment of proximal humerus fractures, with good functional recovery and fewer complications, which are typically technique dependent. Reduction may be difficult, resulting in varus progression. Another disadvantage is risk of axillary nerve injury. Careful surgical technique and correct implant selection is important in the prevention of nerve injury.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, Therapeutic study.Proximal humerus fractures are very common injuries, with increasing incidence in elderly patients. In 2005, Gardner described the anterolateral deltoid-splitting approach for treatment of proximal humerus, The aim of the present study was to evaluate results, including clinical and radiological outcomes and number of complications, following MIPO implemented with use of the PHILOS® proximal humerus internal locking system (Synthes Holding AG, Solothurn, Switzerland). The present study was approved by committee of Çankaya Hospital. Between December 2006 and August 2014, 44 patients with displaced proximal humerus fractures were treated using the MIPO technique. Four patients treated with conventional plates were excluded. Of the remaining 40 patients treated with the PHILOS® plate, 9 patients were lost during follow-up. Ultimately, medical reports of 31 patients who completed at least 1 year of follow-up were retrospectively evaluated. Twelve male and 19 female patients, with an average age of 58.4 years (range: 18–83), were included. Sixteen patients (51.6%) were younger than 60 years of age; 15 patients (48.4%) were older ( All fractures were classified according to Neer classification, using x-ray and computed tomography imaging. Four patients (12.9%) had 2-part, 14 patients (45.2%) had 3-part, and 13 patients (41.9%) had 4-part fractures. Average delay between injury and surgery was 3 days (range: 1–10). All procedures were performed under general anesthesia with the patient in beach chair position. A lateral longitudinal incision was proximally made, beginning at the anterolateral tip of the acromion, and extending at a maximum of 5 cm distally ( Plate was inserted percutaneously from proximal to distal ( Sling immobilization was postoperatively used for 1 week, and passive- and active-assisted range of motion exercises were immediately begun. Active exercises were begun after 4 weeks. Radiographic evaluations were routinely performed at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year, by using 20° external rotation projection for anteroposterior view and full internal rotation projection for lateral view ( Outcomes of the present study were evaluated with SPSS statistical software (version 23.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Comparison of postoperative and follow-up HSA measurements, comparison of varus progression between patients with primary reduction less and more than 130°, and between patients with or without IMCS and varus progression, in terms of fracture type and age, were analyzed with analysis of variance for repeated measures. Comparison of functional outcomes of patients with or without varus progression, in terms of fracture type and age, were analyzed with Student's t-test; p values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. No nonunions were observed at follow-up. Complete implant failure (cut-out of all proximal screws) after varus collapse was seen in 2 patients (6.5%) 3 and 4 months after surgery. They had 4-part fractures which were treated without IMCS. Postoperative HSA of these patients were 117° and 122°, with 22° and 5° of varus progression, respectively, at follow-up. Shoulder arthroplasty was performed for these patients. All other patients had radiographic union at 3-month follow-up. One patient (3.2%) developed AVN 6 months after surgery. He had 4-part fracture with poor greater tuberosity reduction. Short proximal screws had been used in the first surgery. Shoulder arthroplasty was performed. Other complications were primary screw perforation in 1 patient (3.2%), who was treated by changing the long screw at 1 month, deep infection in 1 patient (3.2%), who recovered completely after debridement at 3 weeks, axillary nerve injury in 1 patient (3.2%), and radial nerve injury in 1 patient (3.2%) who had relatively short arm length and was treated with a 5-hole plate. Both nerve injuries healed without clinical consequence. No subacromial impingement or secondary loss of greater tuberosity reduction were observed. Hardware removal was not performed. Overall complication rate was 22.6% (7 patients), and overall secondary operation rate was 16.1% (5 patients) ( Upon postoperative radiographic examination, HSA measurement less than 130° was observed in 12 patients (38.7%). IMCS was used in 11 patients (35.5%), who had metaphyseal communition. Three-hole PHILOS® plate was used in 6 patients (19.4%), and 5-hole PHILOS® plate was used in 25 patients (80.6%). Average postoperative HSA measurement was 130.8°±7.7° (range: 114°–142°). At follow-up radiographic examination, average HSA measurement after fracture union was 128.8°±10.0° (range: 95°–142°). A statistically significant change of HSA measurement was found in accordance with progression of varus displacement at follow-up (p = 0.01). Varus progression was observed in 18 patients (58%). With the exception of 2 patients who underwent arthroplasty due to varus collapse, varus progression was between 1 and 4°. Average postoperative and follow-up HSA measurements for patients with primary reduction of less than 130° were 122.8° ± 14.5° (range: 114°–128°) and 119.0° ± 8.5° (range: 95°–126°), respectively. Average postoperative and follow-up HSA measurements for patients with primary reduction of more than 130° were 135.8°±4.2° (range: 130°–142°) and 135.0° ± 4.1° (range: 128°–142°), respectively. Statistically significant difference was found between the 2 groups (p < 0.001), indicating that patients with insufficient primary reduction (HSA < 130°) had increased varus progression during follow-up. No statistically significant difference in varus progression was found between patients treated with or without IMCS (p = 0.210). The present finding indicated the protective effect of IMCS against varus collapse. Fracture type, plate length, and age had no significant effect on varus progression (p = 0.550, p = 0.341, and p = 0.180, respectively). Three patients who had secondary arthroplasty were excluded from functional assessment. Average Constant score for the remaining 28 patients was 73.2 ± 10.9 (range: 48–91) at 1-year follow-up. Average Constant score of normal shoulder was 84.8 ± 5.1 (range: 70–95). Average Constant scores for patients with or without varus progression at follow-up were 70.5 ± 11.5 (range: 48–86) and 76.9 ± 9.3 (range: 60–91), respectively. Although the varus progression group had lower functional scores, the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.129). Follow-up HSA measurement, fracture type, age, and gender had no significant effect on functional outcome (p = 0.205, p = 0.715, p = 0.455, and p = 0.222, respectively). In the past 10 years, use of the MIPO technique with anterolateral deltoid-splitting approach has become more popular treatment for proximal humerus fracture. Significant functional improvement was presently observed, with an average Constant score of 73.2, consistent with the literature. The most significant result was varus progression at follow-up. Varus progression had previously been reported. Varus progression was more prominent in patients who had postoperative HSA measurements of less than 130°, indicating the importance of primary reduction. A high rate of insufficient reduction (38.7%) was presently observed. Although various indirect reduction techniques have been described, Varus malreduction has been reported to have adverse effects on clinical outcome. No significant difference in varus progression or functional outcome was found between fracture types, in contrast to the findings of Shon et al., who reported lower Constant scores and increased varus progression in 4-part fractures. Overall complication rate in the present study was 22.6%, comparable to that of other series, with complication rates ranging between 12 and 27%. Secondary screw cut-out is difficult to prevent due to subsidence of the humeral head, particularly in patients with metaphyseal comminution. Restoration of medial calcar is very important in order to prevent varus collapse. AVN is a major complication after open reduction, due to impairment of blood supply, and rates of 0–8.2% have been reported in series in which the MIPO technique was used. The axillary nerve is at risk when the MIPO technique is implemented. It is localized at approximately 6 cm distal to the acromion, An unexpected complication, radial nerve injury, occurred in 1 patient. The Radial nerve can be damaged when the MIPO technique is used with long plates to treat proximal humeral shaft fracture. However, to our knowledge, no radial nerve injury following MIPO used to treat proximal humerus has been reported. Irritation of the tip of the 5-hole plate in the present patient, who had a short arm, may be the cause of the discrepancy. Primary screw cut-out and infection are rare complications, each of which were present in 1 patient. Primary screw cut-out can be prevented by careful fluoroscopic control. The primary present limitation was the absence of a control group treated with open reduction technique. In addition, discussion of long-term functional outcome is lacking, and is expected to improve after 2 years. In conclusion, MIPO technique with PHILOS® plate is a safe and effective option for the treatment of proximal humerus fractures, with good functional recovery. Complications such as nonunion, AVN, and infection are rare, due to less soft tissue damage and blood supply impairment. Complications including screw cut-out, nerve injury, and malreduction are usually technique-dependent. MIPO is a technically demanding procedure, and reduction in particular may be difficult, resulting in varus progression observed on follow-up. Use of IMCS for metaphyseal comminution is also difficult, and another disadvantage is the risk of axillary nerve injury. In addition, the radial nerve may be at risk in patients with short arms. Careful surgical technique and correct implant selection is important in the prevention of nerve injuries.