In recent years, plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition (PACVD) has been identified as a suitable technique to deposit hard coatings on tools of complex geometries. This study sheds light on the influence of the duty cycles on the surface characteristics of the nanostructured TiN coatings for the first time. A mixture of H2, N2, Ar, and TiCl4 was used to deposit a thin film of TiN on the H13 steel. The micro-structural, mechanical, and tribological properties of the coating were investigated using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Applying higher duty cycles resulted in formation of rougher surfaces. It was also revealed that the grain size increased with the duty cycle. Moreover, the film's thickness was measured as 1.6–2.3μm, depending on this parameter. A hardness of 1723 HV0.05 was obtained when the layer was fabricated at the lower duty cycles. Meanwhile, the corrosion resistance of TiN coatings grown under a low duty cycle was higher than that of the layers fabricated at higher duty cycles.Hard coatings have been especially useful in applications including abrasive or erosive wear. An early successful application was ceramic coatings, especially those made of titanium nitride and titanium carbide, on cutting tools, in which their good protection against a combination of diffusive and abrasive wear was observed In this study, we report results of growth and characterization of the PACVD-fabricated TiN coatings on H13 steels where influence of the duty cycle on the tribological properties was evaluated. The aim of this work is to elucidate the role of T The substrate used in this study was AISI H13, which was obtained by spectrometric analysis as shown in Prior to TiN deposition, the substrates were exposed to combined sputtering and nitriding pre-treatments. The substrate temperature was kept constant at 520 The plasma nitriding and PACVD TiN deposition were conducted in the same industrial set plant, as shown schematically in The surface topography was characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM) along with the calculating software. The scanning area for all samples was 5 Surface topography of the synthesized TiN coatings studied by AFM is illustrated in Considering the AFM results, the surface roughness of the thin film as a function of various duty cycles was determined employing DME software whose results are presented in The resulting hardness values of the TiN coatings deposited at a temperature of 470  Results of the corrosion of the samples deposited at 33%, 40%, and 50% duty cycles are shown in The corrosion rate at the duty cycle of 50% is higher than its counterpart at other duty cycles. Furthermore,  In this study, influence of the duty cycle on the surface properties of TiN coatings was investigated. Applying higher duty cycles resulted in longer pulse times. The bombardment of the substrate surface increased with the pulse time. The bombardment of the growing film with energetic ions and neutral species resulted in modification of the film morphology as well as its grain size. The films grown using plasma-assisted processes at the low duty cycles were generally fine-grained and had a denser structure, higher thickness, and higher hardness. In addition, better corrosion resistance was obtained at lower duty cycles. Finally, it was found that the surface roughness increased with the duty cycle. Financial support of