Objectives
                  Development of a new generation of stable β alloy, free of aluminum or vanadium and with better biological and mechanical compatibility and evaluate the surface properties of Ti–6Al–4V and Ti–35Nb–7Zr–5Ta after anodization in hydrofluoric acid, followed by deposition of different electrolyte concentrations of magnesium particles by micro arc-oxidation treatment.
               
                  Methods
                  Disks were anodized in hydrofluoric acid. After this first anodization, the specimens received the deposition of magnesium using different concentration (8.5% and 12.5%) and times (30s and 60s). The surface morphology was assessed using scanning electron microscopy, and the chemical composition was assessed using energy dispersive x ray spectroscopy. The surface free energy was measured from the contact angle, and the mean roughness was measured using a digital profilometer.
               
                  Results
                  Anodization in hydrofluoric acid provided the formation of nanotubes in both alloys, and the best concentration of magnesium considered was 8.5%, as it was the condition where the magnesium was incorporated without covering the morphology of the nanotubes. X-ray dispersive energy spectroscopy showed magnesium incorporation in all conditions. The average roughness was increased in the Ti–35Nb–7Zr–5Ta alloy.
               
                  Conclusions
                  It was concluded that anodizing could be used to deposit magnesium on the surfaces of Ti–6Al–4V and Ti–35Nb–7Zr–5Ta nanotubes, with better results obtained in samples with magnesium concentration in 8.5% and the process favored the roughness in the Ti–35Nb–7Zr–5Ta group.Titanium is used as a biomaterial in the manufacture of dental implants due to its properties of low density, high mechanical strength, high corrosion resistance and excellent biocompatibility [ However, concerns about possible toxicity of the Ti–6Al–4V alloy, and its mechanical incompatibility due to the difference in the elastic modulus relative to the cortical bone, have motivated the development of new alloys since 1985 [ Thus, considerable efforts are being directed toward the substitution of alloying elements (Al and V) for others considered, at the present time, as non-toxic [ Surface properties are also of great importance in the performance of dental implants, especially with regard to the quality and accelerate the osseointegration. Osseointegration results in the stable and functional connection between the bone and a titanium surface. It strongly depends on the properties of the oxide film (passive film), which forms naturally on the surface of some metals [ Electrochemical surface modificationof titanium and its alloys is associated with occurring thin (2–5 nm) oxide layer of TiO2 which is formed spontaneously as a result of exposure of titanium and its alloys on air. The oxide layer with strong barrier properties protects titanium surface against corrosion [ A well-known process is surface modification, using electrochemical anodization based on hydrofluoric acid [ A strategy for improving titanium surface involves the biofunctionalization of implant surfaces with elements that participate in the osseointegration process and are present in bone, such as magnesium [ The coating of the biomaterial by the porosities, similar to bone matrix, followed by the addition of magnesium, which is a native element of the human body, significantly influences the strength of the union between bone tissue and the implant. The similarity of the composition and conformation of the bone mineral component, results in a strong chemical and mechanical establishes between the implant and the surrounding tissue, promoting a more adequate bone fixation [ Thus, since both the chemical composition and topography of the surface are crucial for apposition and bone formation around the implant [ TI-6AL-4V Two titanium alloys were used in this study, Ti–6Al–4V (TI-6AL-4V) and Ti–35Nb–7Zr–5Ta (%wt) (TNZT). TI-6AL-4V discs (8mm Ø x 2mm thickness) were obtained by machining commercial bars (Realum Indústria e Comércio de Metais Puros e Ligas Ltda, São Paulo, Brazil). The starting materials to obtain TNZT alloy (Ti, Nb, Zr, and Ta, with a degree of purity greater than or equal to 99.00%) were arc melted in an argon atmosphere, remelted (3–5 times) to ensure homogeneity and, vacuum heat-treated (1000 °C, 8 h, furnace cooled). They were hot-swaged into bars (≈11 mm Ø) and machined into discs with 8 mm diameter and 2 mm thick. These discs were vacuum heat-treated at 1000 °C for 1 h and air-cooled to relieve stress and tensions [ Disks were mechanically polished with silicon carbide abrasive paper (T 216, Norton Abrasives Brazil) with #120, #320, and #600, #1200 and #2000 (for 40 s each). They were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with isopropyl alcohol for 10 min and air-dried and finally they were etched for 8 s in Kroll's solution (distilled water, 75% nitric acid, and 45% hydrofluoric acid; 1:1:1 in vol) to remove the passive oxide layer [ The disks were divided into two groups TI-6AL-4V (Ti–6Al–4V) or TNZT (Ti–35Nb–7Zr), and assigned to subgroups as listed in Anodization was carried out with magnetic stirring, using the potentiostatic method and 140 mL of each electrolyte at room temperature of 25 °C. The disks (anode) remained at 8 mm distance from the cathode (stainless steel plate). After each anodization, the disks were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with isopropyl alcohol for 10 min and air-dried. The surfaces was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-6610LV, Tokyo, Japan) with secondary electrons and high-resolution field emission microscopy (FEG-JSM-7500F, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). The chemical composition of the surfaces was assessed by an Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) coupled to the FEG. Discs were placed directly onto the stub and examined without any preparation or manipulation. The surface free energy (SFE) was analyzed using the sessile drop method with a goniometer (Ramé-Hart 10000; Ramé-hart instrument co.) with different treatments using the SCA-20 software with the Young-Laplace equation [ The surface roughness was measured with a roughness analyzer (Surftest SJ-401; Mitutoyo Corp) with an accuracy of 0.01 μm, a read length of 2.4 mm and a speed of 0.5 mm/s . Five measurements of Ra (mean roughness) were performed on each surface, with nine discs for each subgroup, and the mean values were calculated. Data were analyzed using the software GraphPad Prism 7. The data normality distribution was tested by Shapiro-Wilk. Two-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test was used to clarify whether titanium alloys (TI-6AL-4V and TNZT) or surface modifications.The level of significance was set at 5%. The initial etching in Kroll solution resulted in surfaces with simplified topography showing only granules ( Electrochemical surface modification with hydrofluridic acid resulted in the formation of nanotubes (Figures The EDS technique identified only the alloy components in the control There were no significant differences between the alloys in relation to SFE values ( It is known that when Ti is in contact with oxygen, a layer of oxide forms on its surface, approximately ≤10nm thick, which gives the metal protection and Ti alloys may have varied oxide composition, depending on the alloy elements present which may modify the protective property of Ti oxide [ The nanotubular structure of the TiO2 provides not only a nanotopographical surface to foster bone formation, but also space for delivery of targeting agents to attain extra functions, including antibacterial agents, bone growth enhancement agents, and anti-inflammatory agents have been incorporated into nanotubes in this respect [ An organized structure of nanotubes is obtained by anodizing with 0.3 mol/L in hydrofluoric acid resulted in the formation of, which structure acts in osseointegration [ Following the formation of nanotubes, magnesium was incorporated into the oxide layer. Magnesium is known to stimulate the production of calcitonin, which helps to preserve bone structure and suppress the action of parathyroid hormone. This reduces bone resorption, in addition to stimulating the enzymatic reaction required for the formation of the new bone which are magnesium dependent [ Oliveira et al. [ Intrinsic factors of electrolytes, as composition of the solution, may be influence the medium of current conduct. Higher Mg electrolyte concentration cause the current to remain longer at its maximum value, probably due to the increase in conductivity of the electrolyte [ The electrolyte condition distinctly influenced the wettability of the surface, as the result was published by Huan et al. [ It is known that, in treatment with acids, the roughness of the implant becomes homogeneous due to the formation of the nanotubes; and, there is an increase of the surface area that, consequently, improves the possibility of bio adhesion of the cells [ Despite the limitations of the study, the lower concentration of Mg electrolyte maintained the proposed deposition of Mg with the maintenance of nanotube morphology, without negatively influencing SFE and roughness parameters. With more research, we believe the development of this biomaterial in the future will be interesting for use as short implants, which are not yet used with the safety of regular implants in implant dentistry, especially in areas of low density bone, because of the similarity of the composition and conformation of the bone mineral component, results in a strong chemical and mechanical establishes between the implant and the surrounding tissue, promoting a more adequate bone fixation [ Based on the results of the present study, the TNZT alloy performs equal to or better than the TI-6AL-4V alloy, under the same condition of anodization. Moreover, as the osseointegration mechanism reinforced by magnesium surface chemistry is not fully understood at present, but we know that different concentrations of electrolyte can influence the morphology of the electrochemical surface modification and result in different effects on Ti alloy roughness and SFE. Although it has been shown that increased electrolyte concentration has a negative influence on structural homogeneous maintenance of nanotubes. Therefore, titanium alloys treated by electrochemical surface modification in 8.5% magnesium electrolyte had better results and need attention in more research. Bárbara A. Reis: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Wrote the paper. Laiza M. G. Fais: Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Wrote the paper. Ana L. R. Ribeiro: Performed the experiments. Luis G. Vaz: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.