This Chapter determines the amount of wood fiber that would be available for conversion to food following a global catastrophe. It also provides estimations on the chainsaws, chippers, and transportation infrastructure necessary to process the wood and the additional combustion suppression technologies needed to ensure that the fiber supply is not lost to fire.If we were to attempt to feed humanity by converting existing (and soon to be dead) biomass into food following a global catastrophe, how much do we have to work with? To answer that question, first we find that the stock of dry biomass in vegetation is approximately 1200 Gt ( Although more difficult, it is possible that humans could utilize below-ground biomass. One option is using burrowing animals like beetles. Another option that would only apply to trees is pulling trees down, because this often uproots the tree (as shown in Though there is sufficient building space to provide all of human food with thin biomass (see last Chapter), the conversion rate of trees is much slower. Humans could build temporary structures, but this would require stacking of the logs to utilize this volume better. There is currently limited stacking capacity, so we leave ramping calculations to future work. Therefore, to remain conservative, the only log scenario we consider is tree conversion outdoors in areas where it does not freeze. To get at this wood fiber, we need to be able to cut down the trees (they would die anyway so environmentalists need not be alarmed) and so we need a lot of chainsaws (e.g., see Since we show in Let us first consider the 20 °C crisis. Freight capacity could transport logs from unfrozen zones, but this would only facilitate outdoor mushrooms, which is not a complete solution Because humanity would generally dry the food, the critical transportation requirement is the feedstocks because their mass is generally much greater than the food produced. The natural gas transportation capability would already be adequate for the methane-digesting bacteria detailed in Although there are residential chippers, road chippers, and chippers for paper and paperboard production, retrofitting existing manufacturing facilities to produce wood chippers could increase substantially the chipping capacity. The current global production rate of light-duty vehicles is 63 million/yr ( Furthermore, it may be possible to use thermal methods for comminution. One method is steam explosion, which is currently used to break wood chips into smaller pieces and pretreat for enzymatic cellulose biofuel production. The idea is heating wet wood under pressure, and then suddenly releasing the pressure, which causes the water to boil and expand rapidly, exploding cells. This may achieve chipping as well, but would require pressure vessels. More speculative methods include raising the temperature of saturated wood quickly with hot oil or air, causing explosion. Overall, even without any form of speculative chipping, chipping all the fiber would take a small percentage of humanity’s current energy use, and it should be feasible to retrofit light-duty vehicle factories to produce wood chippers that could chip sufficient wood within 1 year. Once the trees die and dry out, as shown in