Oolitic-iron ore material is one of the most important iron resources in China. However, due to its low grade of Fe, poor liberation of iron minerals and high impurities, no satisfactory processing method has been developed to effectively utilize it for the practical applications. In this work, a coal-based reductive roasting method was applied, where the detail mineral phase transformation and reduction area during magnetic roasting process was quantitatively investigated. Then, low intensity magnetic separation was performed. The results showed that roasting time significantly affected Fe recovery, with a minor influence on Fe content of concentrate. Fe recovery increased from 10 to 60 min before starting to decrease slightly. This may result from the formation of weakly magnetic FeO or Fe3O4-FO (solid-melt-body), where the reduction degree increased gradually from 10 to 50 min. During the roasting process, the mineral phase Fe2O3 changed to Fe3O4, but the original oolitic structure and mineral embedding relation were hardly evolved. This research could enhance our understanding regarding the microscopic view of magnetic phase transformation, and provide help for commercial development of such refractory iron ores.Extracting Fe from raw iron ore materials is considered to be one of the most important topics in thermo-metallurgy field. In present, the blast furnace process is usually applied for extracting iron, where the iron ore needs to be upgraded through a series of pre-treatment Oolitic iron ore Generally, some processing methods, e.g., leaching Several studies The representative samples of raw oolitic iron ores were collected from west Hubei province, by notch sampling method, with particle size below 150 mm. The ore particles were crushed to ≤6 mm, by Jaw Crusher through open circuit, and then classified, homogenized, and sampled. After that, samples with size ≤2.0 mm were obtained by closed-loop circuit using Roller Grinding machine. The chemical composition is shown in The Fe mineral phase and its distribution (by chemical composition method and identification & analysis of ore-minerals) are shown in WG coal powder with size ≤1.0 mm was applied as reducing agent in roasting process. It was used to change the iron phase, hence to modify magnetic property for the facilitation of magnetic separation. The main industrial value of WG coal is shown in For the study of magnetic roasting process and its influencing factor, Muffle Furnace (KSY−12D−16) was used, with the roasting outcome checked and validated by Magnetic Tube (XCGS-73). It is noted that Magnetic Tube is widely used in laboratory scale to determine the content of magnetic components in strong magnetic ores. For large scale application, in order to make it as real industrial practice, drum type weak magnetic separator (Φ400 × 400) was applied to handle large quantity of feeding. The detail procedure was as follow: the oolitic iron sample was thoroughly mixed in specific proportions by stirring with reducing agent (WG coal powder). The mixture was then transferred into a heat-resistant stainless-steel container, which was later roasted using Muffle Furnace. After a certain time of roasting, the reduced samples were rapidly removed and immediately quenched in water, filtered, dried, and ground by ball mill. Finally, its components were separated using Magnetic Tube. Observation and counting method were conducted to examine the statistic ratio of reduction area for the roasted oolitic iron. Polarizing microscope (Leiz, Germany) was applied under various roasting conditions with different sizes. The roasted iron sample was firstly added to the adhesive medium (special cement), and then was cut into a test block of 40 mm × 25 mm. After that, it was treated by rough grinding, fine grinding and polishing. Finally it was investigated under microscope. Fe recovery (ε) is the percentage of the useful component within the concentrate to that of the original oolitic iron sample. It can be calculated as, Conical ball mill, XMQ-Φ150 × 50 was applied for lab scale grinding during Magnetic Tube test, and XMQ-Φ240 × 90 for the case of drum type weak magnetic separator. X-ray diffraction (XRD) test was performed using Rigaku D/max−3c (Japan), with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.541 Å), at an operating voltage of 40 kV and a current of 50 mA. The diffraction angle (2θ) was scanned from 10° to 90°, with a scanning speed of 2 (degrees)/min. The XRD pattern of the raw oolitic iron ore is shown in The oolitic particles were composed of Hematite and clay minerals containing layered structures, with Gangue showing circling layer distribution ( The inner structure of the oolitic particles varied with their particle sizes, and the sample mostly has 3–5 μm dense concentric wrapped shell, with siliceous quartz or clay like Kaolinite in the middle ( The SEM image of the sample is illustrated in The roasting time is a significant factor for the reduction reaction in the process of magnetic roasting. The reductive reaction would lead to the phase transformation of Fe mineral phases and so as to the change of magnetic property. To study the effect of roasting time, the fixed parameters were as follow: roasting temperature was set at 800 °C, and the particle size is less than 2 mm, with a fixed amount of 300 g/per test, and the dosage content of reducing agent as 8%. The detailed roasting results for roasting time from 10 to 80 min are shown in The Fe recovery (rate of percentage) increased all the way from 10 to 60 min. And the increasing tendency is more pronounced for the first 30 min, which became slower for the later 30 min. Furthermore, from 70 to 80 min, it decreased slightly. This may be due to over-reduction of Fe mineral, i.e., the formation of weakly magnetic phase FeO or Fe The magnetic susceptibility The effect of roasting time on reduction degree is shown in At a roasting time of 60 min, the reduction degree R is ∼40%, which suggests relatively good quality. Meanwhile, the Fe recovery and Fe content are also satisfactory. When the time is prolonged to 70 min, the roasting results are not significantly improved in comparison of the result at 60 min. When the roasting time is shortened, the reaction process was not completed. However, if long roasting time is applied, energy cost would be high and over-reduction may occur. At a roasting temperature of 800 °C with a reducing agent content of 8% and a sample amount of 300 g/per test, the influence of roasting time was investigated. The XRD patterns were provided in From Together with No FeO could be found before roasting for 20 min, indicating no over-reduction. However, after roasting for 30 min, a small amount (∼1.3%) of FeO was formed. After roasting for 60 min, the content of FeO reached ∼4.3%, which suggested that the over-reduction continued. The content of Ankerite decreased sharply during the early 30 min, while Calcite increased considerably from 10 min to 40 min. During the roasting process, the P mineral was mainly in the form of Ca From The detailed magnetic roasting process was investigated in terms of ratio of reduction area. Reduction area is the area of Mt (Hm would be transformed to Mt during roasting process) estimated by optical microscope. Observation and counting method (see Due to the random distribution of reduction area for a single oolitic particle, the detailed statistic value and distribution with that of ratio after different roasting time are presented in Firstly, for the ratio of area 0/5, it can be seen that its distribution decreased from 85% (10 min) to 24% (60 min) for the particle size of 0.3–0.5 mm. The decreasing trend was similar for the case <0.3 mm. Secondly, with increases in roasting time from 10 min to 60 min, it could be found that the ratio of area 5/5, 4/5, 3/5 would gradually increase, which means that more and more Hm was changed to Mt. By comparing the results for the two sizes at the same roasting time, e.g. 10 min, it was found that higher ratios (more 5/5, 4/5, 3/5) occurred to smaller size (<0.3 mm). This suggests that smaller size would accelerate the reduction process. For big particle size 0.3–0.5 mm, there are still 23.7% (0/5 area) which was barely transformed. The roasting temperature may also have significant influence on the magnetic roasting process. This was studied by comparing the original oolitic iron ore and the roasted product at different temperatures. A typical view with the ratio of reduction area at 900 °C is shown in It is noted that, Mt or Hm exhibits different colors and degrees of brightness under the optical microscope. From The original oolitic iron ore without roasting, and the view at roasting temperature 800 °C were given in Appendix, It could be concluded that the product after roasting at 800 °C had more reduction area (i.e., more Mt) than original ore. Product after roasting at 900 °C had more ratio than that of 800 °C. The detail reduction area and its ratio are listed in In general, coal is used as the reductant for iron reduction in China, and this is one of the most common techniques for de-oxidation reactions operated in rotary (or tunnel) kiln. From thermodynamics, the standard Gibbs free energies of iron oxides increase for a higher temperature, which indicates that iron oxides are more easily to be reduced at high temperatures. Above 570 °C, the reduction reaction would follow a series of stepwise (Fe The fundamental basis for the roasting process of Fe-O system is shown in During the roasting process, if the roasting time is not long enough, the reduction cannot be fully completed. The reaction can be stopped at a point between B-D (such as at point C), or at a point along B-F, and this means that some amount of Fe If the temperature is too high, weakly magnetic solid-melt-body (Fe In Anshan, north China, during the production within shaft furnace, because of the high calcination temperature (over 1250 °C in the combustion chamber), there has been a phenomenon of refining block and smelting furnace, which severely worsen the roasting effect. Therefore, the maximum temperature should be 200 °C lower than the softening temperature In commercial beneficiation practice To preliminarily test the effect of magnetic roasting, the following parameters were applied: roasting temperature from 700 to 900 °C, roasting time from 40 to 70 min, dosage content of reducing agent from 3% to 11% (the content is 8% in the previous mechanism study). Some result can be seen in The grinding size is also important for iron ore beneficiation. When the grinding size is too small, it is easy to be over-grinding or sliming, which would lead to serious entrainment phenomenon, making it difficult to separate the useful components and impurities. At the same time, it increases the grinding cost. However, if the grinding size is big, the useful minerals and gangue were not fully dissociated. The original iron ore was first processed by magnetic roasting. Afterwards, the roasted product would have a grinding process for the optimization of subsequent magnetic separation. The influence of grinding size distribution was studied and shown in From From the viewpoint of real industrial production, the thickness of the roasting material layer, i.e. the processing capacity of the magnetic roasting, is a very practical parameter for operating condition. To investigate the roasting efficiency in term of capacity, the thickness of roasting layer was studied from 15 mm to 60 mm, under the condition of roasting temperature 800 °C, 120 min roasting, 20% coal. The roasting results at different operation thicknesses are presented in From Reductive roasting and magnetic beneficiation of oolitic iron ores from west Hubei province were performed in this research. The properties during the roasting process under various conditions were examined. The important contribution of this study is the quantitative investigation of the reduction roasting process versus roasting time, and the characteristics during phase changes, using distribution of reduction areas. Some main observations and conclusions can be drawn: Hematite was most predominant in the original oolitic iron ore. Roasting time has significant effect on the Fe recovery, and only slightly influence on the Fe content of concentrate. Fe recovery increased from 10 to 60 min, and was more pronounced for the first 30 min. From 70 to 80 min, the recovery decreased slightly, which may be due to the formation of weakly magnetic FeO (over-reduced to weakly magnetic FeO). The reduction degree increased gradually from 10 min to 50 min. Magnetite increased considerably from 10 to 60 min, while the Hematite decreased with roasting time. No FeO was found before 20 min, after roasting for 30 min, and small amount (∼1.3%) of FeO was generated. After roasting for 60 min, the content of FeO reached ∼4.3%, which suggested that the over-reduction continued. More and more Hm was changed to Mt with increasing roasting time, and smaller size would accelerate the reduction process. With the increase of percentage of size −0.045 mm, the Fe content increased from 54.90% to 56.48%, with decreases in the production yield and Fe recovery. As the thickness of the roasting layer increase from 15 mm to 60 mm, the Fe content of concentrate in total changed slightly. This research was supported by the  To preliminarily test the effect of magnetic roasting, the following parameters were applied: roasting temperature 700 °C–900 °C, roasting time 40 min–70 min, dosage content of reducing agent as 3%–11% (the content is 8% in the previous mechanism study), magnetic field: 1.5 A (1500 Oe ∼ 1600 Oe) 0.8 A (800 Oe ∼ 850 Oe). The detailed data was in table below. Some other roasting results were not good under the condition with low content of reducing agent and short roasting time, so were not listed here.