The uptake of Ni2+ by amorphous and crystalline gehlenite (Ca2Al2SiO7) was investigated. The Ca2Al2SiO7 samples were prepared by solid-state reaction of mixtures of kaolinite, calcite, and aluminum hydroxide mechanochemically treated the mixture for 0–24h and fired at 600–900°C for 24h. The mechanochemically treated samples crystallized to form gehlenite at ≥850°C, below which temperature they were amorphous. Ni2+ uptake experiments were performed by a batch method at 25°C using a solid/solution ratio of 0.002gml−1 and a Ni2+ concentration of 10−4 to 5×10−2
                     M. The uptake capability increased with increasing pH>6 and decreasing initial Ni2+ concentration. The amorphous sample showed a higher Ni2+ uptake than the crystalline sample, and its uptake was also higher than values reported in the literature for amorphous CaAl2Si2O8, zeolites, gylorite, and activated carbon.Because of the global environmental issues, the necessity for absorbent materials and their fields of application are increasing. This situation makes the development of high performance adsorbents a matter of considerable interest and importance. Wastewater discharged by enterprises that process ores and concentrates of non-ferrous metals is usually polluted with heavy metal ions, such as cadmium (Cd There are several methods for the uptake of heavy metal ions from wastewaters, including ion exchange, chemical precipitation, electro deposition, filtration and the use of various types of adsorbents, etc. However, zeolites have higher selectivity for alkali and alkaline earth ions than for heavy metal ions resulting in the deterioration of their uptake properties for heavy metal ions under actual environmental conditions, in which alkali and alkaline earth ions are normally always present. Ion exchange is feasible when an exchanger has a high selectivity for the metal to be removed and the concentration of competing ions is low. In certain cases, special resins having a very high selectivity for a particular heavy metal ion may be manufactured. The metal may then be recovered by incinerating the metal-saturated resin but the cost of such a process limits its application to valuable metals. Such resins are, however, not used for uptake of non-valuable metals nor for separation of metal ions from other metal ions due to their similar chemical character. New materials have been sought for a long time, since development of high-performance adsorbents may provide an economical means of removing mixed heavy metal ions from effluents. We have investigated the development of functional materials from kaolin group minerals. The products include microporous silica From a structural point of view, layered structures should be more suitable than framework structures as host materials for cation uptake because the release of the host cations may occur more readily and efficiently from the layered structures. This is confirmed by the higher uptake ability of amorphous CaAl The starting materials were kaolinite from Georgia USA (Albion Co.), CaCO Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a diffractometer (XRD-6100, Shimadzu Japan) with monochromated Cu Kα radiation. The chemical compositions of the samples were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (RIX2000, Rigaku Japan). The presence of residual carbonate was determined using FTIR (FTIR-8600PC, Shimadzu Japan) spectrometer. The specific surface area was calculated by the BET method using an automatic gas adsorption instrument (Autosorb-1, Quanta Chrome, USA). Solid-state Samples were milled for 12 The XRD patterns of the samples milled for 12 The The Three amorphous samples fired at 650, 700, and 800 Uptake experiments of Ni Ni  Two important physiochemical aspects for the evaluation of adsorption are the equilibria of the adsorption and the kinetics. The equilibrium relationships between adsorbent and adsorbate are described by adsorption isotherms, usually the ratio between the quantity adsorbed and that remaining in the solution at a fixed temperature at equilibrium. The kinetics of Ni Changes of Ni Ni Similar behavior with pH has been reported for red mud The samples after Ni The uptake of Ni All the samples showed very good uptake of Ni Ni Ni The Ni VKJ thanks Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan for the award of a graduate fellowship (Monbukagakusho Scholarship) under which the present study was carried out. A part of this study was supported by The Steel Industrial Foundation for the Advancement of Environmental Protection Technology. The authors thank Dr. K. Kiguchi of Tokyo Institute of Technology for help of the ICP-AES measurements.