This article describes a methodology for analyzing zinc in zinc concentrates materials by wavelength-dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WD-XRF) spectrometry with gel for sample preparation. The sample was decomposed with aqua regia. The sample solution mixed with agaron gel was heated to boiling. The mixture became quasi-solid gel under normal temperature. The elements dispersed in gel medium were detected by WD-XRF spectrometry. The method has both advantages of the solution preparation method and the solid preparation method. In addition, this method was adapted in detecting high content ores, because it avoided the risking of using platinum crucible. The method has been applied to the determination of lead, zinc and iron in zinc concentrates successfully.It is well known that zinc concentrate material contains very high concentrations of zinc (usually more than 5%). A number of studies have addressed the analysis of zinc in zinc concentrates using various analytical methods. One method of determining zinc in ores (concentration in less than 10%) is by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) and atomic emission spectrometry (AES) ( All the foregoing methods, except the method by WD-XRF spectrometry, require complex sample preparation procedures and/or only allow the concentration of one or two elements to be determined and have limited linear range. The present study describes a method of determining zinc by WD-XRF spectrometry, which simultaneously allows multi-element composition of the sample to be analyzed as well as has wide linear range. For WD-XRF analysis, in general, the sample needs to be prepared in the form of pellets or beads ( In present work, we developed agaron gel method for zinc concentrate sample preparation of XRF. The samples were decomposed with aqua regia, and then the sample solution was mixed with agaron gel. Agaron gel could be dissolved in the solution when the mixture was heated to boiling. The hot solution put in the self-made vessel was converted to gelatinoids at ambient temperature. The sealed vessel was detected in vacuum by WD-XRF. Through this pretreatment, liquid sample solution was converted into quasi-solid gel. By this conversion, most of mineral effect could be eliminated. Minimization of matrix effects caused by the loss of water in dissolving samples was attempted by using cobalt as an internal standard. Analytical characteristics of the methods used are compared, and their reliability tested against several certified geological reference materials. The results showed high precision and accuracy. This method has been applied to the determination of lead, zinc and iron in zinc and lead concentrate successfully. The method was linear from 0.5% to 100% with the detection limit of 0.1%. The relative standard deviations were less than 4%. This method has been applied to the analysis of practical throughput. All chemicals used were of analytical-reagent grade. Compressed P-10 gas (Ar 90% A wavelength-dispersive sequential X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (Rigaku ZSX Primus II, Japan) equipped with an end-window 4 Two hundred milligrams of powdered sample were placed in a PTFE vessel ( Many gels, for example pectinose, glutin, agaragar, were used to prepare gelatinous solid. Different Characteristic of above gels is listed in In order to establish the optimum pH for agaron gel formation, sample solutions containing 15 In this section, the amount of agaron gel was also determined. Different amounts of agaron gel, 0.1–0.6 According to the above section, the optimal pH value to prepare the solid gel is above four, however, most of the heavy metal ions will precipitate from solution. Thus, it is very necessary to add a buffer solution to prevent the precipitation of the metal species. It is well known that sodium citrate and EDTA can complex with almost all of metal ions as well as have good acid–alkali buffer ability. Based on the reference ( During the analyses of the samples, the measuring cup was kept in a vacuum to reduce the adsorption of X-rays by the atmosphere. In order for the gel sample to be detected under vacuum conditions, the seal for the cups is the key. Our group designed a sample cup made of stainless steel with a volume of 10 The calculation to correct the effects of coexisting elements in the empirical calibration method is called the matrix correction. The ZSX uses the following general matrix correction formula including overlap correction. The description for every item of the formula is listed in The correcting values of According to the Experimental section, a series of standard solutions of Pb, Zn and Fe were prepared to a solid gel standard and then were detected by XRF (Rigaku ZSX Primus II, Japan). The cobalt used in the conversion process as an internal standard was always introduced in the same amount for all the standard and analyzed samples. The internal standard plays an important role in the compensation of the volume, when heating the solution. Fluorescence intensity ratio of the analyte to Co was found to be proportional to the concentration of analyte. Averages of two point background intensities were subtracted for peak intensities of the four analytes. Method detection limits ( In order to investigate the feasibility, accuracy and precision of the proposed method, three Chinese certified geological reference materials (CRM) were analyzed by the present method. All of the analytical results are listed in In this work, a novel gel sample preparation method for mineral samples used in XRF analysis was reported. Through the sample preparation, matrix effect and mineral effect could be eliminated and the risk of using platinum crucible was avoided. This gel sample preparation method is suitable as a general purpose method for major elements analysis of Pb, Zn and Fe in mineral concentrates. In comparison with certified values of CRMs, the results presented here indicate that sample preparation with gel could also be used successfully for the determination of majors in mineral samples by WD-XRF.