Zijinshan commercial bioheapleaching–SX–EW plant has been in operation since December 2005. 13.9million tonnes of low grade copper sulfide ore (Cu 0.38%) has been leached efficiently with an annual recovery of 80% in this distinct leaching system with high iron concentration, high temperature, high acidity and low microbial activity. This paper is to study the key factors which influence the heap operation in Zijinshan. Dissolution kinetics of diginite and covellite was carried out in acid ferric sulfate solution under controlled redox potential. Moreover, column bioleaching tests were conducted in the laboratory with raffinate from the plant. Both results showed that the main factors accelerating dissolution rate of Cu1.8S/CuS were mainly temperature and ferric concentration, while redox potential only had a slight positive effect. The present work provides an insight into mineral kinetics to understand this unique bioheapleaching operation and gives further information for optimization of the existing practices.Bioheapleaching has been an established technology to recover copper from secondary copper sulfide in which chalcocite is the main copper mineral. This robust technology has been successfully implemented in different mineral deposits, and more than 20 copper bioleaching plants have been in operation worldwide mainly in Chile ( A commercial bioheapleaching plant in Zijinshan copper mine with a capacity of 10,000 Although crushed ore heap leaching of secondary copper sulfides has been widely used for over a decade, the operation is based largely on rule of thumb and operators’ experience instead of understanding the processes taken place inside a heap. It is believed that most existing bioleaching processes is in fact gas–liquid mass transfer or mineral kinetics limit the rate of leaching ( From the foregoing, it is important to understand why Zijinshan copper bioheapleaching plant works efficiently at low microbial activity. The present work describes dissolution kinetics of diginite and covellite in acid ferric sulfate solution under control redox potential and column bioleaching with raffinate from the plant at different temperature and Fe Many publications have reported the dissolution kinetics of covellite and chalcocite in abiotic condition. The first systematic research works on CuS and Cu The first stage leaching of chalcocite is very fast relative to second stage leaching. This is supported by the observed low activation energies (4.18–29.26 It is generally accepted that the intermediate or secondary covellite is more reactive than the primary mineral. The leaching rate of the secondary species increases with increasing ferric ion concentration in the range 0.25 Various papers ( Digenite can be represented as Cu The samples of digenite and covellite were manually sorted from Zijinshan copper ores. The samples were then ground and sieved to particle size between 0.048 The chemical reagents Fe(III) sulfate, Fe(II) sulfate and potassium permanganate for kinetic experiments are prepared as follows. For Fe(III) sulfate solution, different amount of Fe(III) sulfate was added to a 1 For preparation of 0.3 Fe(II) sulfate solution was used to reduce the solution redox potential and potassium permanganate solution was used to increase the solution redox potential but without taking part in the leaching itself ( Experimental setup for leaching kinetic is shown in In order to investigate the effect of temperature and ferric concentration on copper dissolution kinetic of Zijinshan copper ores under biotic condition, column leaching tests were carried out using leachate from Zijinshan copper bioheapleaching plant. The experimental methods were presented in the previous studies ( Microbial community in the leachate, characterized by clone library analysis and real time PCR, consisted of bacteria The chemical composition of irrigation solution for column leaching is summarized in Three different parameters: temperature, ferric iron concentration and redox potential were studied for the dissolution kinetics of digenite and covellite. Results are shown in subsequent sections. The reaction kinetic of digenite leached by iron sulfate solution (36.4  Comparison between the second stage leaching of digenite ( To investigate the effect of Fe The covellite dissolution kinetics was carried out at pH 1.0 and initial redox potential 720 For digenite leaching experiment, redox potentials were set at 655 In summary, both covellite dissolution and second stage dissolution of digenite were sensitive to temperature, but insensitive to redox potential. At 75 In Zijinshan copper ores, the main copper sulfides were digenite (47.2%), covellite (36.6%) and refractory copper mineral enargite (15.0%). To achieve high rate of copper dissolution in heapleaching, temperature was the crucial factor. High concentration of ferric ion would also benefit copper extraction. Column bioleaching experiments (10 Column leaching tests were conducted at temperatures 30  Our previous study indicated that bacteria might accelerate digenite dissolution. At 30 Column bioleaching tests were carried out at initial total iron concentrations 5  It is generally accepted that the bioleaching of sulfide minerals involves three major sub-processes, viz., the acid ferric leaching of the sulfide mineral, microbial oxidation of the sulfur moiety and the microbial oxidation of ferrous-iron to the ferric form. In the bacterial leaching of sulfide minerals, ferric iron is the key oxidizing agent and soluble iron species are the main determinants of redox potential ( In most of existing bioheapleaching practices, the plant design normally focused on the bacterial requirements by using parameters such as ambient temperature, aeration, low heap height, low ferric concentration and high pH. However, Zijinshan copper bioheapleaching plant was operated with parameters far from the optimal condition for microorganisms growth (as about 10  Leaching kinetic experiments indicated that temperature is a crucial factor for abiotic dissolution of covellite, while ferric concentration and redox potential only had slight positive effect. The second stage dissolution of diginite in acid ferric sulfate was relatively faster than that of covellite and sensitive to temperature and ferric concentration. Therefore, elevated temperature plays an important role in covellite and diginite dissolution. High ferric concentration is an additional benefit to the dissolution of digenite. Column bioleaching of the Zijinshan copper ore indicated that copper extraction at 60 This research work on Zijinshan copper sulfide might offer an alternative approach to optimize bioheapleaching in practice: focus on chemical kinetics of copper minerals instead of microorganism activity. It might simplify the engineering aspect of heapleaching, e.g. no aeration and high lift of heaps and these might lead to lower capital and operation cost. For better understanding of Zijinshan practice, biooxidation of sulfur covered the mineral surface and ferric bioreduction inside the anaerobic heap will be under further investigation. The authors thank the financial support from the provincial government of Fujian (regional R&D Program 2009H40101) and central government of China (‘863’ Program 2007AA060901). The excellent mineralogical investigations by Dr. Xu, Tao and his team are also acknowledged.