Prostate cancers have a strong propensity to metastasize to bone and promote osteoblastic lesions. TMPRSS2:ERG is the most frequent gene rearrangement identified in prostate cancer, but whether it is involved in prostate cancer bone metastases is largely unknown. We exploited an intratibial metastasis model to address this issue and we found that ectopic expression of the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion enhances the ability of prostate cancer cell lines to induce osteoblastic lesions by stimulating bone formation and inhibiting the osteolytic response. In line with these in vivo results, we demonstrate that the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion protein increases the expression of osteoblastic markers, including Collagen Type I Alpha 1 Chain and Alkaline Phosphatase, as well as Endothelin-1, a protein with a documented role in osteoblastic bone lesion formation. Moreover, we determined that the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion protein is bound to the regulatory regions of these genes in prostate cancer cell lines, and we report that the expression levels of these osteoblastic markers are correlated with the expression of the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion in patient metastasis samples. Taken together, our results reveal that the TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusion is involved in osteoblastic lesion formation induced by prostate cancer cells.Bone metastases occur in more than 80% of men who die from prostate cancer (PCa) [ Chromosomal rearrangements involving genes encoding ETS (E-twenty-six) transcription factors are found in more than 50% of human PCa cases and constitute the most frequent gene rearrangements in human malignancies [ Several clinical studies suggest that Here, we aim to mechanistically dissect the role of The VCaP cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), the PC3 and PC3c cells were from Edith Bonnelye (INSERM U1033, Université Claude Bernard, Lyon, France). The PC3 cell line was authenticated by STR profiling prior to the experiments (IdentiCell, Aarhus, Denmark) and presented a 100% match with PC3. The PC3c were isolated PC3c clones, stably transfected with either empty pcDNA3.1 vector or Predesigned and pooled siRNAs were obtained from GE Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO, USA). Cells were transfected with the siRNA (50 nM) using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions. Gene-knockdown effects were evaluated 72 h after the transfection. The siRNAs used in this study were siERG (ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool L-003886-00) and the control siRNA (ON-TARGETplus Non-targeting Pool D-001810-10). Total RNA was purified using the NucleoSpin RNA kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. For retrotranscription, 1 μg of total RNA was used to generate cDNA using the High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Quantitative PCRs (qPCRs) were performed using the power SYBR-Green PCR Master kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) on a Stratagene Mx3005P qPCR System (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The relative expression levels of individual genes were calculated using the -2 ChIP assays were performed as described in Tian et al., 2014 [ Conditioned media from cell culture were used for protein detection. The levels of ET-1 secreted by PC3c cells and by PC3c-CT, PC3c-T1E4-L, PC3c-T1E4-M and PC3c-T1E4-H clones were measured using a Quantikine ELISA kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). To analyze To analyze the binding of ERG to the The mice used in this study were handled according to French national rules (Décret N° 87-848 du 19/10/1987, Paris). Experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University Lyon-1, France (CEEA-55 Comité d’Ethique en Expérimentation Animale DR2014-32). Animal experiments were routinely inspected by the attending veterinarian to ensure continued compliance with the proposed protocols. Animals bearing tumor xenografts were carefully monitored for established signs of distress and discomfort and were humanely euthanized. Intra-osseous tumor xenograft experiments in anaesthetized mice were carried out in six-week-old SCID male mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA, USA). PC3 cells are known to induce pure osteolytic lesions, while PC3c cells induce mixed lesions with both osteolytic and osteoblastic regions in the bone marrow cavity [ Human PCa bone (n = 5) and lymph node (n = 3) metastases were obtained from the local tumor tissue bank, C2RC (Lille, France), after the internal review board's approval (CSTMT-042, 27/07/2009). These tumor tissue samples, which had previously been extracted and subsequently frozen, originated from patients who consult at Lille University Hospitals (CHRU de Lille). Lymph node samples were obtained during radical prostatectomies or Immunohistochemistry of human and mouse tissue sections was performed using anti-ERG (ab92513, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) at 1/100, All image treatments were carried out using Image J. Statistical analyses were performed using the GraphPad Prism software (San Diego, CA, USA). The statistical methods used in this study are indicated in the corresponding figure legends. Unless otherwise indicated, all values in the figures are expressed as means ± s.e.m. In order to assess whether Ten weeks after injection, radiographical analyses revealed that, compared to the control animals, animals bearing tumors overexpressing the TMPRSS2:ERG fusion exhibited respectively significantly smaller and larger bone destruction and formation areas ( In contrast to PC3c cells, PC3 cells are known to solely induce pure osteolytic lesions when injected into the tibiae of mice. We then hypothesized that ectopic expression of Taken together, our results indicate that overexpression of the The acquisition of a bone cell-like phenotype, namely osteomimicry, has been proposed to help cancer cells survive within the bone microenvironment [ To further confirm the clinical relevance of this regulatory network, we analyzed a gene expression dataset based on 52 human prostate adenocarcinoma metastasis samples using the cBioPortal platform [ These data suggest that the expression of the Our results demonstrate that aberrant expression of ERG in PCa cells can enhance their osteomimicry properties through increasing osteogenic marker expression. We therefore asked whether these osteogenic markers are directly regulated by ERG in PCa cells. We took advantage of the availability of published ERG ChIP-seq data performed in the VCaP cell line, which is the only cell line harboring endogenous expression of TMPRSS2:ERG [ Furthermore, we also found that ectopic expression of the fusion in PC3c cells ( These results demonstrate that ERG directly controls the expression of the To further understand the mechanism by which aberrant expression of By using PC3c clones expressing distinct levels of the To verify whether ERG is capable of regulating Together, these results reveal a link between ERG and ET-1 expression in fusion-positive human bone metastasis samples. PCa cells most commonly metastasize to the bone, inducing osteoblastic or mixed osteoblastic/osteolytic lesions, and this is an incurable complication of the disease [ Indeed, we found that, in PCa cells, the ERG transcription factor is capable of directly controlling the expression of major bone markers, such as Here, we also found the The formation of metastasis is a multistep process that includes dissemination of cancer cells from primary tumor, organotropism (i.e. bone tropism) and tissue colonization, survival and dormancy of the tumor cells, and finally, after dormant state escape, uncontrollably proliferation [ Nonetheless, PC3 represent an appropriate widely used cell model to study the specific role of TMPRSS2:ERG in the phenotype of induced bone lesions. Indeed, this cell line was produced from a PCa bone metastasis, was free from any chromosomic rearrangements or fusion genes, especially TMPRSS2:ERG, and was known to induce pure osteolytic lesions in murine intratibial PCa engraftment models. Using three PC3-derived cell lines, we showed that the In conclusion, our study provides both All authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was in part supported by the We would like to thank M. Tardivel, A. Bongiovanni and E. Werkmeister from the BioImaging Center Lille Nord de France (BICeL) for their technical assistance; M. Canouil for his statistics advice; and M. Vernier for his bioinformatic advice and stimulating discussions. We would also like to thank the local Tumor Tissue Bank (Tumorothèque), Regional Reference Oncology Center (CRRC) (Head, Pr. M.C. Copin) in Lille, France. The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at