Processing of petalite concentrate from the Bikita deposits in Zimbabwe for production of high-purity Li2CO3 has been studied. XRF and ICP-OES analysis showed that the concentrate consists of oxides of Li, Si, and Al as major components, with an average Li2O content of 4.10%. XRD examination confirmed that the sample is a petalite. Processing of the petalite involves roasting the pre-heated concentrate with concentrated H2SO4 followed by water leaching of the resulting Li2SO4, solution purification and precipitation of Li2CO3. The effects of roasting temperature, stirring speed, solid to liquid ratio, leaching temperature and time on the lithium dissolution are reported. The dissolution rates are significantly influenced by roasting temperature and stirring speed. Water-washed lithium carbonate with a purity of 99.21% (metal basis) was produced. Synthesised and commercial Li2CO3 samples were characterised and compared using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA).Lithium is found in minerals, lake brines, clays, seawater and oil residues. The commercial sources of lithium are minerals, brines and seawater ( In Zimbabwe, petalite deposits are found in the Bikita area east of Masvingo. Pegmatite deposits in Zimbabwe contain significant amounts of lithium and are one of the world's largest lithium deposits ( Lithium carbonate is the precursor for all other lithium compounds including lithium chloride, a raw material for lithium metal production ( In the aluminium industry, lithium carbonate is added during electrolysis of alumina (Al Processing of lithium minerals relies on chemical roasting of the concentrate with the use of sulphuric acid (  This study gives detailed data on the characterisation, concentrate roasting with H Laboratory tests were carried out with a petalite concentrate, as received from Bikita Minerals (Pvt) Ltd in Zimbabwe. A multi-element standard (ICP grade) and analytical grades Na The following instruments were used in this study: for X-ray fluorescence (XRF) a Thermo ARL9400 XP instrument; for inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) a SPECTRO ARCOS; for X-ray diffractometry (XRD) a PANalytical X'Pert PRO diffractometer; for mass measurements a Mettler PM2000MC balance; for pH measurements a pH meter cripson GLP 21; and for thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) a TA instrument DSC-TGA SDT Q600. Dry sieving was performed on a 100.00 Elemental analysis of the concentrate was done using XRF and ICP-OES. The petalite sample was dissolved completely using a method adapted from The finely powdered petalite concentrate was first heated in a laboratory furnace at 1100 This study discusses the conditions such as temperature, leaching time, solid/liquid ratio and stirring rate which affect leaching of lithium. Leaching experiments were performed in a 600 Acid roasting and leaching of petalite concentrate is not entirely selective as co-dissolution of impurities also occurs. The resulting leach liquor contains aluminium, calcium, magnesium, iron and other impurities which can be removed by pH control and addition of a carbonate ( The purified leach solution was evaporated to about 50% of its original volume and filtered to remove the calcium residue. The evaporation process was continued until the concentration of Li was more than 11 The dried Li The particle size distribution of as-received petalite concentrate is shown on The mineral phases recorded from the XRD examination of the lithium pegmatite is provided in The results of the XRF and ICP-OES showed Li A number of experiments were run by varying the roasting temperature in the range of 200–300 The effect of agitation on the dissolution of lithium was investigated in water at 50 The effect of solid/liquid (g The effect of temperature on the dissolution of lithium was investigated with solid/liquid ratio of (1/7.5 Changes of lithium and impurity concentration during processing leach liquors are described in Precipitation of Li Analytical results show that about 86.00% of the lithium was recovered as a precipitate relative to the concentrated leach liquor. The thermogram for both synthesised and commercial Li Mass losses of 58.43% and 60.83% for synthesised and commercial Li A comparison between X-ray pattern for synthesised and commercial Li The purity of the synthesised product is indicated in The XRF and ICP-OES technique showed that the petalite concentrate consists of oxides of Li, Si, and Al as major components, with an average Li The authors would like to thank the