High-purity nickel is mainly produced by electrowinning from sulphate and chloride solutions in the presence of high concentrations of boric acid as a buffer. The generally used pH is in the range 3–4 if Ni concentration in the electrolyte is higher than 10g/l. Lower Ni concentration, as in the case of either industrial liquid effluents and in situ low grade Ni ore leaching, needs pH values ranging from 10 to 11 in order to hinder the evolution of hydrogen. Ni electrowinning from acidic and alkaline solutions is studied to determine in both cases the best operative conditions. Particularly Ni concentration, additive presence, pH values, temperatures, cathode material, current density and voltage, to be used in the case of low Ni concentration, have been considered to obtain low energy requirements together with pure nickel having a good morphology.High-purity nickel is mainly produced by electrorefining and electrowinning and accounts for about half of the total world nickel production. Nickel electrowinning is performed from electrolytes containing NiCl In the electrowinning of nickel, from either sulphate or chloride media, nickel is reduced at the cathode and either water oxidation in sulphate media, or chlorine evolution in chloride media, occur at the anode. In nickel electrowinning from sulphate acidic baths the main reactions are: Furthermore the competing hydrogen reduction reaction can cause a deposit curling and cracking due to internal stresses and hydrogen incorporation ( Besides solution pH, several factors could be take into account to improve the deposit structure and morphology together with process energy requirement such as temperature, electrolyte composition and electrode material regardless of potentiostatic or galvanostatic conditions ( Although there are some studies on the nickel electrowinning and electrorefining processes ( In the case of nickel electrowinning from ammoniacal baths the main reactions are: This work aims at analysing the influence of the electrolyte composition and pH and electrolysis conditions on nickel process yield, purity and morphology of the deposit. Galvanostatic electrowinning has been utilized for high Ni concentration, while Ni content lower than 10 Using synthetic solutions of Ni, prepared by dissolving pure analytic reagents in distilled water in order to have a Ni concentration higher than 60 The cyclic voltammetry tests were performed at room temperature utilizing an EG&G model 273 Potentiostat/Galvanostat and a computer. In the electrolytic cell a BDH anionic exchange membrane separated the anodic and cathodic compartments, 200 The electrowinning tests were performed at current density of 250 The electrolysis tests were carried out by an EG&G PAR potentiostat at constant potential (−1.20 to −1.50 Atomic absorption spectroscope (UNICAM 969) was utilized to perform the quantitative analysis of Ni in the aqueous solutions. The solution pH was monitored by an Amel pH-meter. The Ni deposits were observed and analysed by SEM (Hitachi S2500 and Philips 505, the former is equipped with EDS KEVEX apparatus for quantitative analysis). Several aspects of electrodic processes such as: element discharge potential, kinetics and possible reversibility reaction could be valuated by cyclic voltammetry tests. This technique has been used in the present work to establish which reaction occurs in the cell and the relative potential. Preliminary cyclic voltammetry tests have been carried out on different cathode materials (platinum, nickel, AISI 316L stainless steel, titanium and aluminium) with a 1 Even if boric acid is added to the catholyte Al cathode is not useful to reduce Ni from dilute acidic sulphate solutions. In fact as shown in If ammonia solution was used, the reduction reaction of nickel starts at about −0.8 On the ground of preliminary cathodic polarization curves, the three cathode materials, AISI 316L stainless steel, aluminium and titanium, showing the higher hydrogen discharge potential, were tested in order to identify the best starting cathode material for Ni electrowinning in acidic sulphate solutions. All the galvanostatic electrowinning tests, reported in The tests carried out by AISI 316L stainless steel cathode material indicate that, in the 3.2–4.2 pH range, electrowinning is strongly dependent on temperature: increasing the temperature from RT to 313 The Al cathode is not able to produce a compact metal deposit; any change in temperature and/or pH does not improve the metal deposit, that is extremely powdered and continuously detaches from the cathode avoiding the possibility to weight it and thus to calculate the current efficiency. Electrowinning tests carried out on Ti cathode shows that pH influence is stronger than in the case of AISI 316L cathode and that 4.2 pH value allows having the best results in terms of current efficiency and energy requirements. The process yield is also temperature dependent as in the case of stainless steel cathode. On the other hand deposits obtained on the Ti cathode at any temperature were characterised by internal stresses, and they broke off from the titanium surface quite rapidly if compared with those produced by AISI 316L cathode in the temperature and pH conditions that give the highest process yield. In the case of AISI 316L stainless steel cathode the addition of boric acid doubles the time before deposit detachment, maintaining almost the same results in terms of current efficiency and energy requirements, as demonstrated in a previous work ( The effect of temperature is also evident on deposit morphology as shown in Preliminary potentiostatic tests performed both at −1.0  The electrolytic deposit results in a thick grey powdered Ni that covers the Al cathode. In this work nickel electrowinning from sulphate acidic and alkaline media was studied: the aim of the research was to compare the two systems and identify for both operating conditions that give either low energy requirements and dense deposit with no carling, cracking and brittleness degradation. Several tests were carried out in order to individuate the best cathode material, temperature and catholyte pH. The galvanostatic and potentiostatic experiments were all performed in a cell having two separated compartments. The results suggest that: AISI 316L stainless steel, even showing lowest hydrogen overpotential than Ti and Al, is the best cathode material for Ni electrowinning performed on acid sulphate media with high Ni concentration, while it does not give good electrolysis results in alkaline baths for low Ni concentrations; Temperature influence is more evident in acidic solutions with high Ni content than in alkaline electrolytes at low Ni concentration: particularly temperature increase lowers energy requirements, increases Ni deposition time before its detachment from cathodic support, by avoiding the deposit internal stress formation; it also enlarges grain size of the deposit; Low Ni concentration electrolysis needs the use of alkaline bath and an Al cathode, having low cost and high hydrogen overvoltage, to hinder the occurrence of the competitive hydrogen reduction reaction.