Extant colobine monkeys have been historically described as specialized folivores. However, reports on both their behavior and dental metrics tend to ascribe a more varied diet to them. In particular, several species, such as Pygathrix nemaeus and Rhinopithecus roxellana, are dedicated seasonal seed eaters. They use the lophs on their postcanine teeth to crack open the hard endocarp that protects some seeds. This raises the question of whether the bilophodont occlusal pattern of colobine monkeys first evolved as an adaptation to folivory or sclerocarpic foraging. Here, we assess the sclerocarpic foraging ability of the oldest European fossil colobine monkey, Mesopithecus. We use computed microtomograpy to investigate the three-dimensional (3D) dental topography and enamel thickness of upper second molars ascribed to the late Miocene species Mesopithecus pentelicus from Pikermi, Greece. We compare M. pentelicus to a sample of extant Old World monkeys encompassing a wide range of diets. Furthermore, we combine classic dietary categories such as folivory with alternative categories that score the ability to crack, grind and shear mechanically challenging food. The 3D dental topography of M. pentelicus predicts an ability to crack and grind hard foods such as seeds. This is consistent with previous results obtained from dental microwear analysis. However, its relatively thin enamel groups M. pentelicus with other folivorous cercopithecids. We interpret this as a morphological trade-off between the necessity to avoid tooth failure resulting from hard food consumption and the need to process a high amount of leafy material. Our study demonstrates that categories evaluating the cracking, grinding or shearing ability, traditional dietary categories, and dental topography combine well to make a powerful tool for the investigation of diet in extant and extinct primates.Colobine monkeys have been historically described as specialized folivores, even to the point of being dubbed “leaf eating monkeys” ( Notwithstanding, reports on both their behavior and dental metrics ascribe colobine monkeys a more varied diet. In particular, several species such as Concurrently, seed consumption has been suggested to be the evolutionary link leading from fruit consumption to an extensive folivory in primates ( For most primates, teeth are essential in processing or accessing mechanically challenging foods, which are better digested after comminution or extraction. For instance, primates must remove the protective seed coat and fragment the kernel before digestion and subsequent nutrient extraction ( Investigating how the dental morphology of In this article, we combine classic dietary categories with alternative, mechanically pertinent categories. Classic dietary categories such as folivory and frugivory group a wide range of mechanical properties ( Our work focused on the slightly worn right upper second molar of a partial palate ( The specimens have quadrate, straight-sided bilophodont upper second molars that display asymmetrical distal margins and sharp longitudinal crests ( The comparative sample consisted of 28 upper second molars, from 17 extant Old World monkey species held in the National Museum of Natural History, Paris (France), the iPHEP collections at the University of Poitiers (France) and the Royal Museum of Central Africa, Tervuren (Belgium). We included Asian and African colobine monkeys, as well as some cercopithecines to ensure the comparative sample covered a wide range of dietary preferences ( To predict if “Cracking” refers to the action of making or propagating a crack into the protective layer of the food by exerting a high orthal crushing load, in the same fashion as a nutcracker. “Grinding” refers to the action of comminuting, crushing into pieces, the bulk of the food item (e.g., one would grind the kernels of a walnut, the flesh of an apple or any non-flat tough food object). “Shearing” refers to the action of cutting relatively flat, tough foods such as leaves or grass. From dietary budgets, behavioral reports and comparable mechanical data, we scored the ability to perform each action. Three levels of cracking were defined: Soft (s) – an absence of hard food to crack. Hard and brittle (Hb) – the cracking of hard food such as ripe seeds. Hard and tough (H&T) – the cracking of items that were both hard and tough, like the seed casings of Four levels of grinding were defined: Soft and brittle (sb) – an absence of hard or tough food to grind. Hard or tough (H|T) – the eating of immature seeds or unripe fruit, which are generally tougher than their ripe counterparts ( Hard and brittle (Hb) – the consumption of mature seeds. Hard and tough (H&T) – the consumption of both hard and tough foods (i.e., teeth have to handle both FMPs). Finally, two levels of shearing were defined: Soft and tough (sT) – shearing and eating foods such as the most challenging leaves, flowers ( Hard (H) – shearing soft and tough items, but cracking and/or grinding hard items as well. This level also includes species, such as The original molars were detailed by x-ray high-resolution micro-computed tomography (HR-μCT). Each molar was scanned at the Centre de Microtomographie of Poitiers using either Viscom X1050 or EasyTom HR-microtomographs at between 10 and 30 μm isovoxel resolution under a voltage of 70–100 kV and an intensity of 100–280 mA, depending on the tooth size. We performed 1000–2500 projections with 10–15 acquisitions per complete rotation. Images were filtered with a Tukey filter set to 80. Following approaches detailed in earlier publications ( Following Topographic variables are used routinely for dental analysis, although they are generally computed only on OES surfaces (e.g., We computed three main topometrics for both OES and EDJ subsampled surfaces. Relief index (RFI) is the natural log of the ratio between the square roots of (a) the OES or EDJ crown surface area and (b) the surface area of the crown's projection into an occlusal plane ( Dirichlet normal energy (DNE) measures the change in normal vectors over the tooth surface ( Occlusal patch count (OPC) is an approximation of tooth complexity, i.e., it indicates the number of structures over the tooth's surface ( In addition, 3D relative enamel thickness (RET) was processed for MHNL-PK-25, and enamel-dentine distance was pictured on topographic maps ( All metrics related to RET were computed using Geomagic Studio 2013, and the resulting values, as well as topographic variables of the fossil sample, are available in The relationship between the variables was evaluated using a phylogenetic generalized least-square analysis (PGLS). Following Categories were compared through four different one-way ANOVAs with classic, cracking, grinding and shearing categories as factors. For each ANOVA, we evaluated homoscedasticity with Breusch–Pagan tests and normality with Shapiro–Wilk tests. Afterward, we performed pairwise post-hoc comparisons using Tukey's Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) test. To predict the dietary features of From the PGLS results ( Seed eating cercopithecids have a lower RFI and thicker enamel than folivorous species ( While RFI and DNE group Monkeys that crack hard and brittle foods have significantly lower RFI for both OES and EDJ ( With relatively low enamel RFI and enamel DNE scores, Species that grind either soft and brittle food, or have to deal with either hard items or tough items, have significantly lower RFI scores for both OES and EDJ than pure hard and brittle food grinders ( Values of OPC and RET for Compared to species that shear only soft and tough food, hard food consumers have significantly lower RFI scores (  Every colobine species used in our comparative sample is ascribed to the same classic category (i.e., folivory). While this categorization admittedly overlooks the diversity of their seasonal behavior, especially regarding seed consumption ( Our categories can be used to make predictions on FMPs for extinct taxa, like The molars of Still, 2D dental microwear analysis and 3D dental microwear textural analysis both revealed significant differences between The alternative, mechanically-pertinent categories used in this work give us additional insights into the dental adaptations of In LDAs, a good hard food cracking/grinding ability was predicted for In addition, the LDA evaluating the shearing potential of This work provides significant evidence that the dental morphology of It has been suggested that Old World monkeys could have first evolved molars adapted to seed consumption ( Being the oldest known colobine in Eurasia, One further intriguing finding in our study is the thin enamel of In a similar fashion, the bilophodont morphology of The mechanical approach developed in this work could gain valuable input from other types of functional approaches, based on mathematical modeling such as finite elements analysis ( We are grateful to Adélaïde Euriat and Jérome Surault (Institut de Paléoprimatologie, Paléontologie Humaine: Evolution, Paléoenvironnements of Poitiers) as well as Arnaud Mazurier (Centre de Microtomographie of Poitiers) for their help with the acquisition of the μCT scans. Many thanks to the institutions that lent the skulls from which the comparative sample was built, notably Jacques Cuisin and the National Museum of Natural History, Paris; Emmanuel Gilisen and the Royal Museum of Central Africa, Tervuren; Didier Berthet and the Musée des Confluences, Lyon. Finally, we would like to thank Mark Teaford, Clément Zanolli and four anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript. This work was funded by the