One of the greatest challenges in the development of hydrometallurgical processes for the recovery of indium from secondary sources is the fact that the leaching step generally results in very dilute solutions. Therefore, this diluted indium solution must be concentrated before being sent to a subsequent step such as recovery of the metal by electrowinning. The aim of the present work was to apply solvent extraction using bis(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (D2EHPA) in order to maximize the indium concentration in the solution. Firstly, the extraction and stripping steps were investigated using a synthetic solution. After definition of the best conditions using a synthetic solution, a real solution obtained from the leaching of discarded LCDs was employed.The amount of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) has increased significantly over the past few years, as a result of the technology revolution, and constitutes a new environmental challenge ( LCD screens usually contain conductive electrodes made of tin-doped indium oxide (ITO), which are placed between two glass panels. ITO is a mixture of indium [III] oxide (In Indium is a rare and strategic metal, and is mainly obtained as a byproduct of zinc and lead production ( The main methods used for the recovery of indium from wastes are hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes ( However, there are some difficulties in the development of recycling technologies for indium recovery. In the case of indium recovery from secondary sources, leaching of wastes containing ITO results in solutions with very low indium concentrations (<50 mg/L) ( Although indium is found associated with tin, lead, copper, and iron, it is usually obtained as a byproduct of the zinc smelting process ( In efforts to combat the depletion of natural resources, much attention has been given to extracting indium from discarded LCDs, as can be observed in the available literature. However, to the best of our knowledge, there have been no studies of the use of solvent extraction to obtain a concentrated indium solution. Although several studies have reported the solvent extraction of indium using D2EHPA, these have mainly concerned definition of the optimal conditions for separation and recovery of indium. Therefore, the aim of this work was to develop an efficient method for concentrating indium solutions obtained from the leaching of LCDs from discarded mobile phones. Obtaining a concentrated indium solution is fundamental for making it possible to recover indium directly in its metallic form, for example by means of electrowinning. Firstly, a synthetic solution of indium sulfate [In The following reagents were used in this study: In D2EHPA is a highly popular reagent and is widely used in practical applications because it has good selectivity for indium, over other metal ions ( The LCD screens were processed in a ball mill (Model MA-500, Marconi). The metal concentrations were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (Model 240FS, Agilent). All measurements were performed in triplicate. The pH was measured with a pH meter (Model ITMPA-210, Instrutemp). A mechanical stirrer (Edutec) was used in the extraction and stripping experiments. Firstly, a synthetic indium-containing solution was used to determine the best conditions for the extraction and stripping. A summary of the experimental conditions used in the solvent extraction and stripping experiments is shown in In the LCD leaching step, the following conditions were used: solid/liquid ratio of 1:20, 1.0 M H The concentration of indium in the synthetic solutions was 33.74 mg/L. This concentration was chosen in order to simulate the concentration typically obtained from the leaching of LCD panels ( In all the solvent extraction experiments, the aqueous and organic phases were placed in a 500 mL three-neck volumetric flask and were mixed using a mechanical stirrer at 800 rpm (at 25 °C). To avoid kerosene volatilization, temperatures higher than 25 °C were not used. Afterwards, the two phases were separated using a funnel. The conditions evaluated for the extraction were the contact time, pH, and A:O phase ratio (v:v), as indicated in steps 1, 2, 3, and 4 The stripping of indium from the loaded organic phase was carried out using HCl. The organic and aqueous phases were placed in a 100 mL beaker and stirred at 800 rpm (at 25 °C). A funnel was used to separate the two phases. The conditions evaluated for the stripping were the HCl concentration and the A:O phase ratio, as indicated in steps 5 and 6 In order to maximize the indium concentration in the stripped solution, an initial evaluation was made using different D2EHPA concentrations and A:O phase ratios, as shown in steps 7 and 8 In this step, the best conditions for extraction and stripping, as determined using the synthetic solution, were applied to the solution obtained from the leaching of the LCD panels. The conditions employed are shown in steps 11 and 12 The extraction efficiency increased with the contact time ( The effect of pH on indium extraction is illustrated in Experiments were not performed above pH 3.0, due to the risk of indium precipitation. According to the elemental speciation diagram obtained using Hydra/Medusa chemical equilibrium database and plotting software (  These results indicated that the concentration for saturation of the organic phase was not reached up to a phase ratio (A:O) of 9:1 ( Therefore, a phase ratio of 9:1 was chosen based on the high extraction efficiency achieved. The higher the ratio between the phases (A:O), the more effective the process will be. Furthermore, use of a low A:O ratio would cause wastage of the extractant, increase costs, and decrease the concentration of indium in the organic phase. In order to improve the extraction efficiency, using a phase ratio of 9:1, new tests employing different contact times were performed ( The effect of the HCl concentration on the efficiency of indium stripping from the loaded D2EHPA is shown in Using a solution obtained from the leaching of ITO nanopowder as the starting material, Investigation of the effect of the ratio between the aqueous and organic phases (A:O) revealed that the stripping efficiency decreased as the phase ratio decreased ( The value of 1713.6 mg/L of indium corresponded to a concentration 57 times higher than the initial indium concentration. Therefore, based on the results, an A:O phase ratio of 1:10 was selected in the next tests. The indium content retained in the organic phase could be recovered by means of a new stripping step to produce an aqueous acid solution, which could then be used to leach a new batch of LCD screens. Therefore, the inclusion of this new step ensured that there was no wastage of either the organic solution or the indium. Based on the preliminary extraction study (using an A:O phase ratio of 9:1, pH 0.5, and 5 min contact time), the effect of the D2EHPA concentration (in the range 5–40% v/v) on the indium extraction was investigated. The extraction efficiency progressively increased as the D2EHPA concentration was increased   Investigation was made of the ideal contact time for the stripping process in order to obtain an aqueous solution with the highest possible concentration of indium. The efficiencies (%) and concentrations (mg/L) obtained after stripping using different contact times are shown in The best stripping efficiency was 72.2%, achieved using a contact time of 10 min, which resulted in a final solution containing 8852.12 mg/L of indium After completing the tests with the synthetic solution for determination of the ideal extraction and stripping conditions, new tests were performed using a solution obtained from leaching of the LCD panels, containing 32.64 mg/L of indium and 4.18 mg/L of tin. The final pH of 0.58 was maintained in the extraction experiments, since it was close to the pH value employed in the experiments with the synthetic solution. The indium and tin extraction efficiencies for the experiment using the real leaching solution were 96.7% and 18.65%, respectively. After the solvent extraction, the best stripping conditions were applied. The stripping efficiency was 61.10% for indium and the presence of tin was not observed, indicating that the stripping was selective for indium, under the conditions employed. Despite the lower efficiency obtained for the leaching solution, compared to the synthetic solution, the final indium concentration obtained was 7712 mg/L, which was 236 times higher than the initial concentration in the solution obtained from leaching of the discarded LCDs (32.64 mg/L). Therefore, the indium could be easily recovered from the concentrated solution in its metallic form, using cementation and electrowinning. For example, Concentrated indium solution was obtained by D2EHPA solvent extraction of the metal from a solution obtained from the leaching of LCD panels of discarded mobile phones. The best conditions for the solvent extraction were determined using a synthetic solution that simulated a real solution obtained in the leaching step. The best conditions for extraction from the synthetic solution were as follows: A:O phase ratio of 40:1 (v/v), contact time of 20 min, pH 0.5, and an organic phase containing 30% (v/v) of D2EHPA diluted in kerosene. The loading of indium into the organic phase could be effectively carried out using the following conditions: contact time of 10 min, A:O phase ratio of 1:10 (v/v), and 4 M HCl. After the tests using a synthetic solution in order to define the best extraction and stripping conditions, new tests were performed using a solution obtained from the leaching of discarded LCDs. The indium and tin concentrations in the leaching solution were 32.64 and 4.18 mg/L, respectively. The resulting pH of the leaching solution was 0.58, and the efficiencies of extraction of indium and tin were 96.7 and 18.65%, respectively. The efficiency of indium stripping from the leaching solution was 61.10%, while the presence of tin was not detected in the stripping solution. This indicated that the stripping process was selective for indium, under the conditions employed. The final indium concentration obtained after the stripping was 7712 mg/L, which was 236 times higher than the initial concentration. The findings demonstrated that the solvent extraction played an important role in the recovery of indium from a very dilute solution obtained from the leaching of LCDs, enabling its recovery in a metallic form that could be reused to produce new electronic devices. This study was supported by the following Brazilian agencies: