Fermentation is the most important killing step during production of fermented meats to eliminate food-borne pathogens. The objective was to evaluate whether the food-borne pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella enterica may survive during the production of two Italian fermented sausages. Sausage batter was inoculated with five strains of L. monocytogenes or S. enterica (ca. 105–106
                     cfu/g) and their kinetic behavior was monitored during production. Both pathogens survived relatively well (in Cacciatore L. monocytogenes and S. enterica inactivation was ca. 0.38±0.23 and 1.10±0.24logcfu/g, respectively; in Felino was ca. 0.39±0.25 and 1.62±0.38logcfu/g, respectively) due to the conditions prevailing during production (slow dehydration rate, small reduction of water activity and fermentation temperature mainly below 20°C during the first 48h of fermentation). Quantitative analysis of data originating from challenge tests provide critical information on which combinations of the process parameters would potentially lead to better control of the pathogens.Although fermented meats are generally recognized as safe, some notable outbreaks of food-borne illness associated with fermented foods and the presence of USDA risk assessment ( Safety of any food product, that is intended to be released in the market, must be assured. Therefore, the objective of this study was to evaluate if the food-borne pathogens Cacciatore (Hunter Style) or salamini is a small, dry salami flavored with wine so-called because they were small enough to stuff in the hunter's pocket for lunch. Cacciatore, made from ground pork, is usually 15–18 Cacciatore and Felino sausages were prepared at the Istituto Zooprofilattico according to the standard recipe of each product. The ingredients of each product are shown in After the preparation of the experimental batches, the mixtures were stuffed into casings and incubated following the ripening programs displayed in A 10-g sample of sausage was weighed and placed into a sterile stomacher bag with 90  The pH was measured by immersing the pH probe of a digital pH meter (micropH 2001, Crison, Barcelona, Spain) in a diluted and homogenized sample containing 10 The log-linear (Eq. The Weibull model is given by the equation ( The The equations were fitted to the log concentration data using the Microsoft Excel 2007 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA) add-in GInaFiT v1.6 ( For calculating the kinetic parameters of the inactivation of each pathogen in the corresponding sausage, the model that showed the best fit to the experimental data was selected based on the following statistical indices: i. number of model parameters, ii. Lack-of-Fit ( Dependency is reported by the GraphPad Prism program for each parameter and quantifies the degree to which that parameter is correlated with others. If it is high (> LAB grew well displaying an increase of 2.3–2.8 and 1.6–1.9 Drop in the pH value by 0.6–1.0 The quantitative data obtained from the challenge tests were analyzed to quantify the inactivation of The log-linear model was chosen to describe  In all cases, Depending on the fermentation temperature, the crucial factors for the reduction of the pathogens are pH and a In the Serbian fermented sausage “sremska”, inoculated with  Predictive microbiology and modeling of experimental data obtained from challenge tests as performed in this study demonstrate the risk to consumers that products may have when contaminated with food-borne pathogens and therefore risk management measures for controlling such risks can be taken. The food business operators can influence the prevalence and concentration of the food-borne pathogens in the product before its release to the market. The results from challenge tests can be used in risk assessment studies to evaluate the final risk (probability of infection or cases of disease) and the effect of various mitigation strategies. Quantitative analysis of the data originating from challenge tests may provide critical information on the process and/or product parameters that have significant effect on inactivation of pathogens as well as how the change in these parameters can lead to better control of microorganisms. Challenge studies investigating the effect of fermentation processes on food-borne pathogens are very useful for the sausage industry. The current work has the potential to provide important information for processors and researchers. Based on the results obtained in this study, some indicative examples of control measures are given: change of process and/or recipe to achieve a higher reduction of the pathogens during process (in combination with acceptable organoleptic characteristics), i.e. change of fermentation temperature, a the implications of these findings is that if the initial contamination of raw materials with inclusion of an additional reduction step such as smoking during ripening, thermal treatment or holding of the final products at elevated temperatures for a time period can achieve an additional pathogen reduction ( The present work was supported by the FP7-People-2011-CIG (LisGenOmics) project through the granting of a Marie Curie scholarship (