The flotation separation of molybdenite from copper sulfide minerals (mostly chalcopyrite) typically relies on the use of toxic inorganic depressants such as cyanides and sodium sulfide/hydrosulfide. In this work, a nontoxic, biodegradable and cost-effective derivative of the natural polysaccharide chitosan, O-Carboxymethyl chitosan (O-CMC), is investigated as an alternative depressant for molybdenite during the Cu-Mo separation. The flotation tests on single minerals showed that O-CMC strongly depresses molybdenite flotation from pH 3–11, while chalcopyrite flotation is not affected by O-CMC except at pH 3. The flotation tests on mineral mixtures confirmed O-CMC could efficiently depress the molybdenite flotation without dramatically reducing chalcopyrite recovery and selective separation of molybdenite and chalcopyrite was achieved over the entire pH range tested from pH 3 to pH 11. To explain the flotation results, the adsorption characteristics of O-CMC on both minerals were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging. The experimental results indicate that the strong adsorption of O-CMC onto molybdenite surface over the chalcopyrite surface is responsible for the selective separation.The flotation separation of copper-molybdenum sulfides is largely achieved by depressing chalcopyrite from the Cu–Mo bulk concentrate using inorganic depressants, such as sodium sulfide/hydrosulfide, cyanides ( The mineral samples used in this work are high purity molybdenite (>96%, Dayu, Jiangxi, China) and chalcopyrite lumps (>90%, Ward’s Science, NY, USA). The mineral samples were crushed, ground, and dry screened, and the −150 +74 μm size fraction was used for the flotation experiments. A few high purity molybdenite or chalcopyrite lumps were exfoliated or hand-polished respectively, and used for AFM imaging. In the flotation experiments, purified potassium isobutyl xanthate (KIBX, Prospec Chemicals Ltd., Canada) was added as the collector, 4-Methyl-2-pentanol (MIBC, 99+%, Acros Organics) was introduced as a frothing agent. O-Carboxymethyl Chitosan (O-CMC, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA), with a degree of deacetylation of 90.78% and a degree of substitution of ∼95%, was used as a depressant. The molecular weight of O-CMC ranges from 100 to 300 KDa. The flotation experiments were conducted in a customized Hallimond flotation tube with a Siwek top ( In flotation tests on single minerals, the recovery of molybdenite or chalcopyrite was obtained from the dry weight of the concentrates and tailings. While in flotation tests on artificial mineral mixtures, the concentrates and tailings were filtered, dried, weighed and sent for elemental analysis. The chalcopyrite and molybdenite recovery was then calculated based on the elemental content of copper and molybdenum in the concentrates and tailings. The morphology of the mineral surfaces, before and after O-CMC treatment, was characterized by an Asylum MFP-3D atomic force microscope (Santa Barbara, USA) using acoustic tapping mode. The surface topography of freshly cleaved molybdenite or polished chalcopyrite surface was obtained first. Thereafter, the mineral surfaces were immersed in 0.001 M KCl solution with 150 ppm O-CMC at pH 9 for 10 min, then taken out from the solution and rinsed thoroughly by Milli-Q water. The mineral substrates were purge dried with ultrapure nitrogen gas prior to imaging. The AFM imaging tests were performed immediately after drying to minimize the surface oxidation and contamination. To determine the proper O-CMC concentration for effective Cu-Mo separation, flotation tests were first conducted on single minerals in 0.001 M KCl solutions at pH 9 with varying O-CMC concentrations. As shown in The flotation recovery of chalcopyrite and molybdenite with and without 150 ppm O-CMC at varying pH is shown in However, after the addition of 150 ppm O-CMC, the flotation of molybdenite is strongly depressed over a wide pH range (3–11), and its recovery remained below 12% regardless of the pulp pH. In contrast, the chalcopyrite flotation was not affected by the O-CMC and solution pH, and its recovery remained above 93% except at pH 3, where the recovery of chalcopyrite was lowered to 82%. Overall, a large separation window from pH 3–11 exists in which O-CMC strongly depress molybdenite and also barely affects the chalcopyrite recovery. Flotation tests on chalcopyrite-molybdenite mixtures were then carried out in 0.001 M KCl solutions with 150 ppm O-CMC at varying pH, to examine the selectivity of O-CMC as well as investigate the influence of pH on the depression ability of O-CMC. The adsorption characteristics of O-CMC on freshly prepared mineral surfaces after washing thoroughly with Milli-Q water were investigated by AFM imaging. The topographic AFM images of molybdenite surfaces before and after conditioning with 150 ppm O-CMC in 0.001 M KCl solution at pH 9 are presented in After treatment with 150 ppm O-CMC in 0.001 M KCl solution at pH 9, a significant change of the surface morphology of molybdenite was observed in the height image in  In this work, O-Carboxymethyl chitosan (O-CMC), a nontoxic, biodegradable and cost-effective derivative of chitosan, was exploited as a selective depressant for molybdenite in the Cu-Mo separation. In single mineral flotation tests, O-CMC strongly depressed molybdenite over the entire pH range tested (3–11), while the chalcopyrite flotation was only slightly reduced by O-CMC under strong acidic condition (pH 3). In the mixed minerals flotation, O-CMC is selective and efficient in depressing molybdenite while not significantly affecting the chalcopyrite recovery over the entire pH range tested from pH 3 to pH 11. The AFM images showed that O-CMC strongly adsorbed on molybdenite surfaces, while no apparent adsorption of O-CMC was identified on chalcopyrite surfaces after rinsing thoroughly with Milli-Q water. The AFM images explained the flotation results in The financial support from the