A computer-intensive significance test for estimated power spectra of cyclic sedimentary successions is presented. This simple method requires no more than a few minutes in computer time for a PC-486, and does not require distributional assumptions. It is suitable for all the spectral analysis approaches used in practice. Moreover, good performance is achieved with relatively short stratigraphical series. The method is similar to a permutation test that has been successfully applied to other statistical problems. In the proposed application of the permutation test to the spectral analysis of time series, the data of a stratigraphic sequence are ordered at random (random permutation) and the power spectrum is estimated by the given approach. The process is repeated many times (e.g. 1000 times) and thus it is possible to assess the statistical significance of the power spectrum of the original sequence for each frequency. Simulation results and the application to real data are shown in order to discuss the performance of the method.In the last two decades, numerous studies have focused on the analysis of rhythmic sedimentary successions, in an effort to recognise the possible cyclic influence of astronomical parameters on the Earth’s climate A complete explanation of standard tests for the power spectrum is found in Brockwell and Davis Statistical theory provides estimators of the power spectrum Also, if the data are Gaussian: Then, the 100(1− Confidence intervals are closely related to hypothesis testing. For example the null hypothesis: However, the main drawback of this hypothesis test is that the result depends heavily on which estimate is adopted for representing The significance level In testing the significance of the power spectrum, we perform ( The permutation test, suggested by R.A. Fisher in the 1930s The steps required by the algorithm are: Given the original sequence: From the original sequence a random permutation is obtained: The power spectrum is estimated for the new sequence: Steps (2) and (3) are repeated a large number of times For each frequency The smaller the value of the ASL, the stronger the evidence against the null hypothesis. It should be noted that in A small value of the significance level The ASL is estimated in practice by: One important characteristic of permutation testing is its accuracy, because, if the null hypothesis is true, then It may be noted that each random permutation is not a bootstrap sample because the resampling is not done with replacement. Interpretations on the existence of any possible cyclicity in rhythmic successions have been conventionally approached by spectral analysis of stratigraphic series. However, until now, to analyse the significance of these power spectra, very dependent methods have been used. The application of the methodology explained here provides a new tool that can be of great use to test the significance of peaks recognised in the power spectrum. Some advantages of the permutation test for testing the significance of the power spectrum are: it may be applied with any power spectrum estimator: periodogram, Blackman and Tukey approach, maximum entropy, autoregressive spectral estimator, etc.; it does not require any distributional assumption; it may be applied with short as well as long time series. The permutation test could be useful in at least three different circumstances: Many examples of orbitally induced cyclicity are so clear that spectral analysis only serves as additional proof. In such cases the permutation test is useful to eliminate any doubt. In cases in which orbital cyclicity is not obvious, a misuse of various spectral techniques and filtering may provide a curve with an accidental peak that is more or less similar to an ‘expected’ astronomical technique. The permutation test will check if a real periodicity is present. Testing the presence and stability of the periodicities. The permutation test could be applied to subspectra or to the series after the removal of the first or last 10% or 25% of the data. In case of a stable periodicity throughout the succession, spectra should be fairly similar. The permutation test should provide evidence of the significance of the peaks in these cases too. The implicit model assumed by the method is white noise plus sinusoidal cyclic components. If a trend is suspected, some detrending method should be applied first. If red noise is suspected, a moving window spectral analysis could be performed. The first example is the application of the permutation test to the estimated periodogram of a simulated time series with a white noise stochastic model. Two kinds of white noise have been used: uniform white noise and Gaussian white noise, with three different numbers of data for the series: 128, 256 and 512. The permutation test has been repeated with 1000 and 5000 random permutations. Given a times series of length With 1000 random permutations results are good, while increasing the number of random permutations to 5000 offers little improvement. In any case, at least 1000 permutations should be used and if the computer is efficient enough this number should be increased to 5000. The second simulation example consists of three time series with 256 data each, which were generated as two sinusoidal components plus white noise: The periodogram and the results of the permutation test are expressed in the form SL=(1.0−ASL( The experimental data used are the percentages of the nannofossil The spectral analysis is revisited and the permutation test is applied to the power spectra estimated by the periodogram and the maximum entropy methods. The original succession used is composed of 135 data, most of them on a regular spacing of 0.05 m, measured on a core 6.25 m long between 12.25 and 18.5 m depth The estimated periodogram is shown in Even though for the maximum entropy spectral estimator This illustrates how the permutation test gives basically the same results for the periodogram and the maximum entropy methods, even for different values of the parameter The permutation test is revealed as a non-parametric method for testing the statistical significance of the estimated power spectrum that can be used complementarily with other methodologies. The test directly assesses the ASL of the estimate for each frequency, and while it does not require statistical assumptions, it is computer-intensive. Implicit in the method is the model of white noise plus hidden sinusoidal signals. However, with 1000 random permutations, good results are provided for relatively short series (between 128 and 512 data), requiring no more than a few minutes in computer time for a PC-486. Nevertheless, if time allows, it is advisable to increase the number of permutations to 5000. Although only the periodogram without smoothing together with the maximum entropy estimator have been used in this paper, the method may be applied generally to other spectral estimators. In cyclostratigraphic studies, the importance of the spectral peaks that have been shown to be statistically significant by the permutation test should be corroborated by other information, such as the structure of the correlogram and the physical meaning of the periodicities. We would like to thank the reviewers by providing constructive criticism. The work of P.-I. was supported by a European Community Training Fellowship in the Department of Meteorology (Reading University, UK) as part of the Training and Mobility of Researches (TMR) program. The research of R.-T. was done under the program and financial support of the EMMI Group (RNM-178 Junta de Andalucı́a, Spain) and project PB97-0803 (DGICYT).