Accumulation and breakthrough of several potentially toxic cyanobacterial species within drinking water treatment plants (DWTP) have been reported recently. The objectives of this project were to test the efficiency of different treatment barriers in cyanobacterial removal. Upon observation of cyanobacterial blooms, intensive sampling was conducted inside a full scale DWTP at raw water, clarification, filtration and oxidation processes. Samples were taken for microscopic speciation/enumeration and microcystins analysis. Total cyanobacteria cell numbers exceeded World Health Organisation and local alert levels in raw water (6,90,000 cells/mL). Extensive accumulation of cyanobacteria species in sludge beds and filters, and interruption of treatment were observed. Aphanizomenon cells were poorly coagulated and they were not trapped efficiently in the sludge. It was also demonstrated that Aphanizomenon cells passed through and were not retained over the filter. However, Microcystis, Anabaena, and Pseudanabaena cells were adequately removed by clarification and filtration processes. The breakthrough of non toxic cyanobacterial cells into DWTPs could also result in severe treatment disruption leading to plant shutdown. Application of intervention threshold values restricted to raw water does not take into consideration the major long term accumulation of potentially toxic cells in the sludge and the risk of toxins release. Thus, a sampling regime inside the plant adapted to cyanobacterial occurrence and intensity is recommended.Numerous studies have documented the increasing presence of toxic cyanobacterial blooms in water sources and at water intakes of drinking water treatment plants (DWTPs) worldwide including Eastern Canada ( Due to the human health effects of toxic cyanobacteria, authorities worldwide have introduced threshold alert levels ( The proliferation of potentially toxic cyanobacteria has serious consequences for the management of drinking water sources and water treatment ( Optimal conditions for cell separation may vary significantly between various cyanobacteria species constituting an operational challenge for the adjustment of chemical dosages, especially in the presence of multi species blooms. The breakthrough of cyanobacterial cells into the clarified water can lead to accumulation and even breakthrough of potentially toxic cells while the filter run cycle proceeds. Selective removal of certain species has been documented ( Recent field observations suggest that the currently prescribed low sampling frequencies may lead to the underestimation of significant but short term incoming densities of toxic cyanobacteria and associated toxins into DWTPs ( The objectives of this study are to: (1) study the frequency of breakthrough of potentially toxic cyanobacteria during periods of proliferation, (2) evaluate the effect of cyanobacteria speciation on the removal efficiency of different treatment barriers, (3) locate sites most prone to cyanobacterial cell breakthrough, and accumulation and cyanotoxin release in a DWTP, and (4) propose appropriate treatment adjustment strategies. To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the first detailed study on the fate of four potentially toxic cyanobacterial species from natural blooms in an operational DWTP. The water intake of a DWTP located on Missisquoi Bay (Lake Champlain) in southern Quebec (Canada) was monitored over an entire bloom season from July to August 2011. This bay serves as a source of drinking water for the surrounding municipalities and as a recreational site for boating, fishing, and swimming. A diagram of the treatment train used in the studied DWTP and the characteristics of each treatment process are presented in A total of 23 field visits were conducted to the DWTP after the observation of the first bloom events on July 11, 2011. The visits were intensified upon treatment interruption on midnight July 12, 2011. During each visit triplicate water samples were taken from: (1) water in the intake pipe prior to any treatment; (2) the raw water well; (3) water on the surface of the clarifier/sedimentation tank and clarified water; (4) the surface of the sludge, the middle of the sludge bed, and concentrated sludge in the concentration cone; (5) water over the filter and filtered water; and (6) treated water at the outlet of the contact tank (complete Cl Samples for total suspended solids (TSS), total volatile suspended solids (TVSS), total solids (TS), total volatile solids (TVS) and total phosphorus (TP) were collected in clean opaque plastic 500 mL bottles. Samples for dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and biodegradable dissolved organic carbon (BDOC) were collected in carbon free glass 125 mL bottles. Plastic 500 mL bottles were cleaned by rinsing three times with tap water, then three times with de-ionized water, and left to drip dry. Carbon free Glass 125 mL bottles were rinsed in the same procedure and heated muffle furnace at 500 °C. All water sample containers were rinsed three times with sampled water (from the source water or the DWTP's untreated water) before being filled completely, closed tightly to avoid the presence of air bubbles, and put on ice. Taxonomic identification and counts were performed at the genus level using inverted microscopy ( Only samples for total microcystins measurement were submitted to three freeze/thaw cycles before any analysis for total microcystins. For the entire toxins samples (both total and dissolved) microcystin-LR (MC-LR) analyses were conducted using an Abraxis Microcystin ELISA Plate (an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay – Abraxis LLC, Pennsylvania, USA). The analyses of MC-LR concentrations were measured as μg/L of MC-LR equivalent (eq.). The accuracy of the Plate was validated using standard MC-LR materials and the average standard deviation of triplicate measurements was 3% (similar range as Prior to DOC and BDOC analyses, samples were passed through 0.45 μm cellulose nitrate Supor-450 membrane filters (PALL Life Sciences, USA) pre-rinsed with 1 L of ultrapure water. DOC measurements were made on a 5310C total organic carbon analyzer (Sievers Instruments Inc., USA). BDOC measurements were conducted following the methods developed by Standard methods ( During the entire period studied ( Total cyanobacteria cell numbers frequently exceeded WHO Alert Level 1 and 2 and QC Water Intake Alert Level ( Due to the influence of the bloom, by midnight ( In the days post treatment interruption, despite the shift in the dominant genera to    During the midnight of July 12, 2011 with the increase of raw water turbidity (42.5 NTU at 23 h44 – The type and dosage of the coagulant agent influence the efficiency of the clarification process. A recent review has shown that some coagulants, such as polyaluminium chloride, may be more efficient for the removal of Timing of the adjustment of dosage is an important factor influencing the efficiency of treatment intervention. In the studied DWTP, the increase of coagulant dosage was conducted after a large number of cells had already penetrated into the plant and passed through into clarified water. Without During the period of July 12 to July 15, 2011, the cumulative incoming densities of coagulated cyanobacterial cells caused a major accumulation of cells in the sludge bed ( Microcystins entering in raw water were predominantly cell-bound (>70%) and this proportion did not vary significantly through the treatment processes. Powdered activated carbon (PAC) was added to the water before the clarification process ( Given the observed cyanobacterial cell concentrations (over 1.5 × 10 The situation of greatest concern would be the massive release of toxins of a disrupted sludge bed. Significant cyanotoxin release during clarification has been reported and attributed to hydraulic disturbances ( The elimination and/or reuse of the sludge in the DWTP must consider a toxic cyanobacteria management strategy. Sludge treatment needs particular attention as intracellular toxins might be released during sludge handling and supernatant recycling could increase the loads of toxins for treatment ( In 74% of samples taken from the water on the surface of the filter The turbidity of filtered water started to increase on July 12, 2011 23:44 and a maximum turbidity of 1.4 NTU was recorded in the filtered water on July 13, 2011. The increase in the turbidity of filtered water to values over 0.4 NTU caused an alarm in the DWTP and filtration was discontinued for 4 h on July 12 at midnight leading to a complete disruption of water treatment involving a stoppage of drinking water production and water consumption advisory that lasted for more than 4 weeks. The filtration interruption was the reaction to the incoming densities of cyanobacterial cells into the filter from the clarifier ( Filtration was taken offline and drinking water production was halted because of the increase in filtered water turbidity and associated risk of breakthrough of waterborne pathogens. On July 13, 2011 with the restart of water production in the facility, the dual media filtration reduced the total cyanobacterial cell number to 8800 cells/mL with On July 15, 2011 a sample was taken from the filter media for cyanobacterial identification and count.  This paper provides detailed evidence of the influence of cyanobacterial species on the efficiency of drinking water treatment processes. Under the treatment conditions of the DWTP studied, This paper demonstrates the extent and duration of cyanobacteria cells and microcystins accumulation in sludge beds and filters. The addition of PAC in raw water will not remove cells and cell-bound toxins which may represent 80% of microcystins in raw water. However, the addition of PAC prior to coagulation and its presence in the sludge may remove dissolved and cell bound microcystins released from the lysis of accumulated cells in the sludge bed, thereby reducing the passage of toxins into clarified water. However, the efficacy of PAC is limited by the relatively short contact times available in clarifiers, and sludge age monitoring and management should be considered to minimize toxin accumulation in sludge beds. Furthermore, application of intervention threshold values restricted to raw water does not take into consideration the major long term accumulation of potentially toxic cells in the sludge and the risk of toxin release. The authors of this paper recommend regular frequent sampling from the sludge during the cyanobacterial bloom season and Current monitoring strategies (e.g. non-event based weekly sampling) are not suitable to detect the highly temporal variability of cyanobacterial presence at the water intake of DWTPs. A monitoring strategy including intensive The prolonged accumulation of cells in the sludge bed and filter media suggest that monitoring the breakthrough and accumulation of algal cells, including cyanobacteria in DWTPs considered at low risk of extreme bloom events is of interest. This study was financially supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at