The refining characteristics of the highly concentrated water-in-oil emulsion, which are used as ‘emulsion precursors’ for the preparation of emulsion explosives, were investigated to elucidate the manner in which the refining time influences its microstructure and rheological behaviour. The development of microstructure at various stages of the emulsification process has been studied in detail and an empirical correlation between the characteristic droplet size and refining time has been proposed. The evolution of rheological characteristics of the emulsion during the microstructure refinement has been investigated through different protocols of the dynamic and steady-state rheology. An extended refining led to a finer microstructure and resulted in an increase in the elastic modulus, yield stress and viscosity of the emulsion. The droplet size dependency of the elasticity and the yield stress during the refining have also been discussed. The network structure of the dispersed phase, the droplet size and the corresponding interdroplet interactions all govern the rheological characteristics of the final emulsion.Highly concentrated emulsions (HCEs) are a class of emulsion that have a dispersed phase volume fraction (ϕ) that is greater than the maximum packing fraction of closely packed monodisperse spheres, that is, ϕ greater than 0.74. HCEs retain their original water-in-oil (w/o) or oil-in-water (o/w) structure at volume fractions that exceed the critical value because of polydispersity and droplet deformation within the system Emulsion explosives are relevant to this work and are primarily based on highly concentrated w/o emulsions. Emulsion explosives are extensively used in the mining industry due to their excellent water resistance, adjustable viscosity, high velocity of detonation and low vulnerability to accidental initiation Several experimental and theoretical studies on HCEs have been already reported, and the conditions of formation, preparation, structure and rheology of the HCEs are now well understood HCEs are viscoplastic liquids with peculiar rheological behaviour, with the rheology being a complicated function of various parameters concerned. HCEs demonstrate either ‘solid-like’ or ‘liquid-like’ behaviour, depending on the applied load. These emulsions exhibit elastic, ‘gel-like’ behaviour at small deformations and over a wide range of frequencies The present study aims at elucidating the refining behaviour, microstructure development and evolution of the rheological characteristics of HCEs during the emulsification process, which has not been previously reported. A w/o emulsion system in which the dispersed phase constitutes greater than 90 Ammonium sulphate and ammonium chloride were procured from Sigma–Aldrich. Canola oil [density The dispersed phase of the emulsion comprises an aqueous solution of inorganic salts and constitutes ∼93.5 The emulsion samples were prepared using the high torque stirrer, Caframo BDC 1850, along with a Jiffy impeller (Jiffy Mixer LM, 32 mm diameter). The aqueous phase was prepared by dissolving the inorganic salts and other trace additives in deionised water. The salt solution was then heated to 80 The emulsification process consists of two steps: a low-speed ‘formation’ step and a high-speed ‘refining’ step. Firstly, the heated oil phase was constantly stirred with the high-shear mixer at a low speed (∼700 Confocal micrographs were obtained using an Olympus IX 81 (combined with FV-500) confocal laser scanning microscope. A drop of the emulsion was placed on a glass slide and immediately covered with a covering slide to retain a thin layer of the emulsion between the glass slides. A drop of type-F immersion oil (n The emulsion microstructure was investigated using the Cryo-FEG-SEM facility, JSM-7600F, with a cryo-preparation system (PP3000T, Japan). A small quantity of the emulsion was placed on the stub and frozen at −190 The rheological measurements were carried out at 25 The measurements were carried out in the following deformation modes: Amplitude sweep measurement in periodic oscillations in the strain range of 0.1–200% at a frequency of 1 Frequency sweep: oscillating regimes of deformations in the range of frequencies from 0.01 to 300 Steady shear rate measurements in order to obtain flow curves of the emulsions in the range of 0.001–30 The emulsification process consists of two steps, ‘formation’ and ‘refining’, as is described in Section Confocal laser scanning micrographs of the emulsion samples with varying refinement times are shown in The diameters of around 700–1000 droplets for each refining time were measured, and the data were processed to determine the mean droplet size and the droplet-size distribution. The Sauter mean diameter (mean volume-surface diameter), d  The mechanisms and the kinetics of emulsification in HCEs are complex and are not well understood Taylor’s analysis is based on a Newtonian continuous phase and holds well for the diluted emulsions with low concentrations of surfactant. However, the analysis can be extended to concentrated emulsions by replacing continuous phase viscosity with the overall effective viscosity of the emulsion in order to calculate the shear stress that governs the rupturing In contrast to the rupturing of isolated droplets in quasi-static conditions, emulsification involves the rupturing of many droplets in non-quasi-static conditions. Mason and Bibette discussed fracturing in HCEs with many interacting droplets and experimentally showed that by applying a shear step, a crude polydisperse emulsion could be converted into a monodisperse emulsion In the present study, the low shear emulsion ‘formation’ step resulted in a coarse emulsion of large droplets. The emulsion demonstrated a rapid reduction in the droplet size during the initial few minutes of the high shear ‘refining’ stage. It was also observed that after the initial abrupt fragmentation, the mean diameter further reduced gradually and asymptotically approached a saturating value with extended shearing. The initial abrupt reduction in droplet size could be due to Rayleigh instability, in which the droplets deform into threads of different lengths, and the rupture occurs when each of the threads attains the critical radius. Subsequently, with further shearing, the obtained droplets undergo slow rupturing, and the size distribution becomes even narrower. However, the rupture probability vanishes with a decrease in the droplet size because the stress required to deform the droplet increases for droplets that have a smaller diameter. The experimental data were fitted using an exponential decay curve, which follows Eq. The refinement of emulsion leads to the evolution of rheological characteristics of HCEs because the rheological behaviour strongly depends on the evolved emulsion microstructure. In order to understand how the rheological characteristics evolve during the refining, rheological measurements were carried out on the samples that were collected at the end of the emulsion ‘formation’ stage and also at three different time intervals during the ‘refining’ stage. The details of the emulsion samples are as follows: It has been reported that there is a possibility of wall slip at the solid boundaries in rheometers during the flow of concentrated emulsions and that could affect the measurement data   The influence of the refining time is quite clear from the amplitude sweep results. The cross over strain remains almost the same with further refining of the emulsion [  In the literature, different theoretical models that describe the elasticity and the yield stress of the HCEs have been proposed The dependence of the elastic modulus on the droplet size in the current emulsion samples was investigated using oscillatory data. The elastic modulus values for the all the emulsion samples were extracted from the plateau of the frequency dependence of the modulus. The elastic modulus can be approximated by the empirical equation in the following manner Thus, both the experimental data and the theoretical models predict that the solid-like behaviour of HCEs becomes enhanced with a decrease in the droplet size. However, the quantitative character of the droplet size factor is unclear, and it depends on many factors such as the microstructure and composition of the emulsion; a further understanding of other sources of elasticity of HCEs is, therefore, necessary. Steady-state flow curves for the emulsions at different stages of the emulsification process are illustrated in The experimental determination of the yield stress for the viscoplastic materials has been discussed in several publications In order to determine the yield stress, the measured data in the low shear rate regime of the flow curves (0.001–0.05 The yield stress and the apparent viscosity of the emulsion increase with the refining time, and, therefore, with the reduction in droplet size. The increase in the apparent viscosity at shear stresses that slightly exceed the yield stress is more prominent when compared to the increase in apparent viscosity in a non-Newtonian domain. It was demonstrated that the reduction in droplet size and narrowed polydispersity leads to the increased apparent viscosity The refining characteristics of highly concentrated w/o emulsions, in which the dispersed phase constitutes greater than 90 The authors are thankful to