The 2018 Acta Materialia Gold Medal Award The 2018 Acta Materialia Gold Medal Recipient is Professor Subhash Mahajan, Distinguished Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Davis. Subhash Mahajan received his undergraduate and graduate education at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, and the University of California, Berkeley, respectively. Prior to his current position, he was a Regents' Professor and a Fulton Technical Fellow in the Ira A. Fulton School of Engineering, Arizona State University (ASU). At ASU, he held administrative appointments as Chair of the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering from 2000 to 2006, and the Founding Director of the School of Materials from 2006 to 2009. He previously held appointments at The Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, England; Bell Telephone Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ; and Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, PA. Professor Mahajan's research focuses on two thematic areas: structure-property relationships in functional materials and deformation behavior of solids. Over the years, he received many awards for his excellent contributions to research and education of electronic materials. These include: Fellow of ASM, MRS, and TMS; the John Bardeen Award and 2004 Educator Award from TMS; the Albert Sauveur Achievement Award from ASM and the ASM Gold Medal in 2011. In 2013 he received the Albert Easton Distinguished Teacher Award. He delivered the 2015 Institute of Metals Lecture and received the Robert Franklin Mehl Award. He recently received the Distinguished Alumnus Award of the Alumni Association of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. He presented the Campbell Lecture of ASM in 2007 and the Lee Hsun Lecture of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and a Foreign Fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineering. Professor Mahajan will present an overview of his research at the Acta Materialia Awards Symposium and receive the Gold Medal at the Awards Ceremony during the TMS Annual Meeting in Phoenix, AZ in March 2018. The 2018 Acta Biomaterialia Gold Medal Award The recipient of the 11th Acta Biomaterialia Gold Medal is Jeffrey Hubbell, Eugene Bell Professor in Tissue Engineering in the Institute for Molecular Engineering of the University of Chicago. Professor Hubbell holds a BS from Kansas State University and a PhD from Rice University, both degrees being in chemical engineering. He was elected to the US National Academy of Engineering in 2010 and the National Academy of Inventors in 2014. Prior to moving to Chicago, he was on the faculty of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL, where he served as founding Director of the Institute of Bioengineering and Dean of the School of Life Sciences), the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich and University of Zurich, the California Institute of Technology, and the University of Texas in Austin. Professor Hubbell uses biomaterials and protein engineering approaches to investigate topics in regenerative medicine and immunotherapeutics. In regenerative medicine, he focuses on biomaterial matrices that mimic the extracellular matrix and on growth factor - extracellular matrix interactions, working in a variety of animal models of regenerative medicine. In immunotherapeutics, he focuses on nanomaterials in vaccines that target lymphoid-resident antigen presenting cells and on protein engineering approaches to deliver antigen to the spleen and liver for inverse vaccines to induce tolerance to protein drugs and in autoimmunity. His interests are both basic and translational, having founded or co-founded several biomedical companies based on his technology, including Focal, in Boston, acquired by Genzyme; Kuros Biosciences, in Zurich, in the domain of regenerative medicine; Anokion and Kanyos Bio, in Boston, both in the domain of immunological tolerance; and Clostra Bio, in Chicago, in the domain of food allergy. The Gold Medal will be presented to Professor Hubbell at the 2018 Meeting of the Society for Biomaterials in Atlanta, GA. 2018 Acta Materialia Silver Medal Award The recipient of the 2018 Acta Materialia Silver Medal is Nikhilesh Chawla, the Director for the Center for 4D Materials Science and Fulton Professor of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at Arizona State University. Prof. Chawla received his Ph.D. in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Michigan in 1997. Prior to joining Arizona State University in 2000 he was a postdoctoral fellow jointly at Ford Motor Company and the University of Michigan, and a senior development engineer at Hoeganaes Corporation. He served as acting chair of the MSE program at ASU in 2010. Prof. Chawla's research interests encompass the deformation behavior of advanced materials at bulk and small length scales, including Four Dimensional (4D) materials science, environmentally-benign metallic alloys, composite materials, and nanolaminates. He has published widely and his research is highly cited. He is the author of the textbook Prof. Chawla is a Fellow of ASM International and past member of The Minerals, Metals, and Materials Society (TMS) Board of Directors. He is the recipient of the New Mexico Tech Distinguished Alumnus Award for 2016. In addition, he was named 2016 Structural Materials Division Distinguished Scientist/Engineering Award, as well as the 2016 Functional Materials Division Distinguished Scientist/Engineering Award, both from TMS; 2013 Brimacombe Medalist Award from TMS; 2011 Distinguished Lectureship given by Tsinghua University, China; 2004 Bradley Stoughton Award for Young Teachers, given by ASM International; and the 2006 TMS Young Leaders Tutorial Lecture. He also received the National Science Foundation Early Career Development Award and the Office of Naval Research Young Investigator Award. Prof. Chawla is editor of Arizona Republic. He serves on ASU President Michael Crow's Academic Council, which provides input to the president on academic, structural, and strategic matters. Professor Chawla will present an overview of his research at the Acta Awards Symposium and receive the Silver Medal at the Awards Ceremony during the TMS Annual Meeting in Phoenix, AZ in March 2018. The 2018 Acta Biomaterialia Silver Medal Award Professor Ali Khademhosseini is the recipient of the 2018 Acta Biomaterialia Silver Medal. He is Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School and Director of the Biomaterials Innovation Research Center at Brigham and Women's Hospital. He is also a Faculty member at the Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology as well as an Associate Faculty member at the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering. Professor Khademhosseini is recognized as a leader in combining micro- and nano-engineering approaches with advanced biomaterials for regenerative medicine applications. In particular, his laboratory has pioneered numerous technologies and materials for controlling the architecture and function of engineered vascularized tissues. Dr. Khademhosseini's interdisciplinary research is well cited and has been recognized by over 40 major national and international awards. He is a recipient of the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers, the highest honor given by the US government for early career investigators. In 2011, he received the Pioneers of Miniaturization Prize from the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) for his contribution to microscale tissue engineering and microfluidics. In 2016, he received the Sr. Scientist Award of Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine Society -Americas Chapter (TERMIS-AM) and in 2017 he received the Clemson Award of the Society for Biomaterials. He is also a Fellow of the American Institute of Medical and Biological Engineering (AIMBE), the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES), the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC), the Biomaterials Sciences and Engineering (FBSE) and American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). Currently he serves on the editorial board of numerous leading journals as well as an Associate Editor for ACS Nano (IF: 13.3) and a member of NIH BTSS study section. He received his Ph.D. in bioengineering from MIT (2005), and MASc (2001) and BASc (1999) degrees from University of Toronto both in chemical engineering. Professor Khademhosseini will receive his Silver Medal at the 2018 Meeting of the Society for Biomaterials in Atlanta, GA. 2018 Acta Materialia Inc. Hollomon Award The recipient of the 2018 Acta Materialia Inc. Hollomon Award for Materials and Society is Dr. Julie Christodoulou, Director of the Naval Materials Division in the Sea Warfare and Weapons Department of the Office of Naval Research (ONR) in Arlington, Virginia. Her role is to drive foundational research in the physical sciences, materials and processing, and environmental quality; and enhanced performance, affordability and reliability derived from this research to the men and women on the “Watch”. Specifically, Dr. Christodoulou guides materials research and development from the atomic and molecular level to engineered materials systems and platforms; technologies to ensure environmental quality; and early device concepts for power and energy applications. A unifying theme to the body of work is the development and integration of computational and experimental tools and the protocols to quantify chemical and physical phenomena, accelerate materials implementation, and predict component-level performance. Complementing this, she is active in national and international initiatives, including the Materials Genome Initiative for Global Competitiveness, serving on the National Science and Technology Council Subcommittee; and the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership, by establishing and guiding one of the National Network of Manufacturing Institutes focused on metals for reduced system weight. Dr. Christodoulou is a leader of the Department of Defense-wide Community of Interest for Materials and Manufacturing Processes and the US lead to the Materials Group of The Technical Collaboration Program, an international collaborative body for defense research and engineering programs. Dr. Christodoulou holds a BS in metallurgical engineering from the University of Texas at El Paso, an MS in materials science and engineering from the Johns Hopkins University, and a doctorate in materials science at Imperial College, London. Prior to her current position, she has served as a Materials Researcher for Martin Marietta Laboratories and the Naval Research Lab, focusing on the processing-structure-performance relationships of intermetallics and piezoelectric ceramics, and environmental degradation of structural materials, respectively. She has served as an Associate Director for high-temperature materials at the London International Field office of ONR (now ONR Global) and as an ONR Program Officer for structural metals. Active in the technical community, she has been recognized with the 2013 Leadership Award by TMS, is an ASM Fellow, and has been honored to present the Materials and Society plenary lecture at MS&T 2016. She is a recipient of the Presidential Rank Award for Meritorious Service (2015). The Acta Materialia Hollomon Award will be presented to Dr. Christodoulou in February 2018 at the TMS Annual Meeting in Phoenix, Arizona.