Scientific research often require application of samples with repeatable properties. This demand is difficult to fulfill especially in case of experiments concerning coals. Therefore, a necessity occurs to use a material which stands for coal and is characterized with properties similar to coal. Authors of this article suggest, in required situations, the use of coal briquette as a research material. Huge advantage of coal briquettes application is the fact that in many aspects their properties are similar to the structurally deformed coal (altered coal) which presence, according to recent research, is closely related to areas of increased outburst risk. Authors have conducted studies of mechanical and gaseous properties of coal briquettes. The experimental part of the presented studies included the preparation of coal briquettes of a various porosity (from 13.5% to 33%) and determination of their mechanical parameters: uniaxial compressive strength and Protodiakonov coefficient as well as determination of their gaseous parameters: desorption intensity and adsorption capacity. The properties of coal briquettes were analyzed and referenced to the properties of normal coal and altered coal, characterized by mechanical and gaseous properties specific for coals that are hazardous and prone to outbursts. Dependences between the determined uniaxial compressive strength Rc
                      and porosity, Protodiakonov coefficient f and porosity as well as the relationship between Rc
                      and f for the studied coal briquettes were expressed mathematically. Threshold value of f (equal to 0.3), introduced for Polish outburst prevention, corresponded to 18.5% porosity of coal briquette. Changeover of coal briquette’s porosity provides aprospect of obtaining a coal material which have Rc
                      and f parameters typical for coals occurring in natural conditions. Coal briquette of experimentally determined porosity may replicate the mechanical properties of normal or altered coal. Adsorption capacity of different coal samples (briquette, normal, altered) depended on the coal microstructure and the grinding level of coal. The relationship between the 2min desorption intensity and the methane saturation pressure for different coal samples (briquette, normal, altered) showed that if the grains constituting the grain fraction were larger the amounts of methane desorbed (for the studied time interval) were smaller. A correlation between coal briquette’s porosity and amount of methane released during 2min desorption test was not found. Grinding level of coal material creates a new distribution of grain size and it determines diffusion and seepage rate of gas releasing from the inside area of the pores. It was shown in this work that mechanical and gaseous properties of coal briquettes predispose them to conduct representative outburst research. A proper method of coal material preparation for the briquetting process is a key point for future properties of coal briquettes.In the last several years, after the coal and methane outburst in Pniówek Coal Mine (2002) another outburst has been noted in the South-West part of the Upper Silesian Coal Basin, Poland. On 22 November 2005 in the neighboring Zofiówka Coal Mine, during the exploitation at the level of 900 One of the factors affecting Zofiówka outburst was the presence of coal of the deformed structure Within the shear zone coal can be deformed and have its structure altered. It is then brittle, very weak and may be broken in fingers. The comparison of the various types of coal deformation are shown in In the Strata Mechanics Research Institute the properties of coals are studied to recognize their outburst potential. Studies concerning outburst hazard evaluation incorporate also the use of coal briquettes as a research material The study presented in the current paper aims the coal briquetting as the important process for the outburst investigation and the process that is helpful in exploration of the dangerous coal structures which appear in the natural conditions. Coal briquetting is also the way of obtaining the repeatable research material for the outburst studies. In this study, we focus on the mechanical and gaseous properties of the coal briquettes of various porosity to ensure if they can be representative for replicating the properties of normal or structurally deformed coals. The following stages of studies arose: Preparation of coal briquettes of a various porosity. Determination of the physical properties of the briquetted coal such as: uniaxial compressive strength, Protodiakonov strength coefficient as well as relation of each of them to the preparation procedure (porosity of briquette) and to each other. Searching for adsorption capacity of coal briquettes of different porosity and for the factors which this capacity is dependent on. Determination of desorption intensity indexes of the crushed coal briquettes as a function of the methane saturation pressures, and correlation of this function to the briquette porosity and the grain fraction of the sample. Comparison of the prepared coal briquettes’ properties to the properties of normal or structurally deformed coal from the fault area of the coal seam. Coal material was collected from the area of sub-wall gallery D-6, coal seam 409/4 in the Zofiówka Coal Mine (Jastrzębie Zdrój, Poland). The place of sampling was about 100 Additionally, structurally deformed coal was collected from the fault area of 409/4 coal seam. This coal was designed in present work as an (A) A series of coal briquettes of the porosity ranging from 13.5% to 33% was prepared from (N) coal (see Coal briquettes were formed from the air-dried grain fraction <0.2 Porosities were calculated using the following formula: A single briquette was formed between the two pistons made of hardened steel, which were under loading generated by the hydraulic press. The procedure of forming consisted of: three cycles of slow loading (approximately 5 The last stage of briquette preparation was to get it out from the briquetting machine. Coal briquettes of porosity from 11% to 32% were possible to be prepared and removed from the applied machine. The lower porosity limit resulted from the strength of the briquetting machine which limited maximal applied force. The higher porosity limit resulted from the briquette strength briquettes having more than 32% were too weak to get it out safely from the briquetting machine. The height of the obtained briquettes was established as 48 In this way, for each desired porosity at least three samples (briquettes) were prepared. One coal briquette was dedicated to the compressive strength test and two coal briquettes were used in Protodiakonov test. For gaseous studies selected briquettes were used. In the Polish mining, the Compressive strength of coal briquettes was measured for cylindrical samples of slenderness ratio equal to 1. Considerable advantage of the mentioned slenderness ratio (above more recommended value of 2) was minimization of the briquette’s heterogeneousness as they increase proportionally in the same time. Source of the heterogeneousness is the friction force that appears during briquette preparation between coal material and the inner walls of the briquetting machine. Compressive tests were performed with the use of a In the case of structurally deformed coal, the uniaxial compressive strength was determined by means of the point load test Protodiakonov test is a quick and simple method widely used in many countries with coal industry Adsorption capacity and desorption rate are essential from the point of view of the outbursts initiation Methane adsorption isotherms were determined for pressures up to 1.4 Experimental points were determined with accuracy below 3%. Adsorption of methane for the studied briquettes was compared to the results obtained for altered coal as well as normal coal, both crushed and sieved to the 0.5–1 Desorption intensity index For the purpose of For each porosity, The results of uniaxial testing of coal briquettes of different porosity are shown in Due to the weakness of the structurally deformed coal, it was not possible to prepare a cylindrical sample, which would allow for test in strength machine. Despite this, the authors follow the standard For the sake of the study in question, the coal briquette formed as a result of the adopted procedure is treated as the model material, which can display mechanical and gaseous properties peculiar to the coals of an unaltered structure, or structurally deformed coals. As it was demonstrated in some previous research Normal coal (N) of undisturbed structure had 7 Protodiakonov coefficients In the Polish mining industry, according to the regulation Methane-bearing capacity exceeds 8 Methane-bearing capacity exceeds 8 The firmness value equal to 0.3 was marked on the graph from As it may be seen from Since the Protodiakonov coefficients for altered coal and also normal coal are to be fitted into the above-determined exponential relation, it may be accepted that there is a connection between the strength of coal (various coal structures) and the porosity of coal briquette. The laboratory prepared coal briquette obtained from the undisturbed coal may have the mechanical properties such as typical, or altered coal by selection of a suitable porosity of the briquette. Because altered coal, taken from the fault, has a porosity of 20–24%  The presented in Determination of the above-presented equations has an added advantage. Coal briquette of experimentally determined porosity may replicate the mechanical properties of normal or structurally deformed coal from the coal mine (basin) that is under investigation. Methane adsorption isotherms for the different coal samples (briquettes, normal and altered coal) are compared in As it may be seen from the graph, the curves for coal briquettes are of similar courses. There is no significant dependence between the methane adsorption capacity and porosity of coal briquette. Adsorption properties of the obtained samples are dependent on microstructure of coal (the coal’s original property) from which briquettes were formed. The differences among obtained curves result from volumetric method accuracy and they may be treated as measurement errors. Maximum adsorption capacities Adsorption isotherm of methane for altered coal (A) was placed in chart from On the basis of the isotherm placement ( Therefore, the increased adsorption capacity of coal may signal the presence of some structural alteration and, what follows, indicate that there is a danger of an outburst occurrence.  Desorption intensity Next conclusion concerning desorption intensity for samples obtained from coal briquettes may be drawn. For If we compare a mechanical parameter against a In the conducted studies the properties of coal briquettes were analyzed and referenced to the properties of normal and structurally deformed coal, characterized by mechanical and gaseous properties specific for coals that are hazardous and prone to outbursts. Dependences between the determined uniaxial compressive strength and porosity (or Protodiakonov coefficient and porosity) of the studied coal briquettes were expressed by the exponential functions. On the base of briquette’s porosity as well as the determined exponential functions, it can be obtained a coal material with the desired compressive strength The Samples of various coals, sieved into a narrow grain fraction (0.5–1 The relationship between desorption intensity and methane saturation pressure showed that grinding level of coal material created a According to the authors, both mechanical and gaseous properties of coal briquettes predispose them to conduct representative outburst research. Coal briquetting is the important process for the outburst investigation and permits, most of all, obtaining the repeatable and programmable coal material for the outburst research. A proper way of coal material preparation for the briquetting process is a key point for future properties of coal briquette. Discovered in outburst cavern coal with structure similar to that of coal briquette is an additional argument in favour of using coal briquette for laboratory studies concerning outburst occurrence. The work was made at the Strata Mechanics Research Institute of the Polish Academy of Sciences and it was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 