Low ash clean coal was produced from Indian coking coal through microwave irradiation or ultrasonication followed by solvent extraction in N-methyl-2-pyrollidone (NMP) containing smaller amount of Ethylenediamine (EDA) or Monoethanolamine (MEA). Pretreatment by ultrasonication followed by extraction with only NMP gave 10–15% higher clean coal yield of (56–58%) than extraction with only NMP (without pretreatment). Effect of using up to 10% EDA as cosolvent in NMP led to maximum clean coal yield. However use of EDA concentration beyond this showed decrease in clean coal yield and increase in ash contents. Clean coal yield increases because EDA is a strong polar solvent and strong base, which disrupts coal interactions and breaks bonds in coal by acid-base interactions. The extraction yield with and without pretreatment and microwave irradiation led to the enhancement in the yield of clean coal and was found to be in the range of 66–70% with microwave irradiation, which was 3–4% higher than without pretreatment. Clean coal Free Swelling Index (FSI) was improved by one unit. This was demonstrated at lab scale. Subsequently, this process was scaled up to 40 kg/batch coal mini-pilot plant.Coal is most abundant fossil fuel resource available all over the world and in India. In fact about 89% of Indian coals are non coking in nature. These coals have high ash content, which can be utilized mostly in thermal power generation. The high ash content is difficult to remove as the ash content is disseminated in the organic matter of coal. Very less amount (about 11%) of coking coals are available in India. India is among top five largest producer of crude steel in the world and soon it is expected to become the 2nd largest producer of crude steel In general, coal is being washed by two methods: (a) physical beneficiation and (b) chemical beneficiation. In physical beneficiation, mineral matter is removed on the basis of differences in their physical properties. Physical beneficiation is a cheaper process than chemical beneficiation but shows limited liberation and it cannot reduce the ash yield content beyond a certain percentage. In India, physical beneficiation is used for reducing the ash content of coking coal from 30-35% to 15–16%. Because of its limitations, chemical beneficiation route is being explored which gives substantially higher yield of clean product having lesser ash content. Chemical beneficiation is carried out by chemical leaching of mineral matter present in coal with admixture of aqueous solutions of nitric acid (HNO Masaki and Yoshida et al. Earlier, researchers focus was on chemical leaching and solvent extraction of coal without any pretreatment. However in recent years, many researchers all over the world have reported work on pretreatment of coal by ultrasonication (USN) and microwave irradiation (MI). These pretreatments would also break the intermolecular forces present in the coal macromolecules which hold the solid structure of three dimensional cross-linked gel network structure of coal macromolecules. In the present study author’s approach is to remove the ash content and improve the yield by pretreatment with microwave and/or ultrasonication followed by solvent extraction, i.e., organo-refining. It is the prime interest presently to see the effect of microwave and ultrasonication treatment on the high ash yield Indian coal. Author’s filed a patent on process flow sheet for pretreatment of high ash coal followed by solvent extraction to produce clean coal The advantages of using microwave energy for coal processing are its easy penetration inside the particle, heat all particles simultaneously, controllably and this can be turned on and off instantly. It is a non contact technology, it provides uniform energy distribution, it reduces processing time In recent years, use of ultrasonication technology in mineral processing has been reported and applied for the extraction, leaching, desulfurization, and flotation of coal Few researchers have also tried combinations of microwave and ultrasonic pretreatment method to produce clean coal. In one of such studies, Royaei et al. Most of the previous work on pretreatment by microwave and ultrasonication followed by leaching or extraction was primarily done with coals from other countries. Those feed coals were having low ash in the range of 8–12%. Indian coals are unique in having mineral matter finely dispersed in the organic coal matrix. Saikia et al. The representative samples of high ash yield Indian medium coking coal of bituminous type (Coal A) and flotation clean coal (Coal B) were used in this study. The subsequent sampling from parent coal was performed by coning and quartering method. Then, 1 kg of coal sample was ground to 0.5 mm size and kept in desiccator for further experiments. Proximate and ultimate analyses of feed coals are presented in 5 g of coal A sample with a −500 µm size and required amount of solvents of NMP, NMP/EDA or NMP/MEA mixture (depending on coal to solvent ratio) were taken in a 100-mL beaker and subsequently exposed to an ultrasonic treatment at a frequency of 35 kHz in a Ultrasonic Set up (Type T-420, make Germany) at atmospheric pressure and room temperature for 2–60 min. Then this coal solvent mixture was treated in solvent extraction set up. After the extraction, clean coal yield and ash was calculated and reported in the result section. 5 g of coal B sample with a −500 µm size and 5-mL of EDA or mixture of 5-mL EDA and 5-mL of NMP were taken in a 100-mL beaker and exposed to microwave irradiation in Samsung make microwave oven with a variable power supply of maximum 800 W. This mixture was heated by applying 100% power in microwave oven for 30 and 60 s. After the microwave treatment, required amount of NMP was added in the mixture as to maintain coal to solvent ratio 1:10. This mixture was fed to extraction set up and was treated for 15, 30, and 60 min. After the extraction, the solid residue and the liquid phase (containing clean coal) were separated by filtration. After recovery of solvent, clean coal and residue was washed with water and then dried in oven and sent for chemical analyses. 5 g of coal sample A or coal sample B was either pretreated with microwave/ultrasonic (as mentioned in Sections 3.2 and 3.3) or placed directly with required amount of solvent (based on pre-determined coal to solvent ratio) in a 500-mL round bottom flask fitted with a reflux condenser as shown in schematic diagram in The tests were conducted with solvents NMP, NMP-EDA mixed solvent (varying coal to solvent ratio 1:05 to 1:14) and NMP-MEA mixed solvent (varying coal to solvent ratio 1:05 to 1:12). Extraction time was varied from 15 to 90 min. All the tests were conducted at atmospheric pressure and boiling point of solvent/mixed solvent. The mixture was refluxed for 15–90 min and filtered. The residue was washed with water and then dried in an oven at 100 °C. The liquid extracts (containing clean coal) were concentrated by distillation and the clean coal was precipitated out using water as an antisolvent. The clean coal was dried in an oven and sent for chemical & proximate analysis. The extraction yield was calculated as follows: FT-IR spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer with 256 scans from 4000 to 500 cm The extraction of high ash yield Indian coal (coal A) and flotation clean coal (coal B) was carried out with NMP/NMP-EDA/NMP-MEA mixture and reported the results of with and without pretreatment by microwave or ultrasonication. When the coal is mixed in the solvent and heated in the extractor, the solvent penetrates into the coal and breaks the various bonds such as, van der Waals forces, hydrogen bonds, π-π interaction and ionic forces In a first set of tests, variation of coal to solvent ratio was studied. Slurry was prepared with 5 g of coal sample A and 5 mL of EDA (maintaining 1:1 coal to EDA ratio) along with 20 mL to 65 mL of NMP, varying the coal to solvent ratio from 1:05 to 1:14. The extraction was carried out for 1 h in the experimental set up shown in In other set of experiments, EDA was replaced with MEA as cosolvent. The same set of experiments were carried out keeping everything same as mentioned above, except coal to solvent ratio of 1:05 to 1:12. The results are presented in In the section 4.1, extraction using EDA or MEA at different coal to solvent ratio was discussed. In this section, pretreatment by ultrasonication followed by extraction with only NMP (without cosolvent) will be discussed. Since extraction with only NMP gives clean coal yield in the range of 20–25%, pretreatment with ultrasonication was done to enhance the extraction yield. 5 g of coal A sample with 50-mL NMP (maintaining 1:10 coal to solvent ratio) was put in the 100 mL glass beaker and kept in the ultrasonication equipment. The slurry was treated by ultrasonication irradiation for 15–60 min. After the sonication, the slurry was taken into round bottom flask (RBF) and heated for 15–30 min in the extraction set up and then followed the same procedure to get the clean coal and reject. The results are presented in Earlier, author’s reported results with different coal to solvent ratio keeping same amount of EDA (5-mL) in the experiments. Here, the author’s are reporting on variation of EDA percentage between 0 to 90% of total solvent and changing NMP percentage accordingly to maintain 1:10 coal to solvent ratio. 5 g of coal A sample with varying amount of EDA and NMP (maintaining 1:10 coal to solvent ratio) as mentioned in the The maximum extraction yield (50.9%) was obtained with 10% of EDA. The extraction yield was 35.4% in case of 0% EDA, means extraction with only NMP. After 10% of EDA, the extraction yield decreased with further increased amount in the EDA. And the extraction yield reached to minimum (around 20%) with 90% of EDA. The minimum ash (10.9%) was achieved at 0% of EDA and then it increased with increased amount of EDA%. The reason for decreased yield and increased ash after 10% of EDA may be that EDA is a strong polar solvent and strong base, which disrupts coal interactions and breaks the bonds in coal by acid-base interactions, also presented by Present author’s found that at 15 min of ultrasonication treatment good results can be achieved. Royaei et al. The yield increased with increase in extraction time up to 45 min and then decreased with further increase in time for both the cases (with and without pretreatment). The maximum yield (56%) was achieved at extraction time of 45 min in both the cases at around 11% ash. Interestingly it was observed that extraction yield is higher (53.8%) in case of ultrasonication than without ultrasonication (49%) at 15 min extraction time. Also, most of the cases the extraction yield was 2–3% more in case of pretreatment by ultrasonication. This shows the positive effect of ultrasonication before extraction. Ultrasonication treatment would break more physical bonds from the coal matrix, which resulted in increasing the yield. The same sets of experiments were done using MEA as cosolvent. The rest of parameters such as, coal to solvent ratio (1:10), coal sample A weight (5 g), amount of NMP (45-mL), ultrasonication treatment time (2 min) were kept same as mentioned above in case of EDA. Here, the extraction time was varied from 15 to 60 min. The results are presented in Like ultrasonication, the microwaves can also affect the intermolecular bonding’s in coal through intermolecular energisation. The studies were further extended to investigate the effect of microwave irradiation on extraction yield and the reduction of ash in the clean coals obtained. 5 g of coal B sample was taken either with 5-mL EDA or mixture of 5-mL EDA and 5-mL NMP in 50-mL beaker and kept in the microwave for 30 and 60 s. After pretreatment with microwave irradiation, the treated solution was put into 500-mL RBF and 40-mL NMP was added into the solution (for maintaining 1:10 coal to solvent ratio). Extraction was performed for 15, 30 and 60 min. Four sets of pretreatment experiments were done, which are shown in The maximum yield (72%) was achieved for 60 s microwave irradiation with EDA (60 SE) at 30 min extraction time and 30 and 60 s microwave irradiation with EDA and NMP mixture at 60 min extraction time. In general, the trend was increasing yield with increase in extraction time. The extraction yield for coal B was around 65% without pretreatment with microwave irradiation at 1:10 coal to solvent ratio and 1 h extraction time. The extraction yield is in the range of 66–70% with microwave irradiation, which is 3–4% higher than without pretreatment. The increased yield might be because of formation of coal radicals moieties by microwave irradiation as reported by Sonmez and Giray FT-IR spectra of the coal samples were recorded using FT-IR instrument in the range 500–4000 cm The bands at 1114.1 cm The coking property of the coal is determined by free swelling index (FSI) test. In this test coal is heated under specified condition, shape of the coke button produced is compared against standard set of profiles. Higher value of FSI of a particular coal indicates better coking property. The FSI experiments were performed according to ASTM Indian steel industry is growing rapidly. Coal is a major raw material for steel industries. India has huge reserves of high ash containing coals, which are difficult to wash since the mineral matter is finely disseminated in these coals which are of drift origin. These coals also contain larger amounts of near gravity materials; therefore their washability characteristics are poor. Thus physical beneficiation has its own limitations in demineralisation of these coals, therefore, chemical beneficiation could be the solution to obtain or produce the cleaner coals having lower ash contents (in the range of 8–11% suitable for coke making). The attempt had been made to produce cleaner coals having lower ash contents from high ash containing Indian coking coals through solvent extraction of coal. The low ash coal could be produced by this method at larger scale. This coal can be used in many applications such as, blending with other coals in coke making, synthesis of different value added products and electrode making. This was demonstrated successfully at laboratory scale and subsequently the process was scaled up to a mini-pilot plant scale i.e., 40 kg coal /batch (feed basis) as shown in the Based on the present research work the following conclusions may be drawn: Extraction with NMP gave clean coal yield in the range of 20–25%, while pretreatment with ultrasonication followed by extraction gave enhancement in the clean coal yield by 10–15%. Maximum yield was achieved with 10% EDA as cosolvent in NMP. The comparative study shows increase in clean coal yield by 2–3% using ultrasonication with EDA or MEA as cosolvent. The extraction yield was in the range of 66–70% with microwave pretreatment, which was 3–4% higher than without pretreatment. The ash in clean coal was 6–7%. The pretreatment of coals help in loosening the coal structure. FT-IR spectra indicated that pretreatment followed by solvent extraction reduced the intensity of the peaks related to mineral matter. The present technology is an interesting development in the organo-refining of coal. Future would see the development of this process as a cost effective through research work on upscaling of continuous process design using less energy intensive techniques with almost total solvent recovery. Authors thank Tata Steel Ltd. for providing financial support for this research work. Special thanks to Dr. Soumitra Ghorai for providing help in FTIR analysis.