The essence of underground roadway support is to provide the surrounding rocks of an underground roadway with assistance to help them achieve stress and strain equilibrium and ultimately stability of deformation. The approaches to this goal are either to reinforce the rock mass by rock bolting or injection (internal rock stabilization) or to provide the surrounding rocks with a support resistance with a magnitude being described as the support intensity (external rock stabilization). When an underground roadway is located in soft rocks which are too soft to be reinforced by bolting and/or unsuitable for rock injection because of restraints imposed by either the rock mass impermeability or rock mass deterioration when water is encountered, external rock support, such as steel sets, therefore becomes the only option for the stability control of the roadway. Under this circumstance, the support intensity means a support force acting per unit surface area of the surrounding rocks of the roadway. In soft rock engineering practice, the design of a support pattern for a roadway in underground coal mining is normally based on rules of thumb. In most cases, heavy support measures are adopted to secure a successful roadway.  The critical issue in both cases lies in the determination of an optimal support intensity which is the function of the geometry and dimension of a roadway and its geotechnical conditions including rock mass properties, stress conditions and hydrological status. Physical modelling using simulated materials based on the theory of similarity provides a direct perceptional methodology for mining geomechanics study A physical modelling study of the interaction between support intensity and roadway deformation was carried out using the three dimension physical modelling system (see The effective size of a physical model is 1000 Six flatjacks are used to apply loads to the six sides of the physical model in the form of a rectangular prism. Each flatjack was designed to cover the full area of one of the six sides and be capable of applying a pressure of up to 10 A high-pressure, nitrogen-operated, hydraulic pressure stabilising unit was employed to maintain a consistent magnitude of load applied to the model so that the physical modelling test is able to last continuously for weeks, months or even years without interruption. This feature ensures that the study of the long-term rheological behaviour of soft rocks can be carried out. Physical modelling of an underground roadway/tunnel within soft rocks with a hydrostatic stress condition was carried out. The same simulated materials were repeatedly used six times to construct six physical models. Each roadway model was provided with a different magnitude of support intensity. A specified underground roadway within soft rocks was assumed to be the prototype for the modelling study. Detailed geotechnical conditions of the roadway and its surrounding rocks are: circular roadway with a diameter ( UCS ( bulk density of the surrounding rock was 2500 depth of the roadway location was 500 rock mass stress ( support intensity ( The geotechnical modelling scale ( similarity constant for bulk density: similarity constant for strength: similarity constant for load: similarity constant for time: Geotechnical conditions of the simulated rock mass and roadway were derived from those of the prototype rock mass as presented below: strength of the simulated rock mass: diameter of the simulated roadway: load intensity on the facets of the model: simulated support intensity: Due to the restraints of the small dimensions of the model roadway on the simulation of support structure, the support pattern and structure were unable to be simulated. Instead, an equivalent support intensity was simulated and applied to the surface of the surrounding rock of the model roadway. A Static Water Support and Deformation Measurement System (SWSDMS) was designed specially. A certain constant simulated support intensity was achieved by applying a certain height of static water pressure. A change to support intensity could be made by changing the water height in the rubber tube. The volume change of each of the four water capsules was measured at the due time by collecting and weighing the water overflow. The volume of water coming from each of the four water capsules was used to calculate the radial deformation of roadway surrounding rock, i.e., roof subsidence, wall-to-wall closure and floor heave. The proposed simulated support intensities, i.e., The compositions and properties of materials to be used for the construction of physical models were studied prior to the physical model construction. Given the significant rheological deformation of roadways excavated in soft rock, sand and paraffin wax were chosen for the simulated soft rock. The properties of a series of sand/paraffin wax mixtures were studied in laboratory and are presented in According to the geotechnical conditions of the prototype rock mass and the model scale, a mixture of sand/paraffin wax of 100 The real process of an underground roadway excavation, support installation and deformation of the surrounding rocks with time was simulated in the laboratory physical modelling. After the model had cooled down, prestressing the model, excavation of the roadway under pressure, installation of the SWSDMS device and measurement of the roadway deformation were carried out step by step. The whole process of modelling was strictly conducted according to the time similarity constant. Each physical modelling step lasted for 10–25 days in the laboratory, which were equivalent to a real time period of 50–125 days approximately. Comparable results of the six physical modelling tests conducted with the identical materials and geotechnical conditions revealed the significance of the support intensity in underground roadway/tunnel support. The deformation characteristics of an identical roadway with different support intensity is graphically presented in A negative exponential relation between the deformation rate and support intensity can also be deduced from the curve of deformation rate vs. support intensity presented in Requirements on the control of roadway deformation depend on the usage and service life of the roadway. It is known that a zero deformation rate is impossible practically to target in supporting a roadway in soft rocks. A wise approach is to exercise a design principle that the roadway deformation is allowed to take place to a degree within an acceptable limit. Physical modelling results indicated that an increase of support intensity from 0.1 to 0.5 Therefore, if both technical and economical considerations are taken into account, a support intensity of from 0.3 to 0.5 The three-dimensional physical modelling method provides a ‘conceptual approach to quantitative design’ of roadway support associated with soft rocks. With lack of knowledge of the constitutive relations, especially for the rheological mechanisms, in rock engineering practice, the modelling results could serve as a foundation on which a scientific design of underground roadway/tunnel support is developed, particularly when a large amount of rock mass deformation is concerned. The experimental study conducted with a series of support intensities revealed that a reasonable support intensity exists. Its value depends on the geotechnical and geometric conditions of the underground roadway/tunnel concerned and the requirements applied by the roadway/tunnel safe use specifications and the roadway/tunnel service life span. The results indicate that a support intensity of 0.3 to 0.5 The author would like to thank his colleagues at the Central Laboratory of Rock Mechanics and Ground Control, China University of Mining and Technology, for their generous assistance and help in the physical modelling study.