A cementation process with Zn powder followed by magnetic separation was conducted to separate Co as precipitate from leach solution containing Mn ions and to recover unreacted Zn and concentrated Co from cementation precipitate. The separation of Co component from Mn could be achieved successfully by a cementation process performed under the following conditions; 200 mg/L Cu, 140 mg/L Sb, pH 3.3–3.7, temperature 85 °C, and 1% Zn powder, where Cu and Sb were used as cementation activators to avoid the redissolution of Co. Magnetic separation of the cementation-precipitate was performed using 2000 G magnetic rod, and the results showed that Zn distributed more in non-magnetic fraction while Co, Cu, Sb were contained more in magnetic fraction. The Co was concentrated to 8.3% in magnetic fraction of the precipitate obtained from 60 min-cementation test. The non-magnetic fraction contained the unreacted Zn powder, which could be reused for cementation test for precipitating Co.The separation of Co and Mn ions in leach liquor has been one of important issues in hydrometallurgical processes, and several solvent extraction processes have been developed to solve the problem ( The sulfidization of Co and Zn has been recognized as an alternative process to separate Co and Zn ions from Mn ion ( This process, generally, is performed at around pH 4, where the precipitated Co could be redissolved ( Co has been found as ferromagnetic metal while Zn, Cu and Sb are diamagnetic metals. Thus it is expected that Co component could be concentrated more by magnetic separation, which is found to be a simple and efficient separation process ( The cementation tests were performed using a water-jacket (Pyrex) reactor capped with a silicone rubber cap, where pH electrode, sampling tube, nitrogen gas introduction tube, stirrer and condenser were equipped. The designated amount of ZnSO In a typical run, 500 ml of the solution with Cu and Sb activators was added to the reactor, which was connected to a water bath (Jeio-tech, Co. Ltd., CW-10G). The solution was heated to 85 °C and 300 cc/min of nitrogen gas was introduced during the cementation tests to avoid the effect of dissolved oxygen. Once the temperature stabilized at 85 °C, the designated amount of Zn powder was added to the solution, where Zn powder could be consumed by acidic dissolution as well as by cementation reaction. Since the dissolution of Zn powder could increase the solution pH, 0.5 mol/L H After the cementation test was terminated, precipitate was filtered with 0.45 µm syringe filter and then washed 5 times with distilled water. After the precipitate was added to 600 ml of distilled water in the reactor as described above, the suspension was agitated at more than 600 rpm to disperse the precipitate powder. A magnet rod (2000 G, 8 cm (diameter) × 15 cm (length)) was placed into the suspension, and the magnetic separation was performed for 10 min while stirring. After the magnet was removed from the solution, the solution was filtered to recover non-magnetic fraction, and magnetic fraction was recovered from the magnet by a water hand pump. The magnetic and non-magnetic fractions were washed 5 times with distilled water and then dried at 105 °C overnight. Each fraction was analyzed with MIRA3 FE-SEM (Field emission scanning electron microscope, Tescan, Ltd.) and the metal contents were examined after aqua regia digestion.  The standard reduction potential of Eq. The removal of Co, Sb, Cu ions by adding Zn powder could be given as the following equations ( Co However, the concentration of Co decreased rapidly within 5 min and increased gradually after 10 min. Boyanov’s cementation test was performed at pH 4.8–5.2 while pH was adjusted at 3.3–3.7 in this study. This lower pH could dissolve more Zn powder, so more Zn powder (1%) was added, and other conditions were fixed in the next test.  For comparison with the precipitate formed at 30 min, two other cementation tests were performed under the same conditions as in The weight of magnetic fraction increased with increasing the cementation time, and more Cu, Co, and Sb distributed in the magnetic fraction, and the distribution ratio increased with increasing the cementation time, where the distribution ratio of Co in the magnetic fraction increased 60% at 15 min to 82% at 60 min. More Zn was distributed in the non-magnetic fraction, and the ratios of Zn were 89% at 15 min, 77% at 30 min, and 79% at 60 min.  Since non-magnetic fraction contains a large amount of unreacted Zn, the reuse of non-magnetic fraction was tested instead of Zn powder in the cementation test. The experimental conditions were set considering the fact that the non-magnetic fraction contains Co, Cu, Sb as well as unreacted Zn. The cementation process with Zn powder and Cu/Sb components was investigated to separate Co from Mn ions in the leach solution, and then magnetic separation of the Co precipitate with Zn, Cu, Sb was performed to enhance the economic efficiency of the process by recovering unreacted Zn powder and by concentrating Co component. The Co component (70 mg/L) could be separated, as precipitate, successfully from Mn component by cementation process under the following conditions; 200 mg/L Cu, 140 mg/L Sb, pH 3.3–3.7, temperature 85 °C, and 1% Zn powder. The Co component remain longer in the precipitate by increasing the amount of Sb components as an activator and Zn powder as a cementation agent. The cementation precipitate was separated further into unreacted Zn (non-magnetic fraction) and concentrated Co (magnetic fraction) by magnetic separation. Generally, mineral processing processes such as magnetic separation have been used to concentrate desired metals prior to hydrometallurgical processes, but, in this study, magnetic separation is an effective way to enhance the metallurgical process efficiency by applying the magnetic separation to the product from hydrometallurgical process such as cementation process. This work was supported by the