Granitic rocks can in general be easily split through three mutually orthogonal surfaces, empirically identified in the field Although granitic rocks are regarded as a homogeneous isotropic material, splitting planes are assumed to correspond to physical anisotropies related to microcracks that seem to be oriented due to magmatic flow. An association between microcrack distribution patterns and granitic rock splitting planes have been proposed The present paper reports results obtained in a research project which investigates anisotropies in relevant mechanical properties of granitic rocks due to the existence of such splitting planes. In particular, the paper focuses on measurements of the fracture toughness ( For that matter, tests were carried out on samples of two granites of Rio de Janeiro especially prepared in order to determine their fracture toughness under mode I condition along their splitting planes. The test results are presented and discussed. Subsequently, the test results are used in conjunction with an analytical estimate of the required borehole spacing for block fragmentation/cutting under static or quasi-static conditions. The application highlights the practical impact of the anisotropy in fracture toughness of such materials. Although splitting planes characterization through microscope is sometimes difficult, (more so for coarse grained granites), field observations indicate that these planes can be identified macroscopically through the tracing of magmatic flow foliation. The practical experience associated to quarrying activities shows that it is easier to split the rock along these planes. All granitic rocks seem to possess three sets of nearly orthogonal planes of symmetry The rift in granites is recognized as a foliation, unclear in some cases, along which the granite splits more easily than in any other direction. Although the causes of rift structures and the relative time of their formation are not yet known, it is well-known that granitic rocks are brittle materials and often contain small defects which are preferentially oriented along three mutually perpendicular planes. Researchers have tried to correlate the splitting plane directions with directional microstructural features of the rock. Kudo et al. Although most of the surveyed literature indicates the existence of relationships between splitting plane directions and directional micro-structural texture characteristics in granitic rocks, this topic remains somewhat controversial and in need of further research. Two types of granitic rocks commonly found in Rio de Janeiro were investigated in this study, Utinga and Favela granites ( In order to determine fracture toughness under mode I along the splitting planes, the ISRM suggested methodology was used The macroscopic identification of splitting planes is relatively easy, but under microscope, its recognition becomes a rather difficult task. In many cases it is virtually impossible to identify the splitting planes through thin sections oriented parallel to each of the three orthogonal planes. This is particularly true for coarse-grained granites. The microscopic analysis of the fine-grained Favela granite on thin sections, oriented parallel to the rift plane, allowed the identification of igneous faces of minerals organized in preferential orientation. Nevertheless, for the coarse-grained Utinga granite, probably due to the grain size, no preferential mineral orientation was observed under microscope. Despite the fact that the present study did not focus on microcrack analysis, the observation of thin sections of the Favela granite suggests that microcracks parallel to rift plane are mainly of the intercrystalline and grain boundary types. Similar results were reported by other authors Laboratory tests were carried out on the Rock Mechanics facilities of Petrobras's Research Center-CENPES in Rio de Janeiro. A total of 24 tests were performed under a servo-controlled MTS 10 Samples were tested under mode I type so that diametral loading applied during tests coincided with textural anisotropies (splitting planes) observed in the rocks under study. The observed failure pattern was consistent and coincident with the expected elasticity/failure theories of the adopted methodology ( In these figures, a visible dispersion in In addition, as also observed by other authors The impact of knowing toughness anisotropy on the optimization of rock cutting/fragmentation processes will be demonstrated through the analysis of a simple problem geometry. The object of the exercise is the determination of the optimal spacing between aligned boreholes destined to be pressurized for fracture generation, propagation and coalescence in order to cut/fragment a rock block or a rock face. For that purpose, an expression of the stress intensity factor (SIF) derived by Koiter in 1959 (as appears in Sih The expansion pressure is only effective inside the boreholes, not exerting any pressure in the cracks. The corresponding value for The larger the distance from the line of boreholes to a free face and the crack length being at least two times the radius of the borehole, the more valid are the hypotheses of the model expressed by Eq. The relationship The cut will be possible only if Assuming the equality condition in Eq. One is able to notice from Eq. Through Eq. This result shows that a 87% larger borehole spacing can be used for a line of boreholes aligned with the rift plane as compared with the spacing of boreholes aligned with the hardway plane. A similar exercise using the toughness values for the Favela granite gives Results of a research program aiming at the characterization of mechanical properties along splitting planes in granites were presented. Samples of coarse-grained and fined-grained granites from Rio de Janeiro were tested to determine fracture toughness under mode I conditions along possible splitting plane directions. These tests were performed on cracked Chevron notched Brazilian disc (CCNBD) specimens according to ISRM recommendations The practical relevance of the obtained results was illustrated by the use of an existing analytical solution to a crack propagation problem simulating the process of rock cutting/fragmentation through the application of internal pressures on aligned boreholes. The results showed a considerable increase in borehole spacing in case the boreholes are made aligned with the rift plane, the one of least resistance as compared to when the boreholes are aligned with the divider, the plane of maximum resistance. The authors wish to thank Geol. Wilmar T. de Barros from the Geotechnical Control Office of the municipality of Rio de Janeiro (Geo-Rio) for suggesting the present research topic. They wish to thank the Rock Mechanics Laboratory personnel of CENPES-PETROBRAS in Rio de Janeiro for conducting the tests and the Brazilian National Research Council (CNPq) for the financial support of the first author for his graduate program at the Geology Department of Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.