The Kapalagulu layered ultramafic and mafic intrusion is emplaced between the Paleoproterozoic Ubendian basement and overlying Neoproterozoic Itiaso Group metasedimentary rocks, located near the western shore of Lake Tanganyika. High-grade platinum group element (PGE) mineralization (1–6g/t Pt+Pd+Au) is associated with chromitite and sulfide-bearing harzburgite within the southeastern extension of the intrusion, known as the Lubalisi Zone, which is covered by a layer of nickel-rich (0.2–2%Ni) laterite regolith that contains linear areas of PGE mineralization.
                  In the Lubalisi Zone, the mineralization may be divided into several significant geometallurgical domains: (a) high-grade PGE mineralization (1–6g/t Pt+Pd+Au) associated with stratiform PGE reefs and chromitite seams within a harzburgite unit; (b) high-grade PGE mineralization (up to 12g/t Pt+Pd+Au) associated with small bodies and veins of nickel massive sulfide within harzburgite below PGE-bearing reefs and chromitite seams; (c) low-grade PGE mineralization (0.1–0.5g/t Pt+Pd+Au) associated with a sulfide-mineralized harzburgite unit above the PGE-bearing reefs; (d) laterite style residual PGE mineralization (0.2–4g/t Pt+Pd+Au) associated with chromite concentrations in the saprolite and overlying red clay horizons of the laterite regolith; and (e) supergene Ni associated with the saprock and overlying saprolite clay.
                  Mineralogical study of three samples from the PGE reef consisting of high grade PGE chromitite and harzburgite indicate that this mineralization will give a good metallurgical response to conventional grinding and floatation due to the relatively coarse-grained nature of the PGM (P80 from∼37 to 52µm), association with base metal sulfides, and unaltered gangue minerals (Wilhelmij and Cabri, 2016). In contrast, mineralogical and metallurgical study of the Ni and PGE mineralized laterite indicate that it cannot be processed using conventional mineral processing techniques but that a hydrometallurgical route should be used to recover the base and precious metals. Because any process is very much deposit-controlled, significant metallurgical and geometallurgical testing of mineralized samples, as well as pilot plant testing, will be required to arrive at feasibility studies.Since the discovery of low-grade copper and nickel mineralization on the western shore of Lake Tanganyika in the early 20th century, there have been intermittent field evaluations for Ni and Cu sulfide mineralization by many mining and exploration companies culminating in the discovery by BHP Minerals of platinum mineralization in a trench, which returned over 10 This paper reports new findings from mineralogical and metallurgical work undertaken in 2004–2005 ( Direct leach approaches are therefore considered to be more appropriate. The challenges of effluent disposal also need to be taken into account since hydrometallurgical processing routinely consumes significant quantities of reagents (which might not be fully recovered), generate large quantities of aqueous effluents, leach residues and precipitates (e.g. gypsum, jarosite, goethite and/or hematite). Water consumption from the Lubalisi River or Lake Tanganyika and solid waste disposal are other important considerations for hydrometallurgy. This paper explores the interactions among the geology and mineralogy in arriving at metallurgical processing options. The Kapalagulu Intrusion is a 30 The northwest trending dike-like Kapalagulu Intrusion is subdivided into two domains: A northwestern domain of well layered gabbroic rocks exposed on the side of an escarpment capped by Mesoproterozoic metasediments; and a southeastern domain of poorly layered dunite and harzburgite buried beneath a thick laterite regolith that forms an undulating plateau below the escarpment. The two contrasting lithological sequences present in the domains are known as the Lower Ultramafic Sequence (3100 The structure of the Lower Ultramafic Sequence forms a tight syncline that plunges to the northwest and has been extensively modified by axial parallel faults. This synclinal structure which is bounded by the Ubendian Belt basement gneiss, is known as the Lubalisi Zone and has been the focus of extensive exploration and resource drilling for magmatic and lateritic Cu, Ni and PGE mineralization. In the Lubalisi Zone of the Kapalagulu Intrusion the Lower Ultramafic Sequence consists of a Basal Dunite (270 The Lubalisi PGE-bearing reefs have similarities with the Merensky Reef and PGE-bearing chromitite layers (e.g. UG2) of the Bushveld Complex of South Africa ( A simplified structural cross section through the Lubalisi Zone ( Four drill core samples were taken from PGE reefs intersected in the KPD24 and KPD44 drill holes (see assays in Table 1 of The Lower Ultramafic Sequence of the Kapalagulu Intrusion within the Lubalisi Zone is covered by an up to 20 The laterite regolith of the Lubalisi Zone is described by Drilling of closely-spaced vertical holes through the laterite along traverses across the Lubalisi Zone show that it is possible to trace the PGE reefs within the MCSS lithostratigraphic unit up dip into the laterite profile, where there are residual concentrations of chromite and PGE in the saprolite and/or the ferruginous red clay horizons of the laterite regolith. A schematic diagram illustrating the progressive laterite deflation and weathering of the PGE reefs over time is shown in Closely-spaced drilling allowed calculation of inferred mineral resource estimates for the laterite mineralization using different cut-offs and were the rationale for PGM analyses and metallurgical testwork. Resources using Ni cut-offs are: at 0.5% Ni envelope 113.1 million tonnes of 0.82% Ni, 0.05% Co and 0.1% Cu; at 0.8% Ni envelope 49.5 million tonnes of 1.06% Ni, 0.06% Co and 0.12% Cu. Resources using Pt Base metal distribution in the laterite regolith cross-sections of A detailed illustration of the vertical base and precious metal assays ( In conclusion, there are two large scale geometallurgical domains within the Lubalisi laterite regolith, the supergene Ni associated with the saprock and overlying saprolite clay and the residual PGE and chromite in the saprolite and overlying red clay. Significant resources of PGE mineralization in the Lubalisi Zone are associated with the PGE reefs and chromitite seams within the MCSS harzburgite lithostratigraphic unit and the weathered expression of this bedrock mineralization in the covering laterite regolith ( In summary, four significant PGE-rich geometallurgical domains in the Kapalagulu Intrusion have been identified: High grade PGE (up to 12 High grade PGE (1–6 Low grade PGE (0.1–0.5 Residual PGE (0.2–4 There is most likely a fifth PGE geometallurgical domain that is associated with the supergene laterite Ni (contact between the saprolite clay and the harzburgite saprock), which has related supergene Pd, Au and Cu enrichment, but this domain is not clearly defined by the present drill hole lithological logging and sample assay data. Mineralogical investigations have focused on two of the geometallurgical domains: the PGE reefs and chromitite seams and the associated PGE mineralized laterite saprolite clay. Metallurgical investigations have focused on the PGE laterite geometallurgical domain as the mineralogical study on the PGE reefs with chromite seams geometallurgical domain indicates that this domain may be processed using conventional Bushveld Complex-style flotation, smelting, and base and precious metal refining. The samples studied mineralogically consisted of four diamond drill-core samples from two different diamond drill holes (KPD44 and KPD24) in chromite-sulfide harzburgite and five samples from drill hole KPD22 in the laterite regolith, ranging from ferricrete near the surface to saprolite at the base. Details of assay, sample preparation, and techniques used are described in detail by To study the precious metal mineralogy, the oxidized lateritic samples (KPD22) were first subjected to attrition milling and the coarser “grit” fractions were then studied by similar techniques used for the PGE reef samples, except that no polished thin sections were prepared. The “clay” fraction was qualitatively studied by X-ray diffraction. A split of each of the oxidized samples with no attrition milling were coarsely crushed (<2 Assays for the PGE reef and the laterite samples that were studied geochemically are summarized in Quantitative image analyses reconciled to assays show that the principal minerals belong to the kaolinite-serpentine group [lizardite Mg Particle size distributions for the four PGE reef samples after coarse crushing are given in Because there was insufficient material available for making high-grade concentrates for sample 081914 the searches for precious metal minerals were limited to the other three samples. A total of 364 precious metal minerals were identified and measured (summarized in Analysis for trace Pd in pentlandite showed that it represents a significant proportion of the total Pd, ranging from 13.5% to 21.0% ( The five oxidized samples from the laterite “clay” fraction were qualitatively analyzed by X-ray diffraction of “clay” and showed that goethite is abundant in all samples and that undifferentiated “magnetite-maghemite” is a minor component in all but sample 9550-2, where this is a major component ( The modal analyses by image analysis of all five samples are given in The grain size distributions to determine the predicted grind to liberate the minerals are shown graphically in Bulk assays for KPD22 show lowest for Au, Pd, and Pt concentrations in the near surface sample (ferricrete 2.4–5.0 A total of 139 PGM, gold and silver minerals were found in the five samples, with a variable distribution across the profile as summarized in Wilhelmij and Cabri ( As recorded in Five drill core samples were taken from an inclined diamond drill hole (KPD22, location shown in Two vertical large diameter diamond holes (KPD91 and 92) were drilled into the PGE and chromite-rich laterite to take PQ sized core samples for metallurgical testwork. Another four large diameter holes (KPD89, 90, 93 and 94) were drilled into Ni-rich laterite. The six metallurgical drill holes ( GRD Minproc and Lakefield Ore Test in Perth, Western Australia, completed preliminary metallurgical testwork on six different composite laterite samples taken from six strategically-placed vertical metallurgical drill holesKPD89 to KPD94 ( The testwork made recommendations for taking the project forward that related to resource development (e.g., more closely-spaced sampling, documentation, exploration for additional resources) and to process development suggesting that this should focus first on heap leaching, with a fallback to atmospheric leaching. They also recommend that in parallel to this, development work needs to investigate a viable PGE recovery process. Some hydrometallurgical extraction evaluations were performed on the PGE–bearing high magnesium (HiMgSAPPGE) and low magnesium saprolites (LowMgSAPPGE) through the AJ Parker Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgical Solutions (through its partners Curtin University and CSIRO) and the work was reported by Sulfuric acid use was very high (397, 467 and 497 The combination of high acid consumption and associated supply logistics, large quantities of leach residue (and neutralized precipitate) production, and the use of acidic chlorides under pressure-acid leach conditions amount to taking an extreme, but unselective approach (i.e. solubilizing too much gangue). Other approaches are required and a few are briefly discussed in the following paragraphs. The “Panton Process” developed for the high chromite Panton Sill resource in the North of Western Australia (   Considering aspects such as leach selectivity, reagent consumption and the generation of hazardous waste products, the more recently developed processes, such as the “Panton Process”, Sequential Heap Leach and “GlyLeach” processes, offer significant opportunities to treat these difficult PGE deposits. However, significant process development and piloting would still be required before these processes can be commercialized for deposits such as the Lubalisi Zone PGE mineralized laterite and harzburgite. It has been shown that the Pd/Pt ratios calculated from assays were identical or very close to those calculated from the mineralogy ( The precious metal minerals found in the PGE reef and laterite are summarized in Comparative data for oxidized mineralization are fewer, but our study of the Kapalagulu laterite may be tentatively compared to weathered/oxidized MSZ since there are no grade recovery curves for the samples ( The samples in the present study were too small for a completely satisfactory mineralogical characterization so that the data presented should only be considered as a preliminary investigation of the mineralogy. Combined samples D395 and D396 about 90 In summary, there are several challenges to mineral processing and chemical extraction of PGE as the host rocks are relatively fresh and the precious metal mineralization is associated with typical magmatic sulfides with some of the Pd deporting as solid solution in pentlandite. Future detailed mineralogical studies should be undertaken on larger representative or composite samples to confirm the predicted processing route. At the same time, application of trace-element techniques (e.g., Our mineralogical investigation did not find any Pt or Pd oxides, such as those reported by The relative paucity and nature of the Pd minerals found in the samples, and when found, these are usually very fine-grained, further suggests that other than some supergene Pd minerals, all the primary Pd mineralization has been dissipated or reconstituted. Some of the dispersed Pd also occurs in remnant supergene heazlewoodite. Some of the primary Pt minerals are more resistant to oxidation and dissolution, especially Pt-Fe alloy and sperrylite. Sperrylite might not be stable in the uppermost sample (9550-1), but occurs in all other samples, whereas minerals such as moncheite are no longer stable and their Pt content is now dispersed. Because sperrylite is so stable, it is possible that it is still present in sample 9550-1, but in the form of very fine particles, though there were no signs of alteration on the sperrylite particles found. However, sperrylite is known to slime easily and its tendency to break down to finer-grained particles even when locked in goethite. Like Pd, one cannot be certain of the present location of the dispersed Pt, but it is likely also associated with goethite, as well as Mn-wad. Gold, originally occurring as electrum has in some cases now been leached of Ag, to form relatively pure native gold, which was found in all five samples, sometimes together with electrum. A small proportion of the Au has been recrystallized in the form of supergene tetra-auricupride (CuAu), which was found in sample 9550-2. Silver, originally in electrum and in some Ag sulfides and tellurides has recrystallized in the form of native silver in sample 9550-2. Some of the Ag has been recrystallized as a Pd-Ni-Ag mineral in sample 9550-4 and some may be dispersed in some of the gangue minerals. The relative loss of Pt in the form of PGM to that of Au with depth (or dispersal of gold near surface) may be roughly shown by determining the Pt/Au ratio in the samples from assay values for “grit” (11 for upper two samples to 5.5 for the rest) compared to the ratio determined from the relative weights of Pt and Au calculated from the Pt and Au minerals: ∼2 for upper two samples and 0.8 for deeper samples. Whereas the numbers are not very precise, they clearly indicate the trends. The assay data for “grit” and “clay”, the lack of sulfides, indicate that this mineralization cannot be processed by conventional mineral processing techniques. It is likely that a hydrometallurgical route should be investigated to recover the base and precious metals. The oxidized laterite was shown to have several metallurgical domains ( They concluded by suggesting two possible metallurgical options: first option heap leaching and second option atmospheric leaching, for both of which the mineralogy of the feed was required. However, elsewhere in their report they specify that for atmospheric leaching “The key to the process is the use of seawater….”, but this seems unlikely for this inland deposit. Other assumptions were a recovery of 50% of contained Pt, Pd, and Au and recovery of Ni and Co. Cu was not considered, nor was it the focus of the mineralogical study, yet a considerable Cu resource is evident. They also comment that “An added benefit of heap leaching is that it is unlikely that the PGE’s will dissolve.”, but this requires a better understanding of their deportment than is available, especially as the nature of the Pd deportment is not conclusively known. However, acidic chloride based processes are notoriously unselective and significant gangue co-dissolution may result, generating hazardous effluent requiring significant neutralization costs, and heaps with significant rehabilitation costs. The use of an acidic chloride system is therefore not appropriate for this deposit. For the precious metals there are several direct leach approaches that might be used as discussed in a recent review by We gratefully acknowledge permission to publish by the joint venture partners (Lonmin PLC and Goldstream Mining NL), and also acknowledge the careful work done in different laboratories on behalf of Cabri Consulting Inc: Al Miller (Kishar Research Inc.) for petrography of PTS, Jeanne B. Percival (Geological Survey of Canada) for clay XRD, Rolando Lastra (Canmet) for image analysis and Glenn Poirier for EPMA, and Nikolay V. Rudashevsky (Center for New Technology) for screening, hydroseparation, and SEM analyses and images. LJC is grateful to Megan Becker (University of Cape Town) for providing further details on the “silicate ore” and the authors appreciate discussions and the generosity of Thomas Oberthür (formerly at BGR) in making his unpublished data available. HRW is grateful to Gilberto Fedetto for supervising the drilling of the laterite metallurgical drill holes and for the geological logging of the core and to Martine Wilhelmij for drafting of Figs. 2–5. Finally, the authors are grateful to the reviewers Dave Good, A. S. Macheyeki, and Robert Schouwstra for very helpful reviews, as well as for the comments and guidance of Associate Editor Peter Lightfoot and Editor-in-Chief Franco Pirajno. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at    