Fluoridated hydroxyapatite (FHAp) was successfully synthesized from the starting materials of CaCO3, CaHPO4·2H2O, and CaF2 via a mechanochemical–hydrothermal route. X-ray diffraction, infrared spectroscopy, surface area measurements, and scanning electron microscopy identified the resultant powders as FHAp nanocrystals with the specific surface areas of up to 114.72m2/g. The mechanism study revealed that under such mechanochemical–hydrothermal conditions the formation reactions of FHAp were completed in two stages. The starting materials firstly reacted into a poorly crystallized calcium-deficient apatite and the complete incorporation of fluoride ions into apatite occurred in the second stage.Fluoridated hydroxyapatite (FHAp) has been increasingly investigated as clinical restoration materials for stimulatory purposes in hard tissues or for maintaining the stability of materials during processing. It was reported that FHAp could provide sufficiently low levels of fluoride to act upon the surrounding cells for improving bone formation, while avoiding unnecessary accumulation within the body The mechanochemical synthesis, as a simple method for powder preparation Analytical grade calcium carbonate (CaCO The powders obtained were identified in an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, X’Pert Pro, PANalytical, The Netherlands) using Ni filtered Cu Kα radiation at 40 The specific surface areas of the powders synthesized were measured by a five-point BET method (NOVA 2000, Quantachrome, USA) with N After dispersed in absolute ethanol, a little amount of the suspension was transferred onto a piece of aluminum sheet. Gold was sputtered to the dried powder on the Al-sheet in an auto fine coater (JFC-1600, JEOL, Japan), and then their morphologies were observed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM-6700F, JEOL, Japan). Infrared spectra of the as-prepared powders were recorded using the KBr pellet technique in a Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (FT-IR, Equinox 55, Bruker, Germany) over 400–4000 Thermogravimetric analyses (TGA, STA 449C, Netzsch, Germany) were performed in flowing air (20 The fluoride contents were measured using the fluoride ion selective electrode (PF-1, Shanghai Leici, China). Samples of 10 Specific surface areas of the mixtures milled for various time periods are shown in Thermogravimetric analyses of the as-prepared powders after 60  With the prolonged milling, these sharp peaks of the starting materials degraded significantly. When the milling duration was increased to 10 After milling for 60 Based on the above analyses, it was found that the complete incorporation of fluoride ions into apatite lattice is preceded by the formation of Ca-deficient apatite phase. The reasons for the formation of the Ca-deficient intermediate will be discussed later. FT-IR spectra of the powders milled for different time periods are shown in  As evidenced by the above analyses, the apatite phases formed in both deionized water and acetone, but with the varied rates. Since acetone was the poor solvent of the starting materials, it indicated that the energy caused by the impact and attrition during milling was high enough to induce the formation of apatite. But the kinetics of reactions in acetone is evidently slower than that observed in deionized water. So the fast kinetics of reactions in deionized water resulted from the hydrothermal process induced by the mechanical collision besides the solid-state reaction. Therefore, reactions, which occurred during milling, were decided by those two processes. First, it is essential that the reactants were trapped by colliding balls for mechanical alloying Fluoridated hydroxyapatite (FHAp) was successfully synthesized from CaCO The mechanism study revealed that the mechanically induced solid-state reaction and hydrothermal process simultaneously led to the formation of FHAp. Due to small volume fraction and limited solubility of CaF