This paper presents the application of the standard addition method to on-line measure the solids hold-up at the laboratory scale. The method consists in measuring the electrical conductivity (mS/cm) of a two-phase dispersion using two conductivity cells: the first containing a known amount of dielectric material plus the solid–liquid dispersion and the second containing the solid–liquid dispersion only. A system of two equations are obtained by applying the Maxwell's model to both cells, and the liquid conductivity and the solids hold-up may be evaluated by solving them. It is demonstrated that the studied method is a reliable option to estimate the solids hold-up on-line.The measurement and control of solids hold-up is essential in the mineral processing plants. In mineral grinding, the slurry density, directly related to the solids hold-up, is an important variable in the optimization and control of the process. If this variable is not controlled well, the energy consumption and the grinding performance may be substantially affected. Mineral flotation is another process where the solids hold-up control is important. It was demonstrated, for example, that the performance of the column flotation is affected if the density of the pulp fed to the column is relatively high. As well, the solids hold-up is an important parameter to evaluate the efficiency of a flotation circuit by material balance. In spite of the above said and even though knowledge of the solids hold-up is important to conduct the material balance in any section or circuit of mineral processing plants, only in few cases the control of this variable is a common practice. Considering the advantages of knowing this parameter, the aim of this paper is to present an instrument to perform such a measurement. The standard addition method ( The main characteristics of the studied sensor are presented and illustrated in The tests were conduced in the experimental apparatus illustrated in The tests were performed using silica sand of a narrow distribution of particles sizes. The amplitude of the studied particles size distribution varied between 3 and In order to validate the values of solids hold-up estimated with the standard addition method by comparing them with the values calculated by direct application of Maxwell's model, the conductivity of the liquid was directly measured by shutting down the mixing, allowing the solids to settle and pumping the supernatant through the sensor. This methodology was applied to all the particles classes. To verify the precision of the sensor in a dynamic process, the sensor was tested in conditions where the solids hold-up change in an arbitrary fashion. The size distribution of the silica sand used varied between 74 and  Considering only the correlation between the results obtained with both methods, either  The above discussion leads to the question of how to install a sensor of this kind in process piping. The sensor may be mounted on a bypass to allow the slurry to flow without obstruction. Moreover, in the event of plugging, the sensor may be easily dismantled for cleaning. It was demonstrated, in steady and dynamic systems, that the standard addition method provides a good estimation of the solids hold-up of mineral slurries flowing through pipes. The results showed that the proposed sensor may be a device reliable enough for control purposes.