Background
                  The aim of this project was to analyse whether a CT influences surgical planning in ankle fracture involving the posterior malleolus.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty consecutive patients with fractures involving the posterior malleolus were retrospectively selected and had their plain radiographs and CT scan anonymised. Initially, radiographs alone were presented to nine trauma surgeons to formulate a surgical plan individually. After a minimum of 6 weeks, the same process was repeated with CT scans available.
               
                  Results
                  The surgical approach for ankle fracture fixation changed in 32.7% of cases following CT scan review. A CT scan altered the decision to stabilise the posterior malleolus in 25.6% and the decision of whether to stabilise the syndesmosis in 16.6% of cases.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study demonstrates that a pre-operative CT scan changes the surgical approach in 32.7% of cases and therefore we recommend use of CT scanning in this subset of ankle injuries.Ankle fractures are a common injury and comprise up to 10% of all fractures in the United Kingdom (UK) [ Historically, treatment strategies for ankle fractures with a posterior malleolus fragment have varied among surgeons. Within the UK, the Danis–Weber system of ankle classification is commonly used and, although easy to reproduce, it is not a useful tool to guide ankle fracture management. Moreover, this classification system does not consider the posterior malleolar fragment. Some surgeons advocate fixing the posterior malleolus if the size of its articular portion is a certain percentage of the overall articular surface (25–33%), a dogma based on historic studies of small series [ A CT scan is a useful diagnostic tool when considering management options for ankle fracture involving the posterior malleolus. Not only does it delineate the size of the fragment, but also identifies whether the fragment involves the posterolateral or the posteromedial tibial plafond (or both) [ The aims of this study were to determine whether a CT scan changes the operative approach in ankle fractures involving the posterior malleolus across the practice of our trauma and foot and ankle surgeons in a major trauma centre. Our null hypothesis was that review of a CT scan would not alter the surgical plan in a significant proportion of patients. From December 2014 to April 2015, all patients who presented to our major trauma centre were retrospectively screened for inclusion in this study following review and approval by our institutional review board. Patients were identified from our daily trauma meeting registry which lists every patient discussed for operative and non-operative treatment that presented over the last 24 In our unit since January 2014, all patients with a dislocated ankle, syndesmotic injury or posterior malleolar fracture received a CT scan following plain radiography and reduction in plaster. In our institution, CT scanning is available 24 Nine assessors were selected for the study. All were post fellowship trained clinicians who specialise in trauma and foot and ankle surgery and were able to perform internal fixation techniques using all methods of fixation through any surgical approach to the ankle. In the initial phase of this study the individual assessors were presented solely with the anonymised pre-operative plain radiographs of the 20 patients to simulate the same conditions they would be expected to plan an operation without the use of CT. Additionally they were presented with the patient demographics (age, gender, previous medical history and mechanism of injury). They were asked the following questions: (1) What surgical approach(es) would you utilise? (2) What fixation technique would you use to stabilise the posterior malleolus? (3) What type of implants would you use to fix the fracture (e.g. 1/3 tubular plate/locking plate)? The second phase of the study took place greater than 6 weeks after the assessors had completed the first phase to minimise recall bias. The same nine assessors were simultaneously presented with the anonymised plain radiographs and the associated anonymised CT scan. The assessors were asked to answer the same questions as previously. A Fisher exact test was used to compare categorical variables and statistical significance was assumed to carry a p-value of less than 0.05. Cohen’s Kappa statistic was used to analyse intra-observer agreement to determine whether surgical decisions changed following CT scan review. A total of 180 paired results (20 patients, 9 assessors) were analysed. There were 11 male and 9 female patients aged between 22 and 76 years (mean age 50.4 years). Six of the injuries included the lateral and posterior malleoli whereas the remainder consisted of tri-malleolar configurations involving the posterior plafond. Ten of the 20 injuries presented as a dislocated ankle. All patients suffered injuries as a result of a low energy torsion and had a median ASA grade of I (range I–IV). Patient demographics are summarised in The surgical approaches that were utilised to approach the different aspects of the ankle included direct lateral, direct medial, anteromedial, posterolateral and posteromedial. Following CT scan review, almost a third (32.7%) of surgical approaches to the ankle were changed owing to the new diagnostic information. With specific regard to posterior approaches to the ankle, these changed from 32.2% (58 patients) to 38.9% (70 patients) (Fisher exact p Analysis of whether fixation of the posterior malleolus was planned showed that, prior to CT review, 31.1% (56 patients) of posterior malleoli were planned to be fixed compared to 38.3% (69 patients) after CT scan review (kappa value 0.452, Fisher exact p Questions 2 and 3 focused on what implant assessors planned to use for fixation of the posterior malleolus and which surgical technique they would use. The different modalities of posterior malleolus fixation before and after CT scan are summarised in This study also allowed analysis of how stabilisation of the syndesmosis would be addressed before and after a CT scan. Prior to CT review, 21.1% (38 patients) of syndesmosis injuries were planned for definitive fixation and after CT review, proportionately more 24.4% (44 patients) were planned for fixation (Fisher exact p The use of CT scanning of an ankle fracture involving the posterior malleolus is important for multiple reasons. Delineating the fracture pattern of an intra-articular fracture is of paramount importance as it allows planning of the fixation to aim for anatomical reduction and absolute stability. A fragment that involves more of the posteromedial corner may influence the surgeon to choose a posteromedial approach over a posterolateral approach and this change in surgical decision making is certainly apparent in our results. Additionally, a CT scan also identifies whether the fracture is simple or multi-fragmented and therefore this may affect the choice of implant and the stabilisation mode used [ The primary aim of this study was to assess whether a preoperative CT scan changes the surgical plan in posterior malleolus ankle fractures. Importantly, the approach dictates the patient’s intraoperative position (supine, decubitus lateral or prone). Our results suggest that the planned surgical approach changed after CT scan review in around a third of cases and therefore our null hypothesis was disproven. These findings are in agreement with previous studies that a CT scan changes the surgical plan in posterior malleolus ankle fractures [ Our results suggest that around a third of ankle surgical approaches changed as a result of the CT scan review by the assessors. Additionally, 28% of planned implants changed after CT review and the fixation mode that implants were used in was also influenced in a small number of cases ( The rationale for surgical reduction of the posterior malleolus is to restore ankle joint congruity and achieving secondary stability of the syndesmosis via ligamentotaxis of the posterior inferior tibio-fibular ligament on the fibula [ One of the potential drawbacks of obtaining a CT scan pre-operatively may be the accessibility of the resource. Delays in diagnostic imaging may compromise soft tissue swelling, potentially causing further delays to surgical management. It is imperative, therefore, to ascertain whether a CT scan changes the surgeon’s operative plan compared to when operative planning is based upon plain radiographs alone. Previous studies have shown that up to 46% of surgical plans change using CT scan imaging in ankle fracture management [ Obtaining a preoperative CT scan for every posterior malleolus ankle fracture does have drawbacks, however. Firstly, not every trauma unit has access to 24 The findings in this study are strengthened because we obtained data from nine assessors as opposed to previous studies that have used up to three reviewers to answer the same question [ Our study is limited by the fact that we included a limited number of patients in our analysis and therefore potentially did not include the entire spectrum of injuries that are commonly seen. Nevertheless, subclassification of the posterior malleolus fragment suggests that all types of posterior malleolus injuries were included in this cohort and therefore our findings are valid for all posterior malleolus ankle fractures. Moreover, the large number of assessors meant that we had a significant dataset to analyse intraobserver differences compared to previous studies. Although our results suggest that CT scanning changes the surgical management at the planning stage, many decisions can change intra-operatively and therefore this simulated study may exaggerate or under-report the true impact of a preoperative CT scan. Finally, patients presenting with undisplaced (therefore undiagnosed) posterior malleolus fractures may not have undergone a CT scan causing a selection bias, however this cohort is likely to be very small. Additionally, it is likely that in this patient cohort a CT scan will not alter surgical management significantly anyway. We did not measure inter-observer variability as measured in a similar study by Donohoe et al. [ In conclusion, our results suggest that a preoperative CT scan in ankle fractures and dislocations involving the posterior malleolus changes the planned surgical approach in 32.7% of cases and alters the management of the posterior malleolus fracture 25.6% of cases. CT scanning provides greater anatomical detail including comminution, fragment size, displacement and degree of disruption to the syndesmosis. We therefore advocate the use of pre-operative CT scanning in line with BOAST guidelines where this is feasible without causing significant delay to surgery. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all named authors and that there are no other persons who satisfied the criteria for authorship but are not listed. We further confirm that the order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all of us. We confirm that we have given due consideration to the protection of intellectual property associated with this work and that there are no impediments to publication, including the timing of publication, with respect to intellectual property. In so doing we confirm that we have followed the regulations of our institutions concerning intellectual property. We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole contact for the Editorial process (including Editorial Manager and direct communications with the office). He/she is responsible for communicating with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and final approval of proofs. We confirm that we have provided a current, correct email address which is accessible by the Corresponding Author and which has been configured to accept email from We would like to acknowledge the time and efforts of Mr Richard Gibson, Mr Mick Dennison, Mr Simon Royston, Mr Bilal Jamal, Mr Chris Blundell and Mr Howard Davies. This study could not have been completed without their input.