Calcium borosilicate Ca2SiB2O7 ceramics were prepared by the conventional solid-state reaction. The detailed crystal structure of the as-prepared ceramics was investigated by X-ray diffraction and structural refinements studies. The mechanical properties were measured by the bending strength and elastic modulus. In vitro hydroxyapatite mineralization ability was investigated by soaking the ceramics in simulated body fluid (SBF) at temperature 37°C for various time periods. HA needles can be easily in vitro induced when the ceramics were soaked in SBF solutions. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction patterns and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) analysis were applied to investigate the samples before and after immersion in SBF solutions. The elemental compositions of a hydroxyapatite layer on the surface of ceramics during mineralization were confirmed by X-ray energy-dispersive spectra (EDS). The in vitro mineralization ability was discussed on the base of the structural characteristics of Ca2SiB2O7 ceramic such as the silanol (Si–OH), B–OH groups and pentagonal tunnels and layered structure. The results confirmed that Ca2SiB2O7 ceramics possess good bioactivity and mechanical properties.Investigations for inorganic biomaterials have been significantly increased in the past years to replace and repair bone tissue lost from injury or disease Hydroxyapatite (Ca Except for Si component in bone ceramics, boron has been recognized as a significant element for reproduction and embryogenesis, bone metabolisms, improvement of wound healing, and modifications of calcium In this work, a calcium borosilicate, Ca Ca To evaluate the apatite formation ability, the ceramics were placed in a polystyrene bottles containing SBF solution with ion concentrations nearly equal to human blood plasma, which was prepared according to the procedure described by Kokubo and Takadama XRD patterns were taken on a Rigaku D/Max diffractometer (Rigaku Co., Tokyo, Japan) operating at 40 The as-prepared ceramics were checked by powder XRD measurements, which are shown in Three Ca  To detect the changes of crystal-formation of Ca   The HA needles developed to many bone-like HA with the increase of soaking time in SBF for 7 days as shown in In this work, a references sample of well-known β-Ca To detect the elements changes during the mineralization process, the EDS measurements were used to examine the elemental compositions on the surface of the soaked samples. The changes of the ion concentrations in the SBF solutions were analyzed. It can be noted that Ca The structure sketch map of Ca In Ca As shown in In the structure of Ca As discussed above, the Ca Ca This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the