In recent years the industrial application of a new flotation process has been initiated, namely the reverse flotation of carnallite, the beneficiated carnallite being obtained as a cell product of halite flotation, the latter being carried out with alcylmorpholine as cationic collector. The technology of carnallite reverse flotation has been applied to the industrial processing of the Dead Sea solar salts (Israel, Jordan). Using this technology, beneficiation of carnallite ores from Verkhnekamskoye deposit (Russia) has been developed. Results of sorption and flotation property investigations on alcylmorpholines with various compositions are presented. The possibility of increasing the efficiency of alcylmorpholine operation and of decreasing their consumption by a factor of 1.5–2 is shown. Technological and reagent schemes have been developed for the negative suppression of clayey-carbonate slimes in halite flotation. The possibility of application of halite flotation for potash ore pre-benefication has been discussed. The results of the investigations enabled the cost of beneficiated carnallite production to be decreased and the area of halite flotation implementation to be extended.Carnallite (KCl*MgCl Production of beneficiated carnallite has, until recently, been implemented only by the method of carnallite thermal leaching, with its subsequent crystallization from saturated salt solutions. Due to the high heat consumption in this process, a new method with low energy consumption was proposed late in the 20th century for processing of carnallite-containing raw materials. This was the method of carnallite reverse flotation with impurity extraction into the froth product and beneficiated carnallite production in the form of a halite flotation cell product. At present the industrial application of this method is being implemented at the Dead Sea Works (Israel) and Arab Potash Co. (Jordan) companies. The fractional composition study of carnallite ores from the Verkhnekamskoye deposit (Russia) has shown that under ore milling to a size less than 1 mm almost complete opening occurs of carnallite and halite growths ( an increase in magnesium chloride recovery into the finished product; a decrease in the production costs compared to the method of carnallite thermal leaching and crystallization; an improvement in production ecology. As collectors for halite flotation the alkylmorpholines are now used. Alkylmorpholines produced by Akzo Nobel Surface Chemistry AB are cationic collectors with high operation selectivity, but are characterized by relatively high cost. In the presence of clayey-carbonate impurities (slimes), the components of carnallite ores which actively sorb cationic surfactants (SAS), the cost of carnallite ore flotation increases. In the Laboratory of Flotation and Reagents of Halurgy Institute investigations have been carried out on the suppression of the negative effects of slimes on halite flotation, on the study of sorption and flotation properties of alkylmorpholines with various compositions, and on the enhancement of their operation efficiency. The possibility of halite flotation application for pre-benefication of potash (sylvinite) ores is discussed. Increase of operation efficiency and decrease of alkylmorpholine consumption under halite flotation from carnallite and potash ores; extension of halite flotation application area. Photocolorimetric determination of alkylmorpholine sorption. Monomineral flotation in mechanical flotation cell with a volume of 300 ml. Technological experiments on ore flotation. Industrial tests of reagent modes. For sorption experiments and for the experiments on monomineral flotation, crystals of carnallite and potassium chloride have been used. Technological experiments were carried out with carnallite and potash (sylvinite) ores ( The experiments were carried out in saturated carnallite solutions MgCl    Alkylmorpholines are the products of morpholine and fatty alcohols synthesis. The properties of morpholine are similar to secondary amines. Alkylmorpholine fixation to halite can occur via hydrogen bonding between the oxygen atom of morpholine and the hydrated sodium ion at the halite surface ( Under collector fixation at the surface of mineral via hydrogen bonding or Coulomb forces, the strength of collector fixation is substantially defined by dispersive interaction of hydrocarbon radicals, which is enhanced as the distance between radicals decreases under dense packing of collector molecules or ions at the surface of the mineral. Investigations on hydrocarbon radical length influence upon alkylmorpholine flotation activity has shown an improvement in halite floatability with increase of hydrocarbon radical length, the highest halite recovery into the froth product being observed with hexadecyl-morpholine at a flotation liquid phase temperature of 18–20 °C. As the temperature increases maximum halite floatability is observed when alkylmorpholines with higher molecular mass are applied ( Flotation in saturated salt solutions provides intense alkylmorpholine micelle formation and salting out. Reagents-frothers can improve colloid properties of the collector, enhancing its solubility and dispersion in the liquid phase and activating its sorption at the surfaces of mineral particles. We have studied the influence of two frothers, dioxane alcohol (“Oxal” product), widely used in flotation plants in Russia, and V-1 frother (on the basis of glycol esters), developed in Halurgy Institute, on the efficiency of alkylmorpholine operation. Oxal introduction into alkylmorpholine solution did not produce a noticeable positive effect on floatactivity of alkylmorpholine. Addition of V-1 frother resulted in colloid properties improvement of alkylmorpholine aqueous solution and in enhancement of alkylmorpholine sorption at halite. Improvement of colloid and sorption properties of alkylmorpholine under addition of V-1 frother activates the flotation process, decreasing the collector consumption by a factor of 1.5–1.8 ( V-1 application has not only allowed us to considerably decrease the collector consumption (by a factor of 1.5–2.0), but also created conditions for a decrease in alkylmorpholine residual concentration in liquid phase. This is of special importance under flotation processing of solar bay salts, containing no clayey-carbonate slimes, which actively sorb cationic SAS. Alkylmorpholine accumulation in recirculating salt solutions of solar salt processing results in deterioration of potassium chloride suspension thickening due to the effect of “secondary” flotation in thickeners. Clayey-carbonate impurities, the components of carnallite ores, are easily slimed in milling. Possessing high specific surfaces and capability for active cationic SAS sorption, they adversely affect alkylmorpholine operation. It should be noted that the increase of hydrocarbon radical length of alkylmorpholine not only improves the halite floatability, but at the same time enhances alkylmorpholine sorption at slimes ( Beneficiated carnallite used for electrolytic production of magnesium should contain minimum quantities of sulphate and silicate impurities. Hence, the depressor application for beneficiated carnallite production by carnallite ore flotation processing is inadmissible. To eliminate the negative effect of slimes preliminary desliming is necessary. Desliming can be accomplished by hydroclassification using gravitational, or centrifugal- gravitational methods, by flotation or by a combination. Analysis of the mineral component distribution over the coarsest classes for carnallite ore milled to flotation size has shown ( The process of flotation desliming with the use of a combination of flocculant and oxyethylated slime collector has enabled us to implement flotation ore desliming with considerable lowering of collector (alkylmorpholine) consumption ( The tests confirmed the potential of beneficiated carnallite production by flotation with the required magnesium chloride content, MgCl The developed reagent schemes for halite flotation allowed us to consider the possibility of this process for preliminary beneficiation of potash (sylvinite) ores, represented by a mixture of sylvite (KCl), halite and clayey-carbonate impurities. Under potash ore milling a large number of fine-grained fractions is formed with dimensions less than 0.25 mm, in which easily slimed impurities of clay and carbonate minerals are concentrated. With a content of potassium chloride in the ore of 27–32% and that of slimes of 3.5–4.5%, the respective values for fine-grained fractions are: KCl content 24–25%, and slime content 6–10%. Sylvite flotation in the presence of large quantity of halite fine-grained particles is characterized by lowered selectivity and enhanced collector consumption, which is explained by an enhanced collector sorption at all fine-grained mineral components of the flotation feed. The aim of the investigation was to evaluate the possibility of efficient and selective separation of halite fine-grained particles in order to improve the conditions of subsequent sylvite flotation. Experiments have been carried out on potash ore fractions with particle size of 0.25 Thus, the removal of halite fine fractions, being sorption- and flotation-active, from the feed of sylvite flotation improves the performances of subsequent silvite flotation, decreasing the consumption of collector (alkylamine) and enhancing the quality of concentrate (  Alkylmorpholine sorption at halite proceeds with high selectivity, which creates the conditions for efficient and selective flotation separation of halite and carnallite mixtures. The influence of hydrocarbon radical length upon the efficiency of alkylmorpholine operation has been investigated at various temperatures of flotation liquid phase. Flotation activity of alkylmorpholine mixture is higher than that of monoalkylmorpholines. V-1 frother addition to alkylmorpholine enhances the alkylmorpholine sorption at halite and considerably decreases its consumption under halite flotation. The negative effect of clayey-carbonate slimes upon cationic flotation of halite from carnallite ores is eliminated by ore flotation desliming, and from potash ores by the combination of preliminary desliming and application of organic depressors. The possibility of halite flotation application for preliminary benefication of potash ores and improvement of their processing has been shown. We are thankful to Akzo Nobel Company for making alkylmorpholines of various compositions available for the investigations.