A continuous mixed-suspension, mixed-product removal (CMSMPR) crystallizer with automatic computer control and data acquisition was constructed. Operating this CMSMPR at rpm’s greater than 100 rpm assures well-mixed conditions. The crystallization of NaCl, an impurity in a concentrated CaCl2 solution, was performed by cooling under well-mixed conditions. Atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) and inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) have been used to measure solution concentrations. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), light microscopy and particle size analyzer with advanced laser light scattering have been used to characterize the crystals produced by the CMSMPR crystallizer. Octahedral NaCl crystals are observed. Steady state crystal size distribution (CSD) is observed at nine to ten times the mean residence time for the crystallizer. The CSD has been analyzed to look at the details of nucleation, growth, and aggregation rate as a function of crystallization temperature, rpm, and feed flow rate with the application of a Hounslow’s constant aggregation rate equation.Compared to overwhelming technical data available in other advanced technologies, knowledge about particle technology, especially in particle synthesis from a solution, is still poor due to the lack of available equipment to study nucleation, growth, breakage, and aggregation phenomena in a CMSMPR crystallizer. However, recent technical advances in particle size measurement such as Coulter counter and laser light scattering have made in/ex situ study of some of particle synthesis, i.e. growth, attrition, and aggregation, possible with simple systems. However, even with these advancements in measurement technology, to grasp fully the crystallization phenomena requires further theoretical and technical advances in understanding such particle synthesis mechanisms. This paper presents detailed information about the effect of temperature, flow rate, and mixing speed resulting in the evolution of CSDs with time from a concentrated brine solution, highlighting on nucleation, growth, and aggregation mechanisms. The fundamental thermodynamic driving force for a crystallization process is the change in molar Gibbs free energy, For NaCl ionic crystal precipitation, the solubility is given by the solubility product as: In ionic solution the activity coefficient depends upon the ionic strength of all ions in solution. Through this dependence on the ionic strength, ionic strength is influenced by the complexation of various metal cations in solution. Solution complexation will vary with different temperature, pH, and metal cations as well as the availability of various anions for complexation. For our solution the calcium cation has the most complexes with chloride and hydroxide predominantly. Various examples for the activity coefficient dependence on ionic strength are available including Debye– During precipitation new particles are born in the size distribution by nucleation processes. The nucleation rate, which appears as a boundary condition at size Classical theories The most important and commonly encountered mechanism of secondary nucleation is contact nucleation, sometimes also referred to as collision nucleation. Contacts between a growing crystal and walls of the container, stirrer, or other crystals result in contact nucleation. For materials of high or moderate solubility this is the most significant nucleation mechanism in a crystallizer. Crystals grow by the advance of the individual faces present on the crystal. These faces are usually, although not always, flat. In general, each face will grow at a different rate and the relative growth rates of different faces determine the crystal habit. Faster growing faces tend to grow to completion so those faces making up the major part of the crystal are the slower growing faces. Crystals can also aggregate by either Brownian motion or shear-induced aggregation. Turbulence in the stirred tank is the dominant cause of particle aggregation. In a crystallizer, crystals are kept in suspension by means of a stirrer. This results in attrition of crystals owing to contact with the high speed impeller of the stirrer. Attrition occurs also as the result of collisions of crystals with each other and with the wall. When the impact energy exceeds either the crystal strength or the aggregate strength the consequence is the fracture of the particles. Thus, the crystal geometry changes substantially and it seldom grows to its geometric shape. A typical laboratory scale jacketed crystallizer with 1.4 liter working volume was built and equipped with automatic temperature control by circulating a solution of ethylene glycol/water (1:1 vol%) through the outer jacket of the crystallizer vessel. Polyscience The feed flow rate was obtained by careful calibration of the speed of pump and the size of tube therefore, ensuring the desired feed and withdrawal rates as well as a constant residence time. To ensure a constant solution level in the crystallizer, a level transmitter was used to monitor solution level and to control the outlet pump speed. The Opto 22 The feed concentration was measured before each of these experiments. Care must be taken so that no crystallization takes place before the feed enters the crystallizer. This was prevented by heated feed lines, an internally insulated feed tube within the tank and by measuring the temperature at feed point inside the crystallizer to verify that no cooling took place in transferring the feed to the feed point. The crystallization system has the capability of controlling the crystallizer temperature to The power input per unit volume, crystallizer geometry, and layout should be carefully considered to achieve the vessel to be well mixed and that the particles are suspended uniformly. An empirical correction for the power needed for suspension homogeneity, proposed by Yamasaki et al. The ratio of liquid level to the tank diameter ( The mixing in a continuous stirred tank is often not ideal. The residence time distribution (RTD) is one of the ways to characterize the non-ideal mixing in the tank. RTD measurements show that operating conditions chosen for this work indicate near ideal mixing A feed solution of The CSD was measured with a Beckman Coulter LS230 For a CSD measurement, a slurry sample ( Even with the careful sample preparation for the CSD measurement, we found a special treatment was necessary since the particles were not stable during the measurement due to either growth or dissolution of particles caused by uncontrollable slight environmental differences in LS230 compare to crystallizer. The successful application of The crystallization chosen to study in this work is the purification involving the precipitation of KCl and NaCl from an impure aqueous solution of The detailed information for the ionic complexes existing at various temperatures is shown in The precipitation point for dominant solid species crystallizing out of an aqueous solution is shown in The solution composition analysis was done with Perkin-Elmer atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) and inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). The analysis (  The microscopic photos taken with wet particles a short time after sampling are shown in from 5 to 80 With  The effect of different flow rate on CSD is given in   The temperature effect with the same flow rate and mixing speed shows linear increase in size for all experiments. The mixing speed effect at the same flow rate and crystallization temperature clearly shows that smaller mean size of particles are produced with higher mixing speed. The effect of flow rate is not as pronounced with 20 ml/min showing a lower slope in contrast to all the other flow rate data. The CSDs at steady state were analyzed using Hounslow’s constant aggregation rate equation developed to solve the population balance equation that accounts for nucleation, growth, and aggregation with a constant aggregation rate kennel and a constant crystal growth rate The results obtained by the application of Hounslow’s equation into the CSDs at 10 Particles spending less time in a crystallizer at higher flow rate (i.e., shorter residence time distribution) and at higher level of solution supersaturation explain the increase in nucleation rate and the decrease in aggregation rate constant with increase in flow rate. The 3 fold increase in nucleation rate with increase in mixer rpm is due to secondary nucleation. The linear decrease in aggregation rate constant with increasing mixer rpm is expected due to turbulent mixing of the tank’s contents. While the growth rate shows the least change with temperature, flow rate, and mixing speed in The solution complexes and insoluble species at various temperature were elaborated with a stream analyzer (OLI Systems Inc.) for an impure 47 wt% The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the U.S. Department of Energy – The Office of Industrial Technologies.