Discontinuities within the rock mass can divide the rock into blocks with different sizes and shapes based on the geometrical parameters and pattern of existing joints. The volume of blocks created by cross-cutting of joints has a key role in underground works and selecting the proper supporting system. The dimensions of these blocks are controlled by the spacing and the number of the joint sets and random joints. The size of a block is closely related to the degree of jointing of the rock mass. One block is divided from the other blocks by different types of discontinuities. In this paper the possible shapes which a block can take as a result of the cross-cutting of the joints, as well as the general principles existing in block volume calculation methods are described, and a new method which concerns a special focus on dip angel, strike, spacing and density of joints is proposed. By this method the block volume calculation is performed more accurately. The software used in this study is AutoCAD. This method proved an acceptable result on the case study performed on a part of horseshoe tunnel of Marvdasht railway having 8 (m) length and 5.35 (m) diameter. This tunnel has been drilled within limestone rock using blasting method. After finishing measuring of all the joint sets existing in the study zone, the main part of the study, which involves the application of software, begins. Once the joints were emplaced inside the rock mass along the tunnel, it is possible to detach the resulted blocks and calculate their volumes using the command available in software. It is also possible to apply vertical and horizontal sections along or across the rock mass and tunnel to study the stability of blocks. Simply it is possible to create different cuts in the roof and right and left walls of the tunnel select different blocks and calculate their volumes. Then the average volume of the blocks for a given direction can be calculated. In previous methods the role of two important parameters of dip angle and strike of joints has not been considered. All of them are mainly based on the joint spacing, number of joints and the area in which the joints are collected, neglecting the important role of dip angle and strike of joint. The confidence in the proposed method is higher and it can be considered as a more accurate method compared to other methods. 