Amorphous Ti–Si–N films of approximately 200 and 650Å thickness were reactively sputtered on Si wafers using a dc magnetron sputtering system at various N2/Ar flow ratios. Their barrier properties between Cu (750Å) and Si were investigated by using sheet resistance measurements, XRD, SEM, RBS, and AES depth profiling focused on the effect of the nitrogen content in Ti–Si–N thin film on the Ti–Si–N barrier properties. As the nitrogen content increases, first the failure temperature tends to increase up to 46% and then decrease. Barrier failure seems to occur by the diffusion of Cu into the Si substrate to form Cu3Si, since no other X-ray diffraction intensity peak (for example, that for titanium silicide) than Cu and Cu3Si peaks appears up to 800°C. The optimal composition of Ti–Si–N in this study is Ti29Si25N46. The failure temperatures of the Ti29Si25N46 barrier layers 200 and 650Å thick are 650 and 700°C, respectively.Copper has drawn much attention as a new interconnect material for deep submicron ultra-large scale integrated circuits (ULSIs), because of lower resistivity (1.7 On the other hand, amorphous thin films are an attractive alternative to polycrystalline thin films because of the absence of grain boundaries for diffusion, since most barrier failures occur along grain boundaries. Recently, ternary amorphous thin films such as M (M Sun et al In this work, we investigated the barrier properties of the amorphous Ti–Si–N between Cu and Si by using sheet resistance measurements, X-ray diffractometry (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), RBS, and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) depth profiling focused on effects of the nitrogen content and the thickness of Ti–Si–N thin film on the Ti–Si–N barrier properties. P-type (100) Si wafers were cleaned in a dilute solution of HF (HF:H The composition and thickness of the Ti–Si–N films were measured by 2.240 The compositions and atomic densities of Ti–Si–N films deposited at various N The compositions of the as-deposited Ti–Si–N films are marked in a simplified Ti–Si–N ternary phase diagram (see  X-ray diffraction spectra of Cu/Ti–Si–N(650 There are two possible mechanisms for the barrier failure. One is the diffusion of Cu into the Si substrate to form Cu   AES depth profiles of the as-deposited and annealed Cu/Ti  The surface morphologies of Cu/Ti The barrier properties against Cu of amorphous Ti–Si–N films sputtered on Si wafers were investigated. As the nitrogen content increases, first the failure temperature tends to increase up to 46% and then decrease. Barrier failure occurs by the diffusion of Cu into the Si substrate to form Cu This work was supported by Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) via the Research Center for Thin Film Fabrication and Single Crystal Growing of Advanced Materials (RETCAM) at Seoul National University.