Gob-side entry driving can increase coal recovery ratio, and it is implied in many coal mines. Based on geological condition of 10416 working face tailentry in Yangliu Coal Mine, the surrounding rock deformation characteristics of gob-side entry driving with narrow coal pillar is analysed, reasonable size of coal pillar and reasonable roadway excavation time after mining are achieved. Surrounding rock control technology and effective roadway side sealing technology are proposed and are taken into field practice. The results showed that a safer and more efficient mining of working face can be achieved. In addition, results of this paper also have important theoretical significance and valuable reference for surrounding rock control technology of gob-side entry driving with narrow coal pillar under special geological condition.Chain pillar size is one of the main factors that affect stability of roadway surrounding rock Gob-side entry driving is a technology for roadway layout in underground mining 10416 working face is a subsequent working face of 10414 working face in Yangliu Coal Mine. Working face tailentry was excavated along the gob. The strike length of 10416 working face is 1160 Gob-side entry driving makes the roadway lay in solid coal and gob. Face-end main roof caving feature is that the face-end broken line of working face is in an arc, and the arc triangle block B is formed (shown in When the second working face is mined, the original equilibrium state of overlying large structure will be strongly affected. The process can be summed up as: main roof strata will develop new breakage when second working face is mined; the newly developed block A and the original arc triangular block B are hinged with each other. After main roof caving, key block A and B are in unstable state due to moments M and M′, which are in front of the roadway along gob, the high abutment pressure is formed ( According to the geological condition of 10416 working face, the main roof will be stable during the excavation period along the gob and the surrounding rock deformation is small. When the working face is mined, the key block A and C will move due to dynamic pressure. The motion of the key block A and C breaks the balanced structure. And the weight of overlying strata is applied to roadway support, which causes large deformation for the 10416 working face tailentry at last. After the first working face is mined out, the overlying strata gradually stabilized. It is very difficult to control surrounding rock deformation if the overlying strata is not stable. Therefore, the study of reasonable excavation time is very important for surrounding rock stability. After the main roof broke and caving in gob, the masonry beam is formed. The main roof above roadway is braced by the masonry beam, waste, roadway support and solid coal, which can be simplified into hinged bearing. The mechanical structure model is shown in For 10416 working face, mining depth is 600 The width of chain pillar directly affects the stable of the roadway surrounding rock and coal pillar, and the coal recovery ratio is closely related to the chain pillar. The major factors of chain pillars width include mining depth, angle of coal seam, the ultimate strength of coal pillar, friction angle of contact interface between coal seam and rock strata, cohesive force of contact surface between coal seam and rock strata, support resistance, mining disturbance coefficient, lateral restriction of gob to coal pillar, etc. The ultimate strength, friction angle of contact interface between coal seam and rock strata, cohesive force of contact surface between coal seam and rock strata are closely related. Through the stress model of limit equilibrium zone ( Combining “extraction roadway surrounding rock stability classification and support decision system” with theoretical calculation result, and considering field production practice, the support parameters of 10416 working face tailentry are as follows; roof bolt specification is Ф22 In order to prevent spontaneous combustion of coal seam, gas accident and the water inrush accident by air leakage in gob-side entry driving, sealing technology should be adopted. Air leakage distance that is calculated by Eq. P.O42.5 ordinary Portland cement was chosen as grouting material. According to the strength of rock specimen after grouting by different water cement ratios in the laboratory, the appropriate water cement ratio is determined. The compressive strength of four proportions (0.5:1, 0.75:1, 1:1, 1.5:1) is shown in the Grouting pressure is controlled between 0.8 and 1.0 Two rows of grouting bolts are set in the grouting area of two sides of the roadway, and the distance from the two rows of grouting bolts to the roadway floor is 1 and 2  The results show that in the excavation period: Convergence between roof and floor is larger than two sides, and the maximum is 150 Surrounding rock movement of the tailentry can be divided into 3 stages. The first stage is the severe movement of surrounding rock, which is about 25 In the mining period: Convergence between roof and floor is larger than two sides, the maximum roof and floor convergence is 210 Surrounding rock movement of tailentry can be divided into 3 stages. The first stage is the severe movement of surrounding rock, which is about 25 (1) The reasonable roadway excavation time of 10416 working face tailentry is found as 4 (2) Based on the calculation of the coal pillar limit equilibrium zone, the reasonable width of coal pillar in 10416 working face can be obtained as 5 (3) The anchorage support parameters of the 10416 working face tailentry can also be determined. Through the field test, its supporting design can meet the normal production need. Financial support for this work was provided by the