The bulk metallic glass (BMG) bonding with a thin elemental crystalline layer has been examined in terms of electro discharge technique. The estimated temperature rise during electro discharge was up to about 3500°C, and thus the interface involved a liquid phase. When the optimized database was applied to fabricate the two-layered BMG (BMG/Zr/BMG), the interface between crystalline layer and BMG showed a well-bonded interface and the fracture toughness of the two-layered BMG exhibited higher value compared with monolithic BMG. The detailed calculation for input energy and the main mechanism for the higher toughness are discussed.The fabrication of bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) has received an attention due to the unique properties, such as high strength, large elastic limit and high corrosion behavior While several approaches have been made for successful bonding, the electro discharge technique has not been examined in detail. The electro discharge technique has been intensively investigated by Lee and co-workers In this study, we first attempted bonding experiments with specimen arrays of BMG/thin crystalline layer with using a charge electro technique in order to identify optimum conditions for the achievement of successful bonding. As a model system, a commercial Vitreloy 1 (Vit. 1) and several crystalline thin layers (Nb, Zr and Al) have been applied in order to examine the effect of crystalline layers, such as melting temperature and applied energy. The cross-sections of the bonded layer exhibited complete bonding without defects when an optimum condition was selected. Here, we present the optimization criteria of input energy associate with materials properties of the fabricated laminated composites. 30 Each multilayered sample was put on the tungsten electrode at the bottom. An upper electrode was automatically machine-driven on the top of the sample followed by application of a 10 Following the discharge process, the specimen was cut perpendicular to the interface direction, and metallurgical estimations with a variation of input energy have been carried out by optical microscope (OM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-2700). X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku CN2301) was used for the phase identification. Following the identification of the bonding conditions, three-point bending tests of Vitreloy 1 and the composite with Zr layer have been performed with a strain rate of 2.5  For the BMGs with the Nb insert layer (  Compared Al (melting point: 660 Since the fracture toughness of the two-layered BMG showed higher value than that of the monolithic BMG, the interface between BMG and crystalline layer has been investigated. Especially, when the stacked number of the BMG layers reaches four layers, the specimen has not been fractured, even though the load for fracture passed the maximum value ( The BMG bonding with a thin elemental crystalline layer has been examined in terms of electro discharge technique. It appears that the input energy provides a critical factor for successful bonding. Since the temperature rise during electron discharge was estimated up to about 3500 The authors are grateful for the financial support of the Creative Research Initiatives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology, and the ERC program of KOSEF (grant # R11-2005-048-00000-0).