This work presents elemental-composition studies of dental calculus by X-ray fluorescence analysis using synchrotron radiation. The intrinsic characteristics of synchrotron light allow for a semi-quantitative analysis with spatial resolution. The experiments were carried out in the high-vacuum station of the XRF beamline at the Synchrotron Light National Laboratory (Campinas, Brazil). All the measurements were performed in conventional geometry (45°+45°) and the micro-collimation was attained via a pair of orthogonal slits mounted in the beamline. In this way, pixels of 50
                        μm×50
                        μm
                      were obtained keeping a high flux of photons on the sample.
                  Samples of human dental calculus were measured in different positions along their growing axis, in order to determine variations of the compositions in the pattern of deposit. Intensity ratios of minor elements and traces were obtained, and linear profiles and surface distributions were determined.
                  As a general summary, we can conclude that μXRF experiments with spatial resolution on dental calculus are feasible with simple collimation and adequate positioning systems, keeping a high flux of photon. These results open interesting perspectives for the future station of the line, devoted to μXRF, which will reach resolutions of the order of 10 μm.It is well known that the use of synchrotron radiation in trace analysis by X-ray fluorescence (SRXRF) allows to reduce detection limits and to improve sensitivities Grodzins The first photon microprobe induced by synchrotron radiation was reported by Horowitz and Howell In general, the SRXRF technique is specially adequate for non-destructive trace analysis on the spatial range of 5–100 μm. Many situations can be resolved efficiently with collimating systems, energy-dispersive setups and white beam. The use of a monochromator and/or wavelength-dispersive systems permits to optimize the irradiation conditions, to perform a selective analysis and to extend the dynamic range of the technique, improving sensitivities and detection limits for low- This work shows the results of spectrochemical analysis with spatial resolution in the XRF beamline of the Synchrotron Light National Laboratory (Campinas, Brazil). The measurements were carried out using a conventional system of collimation (orthogonal slits) and white beam. This produced high counting rates reaching spatial resolutions of some tens of microns. The analyzed samples were human dental calculi in different stages of formation. At present, several theories of calculus formation exist Calculus is generally classified into two types according to its position on the tooth The Synchrotron Light National Laboratory (Laboratorio Nacional de Luz Sı́ncrotron, LNLS) is a national research center located in Campinas, State of São Paulo (Brazil). The electron energy inside the storage ring is 1.37 GeV with a dipole magnetic field of 1.65 T. This gives a critical photon energy of 2.08 keV. The natural emittance is 100 nm rad and the revolution frequency is 3.2 MHz for this 93.2-m long machine The synchrotron radiation source for the XRF beamline is the DO9B (15°) bending magnet of the storage ring. The components of the line include 125-μm beryllium windows, to isolate the beamline vacuum from the ring vacuum and from atmosphere, a channel-cut crystal monochromator, and a motorized computer-controlled set of slits to limit the beam size. Both monochromatic and white beam can be used. For this reason, the monochromator vacuum chamber can be displaced allowing these two configurations. Since the intensity of the white beam is very high, aluminum filters must be used to avoid thermal damage of the beamline components. The beamline has two experimental stations. In the first one, both conventional XRF analysis and the total reflection X-ray fluorescence (TXRF) technique Si(Li) and HPGe energy-dispersive detectors compose the detection systems. Both detectors are placed at 90° to the incident beam and one of them (HPGe) is optimized for low- The TXRF station consists of a vacuum chamber (∼5×10 This setup (still under construction) consists of a capillary alignment table that is designed for repeatability and high angular resolution, as well as complete translational capacity. Four linear translation stages are mechanically coupled with flexible linkages to provide translations and rotations perpendicular to the capillary longitudinal axis. Movements of the linear translation stages of the same sign result in horizontal or vertical motions. Movements of opposite signs result in angular displacements of the capillary. This station also includes an optical microscope with motorized zoom, and Specimens of human dental calculi were obtained from adult patients suffering from periodontal disease who demanded periodontal treatment. Mass calculi were taken from the lingual surfaces of the lower anterior teeth using curettes, while trying to obtain representative specimens as big as possible. The samples were cleaned with distilled water and allowed to dry under lamp. From the set of samples, two of them were selected due to their suitable clinical characteristics: a small one named #1, which presented well-defined sub- and supragingival areas; and a bigger one named #2, which showed by sight an undefined pattern of deposit. Both samples were fixed in resin and polished in order to present a flat surface, parallel to the growing axis of the calculus. As the μXRF station is still under construction the high-vacuum station was used for the measurements in the conventional setup. The working vacuum inside this chamber was lesser than 10 For the sample #1 a linear scanning along the growing axis of the calculus was performed (see A 2D scanning was performed on sample #2. Because of the size of the sample, the beam size was increased up to 500×500 μm. The counting live-time for each pixel was 30 s/step and the step size was 100 μm/step in both orthogonal directions. The experiments described in this work show that micro-irradiation measurements of human dental calculi can be carried out using conventional systems of collimation. While no condensing device was used, counting rates were high enough to produce spectra with good statistics in reasonable time. The variety of elements shown in As mentioned before, sample #1 contains the two kinds of calculi. Sample #2 presents the same characteristics of sample #1 regarding the presence of supra and subgingival calculi near the borders. Nevertheless, the changes in the P/Ca K/Ca and Zn/Ca ratios observed in Although the spatial resolution reached is not very high (tens of microns in sample #1) the results open promising perspectives regarding the future performance of the beamline taking into account the dedicated μFRX station. This station will support a capillary device which will condense photons down to 16 μm from a 75 μm entrance hole, and a Kirkpatrick–Baez system which will focus the X-ray beam down to a 10 μm spot size. As can be seen in This research was partially supported by the LNLS – National Synchrotron Light Laboratory, Brazil.