Impact hammers have had an important role in construction and mining industries, recently. The importance of an excavation machine is evaluated with its excavation capacity. Excavation performance of these machines can be variable. Hourly excavation amount of an impact hammer is very important in terms of the project economy. Therefore, prediction of these machines' excavation performances makes the “machine selection” easier and also eases the leading to excavation schedule of the project. The performance prediction scales developed by the manufacturer companies just have the uniaxial compressive strength of rock and machine specifications. Thus the rock mass condition has not been considered. Bilgin et al. Within the scope of this study, a new laboratory equipment has been developed to determine the breaking energies with impact. The breaking energies of the rocks were determined after tests. Additionally, a new classification is introduced. Rock Structure Index (RSI) RSI is an index value that includes the breaking energy, structural condition, discontinuity condition and the strength of rock material. The parameters used in the formation of RSI are listed below: (a) minimum energy spent to break the rock by impact hammer system (from Impact Hammer System) The most important part of this research is the determination of the energy spent during breaking of rocks by impact hammer. For this purpose, a new laboratory equipment called Impact Hammer System (IHS) has been developed By using the newly developed laboratory equipment, repeated forces are applied either on cubical samples with the smallest 5 In this case, from equilateral triangle formed by the arms Each engine period is characterized by at least eight units of measurement ( If In this process, primarily as a result of experiments on samples of different sizes, the most appropriate sample size (54 As can be seen from the above figures, chisel bits on hard rocks and pick bits on soft rocks have higher performance. As can be seen from the graphs in In this context, ten different rocks were studied. In the light of the evaluations of the research, the classification of breakability of rocks by impact hammer and rock structure index ratings are given in Extremely weak rock and extremely hard rock have not been included in the classification. Some samples (extremely weak rock) squeezed with the weight of arm of IHS. Scrapping excavation, which are out of the scope of this study, is probably applicable for this type of rocks. Some samples also (extremely hard rocks) cannot be crushed with the equipment. The excavation can be operated by the help of discontinuities for these rocks. The condition of the rock mass where the excavation is to be made affects the performance of the excavation. Let's look at the excavations under the same conditions with the same impact hammer. There will be a big difference between hourly excavation rates of an intact/massive rock mass and a very blocky rock mass. Therefore, it was thought that the developed RSI must include the structural state of the rock mass. In RSI determination, structure rating (SR) recommended by Sonmez and Ulusay Rock masses contain discontinuities of different types, sizes and properties. These discontinuities affect the excavation significantly. Sometimes, large blocky rock masses that contain discontinuity allow easy excavation and sometimes do not. In this part of the research, the integration of discontinuities to RSI is investigated. Here, again, surface condition rating (SCR) ( Rock strength is important in the selection of the rock excavation machine. It does not make any sense to excavate clay and basalt with the same machine. For this reason, the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of a rock is a parameter in RSI. Where UCS is not applicable (laminated-foliated rocks) Block Punch Index (BPI) can be used to get UCS value. Here, equation of Ulusay et al. RSI developed for the selection of the impact hammer consists of four parameters. All ratings of MBE, SR, SCR and UCS parameters are given in The important parameters of the impact hammers' excavation performance are rock mass condition and the power of the machine used. All properties of the rock mass, rock strength and energy needed to break rock are integrated into the formulation with RSI. Power of the machine is the other important parameter. In the developed equation there are both rock mass and material and machine power. In the scope of this study, forty-four different field studies were carried out. In-situ measurements, observations, machine powers and production rates are given in As seen in As a result of the studies made at forty-four different fields, different rock conditions and different machine properties, the formerly-given formulation has been updated. New suggested equation is given below. There are two developed and in-use equations for predicting performance of impact hammers. One of them was developed by Bilgin et al. The other equation, which is given below, was developed by Aksoy If this equation is examined, it can be seen that it contains the properties of rock material, rock mass and impact hammer. But, there is no any parameter for the breaking with impact. Therefore, the newly developed equation not only contains the static parameters of the rock mass and material and the power of impact hammers but also the dynamic parameter to determine the minimum amount of energy expended in breaking process. To predict the minimum breaking energy for rocks were given in In the scope of this research, for forty-four different areas, different rocks and rock mass conditions and different machines, Eq. Impact hammers used more extensively in the construction and mining sector. Excavation performance of these machines and the selection of correct machine are very important for the economy of project. Rock engineers, involved in project planning, formed the excavation plan with the prediction of excavation performance of impact hammers. Therefore, an easily used equation was developed for the rock engineers. The new prediction equation proposed as a result of this research conducted for different machines in forty-four different areas, can easily be used in the performance of the excavation close to reality. The most important thing to remember here is the machine utilization rate, depending on the site condition and facilities, significantly affects the performance of the excavation during the project. One of the issues to bear in mind, on the other hand, inclination and strike of geological discontinuities play an important role in determining the hammer efficiency or production rate. Correction factor can be applied depending on the inclination and strike of geological discontinuities. Tunnel face will brake easily if the inclination is upwards in respect of the tool attack and difficult if the inclination is downwards. This issues were not investigated for this research as the new equation contains enough parameter about the geological situation of rock mass. This study was conducted under the scientific project numbered 109M604 of TUBITAK (The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey). The authors thank to