Molybdenum-containing catalysts are mostly used in petroleum-refining industries for mild hydrogenation processes. These catalytic processes generate huge quantity of spent catalyst. With the increasing demand of metal values and environmental awareness, catalysts can serve as a secondary source for metal recovery.
                  Spent hydro-refining catalyst mainly consists of 10–20% MoO3, 6–8% CaO, 0–12% V2O5, 0.5–6% NiO, 10% S, 10–12% carbon and the balance is Al2O3. The spent catalyst was roasted with soda ash to convert molybdenum into a water-soluble compound. Various parameters like temperature, time and soda ash addition have been studied thoroughly and conditions for the maximum recovery of molybdenum have been established. It has been found that at 600 °C with 30 min of retention time and using 12 wt.% soda ash, it is possible to extract 92% of molybdenum from the spent catalyst. The molybdenum is extracted as sodium molybdate. This sodium molybdate is further purified using carbon adsorption method to obtain a pure grade of molybdenum trioxide.Molybdenum, a typical transition element, has wide applications in the steel industry as an alloying element. Its extensive consumption in all the industrialized countries is attributed to the numerous beneficial effects it imparts on iron and steel One half of the world's supply of molybdenum comes from the processing of molybdenite, poweltite and wulfrenite ores Apart from other industrial uses, molybdenum is widely used in catalysts A number of hydro and pyro-metallurgical processes have been proposed for the recovery of molybdenum from its low grade concentrate. These processes include hypochlorite, electro-oxidation, nitric acid leaching, alkali leaching (pressure leaching process), chlorination and roasting with lime as well as with soda ash. The hypochlorite and electro-oxidation processes are efficient but the electrical energy consumption makes those processes less competitive The nitric acid process utilizes liquid oxygen whereas alkali leaching involves injection of oxygen gas. Capital costs for the installation of the equipment, prohibit the successful commercialization of the process The soda ash process has been widely investigated and the final product is sodium molybdate The raw material used in the study is a hydro-refining spent catalyst. The chemical analysis of the spent catalyst is given in The soda ash used in the study is of analytical grade. Experiments were carried with 20 g of catalyst. The charge mix of a weighed amount of catalyst and soda ash was kept in a mullite boat and heated gradually in a carbolite furnace to a desired temperature. The temperature accuracy of the furnace is ±1 °C. After the reaction is over, the roasted mass was cooled inside the furnace under flowing nitrogen to 100° and the mass was taken out from the furnace and air cooled to room temperature. The calcined mass was leached in de-ionized water with pulp density of 10 wt.% at 80 °C for 2 h to extract water-soluble sodium molybdate. The percentage recovery of molybdenum as sodium molybdate was determined by the volumetric oxime method In this communiqué, the main parameters, which affect the recovery, are discussed. During the study, the roasting temperature was varied in the range of 450–700 °C with an interval of 50 °C, using stoichiometric amount of soda ash with constant 30 min time of roasting. The feed mixture was roasted in an open crucible. The percentage molybdenum recovery vs. temperature is shown in The effect of soda ash addition on molybdenum extraction from the spent catalyst was studied for a period of 60 min at 600 °C. The percentage soda ash addition varied from 0 to 16 wt.% and the results obtained are illustrated in  The experiments were carried out at constant soda ash content in the feed mixture and reaction temperature 600 °C while reaction time (retention period) was varied from 10 to 60 min with 5-min interval. The experimental results are given in  The above optimisation of parameters study reveals that on a laboratory scale, it is possible to recover 92% of molybdenum at 600 °C after 30 min roasting with 12 wt.% of soda ash. In order to obtain molybdenum trioxide from the leached sodium molybdate solution, the pH of this solution is changed. Treatment of spent catalyst with sodium carbonate at 600 °C, leads to soluble sodium molybdate formation. The reaction is as follows The resultant molybdate solution is treated with hydrochloric acid at pH 2 which decomposes the sodium molybdate complex into various chloride salts. The reaction involved is as follows: The resultant solution is then neutralized with ammonia until pH reaches 11. At this stage, the ammonium polymolybdate is formed and precipitates from the solution: The precipitate of ammonium polymolybdate is then filtered and washed 2–3 times with warm water. Finally, the product is calcined at 450 °C, where the incorporated ammonia evolves leaving molybdenum trioxide (MoO The source sodium molybdate solution has to be purified in order to obtain high purity molybdenum oxide. Therefore, the activated charcoal adsorption/desorption technique was first studied. Initial tests revealed that 20 wt.% charcoal is enough to purify the solution. Sodium molybdate solution was first treated with hydrochloric acid (conc.) to adjust the pH up to 2. Then, the calculated quantity of charcoal was added. At this pH, most of the molybdate anions are selectively adsorbed on to the activated charcoal while the impurities remained in the solution. Thereafter, the molybdate-loaded charcoal was first washed with water then treated with ammonia to desorb the molybdates. The solution is then heated at 90 °C to produce ammonium polymolybdate. The ammonium polymolybdate thus formed was filtered and the residue was calcined at 450 °C to produce molybdenum trioxide. The chemical composition MoO Application of activated charcoal as an adsorbant, thus allows for the production of high purity molybdenum trioxide. The flow sheet for the above system is represented in The investigation performed revealed that molybdenum-spent catalyst generated from hydro-refining plants can be a secondary source of molybdenum. Roasting with soda ash is efficient for low concentrations of plant catalyst and allows recovery of molybdenum as trioxide. Under selected experimental conditions, i.e. roasting at 600 °C and addition of 12 wt.% soda ash for 30 min up to 92% molybdenum is extracted from a hydro-refining spent catalyst. Carbon absorption and desorption with ammonia produces pure ammonium molybdate that can be precipitated from solution and calcined to molybdenum trioxide. A scaling up of this process is being conducted.