In the past, it is experimentally revealed that the stacking fault energy (SFE) for the strain-induced martensitic transformation (SIMT) in metastable austenitic stainless steels is positively dependent on the strain rate, especially at impact strain rate; however, a conflicting view is recently reported that it is independent on the strain rate. To solve the conflict on the rate sensitivity of SFE, a non-destructive method to determine the martensitic volume fraction precisely under quasi-static tensile loading is effective and a method for measuring the relative magnetic permeability using AC voltage has been previously developed. However, this technique overestimates magnetic permeability during impact testing due to the eddy current generated at high frequencies, which can be avoided by applying DC voltage to the primary coil. In this work, quasi-static and impact tensile tests are performed on commercial SUS304 metastable austenitic stainless steel at various strain rates to determine its relative magnetic permeability during deformation. The obtained experimental data are utilized to investigate the SIMT behavior of SUS304 steel under quasi-static and impact tensions. As a result, it successfully captures the SIMT behavior in SUS304, especially during high strain rate deformation and the role of SFE on SIMT at higher strain rate is discussed.Metastable austenitic stainless steels exhibit superior mechanical properties that can delay the onset of necking because of the strain-induced martensitic transformation (SIMT), during which their structure transforms from paramagnetic austenite to ferromagnetic martensite [ As of today, several post-mortem studies have been conducted for this purpose including scanning electron microscopy [ Cao and Iwamoto [ The objective of the present study is to investigate the SIMT behavior of SUS304 steel, especially at high strain rates. In order to examine the SIMT process during deformation at various strain rates, quasi-static and impact tensile tests are performed at room temperature. Owing to the ferromagnetic properties of martensite, volume fraction could be estimated indirectly through the relative magnetic permeability using a DC voltage supply at a relatively low magnetic field. From the obtained magnetic permeability data, the SIMT behavior of metastable austenitic stainless steel during quasi-static and impact tests is investigated. In order to clarify the role of SFE on strain-induced martensitic transformation at high strain rates in particular, the strain rate dependency of the derived parameters  The constant magnetic field is produced by applying DC voltage to the primary coil and utilized to measure the value of Accordingly, Hence, In our previous study [ In this case, the time derivative The constant magnetic field The details of transformations from Eqs. Commercially available SUS304 metastable austenitic stainless steel satisfying the JIS standard (JIS G4303) is used in this study (its chemical composition is listed in A manufacturing technique for the coils used in the magnetic measurement setup is described in a previous study [ In order to study the dependence of the SIMT characteristics of SUS304 steel on the loading strain rate, tensile tests are performed in a wide range of strain rates varying from the quasi-static to impact ones. For the quasi-static values, uniaxial tensile tests are conducted at 298 K using an INSTRON-type material testing machine (Shimadzu AG-250kNX). Strain rates of The experimental setup employed for impact tensile tests is described below. Unlike the two-inch gas gun facility [ To measure the value of According to Cao and Iwamoto [ The Villari effect on the magnetic properties of steels must be considered when applying DC voltage. This effect (also caused the inverse magnetostriction [ When DC voltage is applied to the primary coil, the generated heat may significantly affect measurement results. Therefore, in this work, the influence of the heat generated in the coil on the obtained data is examined. For this purpose, the temperature of the specimen is measured using a type T thermocouple (Omega, TT-T-40-25) with and without coils under the same experimental conditions. The obtained relationships between temperature change and nominal strain are shown in To investigate the strain rate dependency of SIMT in SUS304 under impact tension, the incident stress wave  Furthermore, the relationships between the transverse strain and longitudinal strain obtained under quasi-static and impact tensions are shown in The  The value of To clarify the role of SFE at higher strain rate, the model proposed by Iwamoto et al. [ The parameters From On the other hand, as shown in For the parameter In this study, a non-destructive continuous evaluation of the SIMT process that occurred in SUS304 metastable austenitic stainless steel during impact deformation was performed. For this purpose, DC voltage was applied to the manufactured circuit, and its relative magnetic permeability was measured directly during tensile tests conducted at various strain rates ranging from the quasi-static to impact ones. In order to clarify the role of SFE on SIMT at high strain rates, in particular, the strain rate dependency of the derived parameters The non-destructive measurement of relative magnetic permeability accesses the SIMT behavior of steel with high accuracy because the change in its magnetic properties caused by the martensitic phase transformation can be evaluated by eliminating the influence of the jigs. As a result, the relative magnetic permeability may be determined at much higher strain rates under impact tension using DC voltage instead of AC voltage. From the measurement results of relative magnetic permeability by the proposed technique, in the quasi-static range of strain rate, the volume fraction of martensite indicates negative rate sensitivity. However, the amount of martensite by SIMT at impact strain rate gets higher than that at quasi-static one in the initial deformation stage less than 0.2 of nominal strain. More than the strain level, the SIMT at the impact loading was suppressed by the temperature increase caused by the increase in the strain rate due to temperature effects. In addition, it can be found that the magnitude of The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank Emeritus Professor Masami Saeki from Hiroshima University for his valuable suggestions regarding the proposed measurement method. The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at According to the Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction shown in Eq. Then, Besides, from Eq. By using Eqs. Furthermore, the Eventually,