The aim of this study was to compare the potential activity of enzymes involved in N, C, P and S cycling in the humus layer under three tree species: silver birch, Norway spruce and Scots pine. For arylsulphatase and protease the highest activities were found under birch, whereas beta-glucosidase activity was highest under pine. Beta-glucosaminidase and acid phosphatase showed similar activities regardless of tree species. Our studies show that soils under these species may differ enzymatically from each other. Enzyme activity studies under different tree species need more attention as the activity of different enzymes influences on soil nutrient availability in boreal forest soil.Several studies have shown that tree species can have an impact on the physico-chemical properties of soil ( Silver birch ( Because the soil microbial community drives decomposition process through extracellular enzymes, enzyme activity in soil can be treated as a sensitive marker of microbial mineralization processes ( The soils used were from the Kivalo study site (66°20′N, 26°40′E, northern Finland). This site is a tree-species experiment that includes adjacent 81-year-old stands dominated by silver birch ( Representative soil samples (20 cores, diameter 5.8 Since the pH values of the birch, spruce and pine soil were 4.0, 3.8 and 3.8 (±0.1), respectively, acetate buffer (40 β-Glucosidase activity (EC 3.2.1.21.) was measured according to the method of β-Glucoaminidase activity (EC 3.2.1.30.) was measured according to the method of Protease activity (EC 3.4.) was measured according to the method of Acid phosphatase activity (EC 3.1.3.2.) was measured according to the method of Arylsulphatase activity (EC 3.1.6.1.) was measured according to the method of The amount of crystalline cellulose in soil was determined on the basis of the difference between the amount of glucose obtained after acid hydrolysis (whole amount of glucose in samples) and methanolysis (non-cellulosic glucose). Methanolysis was done according to the method of Acid hydrolysis was done according to the method of Results are presented as amounts of anhydrosugars. Air-dried soil (10 To determine the differences between means of the values, one-way ANOVA was used, followed by Tukey's test. If needed, the results were transformed to fulfill the assumptions of the analysis of variance. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article. Beta-glucosidase activity was twice as high in the humus layer under pine as under birch and spruce ( Amounts of cellulose under birch, spruce and pine did not differ significantly, the lowest average value was found for birch soil ( For both, S and P, the lowest average values were obtained for pine soil; however, only in the case of P was this difference statistically significant ( Extracellular hydrolytic enzymes convert organic polymers of C, N, P and S to available nutrient forms for microorganisms and plants. Dominant tree species may influence several biological and chemical characteristics of boreal forest soil ( Beta-glucosidase, which is involved in the last step of cellulose degradation, showed the highest average activity in soil under pine and lower activity for soil under birch and spruce. The concentration of cellulose, i.e. the substrate for reaction, did not explain these differences well. Nevertheless, the mean value for cellulose was lowest under birch and highest under pine. One reason for the smaller amount of cellulose in birch soil may be less of this polysaccharide in birch leaf litter compared with needle litter ( Beta-glucosaminidase participates in converting chitin to amino sugars, a source of easily mineralizable C and N ( Proteolytic activity was highest under birch, lower under pine and negligible under spruce. In birch soil, higher microbial biomass, probably excreting more proteases, may partly explain this result ( Tree species had no significant impact on soil acid phosphatase, which hydrolyze organic P esters releasing PO Arylsulphatases, which hydrolyze aromatic sulphate esters and release SO Both tree species itself and the typical ground vegetation developed under the tree species may contribute to soil microbial population and enzyme activities. In this study site, there were no major differences between the tree species in the amount of aboveground litterfall (Helmisaari, unpublished) but the composition must have been different ( Birch has a reputation as a soil improving species ( We are grateful to Dr Joann von Weissenberg for checking the English language of this paper, to Anneli Rautiainen for helping with laboratory work and to Arja Tervahauta for analyzing the acid ammonium-acetate-extractable elements. This study was funded by the