The effect of pyridine, 2-picoline and 4-picoline on current efficiency (CE), deposit morphology, crystallographic orientation and polarization of the cathode during electrodeposition of nickel from acidic sulphate solutions containing boric acid were investigated. These additives were found to have no significant effect on current efficiency. However, the nickel deposits obtained were smoother, more compact and more leveled in case of picolines than with pyridine. The (200) plane was the most preferred plane and was not affected by the presence of these additives in the electrolyte. Each of the additives polarized the cathode with the order of polarization being 4-picoline>2-picoline>pyridine. The quality of the deposit was improved by these additives in the order 4-methyl pyridine>2-methyl pyridine>pyridine.Additives are commonly used to improve the quality of nickel deposits from aqueous electrolytic baths. In particular, addition of relatively small amounts of organic additives in the plating bath has been reported to affect the current efficiency (CE), surface quality, deposit morphology, crystallographic orientation and polarization behaviour of the cathode during the metal deposition Gao et al. Hoare Pyridine and its derivatives act as corrosion inhibitors While there is wealth of information on the effect of pyridines on the electrodeposition of various metals, information on nickel electrodeposition is scanty. This paper reports the effect of pyridine and its derivatives; 2-picoline and 4-picoline on the cathodic CE, surface quality, deposit morphology, crystal orientation and polarization behaviour of nickel electrodeposited from sulphate solutions containing boric acid. Nickel electrodeposition was carried out in a rectangular flow cell of dimension 13.2×8×6 cm made from Perspex consisting of separate cathodic and anodic compartments each of dimensions 9×4×6 cm separated by a microporous daramic separator. The cathode and anode each of area 20 cm The nickel electrolyte was prepared from analytical grade Ni [60 g dm For electrodeposition and polarization studies, the surface of the electrode prior to nickel electrodeposition was polished with 400 and then 1200 grade silicon carbide paper and then rinsed with 1 M HCl followed by ultrapure water. All the electrodeposition experiments were conducted for 2 h at a current density of 200 A m A Philips PW 1030 X-ray diffractometer was used to examine the nickel deposits to determine their preferred crystal orientations relative to the ASTM standard nickel. The surface morphology of the deposit was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Philips XL 20 SE microscope. All the experiments for studying the polarization behaviour of nickel electrodeposition were carried out in a glass cell with 100 cm The cathode potential was scanned in the potential range of 0 to −1000 mV at a scan rate of 10 mV s The effects of pyridine and its derivatives, namely, 2-picoline and 4-picoline, in the concentration range of 2–40 mg dm The investigated additives showed a marked effect on the surface quality of the nickel electrodeposits. The deposits obtained in the absence of the pyridine/picoline additives were smooth, bright and uniform. The addition of pyridine/picolines improved the quality of deposits. The degree of improvement increased with the increase in additive concentration. The picolines were more effective than pyridine. Typical SE micrographs are shown in Increasing the concentration of the additives increased the brightness of the deposits. The brightness of electrodeposits may be attributed to the adsorption of both boric acid and these compounds on the cathode surface similar to that reported by Alaune et al. The data on crystallographic orientations of the nickel deposits are given in However, addition of 4-picoline did not change the preferred crystal orientation throughout. Addition of 4-picoline significantly reduced the peak intensities of (220) and (311) planes, which was also reflected in the surface morphology. The cathodic polarisation of Ni The cathode polarisation effect of these additives during nickel electrodeposition on stainless steel electrode can be seen from the linear sweep voltammograms ( The following conclusions could be drawn regarding the effect of pyridine, 2-picoline and 4-picoline on nickel electrodeposition from acidic sulphate solutions containing boric acid The additives have only a marginal effect on the CE of nickel electrodeposition. The picolines result in smoother, more compact and more leveled deposits compared to pyridine. The presence of the additives has a strong influence on the preferred orientations of the electrodeposited nickel. However, no generalization is possible. The additives cause cathode polarization in the order 4-picoline>2-picoline>pyridine. USM would first like to thank the CSIR for granting him a Research Fellowship. The authors thank P. Fallon for assistance in SEM, K. Seymour for XRD and T.B. Issa for general assistance throughout the work. The authors also thank the Director, Regional Research Laboratory Bhubaneswar for his permission to publish this paper. Financial support was partly received from the A.J. Parker Co-operative Research Centre for Hydrometallurgy.