Sometimes engineers need to estimate the wet-rock P-wave velocity from the dry-rock P-wave velocity. An estimation equation embracing all rock classes will be useful for the rock engineers. To investigate the predictability of wet-rock P-wave velocity from the dry-rock P-wave velocity, P-wave velocity measurements were performed on 41 different rock types, 11 of which were igneous, 15 of which were sedimentary and 15 of which was metamorphic. In addition to the dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocity measurements, the P-wave velocity changing as a function of saturation degree was studied. Moreover, dry-rock S-wave velocity measurements were conducted. The test results were modeled using Gassmann’s and Wood’s theory and it was seen that the measured data did not fit the theories. The unconformity is due to the fact that the theories are valid for high-porosity unconsolidated sediments at low frequencies. Gassmann’s equation was modified for the rocks except high-porosity unconsolidated sediments.
                  The dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocity values were evaluated using regression analysis. A strong linear correlation between the dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocities was found. Regression analyses were repeated for the rock classes and it was shown that correlation coefficients were increased. Concluding remark is that the derived equations can be used for the prediction of wet-rock P-wave velocity from the dry-rock P-wave velocity.Ultrasonic measurement is one of the non-destructive geophysical methods commonly used by engineers working in various fields such as mining, geotechnical, civil, underground engineering as well as for oil, gas minerals explorations. This method can be applied both in the laboratory and in the field. There are different application areas such as the assessment of grouting There are a number of factors that influence the sound velocity of rocks. The important factors are rock type, texture, density, grain size and shape, porosity, anisotropy, water content, stress and temperature. In addition to these factors, rock mass properties also influence the sound velocity. Weathering and alteration zones, bedding planes and joint properties (roughness, filling material, water, dip and strike, etc.) have important influence on the sound velocity. Some researchers have investigated the effect of water content on the ultrasonic velocities. Wyllie et al. Although several researchers have investigated the effect of saturation on P-wave velocity of different rocks, none of them has derived an empirical equation between dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocities. A correlation equation between dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocities for the estimation purpose will be useful for the rock engineering applications. In this study, the predictability of wet-rock P-wave velocity from the dry-rock P-wave velocity was studied. Sound velocity tests were performed on 41 different rock types, 11 of which were igneous, 15 of which were sedimentary and 15 of which was metamorphic. Rock blocks were collected from the stone processing plants, quarries and natural outcrops in Turkey. Each block sample was inspected for macroscopic defects so that it would provide test specimens free from fractures, partings or alteration zones. The name, location and class of the rocks are given in NX (54 Firstly, the samples were saturated with distilled water for 48 Some of the tested rocks had bedding or schistose planes. It is known that weakness planes reduce the velocity. In this study, experiments were carried out on the samples cored perpendicular to any visible bedding or schistose plane in the laboratory. Porosity values of each sample were determined from the saturated and dry weights. Measured dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocity values and porosity values are given in To see the P-wave velocity changing on the samples allowed to dry in the atmosphere over a period of 32 When the P-wave velocity plots as a function of saturation degree was examined, it was shown that after initial increasing with increasing saturation degree, P-wave velocity values were remained approximately same up to a saturation degree value depending on the rock properties. After a value defined as threshold saturation degree (SD The P-wave velocity plots as a function of saturation degree show some similarities to the results obtained by Wyllie et al. Several petro-elastical models have been proposed by the different researchers. The most obvious and simple model is Gassmann’s theory according to Carcione One of the results of Gassmann’s theory is that the wet- and dry-rock shear moduli are the same, so the wet- and dry-rock S-wave velocities are Some properties of the tested rocks and Gassmann wet-rock P-wave velocity are given in Although Gassmann’s theory does not fit the data, there is a good correlation between Gassmann wet-rock P-wave velocity and measured wet-rock P-wave velocity ( As stated in Eq. To model partial saturation Wood’s theory For the modeling of partial saturation, the data in the 2nd and the 16th hour during the drying period after saturation were used. Dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocity values were evaluated using the method of least squares regression. Linear, logarithmic, exponential and power curve fitting approximations were tried and the best approximation equation with highest correlation coefficient ( The correlation between the dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocity values is indicated in To see how the rocks classes affect the correlation, regression analysis were performed for sedimentary, metamorphic and igneous rocks, respectively ( As shown in In addition, the correlations between dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocity values were investigated for the rock groups having a porosity value of lower and higher than 1%. It was found that, conforming to the above statements, while Δ Dry- and wet-rock P-wave velocity and dry-rock S-wave velocity measurements were carried out on 41 different rock types. The results were evaluated and following conclusions were obtained: The threshold saturation degree (SD A general correlation between Δ The modeling of fully and partial saturation using Gassmann’s and Wood’s theory showed that the theories did not fit the data. This is because Gassmann derived his equations for high-porosity unconsolidated sediments at low frequencies. Gassmann’s equation was modified for the rocks except high-porosity unconsolidated sediments. Regression analysis indicated that wet-rock P-wave velocity values were strongly correlated with the dry-rock P-wave velocity values. When the regression analyses were repeated for the rock classes respectively, it was seen that correlation coefficients were increased. The derived equations can be used for the prediction of wet-rock P-wave velocity from the dry-rock P-wave velocity. Author thanks to Professor J.M. Carcione for comments and suggestions. This study has been supported by the Turkish Academy of Sciences (TUBA), in the framework of the Young Scientist Award Program (EA-TUBA-GEBIP/2001-1-1).