Molecular-level forces experienced by a surfactant during emulsification can have a significant impact on emulsion structure and effective properties. Understanding the interplay of molecular-level forces and effective phase properties during in situ emulsification is a fundamental question relevant to various subsurface engineering applications. Herein, we use dynamic synchrotron-based X-ray microtomography to capture flow dynamics during an oil emulsification process, whereby brine salinity influences the predominate molecular-level forces. We measure oil recovery, phase viscosities, phase morphologies, contact angles and water relative permeability to elucidate the underlying oil recovery mechanisms. Optimum salinity formed a stable emulsion phase with ultra-low interfacial tension, viscosity high enough to reduce the mobility of the injected solution and a reduced adhesive force that resulted in less contact between oil and solid grains. These mechanisms are attributed to favorable flow dynamics that lead to improved oil recovery that can be tuned by brine salinity.Multiphase flow in porous media is important for a wide range of applications, such as geologic CO Winsor type II + systems form a water-in-oil phase in equilibrium with a nearly pure water phase. This behavior results from the steric repulsion between aliphatic tails in the oil phase, resulting in suppressed Coulomb forces (also known as ionic forces) between water and oil molecules. Conversely, in Winsor type II-, the Coulomb repulsions are dominant between the polar heads of the surfactant molecule, leading to phase equilibrium between droplets of oil-in-water and pure oil ( Multiphase flow at the pore-scale is highly dependent on effective phase properties as characterized by the well-known Herein, we utilize synchrotron-based μ-CT imaging to study AS flooding scenarios at under-optimum and optimum conditions since salinity plays a pivotal role in effective emulsion phase properties, and thus pore-scale flow during oil recovery. We choose to study only these two salinities for their structural differences and importance in subsurface engineering processes. As depicted in Enordet J13131, produced by Shell Chemicals, and sodium carbonate (NaCO Rocks were first cut to 5 mm diameter and 10 mm length and then fitted to a heat-shrink rubber tubing. Hot air gun was used to shrink the rubber to provide a seal around the rock samples. Inlet and outlets ports were connected on both sides of the sample for flow experiments. The samples were mounted on a sample holder and a top-bottom injection was done using a syringe pump. The rocks were first saturated with water followed by decane, and waterflooding to achieve residual oil saturation, and then flooded with AS solution at a rate of 50 μl/min. The experiments were conducted at ambient conditions. Dynamic 3D tomograms were obtained from GeoSoilEnviroCARS Sector 13 at Argonne National Laboratory Advanced Photon Source (APS). It offers X-ray photon fluxes ~10 Mt. Gambier limestone (φ = 52.8%, Image processing was performed using Avizo Fire 9.7. Images were cropped to 500 Oil recovery was measured from the segmented images based on In-house software for contact angle measurement along the 3-phase contact line ( Euler number was measured for individual oil phase extracted from the segmented tomograms. This number was used to measure the oil phase connectivity at 1-3 PVs of AS fluid. When To understand the nature of the tested emulsions, we measured the IFT between the emulsion phase and brine, and the viscosity of the emulsion. IFT measurements demonstrated that optimum condition had the lowest IFT and highest viscosity ( The type of flow regime that develops for under-optimum and optimum salinity AS flooding can be interpreted as a result of the molecular-level forces that influence IFT and viscosity. Firstly, the flow regimes can be characterised by a We also measured the contact angle distributions at 3 PV injected to further understand the wetting conditions during AS flooding. From Previously, They found that the adhesive energy between water and oil in emulsions decreases with lower salinity, which correlates to higher contact angle ( When comparing the oil clusters after 3 PV of AS flooding ( To illustrate the effect of IFT, viscosity, oil mobilization, contact angle and oil cluster sizes presented in Supplementary video related to this article can be found at The following is/are the supplementary data related to this article: To analyze the topology and geometry of individual oil clusters, we measured their Euler characteristic while AS solution was injected. To emphasize the type of oil cluster observed, we looked at the averaged value of the normalized Euler characteristic of the oil cluster. As seen in Since the wetting condition is known to influence relative permeability ( Mobility ratio (  The optimum salinity condition resulted in a stable emulsion phase in the presence of oil and water, which is attributed to having higher ratios of surfactant to oil and surfactant to water ratios. For the tested systems the length scale of the emulsion structures for optimum and under-optimum conditions were similar and within the 100 nm range. However, the longer-range forces involved in stabilizing the type III system ( The optimum salinity condition provided lower contact angles for both rocks, as explained by the Young Dupré equation, whereby the adhesive force between oil and solid was reduced. We also assessed oil cluster sizes at the end of each flooding scenario. Under-optimum salinity had a higher frequency of large oil clusters (10 While further work is required on a case-by-case basis when designing AS flooding protocols, it is clear that phase behavior and molecular-level forces have a fundamental impact on pore-level dynamics. Effective phase properties of the emulsion phase provide a key indicator for the flow regime, which can be tuned by addition of a co-solvent and/or adjustment of brine salinity. These basic parameters will be important for the design and fundamental understanding of any subsurface engineering technology involving Yara A. Alzahid: Designed the research work, conducted data analysis and wrote the manuscript with input from all other authors. Hussain Aborshaid, Contributed in data analysis, Mohanad Asali, Contributed in data analysis, James McClure: Partially conducted the experiments and critically revised the manuscript, Cheng Chen: Partially conducted the experiments and critically revised the manuscript. Peyman Mostaghimi: Critically revised the manuscript and helped with interpretation of data. Ying Da Wang: Contributed in data analysis, Chenhao Sun: Contributed in data analysis. Ryan T. Armstrong: Conducted the experiments, helped with interpretation of data and critically revised the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Yara Alzahid acknowledges the graduate fellowship provided by Saudi Aramco. The authors also acknowledge GeoSoilEnviroCARS Sector 13 at Argonne National Laboratory's Advanced Photon Source (APS) where the X-ray imaging was conducted. The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at