The mechanism of gold dissolution in acidic thiourea (Tu) solutions was investigated using cyclic voltammetry (CV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV). CV over the potential range of −0.3 to 0.75V vs. SCE shows peaks for the Tu/FDS (formamidine disulfide) and 
                        
                           Au
                           /
                           Au
                           (
                           Tu
                           
                              
                                 )
                              
                              
                                 2
                              
                              
                                 +
                              
                           
                        
                      redox reactions. An oxidation peak associated with gold dissolution occurs at ϕ
                     ⩾0.36V vs. SCE. This peak is often not observed in the first scan and its presence and magnitude are sensitive to the positive sweep potential limit of the first scan. FDS addition to the solution or adsorbed on the electrode has a strong catalytic effect and makes gold dissolution peak shift to lower potential during the first scan. This catalytic effect is identical to that exerted by scanning to higher potential. Tu/FDS ratio has a significant effect on thiourea stability, and it should be about 10:1 for the minimum thiourea decomposition and maximum gold dissolution rate. EIS results at 0.5−0.7 V vs. SCE with only Tu initially present in solution reveal a high-frequency capacitive loop associated with double layer charging, a medium-frequency inductive loop associated with FDS adsorption, and a low-frequency capacitive loop related to Tu oxidation. It appears that FDS adsorption on the gold surface activates the dissolution of gold and inhibits the oxidation of Tu.Since the initial report of thiourea (Tu) as a complexing agent for gold dissolution, considerable research has been directed towards the use of Tu as an alternative ligand to cyanide for leaching gold ( Gold can be attacked or passivated depending on the applied potential ( The aim of this paper is to provide more information about the role of FDS on gold dissolution. Accordingly in this study, gold dissolution in acidic Tu solutions was investigated using electrochemical methods, such as cyclic voltammetry (CV), linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Tu (99%, Fisher Scientific) and formamidine disulfide chloride salt (97%, Alfa) were used without further purification. Reagent grade sulfuric acid was obtained from Mallinckrodt. All solutions were prepared from deionized water purified in a Millipore Milli-Q system (18 Experiments were carried out in a conventional three-electrode glass electrochemical cell. A gold (99.9% purity, 7 Prior to each experiment, the working electrode was carefully ground and polished with successively finer grades of aluminia powder of size 1.0, 0.3, and 0.05 The electrochemical measurements were performed using a Gamry Instrument PCI4G750 potentiostat. The CV experiments were carried out at a scan rate of 100  No consensus exists about the origin of the two peaks. The reaction above 0.8 To identify the peaks and expose the reasons for the appearance of peak A2 at the expense of peak A1 in the second scan, the first and second scans of CV were run to different final positive potential. Examples of cyclic voltammograms with different final positive potentials are presented in It is apparent from The anodic peak potential shifts negatively with To further support the theory that FDS is formed and adsorbed during the first scan and then accelerates gold dissolution during the second one, experiments were performed to in situ remove the adsorbed FDS. After running two scans, a third scan was run from −0.73 The previous discussion of anodic peaks occurred for cyclic voltammetry as performed under static conditions. If the gold electrode is rotated during the first sweep, the peak (A1) appears around 0.61 To further confirm that the adsorption of FDS catalyzes the dissolution of gold, a clean gold electrode was first pretreated in a solution containing 5 It is evident that FDS adsorption shifts the gold dissolution to lower potentials. To check the effect of Tu/FDS ratio on the stability of Tu and gold dissolution, CVs for different molar ratio of Tu to FDS were run as shown in When keeping the Tu concentration at 5 From It is obvious that gold dissolution depends on the presence of FDS. This may be the adsorption of Tu on gold forms a blocking layer, which passivates the surface ( To further investigate the behavior of gold in acidic Tu solutions, a series of potentiostatic EIS measurements were performed. The resulting Nyquist plots are shown in In In The reason for this can be seen in the inductive loops in The finally aspect of the EIS plots in EIS measurements appear to confirm the observation made by CV that oxidation of Tu to FDS occurs at higher potentials, which leads to the adsorption of FDS onto the gold surface, and then gold dissolution occurs to produce To further understand the role of FDS in the dissolution of gold in acidic Tu solutions, linear sweep voltammetry was performed at quasi-steady state polarization (e.g. 1 From this investigation, the major findings are: The dissolution of gold in acidic Tu solutions containing no catalytic species is severely hindered. The anodic dissolution peak starts at potentials exceeding 0.36 FDS, which forms during anodic oxidation of Tu, when added to solution, or is deliberately adsorbed at the electrode surface, has a catalytic effect to promote the anodic dissolution of gold. The gold dissolution rate increases with an increase of Tu or FDS concentration. Low Tu/FDS ratio is favorable to the stability of thiourea. It should be about 10:1 for the minimum thiourea decomposition and maximum gold dissolution rate. EIS over the potential range of 0.5–0.7 LSV was found to confirm the catalytic behavior of FDS in gold dissolution. Gold dissolution is electrochemically controlled. The product may cause the decrease of gold dissolution current, further work is needed to identify. Grateful acknowledgement is made to Newmont Mining Corporation for the financial support of this work. Xiyun Yang thank China Scholarship Council for awarding a scholarship to pursue her study in USA as a visiting scholar. Discussions with Jinshan Li and Xuming Wang are greatly appreciated.