Tibial shaft fracture is the most common of long bone fractures. A wide range of complications accompanies the treatment even of closed tibial shaft fractures. Management of this injury should be concentrated in units with adequate facilities and knowledge of these fractures. The treatment may be accomplished either conservatively or surgically; selection of approach must be based on clinical and radiological examination. Also patient-related variables must be considered. Conservative treatment is justified for fractures with slight initial displacement. In such cases, closed functional bracing is to be recommended. Intramedullary locking nailing (IMLN) should be applied when closed reduction under anaesthesia is necessary to achieve an acceptable alignment. A subset of patients must be managed using either plate fixation or an external fixation device.Tibial shaft fracture is the most common of long bone fractures. In 1999, a total of 1422 patients were treated for tibial shaft fractures in hospitals in Finland ( Both conservative and surgical treatments of tibial shaft fracture have developed during recent decades. However, the need for surgical treatment of closed tibial shaft fractures is still controversial. Some traumatologists advocate the non-operative approach as optimal primary treatment for these fractures, while others observe a lower threshold for surgery. The tibial shaft fracture has a bad reputation. A wide range of complications accompanies treatment of this injury. These complications may be related to both the injury and its treatment and it is sometimes difficult to identify the precise source. Acute complications comprise compartment syndrome, thromboembolism and infection, while delayed union, non-union, malunion and chronic anterior knee pain are the complications which may occur in the late phase of treatment. Protracted morbidity is characteristic of the tibial shaft fracture even if it heals without complications, and the emergence of a complication usually extends it dramatically. In order to spare the patient needless suffering and to avoid extra costs, the surgeon must carefully weigh the advantages and disadvantages of a given treatment for each patient. The objective of this paper is not to give strict guidelines as to how to treat closed tibial shaft fractures but rather offer guidelines for the reader to develop a basis for clinical judgment. The unit managing tibial shaft fractures must have a staff experienced in the treatment of these injuries. The doctor on the unit must be capable of balancing the fracture type against the resources available and detecting the signs heralding complications. If the injured leg is clearly abnormally aligned it must be reduced and supported with a splint (before X-rays). The leg should be elevated beyond heart level in order to reduce swelling. The possibility of other injuries besides tibial shaft fracture must be considered. The concomitant injuries can be in the same extremity or elsewhere in the body. Particularly, injuries to the upper extremity commonly occur in these patients. Since the pain caused by the fracture itself sometimes renders it difficult to discern concomitant traumas initially in the emergency room, it is important to repeat the examination after stabilisation of the fracture. The history of illnesses and medication must be ascertained. The abuse of alcohol, use of drugs and the patient's mental status must be recorded. The energy which has caused the injury may give some indications of the likelihood of other injuries. Concomitant life-threatening injuries are uncommon when the tibial shaft fracture has been caused by low trauma energy, i.e. either by indirect stress or by direct violence. Typical mechanisms of injury are slipping or stumbling at ground level, falling from a height less than 3 m, and sporting or bicycle accidents where a motor vehicle is not involved. By contrast, if a patient has sustained a high energy tibial shaft fracture, the possibility of other even more serious injuries must be borne in mind. Typical mechanisms in this case are road traffic accidents and falling from a height of more than 3 m. In the examination of a patient sustaining a high energy tibial shaft fracture, the generally accepted order for polytraumatised patient examination must be followed (chest, abdomen, pelvis, head, vertebral column, extremities). Nerve function and blood circulation in the injured leg must be assessed (pulses, colour, temperature and capillary circulation). The most important goal in treatment is to promote the healing of the soft tissues. Although the fracture is closed (no communication between skin and bone) there may be a variable extent of destruction of soft tissues. Without vital soft tissues at the fracture site the healing of the fracture will be compromised. The extent of soft tissue damage must be reported meticulously in the patient's record according to some generally accepted grading system. The four-grade classification developed by Tscherne (1984) has proved practical ( Plain radiographs must be taken in two perpendicular views (frontal and sagittal planes) to establish the fracture site, the fracture pattern, fracture displacement and possible fracture extensions into the knee or ankle joints or metaphysis of the tibia. For appropriate assessment, it is important that X-rays be taken so that both knee and ankle joints are visible on a single film. An assessment of the degree of comminution of the fracture is important for two reasons. Firstly, as the mechanical stability of the fracture is dependent on the number of fracture fragments, then as comminution increases stability decreases. Secondly, it indicates indirectly the severity of the soft-tissue damage. For practical purposes, all closed injuries covered by devitalised skin should be considered as contaminated and broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics or a combination of antibiotics covering also anaerobic bacteria should be started. It must also be ensured that the patient has appropriate vaccination status against tetanus. The goals in treating tibial fractures include (1) achievement of bony union, (2) acceptable alignment of the fracture, (3) return to pre-injury level of function. Additional goals are (1) a definitive procedure immediately, (2) sufficient external or internal stabilisation allowing early weight bearing, (3) early range of movement of knee and ankle joints, and (4) low overall costs (direct and indirect). However, comparison of the results of treatment in different studies is difficult in that the characterisation of injury severity and patients has been inadequate and unstandardised ( Traditionally, closed fractures of the tibial shaft have been managed by using a long-leg cast with delayed weight bearing. This approach is based on the assumption of an adverse effect of movement of the fracture fragments in the consolidation process. During the last decades, the beneficial effect of early weight bearing for fracture healing has gradually come to be recognised. In the 1960s, the American surgeon Augusto Sarmiento questioned the concept of immobilisation of the joints adjacent to the fractured bone. Most closed tibial shaft fractures are caused by indirect force and tend to have a spiral (AO-type A1) or a spiral wedge (AO-type B1) configuration. In such fractures, the initial displacement has been considered an important factor predictive of successful conservative treatment. Böstman (1986) reported that when the initial displacement was more than 50% of the width of the shaft, plaster cast treatment failed in 40% of cases, and he suggested surgical treatment for fractures initially displaced more than 50% of the diameter of the shaft. In the beginning of the last century, intramedullary nailing (IM nailing) was introduced for the treatment of fractures of long bones. There were no interlocking facilities in the first generation IM nails (i.e. the Küntscher nail). These nails were effective in controlling bending and displacement, whereas rotational stability was not guaranteed. Further, alignment of the fracture of the distal third of the tibial shaft was difficult to control by this means. However, with the new generation of IM nails with interlocking bolts introduced in the late 1970s, rotational stability and prevention of shortening were also attained. With the advent of interlocking capacity and better familiarity with the IMLN treatment technique the approach has come to constitute a viable alternative along with conservative treatment in the management of closed displaced tibial shaft fractures. When a traditional interlocking nail was used, a 12-mm diameter was required to achieve adequate nail strength, and reaming of the intramedullary canal was necessary to permit insertion of these large diameter implants. During the last decade, some authors have suggested the application of small diameter IM nails without reaming (unreamed nails) in the treatment of closed tibial shaft fractures. Chronic anterior knee pain is the most common complication following IM nailing of a tibial shaft fracture. No doubt, surgical intervention can expose the patient to serious infection. When an IM nail is used the risk of deep infection has been described to be less than 1%, whereas the incidence is 0% in conservative treatment. The acute compartment syndrome may occur in approximately 10% of patients after tibial shaft fracture. Costs incurred in the injury can be evaluated from a number of viewpoints: the patient, the medical care delivery system and society at large, which covers social security payments and lost wages as well as treatment. Overall costs of the injury can be divided into direct costs, which may be specified as treatment, hospitalisation and outpatient expenses and indirect costs which constitute those incurred because of lost production if the individual is away from work. There are only two retrospective reports comparing the overall costs attributable to plaster cast treatment and IM nailing of tibial shaft fractures. Plate fixation of tibial shaft fractures offers excellent control of fractures extending into either the proximal or the distal metaphysis. The feasibility of the procedure is restricted by the risk of skin necrosis and resultant infection. When plate and screws however are used the surgeon must bury them meticulously under the muscles; a plate covered solely with skin is at high risk of inducing skin necrosis, which usually leads to severe infection. One factor sometimes rendering the treatment of tibial shaft fractures more complex is the metaphyseal extension of the fracture. Treatment is even more demanding when there is intraarticular involvement affecting the congruity of the knee or ankle joints. Such fractures often require modifications of standard treatment of diaphyseal fractures. External fixation devices or plates and screws are sometimes necessary to ensure sufficient stability of the fracture and alignment of the joint. One mode, using half pins in the diaphysis and tensioned wires in the epiphysis, the so-called hybrid fixator, is a valuable tool in managing diaphyseal fractures with a metaphyseal extension. Other cases calling for the use of external fixation devices are patients with a significant local or systemic disease increasing the risk of infection (diabetes, arteriosclerosis), patients sustaining an infection involving the soft tissues or bone at the fracture site, patients with a concomitant burn or severe frostbite in the injured leg and those with Tscherne's C3 soft-tissue injury. Cast treatment with early weight bearing is applicable when there is inadequate familiarity or resources for functional brace treatment. A plaster cast can be applied in the emergency room. Both legs hang vertically over the end of the table, with 90° of flexion at knees and hips. Both legs are checked to ensure correct rotational alignment. At this stage, a below-knee cast is applied. When the plaster is sufficiently hardened, the long-leg cast is applied while the patient lies supine. Initially, the cast must always be split and loosened to accommodate potential or actual swelling of the injured limb. After casting, the patient is hospitalised with the leg elevated slightly above heart level. In the ward, patients must be monitored for neurovascular status. All patients with tibial shaft fracture must receive antithrombotic therapy at least during hospital stay. For patients with a high risk of deep vein thrombosis (obese patients, patients with a history of deep venous thrombosis and women using contraceptives) it might be advisable to continue medication throughout the cast treatment. Before starting antithrombotic medication it must be ensured that there are no contraindications for medication (i.e. intracerebral haemorrhage). During hospitalisation, a physiotherapist should instruct the patient in walking with sticks. The patient is encouraged to bear as much weight as possible without pain. However, it must be remembered that the sensation of some patients might be decreased and here limitations are called for in bearing weight (diabetics and alcoholics). Before discharge (2–3 days), an X-ray must be taken to be sure that the fragments are in an acceptable position and the split plaster cast must be closed. If the radiographs reveal that acceptable fracture alignment has been lost, the patient must be taken to the operating theatre for IM nailing. The first check-up in the outpatient clinic should be at 6 weeks from injury. At this stage, it is normally possible to be rid off the long-leg cast and continue immobilisation with a below-knee cast which allows full ROM of the knee joint. Immobilisation continues until the fracture can be considered healed. If however, there are no radiological or clinical signs of consolidation at 12 weeks after injury, the plaster cast treatment should be converted to IMLN treatment. At the beginning, the closed functional brace treatment is similar to the traditional plaster cast treatment. When the plaster is sufficiently hardened (1–2 days), the patient is encouraged to attempt ambulation with weight bearing as tolerated, otherwise elevating the limb when not walking. Antithrombotic therapy must be established as in cast treatment. The first visit to the outpatient clinic is at 3 weeks from injury. The plaster cast is bivalued and radiographs are taken. In the clinical examination, the patient is asked to raise his/her leg straight up. If this is possible without excessive pain and deformity at the fracture site, treatment continues with a functional brace. X-rays are obtained in the brace initially and again after 1 or 2 weeks. The patient can be referred to a physiotherapist specialised in the care of patients treated in this manner. The physiotherapist gives instructions on how to bear weight and how to manage with the brace at home. One notable advantage of brace treatment over the traditional cast is that the device can be removed while the patient is having a shower. Brace treatment is extended until bony union is established both clinically and radiologically (at least 12 weeks). Some authors have suggested that nailing of closed tibial shaft fractures is safest after 4–7 days’ delay. Spinal anaesthesia is generally used, but general anaesthesia may be advisable, since long-lasting analgesia of the injured extremity can mask the symptoms of compartment syndrome. If spinal anaesthesia is selected, appropriate monitoring of the compartment pressures must be arranged. Preoperatively the site, morphology, and anatomical abnormalities must be considered. If severe skin or muscle damage occurs these must be cleansed and aerobe and anaerobe cultures obtained, and foreign bodies must be meticulously removed. Pulsating irrigation has proved particularly practical for removing foreign material from wounds. Debridement of necrotic tissues must be carried out before commencement of nailing. A perioperative parenteral antibiotic is the rule when surgery is required in stabilisation of tibial shaft fractures. The nailing procedure can be accomplished using either a traction table or manual traction. Use of fluoroscopy in two planes is mandatory for proper accomplishment of IML nailing. Patients with multiple lower extremity injuries are preferably placed on a radiolucent operating table which facilitates access to concomitant injuries. The use of a tourniquet is not advisable since it abolishes the cooling effect of the blood circulation. When a traction table is used the patient is positioned on it lying supine with the injured leg flexed with hip and knee at 90°. Traction should be maintained using a calcaneal pin. In order not to expose the patient to iatrogenic compartment syndrome, long-lasting forceful traction or application across a posterior thigh post should be avoided. A longitudinal midline incision of approximately 3–5 The use of IMLN for fractures of the proximal third tibial shaft has been found problematic in that they do not respond as favourably to IM nailing as do fractures in the distal two-third of the tibia. Valgus, apex anterior angulation and residual displacement at the fracture site are common after nailing in these kinds of fractures. Surgical errors in medialised nail entry point and a posteriorly and laterally directed nail insertion angle contribute to malalignment. Plate fixation or external fixation is to be recommended for the treatment of proximal third fractures of the tibial shaft. Krettek and colleagues (1999) proposed the use of blocking screws in order to achieve correct alignment and stability of the fracture. In postoperative care, moderate elevation and observation for neurovascular problems are advisable for 48 In the treatment of closed tibial shaft fractures IML nailing has proved an effective, safe treatment mode with high cost–benefit ratio. IML nailing should be carried out when closed reduction under anaesthesia is necessary to achieve an acceptable alignment. When conservative treatment is selected, closed functional bracing is to be recommended. The application of external fixation and plate fixation is reasonable only in special situations (