Utilization of two solid wastes of altered rock gold tailings and soda residue as main raw materials, and investigated the effects of soda residue, Al2O3 and MgO contents on bulk density, compressive strength and crystal phase of porous ceramics. The results showed that porous ceramics with the main crystalline phases of diopside can be prepared from high solid waste content (gold tailings + soda residue accounting for 95%) at 1170 °C. The addition of MgO made the final product generate augite phase, which improved the compressive strength of the porous ceramics. The best results of bulk density and compressive strength of the final product are 0.50 g/cm3 and 6.02 MPa respectively.With the continuous increase of global energy consumption, increasing building energy efficiency and reducing energy consumption by adding energy-saving insulation materials into building walls have become the focus of research ( Porous ceramics have a wide range of raw materials. Mineral extraction waste and processing tailings ( Soda residue is the waste discharged in the process of soda production. At present, the research on soda residue mainly focuses on the preparation of calcium and magnesium fertilizer ( Leibo Deng ( At present, the abundant calcium and magnesium in Soda Residue has not been effectively utilized. In this paper, the Ca–Si–Al–Mg system porous ceramics are prepared by using altered rock gold tailings as Si–Al raw materials and soda residue as Ca–Mg raw materials. The effects of Al, Ca and Mg contents on the sintering performance of the products and on the crystalline phase of the products are discussed, and the porous ceramics with low bulk density are prepared. Altered rock gold tailings (from Hexi Gold Mine, Shandong Province, China), Soda residue (Weifang, Shandong Province, China), Aluminum oxide (analytically pure), SiC powder (analytically pure), MgO (analytically pure). The chemical composition and mineral composition of gold tailings are shown in As can be seen from The chemical composition and mineral composition of soda residue are shown in It can be seen from Preparation of green bodies: green bodies with different proportions are mixed and ground in XQM-4 Planetary Ball Mill (TENCAN POWER, Changsha, China) at speed of 400r/min for 3 min. Using 769 YP-30T Manual Powder Tabletting Machine (with pressure of 20 MPa, hold for 10 min), the grinding particles are pressed into a cylinder of about ϕ Φ50 × 10 mm Sample sintering system: the experimental sample is placed in a graphite crucible and heated in the box furnace. With heating rate of 2 °C/min, from room temperature to 200 °C, to remove a small amount of water and mixed organic matter in the green body, and prevent the green body from cracking due to heating too fast. Keep the temperature at 200 °C for 10min, and raise the temperature to 1170 °C at a rate of 5 °C/min, keep the temperature at 1170 °C for 120min, and then naturally cooling to room temperature. Performance test: The compressive strength is measured by WDW-50 Microcomputer-controlled Universal Material Testing Machine. The macro structure is taken by digital camera to obtain the appearance of the product. Phase composition was performed by x-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Utima IV, Rigaku, Cu Kα, scanning ranges from 5 to 80°). Preparation steps of scanning electron microscope sample: place the sample in a plastic beaker, wetting it with several drops of water, slowly add hydrofluoric acid (1 + 1) ( The formula of raw materials and additives during the test is shown in  As can be seen from the figure, the pore size of the product increases with the increasing amount of soda residue. Because with the increase of soda residue content, the content of calcium-containing component which act as fluxing agent increases rapidly, resulting in a rapid drop in the melting temperature of the product. At the same temperature, the liquid phase viscosity generated by the sample with a large amount of soda residue content is lower, the wall of pore is insufficient to maintain the air pressure in the pore, and the pores merge, resulting the wall thickens, and part of the pore diameter gradually increases, thus reducing the bulk density. When soda residue content is less than 5%, pores development is incomplete. When the soda residue content is higher than 10%, pores merge to form many large bubbles with uneven pore size distribution. The content of soda residue should be controlled between 5% and 10%, and the uniformity of pores is good under this condition. The influence of soda residue content on the sintering product performance at 1170 °C is shown in  On the other hand, with the increase of soda residue content from 5% to 15%, the strength of sintered products decreases slowly at first, then rapidly. The main reason is the decrease of quartz content as barren aggregate ( Al  The influence of Al  Joohyun Park ( With the increase of Al2O3 powder content, the characteristic peak strength of quartz and feldspar in the raw materials becomes stronger and stronger ( On the one hand, the change of strength is related to the densification degree of sintered products, on the other hand, it is also related to the crystal phase type and content of sintered products. The higher the content of Al MgO is used as a foam stabilizer ( With the addition of MgO increased from 2% to 8%, the pore size of porous ceramics remained basically unchanged. When the addition of MgO exceeded 10%, the pore size of the product was strongly inhibited. It shows that MgO can play a certain role in stabilizing bubbles, but excessive content of MgO inhibits pores excessively, resulting in abnormal development of pores (    With the increase of MgO content, the compressive strength increases first and followed decreases, and then continues to increase. When MgO content is between 0% and 10%, the change regularity of compressive strength is consistent with that of bulk density. In this range, needle-like augite ( Selected 200 holes randomly from the macro morphology picture of the product obtained under optima conditions, and used Image-Pro Plus 6.0 (  Realizes the high content utilization of double solid wastes by use altered rock gold tailings as the main Si–Al raw material and soda residue as the Ca–Mg raw material. The comprehensive utilization of double solid wastes with large dosage was studied by adding a small amount of Al The main minerals of altered rock gold tailings are framework silicate (Quartz) and aluminosilicate (Feldspar), in which Si and Al act as network molding agents, while Ca and Mg act as network modifiers. The alkaline earth metal oxides (MgO and CaO) in soda residue can greatly reduce the viscosity of silicate melt and the growth resistance of pores through the depolymerization of silicate framework, among which the viscosity of the melt can be reduced more obviously by Ca, but the excessive addition resulted in too low viscosity and serious pore rupture and merger, so it was necessary to add an appropriate amount of Al. The addition of Al increased the length of the silicate polyanions to some extent, thus increasing the melt viscosity. The high viscosity melt can effectively prevent the floating and coalescence of fine pores in the foaming process, so that the pores in the ceramic foam are independent and evenly distributed. The addition of an appropriate amount of MgO also caused the change of phase composition of the product. The newly generated needle-like augite significantly increased the melt viscosity, made the expansion and distribution of pores more uniform, and improved the mechanical properties of the product. However, excessive MgO makes the pore diameter of the product too small, and the product augite changes from needle-like to granular, and the granular augite with a large number of defects leads to the rapid reduction of compressive strength.  We declare that we have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The project is supported by the