High dense bulk specimens of 0.55% C steel with ferritic grain sizes within the nanocrystalline and ultrafine regimes have been produced from ball-milled iron powder through the warm consolidation process. The microstructure, the mechanical properties and the strain rate sensitivity parameter (m) were investigated for the different grain sizes obtained. A constant decrease of m was found as the grain size decreases within the ultrafine regime. In the nanocrystalline regime, on the contrary, as the grain size decreases a slight increase of m was observed.Nanostructured materials with grain sizes below 100 There is scarce experimental data regarding the strain rate sensitivity for bcc iron in literature, especially as regards as the nanostructured regime The most usual procedure to obtain truly nanocrystalline materials is the consolidation from powders previously deformed by mechanical milling However, some problems arise with the bulk samples processed this way, namely, the presence of processing flaws which can affect the ductility of bulk specimens and the contamination of the samples. The impurities are first incorporated during the milling process due to the wear of the milling media and after by mechanical alloying with the process control agent. As a consequence, a clear determination of the level of impurities after milling is important in order to understand the mechanical behaviour of the iron consolidated samples. It must be noted that most of the studies reported in literature regarding the strain rate sensitivity in the nanocrystalline and ultrafine-grained bcc iron use bulk specimens processed by warm consolidation of mechanically milled powders In this paper, the possible dependence of the strain rate sensitivity on the grain size is studied within the nanocrystalline and ultrafine regimes for a medium carbon steel with a significant and well-defined amount of carbon. This knowledge could help in the correct interpretation of the different tendencies pointed out before for the strain rate sensitivity of bcc iron in the nanocrystalline regime. Commercial pure iron powder was severely deformed in a planetary ball mill with stainless steels balls under an Ar gas atmosphere for 52 Two types of consolidated specimens were designed depending on the test to be performed. Cylindrical specimens 5.1 As already mentioned, a two-step process was used The constituent phases were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Kα radiation with wavelength The strain rate sensitivity parameter The indentation strain rate was varied from 3 Compression tests on bulk specimens were performed on an INSTRON 5585 testing machine at a strain rate of 1  The evolution of the microstructure with the processing temperature can be observed in the TEM micrographs shown in When the consolidation temperature increases (460 The flow curves of the compression tests at room temperature for the consolidated specimens are shown in The hardness values determined by nanoindentation techniques for the four ferritic grain sizes studied are plotted against the strain rate on a log–log scale in The response of the nanocrystalline 0.55% C steel referred to in this paper and produced by a warm consolidation process is similar to others reported in literature and processed in similar conditions, that is, a high compressive strength combined with brittle behaviour Samples with a grain size of 145 With regard to the 0.9 The dependence on the ferritic grain size of parameter The behaviour suggested for the strain rate sensitivity of 0.55% C steel in the nanocrystalline and the ultrafine ranges is marked with a dotted line in A possible effect of the existing porosity on the measured hardness must also be considered. A Berkovich indentation on a sample with an average grain size of 46 The effect of porosity has been described and discussed as the main artifact responsible for the small values and the great deviation in hardness and strength for samples with a grain sizes below tens of nanometers It is also worth comparing the behaviour observed for 0.55% C steel in the nanocrystalline range with the two previous tendencies for bcc iron reported in literature and referred to in the introduction, and which are also included in On the other hand, Jang and Atzmon Regarding the effect of carbon dissolved in the nanocrystalline ferrite grains one should take into account the fact that the consolidated specimens used in the work of Koch et al. The Wei et al. approach For the 0.55% C steel in the ultrafine range, it is assumed that the mobility of screw dislocations is also the rate-controlling mechanism in the ferrite grains. On the contrary, the role of the hard cementite particles on the plastic deformation is focused more on the strain hardening and on the total plastic deformation attained than instead of on affecting the existing rate-controlling mechanism in the ferrite grains. Therefore, the strain rate sensitivity parameter However, in the nanocrystalline range, the behaviour of 0.55% C steel deviates from the model since a slight increase in the Bulk samples of 0.55% C steel with ferritic grain size into the nanocrystalline and ultrafine regimes have been produced by a warm consolidation process from milled iron powder and subsequent heat treatments. The microstructure consisted of a ferritic matrix with cementite precipitates located on the ferrite grain boundary. The cementite particles were larger in size as the ferrite grains increased. Compression tests of the nanocrystalline samples showed high mechanical strength but very low ductility. Samples showed good mechanical strength combined with large plastic deformation when the ferritic grain size was as large as 1 The strain rate sensitivity parameter The decrease observed for the strain rate sensitivity parameter In the nanocrystalline regime, this model cannot explain the increment of The authors wish to thank Dr. Antoni Roca and Dr. Jordi Llumà for their help in the studies of the milled powder as well as Pep Bassas and Montserrat Marsal for their assistance in XRD and SEM observations, respectively. This work was supported by the Spanish CICYT (project DPI 2005-09324). R. Rodríguez-Baracaldo is also grateful for the grant awarded to him by the Fundación Carolina.