Lead is a heavy metal that is bio accumulative and non-biodegradable that poses a threat to our health when it exists in excess in our bloodstream. It has found its way into wastewater from mostly chemical industrial processes. In this article, we investigated the adsorption and hence removal of lead (II) ions from wastewater in order to purify it for re-use in industrial processes or for plant and animal use. We synthesized nano silica hollow spheres (NSHS) and used them as adsorbents to remove lead ions from wastewater. When we characterized the NSHS using X-Ray diffraction, the amorphous nature of silica was evident with average crystal size of 39.5 nm. Scanning electron microscopy was used to determine the morphology of the adsorbent and the particles were found to be spherical in shape within a size range of 100–200 nm. Thermogravimetric analysis was used to determine the mass loss of NSHS which was ~2% at 800 °C. Our experimental results from adsorption studies showed that there was a linear relationship between temperature (27–60 °C) and adsorption efficiency and an inverse relationship between initial metal concentration (50–300 mg/L) and adsorption efficiency. At a maximum temperature of 60 °C and maximum initial metal concentration of 300 mg/L, the adsorption capacity was 200 mg/g and 262 mg/g, respectively while the adsorption efficiency was 99.6% and 87.4%, respectively. Our equilibrium and thermodynamic results revealed that the process was better modelled by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm (qmax = 266.89 mg/g and b = 0.89 L/mg). The adsorption process was both endothermic (ΔH = 97 kJ/mol) and spontaneous (ΔG = -22 kJ/mol). We can conclude that we were able to successfully synthesize NSHS, use them to remove lead (II) ions and the produced NSHS have a capacity that is higher than most other adsorbents investigated by other researchers.One of the socio-economic challenges we face in the present day world is access to fresh water for human consumption and industrial purposes. Our fauna and flora especially in Southern Africa have also succumbed to the diminishing levels of this basic natural resource ( There are many different methods that can be used to remove heavy metals from wastewater like precipitation, solvent extraction, ion exchange and membrane separation but only adsorption seems to be an economical option at this stage. The application of adsorption as a unit operation in domestic water and industrial wastewater treatment processes has gained a lot of popularity in modern day plants. A lot of research has been done on adsorption of heavy metal ions over the years, but the research is still continuing. Different adsorbents have been proposed and they can be classified into different groups that include chemical adsorbents, zeolites, bio adsorbents and nano-adsorbents ( Currently, there is a growing trend in interest and demand for nano-adsorption technologies in wastewater treatment processes. Nanomaterials have gained popularity in water treatment because of their large surface area to volume ratio, and surface multi-functionality that makes them to easily react chemically and bind/adsorb a specific target metal ion(s) on their surfaces ( A lot of research has been done on the removal of heavy metal ions from wastewater using silica nano-particles and their derivatives as adsorbents because they have been shown to have very good properties like definite pore size, high surface area, good selectivity and adsorption capacity. However, silica is employed in its modified form, either functionalized or as a composite ( When considering adsorption of metal ions from wastewater, the most important property that we consider is a high adsorption ability, which is linked to a large surface area to volume ratio ( We obtained all the raw materials and samples for our experimental programme from Harare, Zimbabwe. In order for us to synthesize NSHS we used anhydrous calcium chloride (AR, CaCl We carried out the synthesis for NSHS in three stages, apart from the preparation of sodium silicate step. The details of this synthesis process are covered in We employed the sol-gel method which consists of hydrolysis, condensation, aging, and drying as highlighted in The structure and properties of synthesized nanomaterials are affected by the nature of precursor, solvent used, the modifying agents as well as the process conditions, such as pH and temperature ( We carried out experiments to determine the effect of initial sorbate concentration and temperature, on adsorption rates. We adopted the experimental procedure employed in this section from We investigated the change in adsorption rates of Pb To enable us to investigate the effect of initial metal ion concentration on the rate of adsorption, we suspended 50 mg of the adsorbent in 50 ml of varied sorbate concentration ranging from 40, 100, 200–300 mg/L. We then fixed the stirring speed at 450 rpm, pH at 5.0, temperature at 27 ± 1 °C and a residence time of 40 min. After which, we filtered the samples to separate the cake adsorbent. We proceeded to determine the residual sorbate or equilibrium concentration using AAS. This enables us to evaluate the optimum initial sorbate concentration. There are several adsorption isotherms available in literature, namely: Langmuir, Freundlich, BET, Temkin, Dubinin-Radushkevitch, Hill, Redlich-Peterson, and Sips ( Langmuir Isotherm equations Freundlich Isotherm equations Equilibrium relationship equation In the equations, q The adsorption studies can be quantified by many parameters and one of them is the adsorption efficiency, which we used in this study ( Adsorption thermodynamics shows the impact of temperature on the adsorption process. The experiments we performed to investigate the effect of temperature on the adsorption rates, gave us the basis on which to evaluate the associated adsorption thermodynamics. We employed AAS to measure the concentration of the metal ions at equilibrium (C The purpose of adsorption thermodynamics is to determine the if the adsorption is exothermic (ΔH < 0) or endothermic (ΔH > 0), spontaneous (ΔG < 0) or non-spontaneous (ΔG > 0) as well as to see if the metal ions like to be in random disorder (ΔS > 0) or ordered on the adsorbent solid surface (ΔS < 0). We performed two forms of statistical analysis in this study. The first one was done with analysis of variance (ANOVA). During the experiments to determine the effect of temperature and initial metal ion concentration on the adsorption process, the experiments were performed three times and an average value was determined afterwards. Statistical analysis using ANOVA's single factor in Microsoft Office Excel was used to determine if there was any difference between the three experimentally determined values so that we can gain confidence in the average value calculated from the three values ( The standard hypotheses for ANOVA: Single Factor for our study are ( Null hypothesis: All the three values from the experiments can be considered equal Alternative hypothesis: All the three values from the experiments can be considered significantly different If the p-value (P-value from MS Excel) is less than our significance level which we set at 0.05, we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that the values are significantly different, meaning that their average cannot be considered reliable ( The second analysis was performed using Microsoft Office Excel's t-test: Paired Two Sample for Means to test if the calculated values performs well against standard values we were supposed to get. T-test was used because the sample for our experiments was small ( The equilibrium concentration (C The statistical t-tests were based on the following: Do the C Do the q Do the R values obtained in the experiments differ very much from the standard R value of 100%? The standard t-test uses the following hypotheses ( Null hypothesis: The calculated value is equal to the standard value Alternative hypothesis: The calculated value is not equal to the standard value If the p-value for two tailed test (P (T<=t) two-tail from MS Excel) is less than our significance level which we set at 0.05, then we can reject the null hypothesis and conclude that the calculated values are significantly not equal to the standard values ( Morphology, thermal stability and particle size are the three characterization techniques we employed to assess inherent surface characteristics of the prepared nanomaterials. These characteristics are typically relevant in understanding the ejection of heavy metals from aqueous systems. Outlined below are the results we obtained from the various analytical techniques of the NSHS.   We employed SEM analysis to gather important information about the morphology, texture, size as well as shape of the nanoparticles. Micrograph images of NSHS nanoparticles are shown in We investigated the removal of Pb      Researchers have found the adsorption of Pb The relationship between the equilibrium values of the sorbate concentration (C   In general, our experimental results elucidate that there is a positive correlation between the initial metal ion concentration and adsorption capacity. In this study, we also observed that the adsorption efficiency decreased with an associated increase in initial metal ion concentration. At low initial concentration, all of the Pb A plot of adsorbed metal ions per adsorbent (q  The two adsorption isotherms we considered during our studies were the Langmuir and the Freundlich isotherms. Results for the Langmuir isotherm model are given in  In this study, we used the Langmuir isotherm to best describe the adsorption equilibrium and we made use of A plot of q   The majority of the studies using different adsorbents for adsorption of Pb From In addition, the NSHS had very high maximum adsorption rates (q We then used The R The R To determine the thermodynamic parameters, we plotted ln K We then performed a regression analysis and determined the correlation coefficient to be 0.8787. The corresponding equation of the line of best fit gave a gradient of -11698, corresponding to The values of ΔG at the various temperatures were negative. We also observe that there is a negative correlation between ΔG and the solution temperature, which show that the adsorption process of Pb Again, NSHS adsorbents are showing good performance against other adsorbents by giving higher thermodynamic values. This is proving their worth in removing Pb Taking natural logarithms: Using the same gradient and intercept, the activation energy (E This is the Arrhenius law for Pb In this equilibrium and thermodynamic investigation, we successfully synthesized nano silica hollow spheres (NSHS) that were verified by the three characterization techniques employed. We then used the synthesized NSHS particles to remove Pb In future, there is need to test the nanomaterial, NSHS on its suitability for the removal of various other heavy metals such as chromium and arsenic. In the current study, the adsorption process was batch-wise, so an in-depth study using continuous systems is highly recommended. This is because continuous systems give a more realistic resemblance to the industrial setup. In addition, desorption and reusability test experiments should be conducted to reduce the cost of the adsorbent as it will be more attractive if it can be used more than once. Milton Manyangadze: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. Nyaradzai M.H. Chikuruwo, Gratitude Charis, Gwiranai Danha & Tirivaviri A. Mamvura: Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. T. Bala Narsaiah & Ch. Shilpa Chakra: Conceived and designed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. The authors would like to acknowledge their individual institutions for assisting with the study. The institutions are Chemical and Process Systems Engineering Department, Harare Institute of Technology, Harare, Zimbabwe; Industial and Manufacturing Engineering Department, Harare Institute of Technology, Harare, Zimbabwe; Institute of Chemical Sciences and Technology, Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, India and Department of Chemical, Materials and Metallurgical Engineering, College of Engineering and Technology, Botswana International University of Science and Technology, Botswana. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.