Platinum concentrator plants experience significant losses in their overall Platinum Group Elements (PGE) recoveries due to the inefficiencies of their secondary grinding circuits. This study involves an investigation of selective grinding of the platinum-bearing silicate particles present in UG-2 platinum ores found in the Bushveld Igneous Complex (BIC).
                  Batch-scale laboratory test work was done to investigate the effect of a secondary milling circuit configuration, using a hydrocyclone underflow sample from a UG-2 concentrator plant as feed material. The envisaged secondary milling circuit consists of a conventional hydrocyclone to de-slime the feed followed by density separation with a spiral concentrator to separate the ore into lights (silicates-rich) and heavies (chromite-rich) fractions, followed by separate milling of the two fractions in parallel ball mills, and combined rougher flotation. A full-scale spiral was run in batch mode, followed by separate milling of samples in a 200mm diameter mill and combined flotation in a 4.2l cell. The milling energy inputs were re-distributed between the lights and heavies mills to determine the effect on the platinum mineral rougher flotation recovery and the Cr entrainment.
                  The most promising results were found with 88% of the energy input to the lights mill and 12% to the heavies mill. The results indicated that under batch conditions, the secondary rougher flotation recovery (69% 4E) was similar to the conventional mill-float circuit (70%) however the Cr entrainment was significantly reduced by approximately 40% (2.3–1.4% Cr).
                  This test work has confirmed the benefit of separate milling in the secondary milling circuit for a UG-2 ore. Spiral concentrators have shown potential as an effective density separating device to produce a silicate-rich and chromite-rich fraction for milling; further test work will be conducted to confirm its viability on an industrial scale.Platinum is a major source of revenue to the mining sector in South Africa. Currently, most circuits treating UG-2 platinum ores involve two stages of grinding and flotation. Primary grinding usually involves a ROM ball mill, followed by flotation, secondary ball-milling of the flotation tails, and secondary flotation. The secondary ball mill is operated in open circuit. The feed to the secondary ball mill usually comprises of large amounts of liberated chromite and silicate-rich particles containing the bulk of the PGE-bearing minerals in a locked state. In order to minimize PGE losses and energy expenditure, there is considerable incentive to find ways of milling the platinum-rich particles selectively. The objective of this project is to investigate the effect of platinum recovery and chromite entrainment on a secondary milling circuit design for a UG-2 ore. The Bushveld Complex consists of three magmatic lineages, i.e. the main, critical, and lower zones. The UG-2 (Upper Group 2) chromitite layer in the upper critical zone is probably the largest PGE resource on Earth ( Mintek have assisted Lonmin with the implementation of the MF2 (mill-float-mill-float) circuit and thereafter with the conversion of UG-2 milling circuits to open circuit to reduce the high circulation of chromite to the secondary ball mill and to prevent the silicates from being displaced ( This configuration was shown to make significant inroads to reducing the presence of coarse unliberated silicates which contain majority of the platinum-bearing minerals. Anglo Platinum have also addressed the chromite entrainment problem and poor liberation of the coarse silicates (  This circuit design indicated that separate milling of the silicates and chromite is necessary to overcome the problem. A 1.67 A hydrocyclone was used as separating device however due to the large density difference between the chromite particles (4.5 The consequences of such a split are that if the cyclone overflow stream (flotation feed) contains coarse silicates with locked PGEs, a loss in valuable mineral recovery will be noted (  The silica and chromite splits to the product streams show that the three product cyclone can be used to recover coarse silica through screening the middlings product which contains 24% and 19% of the +100 The outer overflow is comprised of coarse silicate and the fine chromite fraction which are screened at 100 Pilot plant trials were performed on a Lonmin Platinum Concentrator UG-2 platinum ore sample by The efficiency of separation of the three product cyclone may be improved through the use of finer screening technology below 75 The envisaged milling circuit configuration is shown in The circuit incorporates the separate milling technology employed by Anglo Platinum ( Slurry flow – 0.5–1.5 Solids content – 15%. Splitter opening – cut point at 1/3 of splitter opening (∼6 These optimised parameters were found to adapt well to the separation of chromite and silicates in the UG-2 ore as it also has an average SG between 3.2 and 3.4. A 20 Previous test work conducted by Separate batch ball milling tests were conducted on the lights and the heavies fractions keeping the overall energy input to the system constant. Sixteen minutes of milling time was required to mill a 500 The milled products were then combined to form a 500 The conventional process route of open circuit ball milling of the secondary hydrocyclone underflow stream (feed to secondary mill) followed by rougher flotation resulted in a 70% recovery of 4E platinum minerals and a 2.3% Cr recovery under batch conditions. This base case recovery data must be considered when evaluating the new circuit incorporating a spirals separator to produce a lights fraction (silicate-rich) and a heavies fraction (chromite-rich) followed by separate milling of the spiral lights and heavies using two ball mills at varied milling times. The total energy input to the milling circuit was fixed (16 The flotation results for the effect of separate milling of the spiral product mixtures and for the 100% spiral lights and heavies products are shown in The recoveries of the 4E and Cr have been plotted as a function of the energy input to the lights fractions as shown in The 4E platinum mineral recoveries in In The results have also indicated that the heavies fraction may not need a large proportion of grinding energy as the 4E recovery was 67.6% for the 100% energy input to the lights mill, as compared to 69% for the 88% energy input to the lights mill, i.e. only 12% energy addition to the heavies fraction for a further 1.4% 4E recovery and thus alternative technologies such as attritioning may be explored in this regard. The results also confirm the benefit of the implementation of separating ball milling of the silicates and chromite fractions by Anglo Platinum in their secondary circuit design ( The significant reduction in the Cr recoveries (∼40%) is due to the fact that most of the total milling energy can be re-distributed to the silicates ball mill thus reducing the energy input and thus degree of over-grinding on the chromitite fraction. The lower Cr recoveries may also be attributed to the reduction of any density interactions that may occur between the high-density chromitite and low-density silicate particles in the ball mill. Separate milling of the silicates and chromite fractions of a UG-2 ore have shown significant benefit as a more selective secondary ball milling circuit option. The Cr recovery was significantly reduced by 40% (2.3–1.4% Cr) in the secondary rougher concentrate by incorporating a conventional hydrocyclone as a de-sliming device, followed by spiral concentrators for density separation and then separate milling of the silicates and chromite streams. A large proportion of the total milling energy was distributed to the silicates ball mill (88%) without a drop in the overall platinum mineral rougher recovery (∼69% 4E). Lonmin (Dr. Victor Ross, Johan Steyn, Allen Hemphill) for providing the UG-2 ore sample and for their technical assistance. NRF Thuthuka for the financial support of the Project. P. Chetty, R. Balkissoon and L. Naidoo for assisting with commissioning runs on the spiral concentrator with the UG2-ore.