Nitric acid extraction by tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) in dodecane is investigated by molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, for different concentrations of TBP in the range 0.1M to 2M with aqueous phase HNO3concentration of 1M, 2M and 3M. The MD studies are carried out considering dissociated as well as molecular forms of HNO3. The simulations showed formation of a third phase consisting of TBP, HNO3 and water which is in agreement with reported experimental results. HNO3, in dissociated form, shows formation of NO3
                     − and H3O+ pockets in the third phase while HNO3 in molecular form remains dispersed in the third phase without such specific formations. The impact of concentrations of the acid and TBP on the third phase formation, reverse micelles of TBP in dodecane and NO3
                     − and H3O+ pockets in the third phase, have been demonstrated. The estimated diffusion coefficient values of TBP and dodecane match well with the reported literature values.Solvent extraction is widely used for separation of elements or groups of elements from nuclear waste or from waste waters originating from metal industries such as mining, mineral processing, metal finishing or battery production plants The choice of an extractant is one of the most important criteria in solvent extraction. Organophosphorous compounds form the most common group of the extractants. Of which, tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) is the preferred extracting agent due to its high solubility in organic phase, low solubility in aqueous phase, good loading of metal ions, and ease of formation of complex with metal and good selectivity for extraction of desired metals When the concentration of acid in the aqueous solution increases, the organic phase splits into two layers - a lighter layer containing most of the diluent, a little amount of the extractant and metal ions with counter ions while the heavy third phase contains high concentrations of the extractant, metal ions and a little amount of the diluent. The aggregation of initially formed reverse micelles leads to the formation of third phase In order to understand and visualize molecular-level mechanism of reverse micelle aggregate ion and the third phase formation, several MD studies have been reported for the systems involving TBP and interfacial complexation of metal ions with TBP Ye et al. In current paper, MD studies have been done for the TBP-water-acid system in dodecane to explore the third phase formation. The MD simulation contributes molecular-level understanding and insight into experimental studies reported for third phase formation. Major obstacle in getting accurate molecular-level mechanism for extraction of acid and water by TBP involves development of appropriate molecular models to predict physicochemical properties and also longer simulation time is necessary to determine accurate diffusion coefficients. The MD simulation was carried out in a periodic cubic box of varying dimensions ( A GROMACS code for a system of N interacting atoms based on Newton's equations of motion has been used to perform the MD simulations In a cubic box, about 400 molecules of dodecane were added followed by calculated number of TBP molecules, nitric acid and water molecules. Energy minimization of the system was conducted by steepest descent (1000 steps) and conjugated gradient minimization (1000 steps). A 20 TBP has affinity for both acid and water molecules and hence it forms the third phase. It is essential to study the molecular nature of the third phase and the type of interactions present between TBP, water and acid in organic phase (dodecane). MD results have been presented below to show the effect of TBP and acid concentrations and temperature on the third phase formation. MD simulations were carried out with both nitric acid in dissociated and molecular forms in two different subsystems. For the molecular form of nitric acid, at 0.5 Initially there were 3 to 4 such positions in the simulation box, where TBP starts aggregating along with water, nitrate and hydronium ions. These aggregates of reverse micellar structures of TBP could be the initiation of the third phase formation. The organic layer splits further into two layers, one layer consisting of light diluent rich phase (dodecane) and other layer of heavy extractant (TBP) rich phase, which constitutes the third phase as shown in For higher concentrations of TBP in dodecane, i.e. 1 Even when the nitric acid was considered in molecular form, the third phase formation was observed. For lower TBP concentrations, the phase separation was incomplete and while for higher concentrations of TBP (> After taking a closer look at aggregates of TBP, it was observed that there are individual reverse micellar structures of TBP present in the patches of TBP/aggregates/third phase. In these reverse micelles, water molecules and/or acid (dissociated or molecular form) are surrounded by TBP molecules. TBP interacts with the extracted HNO It has also been observed that there are pockets of nitrate and hydronium ions along with water molecule surrounded by TBP, present at the specific locations in the third phase ( The rest of the third phase consists of reverse micelles of TBP, but these are different types of reverse micellar structures. These reverse micellar structures comprise of only water molecules in the hydrophilic core surrounded by TBP with the P As the concentration of nitric acid is increased, the size of these TBP-water reverse micelles also increased ( In case of MD simulation using molecular nitric acid, similar type of TBP-water reverse micellar structures were observed in the third phase but HNO TBP shows 1:1 complexation with HNO For molecular form of nitric acid, there is direct hydrogen bonding between ‘H’ atom of OH group from nitric acid and ‘O’ atom from P Two hypotheses have been proposed to explain extraction of acid at the interface. In the 1st, TBP forms a hydrogen bond with the acid at the interface and pulls it into the organic phase. In the 2nd, TBP interacts with nitrate ion via a bridging hydronium at the interface and thus the acid gets extracted as nitrate-hydronium ion pair by TBP into the organic phase. The simulation shows that at a time, two water molecules interact with single molecule of TBP ( A HNO The nitric acid and water concentrations in the third phase have been estimated for all the three systems/concentrations of TBP and acid ( Different sizes and shapes have been reported for the TBP aggregates containing different numbers of TBP,NO Chiarizia et al. The self diffusion coefficients of TBP and dodecane estimated by MD are in the range of 4.7–3.22 The diffusion coefficients of TBP and dodecane decrease with increase in the concentration of TBP and as well as that of nitric acid because the size of reverse micelle increases, as shown in There are various techniques for avoiding third phase formation, i.e., by raising the extraction temperature, using aromatic diluents and adding polar long chain alcohols as modifiers. MD simulations were carried out at 300 Nave et al. These studies can be used to optimize the temperature range to carryout extraction of metal ions and avoid the third phase formation as it decreases the efficiency of continuous-counter current extraction process. The local concentration of radioactive metal ions along with nitric acid may increase substantially in the third phase and becomes dangerous from safety point of view MD simulation of TBP aggregation for a wide range of TBP (0.5–2 Authors would like to acknowledge