Certain metals are essential to biological actions. However all metals, whether essential or inessential, will tend to show toxicity at certain levels. Previous attempts to biologically leach nickel oxide ores are hampered by poor tolerance of the strains to heavy metals, which suggest the need for new strains with resistance to high concentrations of heavy metals. This study investigates the development of training strategies, which is attempting to address this issue. The heavy tolerance development of Aspergillus niger, Penicillium simplicissimum, Aspergillus foetidus and Aspergillus carbonarius strains in the presence of Ni, Co, Fe, Mg and Mn was studied up to concentrations of 2000 ppm. The adaptive behaviour was measured from the rates of initial growth and death rate of the strains with time. The effect of type of metal, the metal concentration and the type of strains on this adaptive behaviour was investigated. The results indicate that these initial adaptive behaviours are reflections of the strains tolerance development with increasing metal concentration. A high growth followed by a weaker death rate appear to lead to tolerance development of strains in increasing metal concentration often exceeding the control. Whereas a strong growth followed by an equivalently high death rate appear to lead to poorer tolerance. The relative toxicity of the various metals to the strains was used to select a strain that would be most suitable in leaching nickel laterite ores.Nickel laterite is a low-grade oxide ore, which represents the bulk or about 80% of known nickel and a greater quantity of cobalt global reserves ( Recently Fungal strains including The strain selection involved exposing the various fungus strains with synthetic leachate metal solution produced from dissolved NiCl Growth tests were conducted through a series of repeated sub-culturing of the fungi exposed to different concentrations of metals including Ni, Co, Fe, Mg and Mn in plate test. Isolation and acclimatisation were conducted in petri dish, 8.5 cm in diameter, containing the growth medium with metal concentration from 500 to 2000 ppm. The plates were inoculated with a 4 mm circular extract of growing fungi strain. The plates were incubated at 25–32 °C between 9 and 18 days to establish their growth rate at the lower metal concentration (500-ppm). The growth was monitored from the radius of the strain. Strains demonstrating growth are sampled and exposed to another petri dish with a higher metal concentration. Tolerance was measured from the growth of the fungi in the presence of metal divided by the growth in the same period in the absence of metal. In the process of adapting to the toxic effect of heavy metals, the fungi demonstrates an initial growth rate in phase b, followed by a decline in growth relative to the control in phase c which will be referred to in this paper as death rate (see The growth at phase b and death rates at phase c are related to the tolerance index developed at phase d in It was of interest to establish the effect of type of heavy metal, the metal concentration and the strain on this adaptive behaviour. The following results show the correlation of these parameters to the growth rate and death rate of fungi. The effect of various types of metals at 1000 ppm on the initial growth and death rate of various fungi sub-cultured at phase e from fungi growing at 500 ppm of the corresponding metals are shown in Nickel laterite ores, which are of interest in this study, include limonite, nontronite, and weathered and fresh saprolites. Limonite is distinguished by high iron content typically 40–50 wt% Fe and saprolites by the high magnesium (20 wt%) content. Nontronite is the phase between limonite and saprolite. Since the majority of the metals present in laterite ores are Mg and Fe, the strain that would be most suitable for leaching this ore would be the strain showing highest growth in the presence of these metals. According to Comparison of the death rate in The effects of sub-culturing The adaptive behaviour of fungi strains to heavy metals reflected by the growth and death rate of strains could be used to indicate the tolerance behaviour or adaptation with increasing metal concentrations. A high initial growth rate at phase b followed by a weaker death rate in phase c, where the reduction is at least 50% of the growth rate leads to strong tolerance development with increasing metal concentration. The tolerance developed at phase d often exceeding that of the control where there are no heavy metals. This adaptive behaviour is prevalent to The authors would like to acknowledge Ms. Lydia Tang’s assistance in the experimental work of this study.