This study investigates the clinical and radiographic characteristics of complex axis fractures with adjacent segment instability and describes the outcome of surgical treatment. Twenty-one patients (14 male, seven female; mean age=34years) with complex axis fractures and adjacent segment instability who were treated between August 2003 and June 2009 were retrospectively reviewed. Treatment selection was based on fracture type and stability of the upper cervical segments. All patients were immobilized with a hard collar for three months after surgery. The mean follow-up period was 12months (range=6–36months). No intraoperative surgery-related complications were observed and fusion was achieved in all patients. The outcome was excellent for 17 patients, good for two patients, fair for one patient, and poor for one patient. The upper cervical segments that can become unstable due to complex axis fractures include the atlantoaxial and C2–3 joints. Recommended surgical treatments produce good results.In clinical practice, it is not uncommon to see patients with simple fractures of the vertebral body, odontoid process, or pedicle of the axis; however, patients also present with more complex fractures involving more than one part of the axis with accompanying instability of adjacent segments. Patients with a more complex type of axis fracture and adjacent segment instability characterized by adjacent joint dislocation or subluxation require additional attention. In these patients, instability of the atlantoaxial or C2–3 joints induces upper cervical instability which, if not treated in time, can result in spontaneous spinal cord compression and a potentially life-threatening situation. Previous studies have divided axis fractures into three types: odontoid, pedicle, and vertebral body. Odontoid fractures have been sub-classified into three types by Anderson and D’Alonzo. Previous studies of axis fractures have focused on odontoid fractures and hangman’s fractures, and have failed to study the impact of the fracture on adjacent intervertebral instability. In more complex axis fractures, a separation of fracture segments occurs which is associated with either C1–2 or C2–3 dislocation, facet joint dislocation, or fracture of the superior portion of the atlas or inferior portion of the C3 vertebral body. Imaging studies are important to make an early diagnosis of upper cervical spine instability. Because of the complexity of the injury mechanism in axis fracture, fractures of the same type can have a variety of appearances on a simple X-ray. Therefore, it is sometimes necessary to use additional imaging techniques to define the diagnosis, which is very important for further classification of the fracture–dislocation and for making decisions about treatment. Only MRI can sufficiently demonstrate compression caused by the soft tissue components. For patients with symptoms of neural compression, MRI shows the origin of spinal cord compression, and can reveal bleeding, swelling, degeneration, and so on. MRI is also very useful when selecting the surgical approach and determining the prognosis. Previous surgical treatments have focused on treatment and surgery of the fracture itself with limited consideration given to treatment of adjacent segment instability, which could result in serious consequences for patients with these fractures. The aim of this study was to obtain more information about the clinical and radiographic characteristics of patients with complex axis fractures and related adjacent segment instability, and describe the outcomes of surgical treatment. Among 54 patients with axis fractures who were treated at our institution between August 2003 and June 2009, we identified 21 patients with complex axis fractures and adjacent segment instability for whom complete data were available. Adjacent segment instability was confirmed by the dislocation or subluxation of an adjacent segment joint on preoperative X-ray imaging. The assessment of instability was largely based on the axis fracture type and the presence of C1–2 or C2–3 subluxation. In this study we defined complex axis fracture as a separation of fracture segments associated with either C1–2 or C2–3 dislocation, facet joint dislocation, or fracture of the superior portion of the atlas or inferior portion of the C3 vertebral body combined with C1–2 or C2–3 segment instability. The records of the 21 patients were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were included if they had isolated trauma and did not have pre-existing upper cervical spine deformity disease. Patients were not included if they could not tolerate surgery because of brain, heart, or lung disease or trauma. Patients with simple axis fracture were also excluded. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of our hospital. All patients were informed about the purpose of the study and signed an informed consent form. The diagnosis was established using data from imaging studies, including anteroposterior, oblique and open-mouth radiographs, thin-slice CT scans with three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction, and MRI of the cervical spine. The American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) classification was used to classify the severity of spinal injuries. The mechanism of injury was determined according to the pre-injury position of the patient, direction and action point of the external force, condition of the superficial soft tissue injury, associated injuries and the type of axis fracture. Previous reports of such injuries were also taken into account for determining the mechanism. After two to three weeks of traction for fracture and subluxation reduction, the results of fracture reduction and symptoms of neural compression were assessed and, according to the fracture type and the stability of the atlantoaxial joint and C2–3 joint, one of the following surgical procedures was performed: (i) anterior C2–3 discectomy and bone grafting and anterior cervical plate fixation (I); (ii) odontoid screw fixation (II); (iii) posterior atlantoaxial pedicle screw fixation and fusion, C2 pedicle screw fixation, C3 lateral mass screw fixation (III); or (iv) combined anterior and posterior surgery (IV). Selection of the surgical treatment was individualized based on the type of axis fracture and the degree of adjacent segment instability, as well as the patient’s age, fracture morphology, and degree of comminution (see Bone fusion was assessed by plain film radiographs between three months and six months after surgery. Fusion was later confirmed with dynamic flexion and extension by plain film radiographs and cervical spine CT scan. The demographic and injury characteristics of the 21 patients (14 male, seven female, mean age The injury mechanism of complex axis fracture was hyperextension compression in five patients, flexion compression in seven patients, lateralflexion compression in three patients, and hyperextension distraction in six patients. Three patients had vertebral body fractures of the axis associated with type II odontoid fracture, one had type II odontoid fracture associated with type II pedicle fracture of the axis, two had type II odontoid fractures associated with partial dislocation of the cervical spine (C2–3), three had vertebral body fractures of the axis associated with type I pedicle fracture of the axis, two had vertebral body fractures of the axis associated with type II pedicle fracture of the axis, six had type II pedicle fractures of the axis associated with partial dislocation of the cervical spine (C2–3), two had pedicle fractures of the axis associated with fracture of the atlas, and two patients had fractures of the axis associated with fracture of the C3 vertebral body ( The operation time and blood loss for each patient are shown in We retrospectively reviewed the records of 21 patients with complex axis fractures associated with instability of the adjacent segments, and analyzed and described the clinical characteristics, injury mechanisms, types of fractures, and treatments. To our knowledge, there are no previous reports of axis fracture in which adjacent segment instability was considered concomitantly. In patients with axis fractures, the injury is determined by the related specific vectors of force, including their size, direction, action point, and action time. Generally, the position of each structure when the forces reach the spine, and in some patients the distinct mechanical characteristics of the spinal structure, determine the specific injury, components of the destroyed structure, and degree of displacement. Hyperextension is the component of force most likely to cause trauma. As impact to the forehead consists of both axial pressure and rotating components, a resulting complex axis fracture includes more than two odontoid, pedicle and vertebral body fractures, and is also associated with dislocation or instability of the atlantoaxial or C2–3 joints. A biomechanics experiment of axis fractures showed that an increase in the flexion and extension load mainly causes hangman’s fractures; however, when an anterior shearing load is combined with flexion, posterior extension, and rotation load, it may result in a rare odontoid fracture associated with hangman’s fracture, and there may be C2–3 instability. The causes of this type of injury are commonly traffic accidents, falls, and slips. Extension, posterior rotation and, finally, flexion occurs during the injury process, which differs from the mechanism of simple odontoid fracture and hangman’s fracture. In this study, the heads of two patients were extended by a protection net during a 10 For patients with axis fractures, the treatment normally focuses on the type of fracture itself. The possible adjacent segment instability is often neglected. This instability of the atlantoaxial or C2–3 joints induces upper cervical instability which, if not treated in time, can result in spontaneous spinal compression and a potentially life-threatening situation. It is very important to consider adjacent segment instability during the treatment for axis fractures; however, there have been no previous reports about axis fractures that concurrently considered adjacent segment instability. Clear lateral and open-mouth radiographs of the cervical spine can identify the type of axis fracture, the degree of displacement, and adjacent segment injury. CT scans and MRI should be used according to the clinical requirements of patients with cervical spine injury as suggested by conventional radiological examination or clinical manifestations, and for patients who likely cannot be diagnosed with conventional radiological examination. Lateral flexion/extension views of the cervical spine are suitable for previous injuries, but should not be used routinely for acute injuries as spasm of the cervical muscles often makes it impossible to obtain satisfactory images and also because this kind of procedure can aggravate the injury. If this type of examination is indispensable, it should be performed only when close observation is possible. Studies have found that the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of lateral cervical X-ray is 84%, 74%, and 80%, respectively, which means that up to 25% of patients can be misdiagnosed. However, these figures improved to 93%, 80%, and 87%, respectively, after anteroposterior and open-mouth odontoid views were included. During the past few years, there has been extensive application of high-speed spiral CT scan, 3D CT scan, and MRI in spinal surgery, providing surgeons with comprehensive information before surgery, and also providing helpful information for the selection of different surgical procedures. A 3D reconstruction CT scan can clearly show the fracture type, direction, and degree of displacement and it is most valuable for patients with limited range of motion after a cervical injury. If adjacent segment instability or even dislocation and displacement occurs during axis fracture, it can easily induce high cervical spinal cord injury and vertebro-basilar artery insufficiency, resulting in quadriplegia, and may even be life-threatening. If bone fragment compression from the anterior wall of the spinal canal occurs, anterior decompression and fixation can be performed. If the compression originates from the posterior wall of the spinal canal, the posterior approach should be used. After axis fracture–dislocation, spinal cord compression will most likely be caused by bony compression, including bone fragments protruding into the spinal canal, avulsion fragments, and so on. There may also be compression from the soft tissues, including the disc and ligamentum flavum. When traumatic spondylolisthesis of the axis is associated with intervertebral disc disease, the extruded disc may directly compress the spinal cord. Surgical indications should be strongly considered because of the poor stability of type II odontoid fracture; the rate of non-union is approximately 36% after conservative treatment and so surgical treatment is now the preferred choice for this type of fracture. Anterior odontoid process screw fixation preserves the motion of the atlantoaxial joint, is beneficial for fracture healing, and is the best option for the treatment of type II odontoid fracture. Graziano et al. found that there was a statistically significant difference between single-screw fixation and double-screw fixation in antirotation and antibending, while single-screw fixation can reduce the error rate. Traumatic spondylolisthesis of the axis (hangman’s fracture) indicates bilateral pars fractures of the axis, and can be associated with C2–3 disc rupture. For type I and II fractures (according to Levine and Edwards’ classification), reduction can be performed after skull traction, and bone healing can be expected in most patients three months later, but only if fixation is reliable. Type II and IIA fractures are relatively unstable however most patients are satisfied with conservative treatment; non-union swan-neck deformity and aggravated spondylolisthesis occur in a few patients during long-term follow-up, so the choice of treatment is still controversial. However, fracture displacement is aggravated after skull traction in type III fractures, which results in fracture non-union. The choice of treatment should be based on cervical dynamic X-ray, MRI, and complications. Type III fractures are unstable and surgery should performed if there is instability or dislocation between C2 and C3. Anterior discectomy and bone grafting, combined with anterior plate fixation, is recommended; the results in clinical practice prove that the fusion rate and stability of anterior C2–3 plate fixation are better for this procedure than for the screw fixation technique. The former procedure is also easier to carry out, and it can preserve the motion of the atlantoaxial joint with fewer complications. Posterior C1–3 fusion and lag screw fixation of the C2 pedicle can also be used. C2 pedicle screw fixation can be used for pedicle fracture. Tuite et al. and Roy et al. During the operation, the posterior approach can be used to relieve the locked facet joint, reduce C2–3 dislocation, and restore the physiological curve of the cervical spine. Axis fracture associated with atlas fracture is a rare spine injury; because of the injury mechanism bone fragments tend to be separated and often do not compress the spinal cord. Patients with an unstable atlas fracture should undergo early surgical treatment to restore cervical stability. Surgical procedures that restore stability include atlantoaxial fusion and occipitocervical fusion. Posterior atlantoaxial pedicle screw and rod fixation and fusion can be used because this type of procedure can achieve early stability and easy reduction; the bone graft can be placed posterior to the bilateral facet joints, which does not affect the integrity of the posterior structure of the atlas and axis. Our study had several limitations. The study design was retrospective. The mean follow-up period was only 12.3 For complex axis fractures, the related fracture types and status of the stability of the atlantoaxial joint and C2–3 joint should first be determined. Various appropriate treatments should be used for different types of fractures to decrease surgical trauma, physiological disruption, and medical costs, and achieve immediate restoration of stability after the operation, and then prompt recovery. This study was financially supported by