In this work, phytochemical properties of Hieracium pilosella L. powders of different particle sizes were assessed. Four granulometric classes with 180, 315, and 500µm sieves, as well as the unsieved plant powder were studied for that purpose. Antioxidant activity was determined by DPPH scavenging activity assay and the main bioactive compounds found in H. pilosella L. were quantified by LC-PDA-ESI/MS. The highest antioxidant activity was obtained for the 180–315µm and 315–500µm fractions, with 22.5 and 22.3mg Trolox equivalents per gram of dried matter, respectively. The major bioactive compounds of H. pilosella L., including phenolic acids, flavonoids, and umbelliferone, were evidenced in hydromethanolic extracts. Their maximum content was reached for the same granulometric classes as for maximal antioxidant activity. These results highlighted the interest of grinding and sieving for improving phytochemical properties such as antioxidant activity and bioactive compound content of plants.Plants provide invaluable resources of natural raw materials commonly used for medicine and nutraceuticals ( Plant use dates from time immemorial and, over the centuries, a wide array of processes has been developed for the preparation of plant ingredients. As a matter of fact, several conventional extraction techniques, such as distillation, maceration, hydrodistillation, decoction, infusion, and Soxhlet extraction can be employed to release bioactive constituents from herbs and plants ( Grinding is a process of size reduction of solid particles subjected to mechanical forces wherein the fracture occurs within the failure of internal molecular binding forces regarding external forces (  This work intends to evaluate the effects of the grinding/sieving operation on the bioactive compound content and antioxidant activity of Aerial parts (leaves and stems) of organic HPLC-grade methanol, water, acetonitrile, formic acid, Folin-Ciocalteu phenol reagent, gallic acid, 2,2′-Azobis(2-amidino-propane) dihydrochloride (AAPH), (±)-6-Hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchromane-2-carboxylic acid (Trolox), as well as reference standards of chlorogenic acid, 3,4-dicaffeoylquinic acid (3,4-diCQa), 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid (3,5-diCQa), 4,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid (4,5-diCQa), luteolin, luteolin-7-glucoside, and umbelliferone were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint-Quentin-Fallavier, France). Sodium carbonate (Na A ultra centrifugal mill ZM 200 (Retsch, France), supplied with a 24-tooth rotor of 99  Particle size distributions of all granulometric classes and unsieved powder of Water activity of powder samples was measured with a Hygro-Palm apparatus (HP23 AW-A, Rotronic, Croissy-Beaubourg, France) in standard mode using about 10 Powder composition in macronutrients (moisture, lipids, proteins, minerals, and carbohydrates) was determined for all granulometric fractions, as well as for unsieved powder. 2 Hydromethanolic extractions of all powder samples were performed. Under stirring, 2 Phenolic compounds were determined by LC-PDA-ESI/MS (LC–MS 2020 system, Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan). Separation was achieved on a Gemini 3 DPPH radical scavenging activity was evaluated according to the method detailed by Statistical analysis was performed using Sigma Stat 3.1 (Systat Software, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). All experiments were conducted in triplicates and reported values correspond to means and standard deviations. Data were statistically analyzed by one-way ANOVA and means were separated by Tukey’s test at Prior to chemical and phytochemical analyses, the efficiency of the combined grinding/sieving procedure in producing well-different granulometric classes in sufficient amounts was checked by weighing powder samples and measuring their mean particle size and span ( Sieved mass fractions showed that <180 It is worth noting that  However, the (probable) high content in fibers, combined with the presence of plant trichomes, negatively affected the sieving procedure, as shown by the close D Water activities of  LC-PDA polyphenol profiles of the hydromethanolic extract of unsieved powder of Thanks to mass spectrometry, an additional compound was identified, namely umbelliferone (peak 5, t  DPPH cation radical scavenging assay was applied to determine the antioxidant activity of the unsieved powder and the different granulometric classes of These results slightly differ from those previously described for other plants. For instance, the maximal antioxidant activity was obtained for particle sizes ranging from 180 to 315 In this work, the influence of a successive grinding/sieving operation on content of bioactive compounds and antioxidant activity of The authors thank the