Obligate autotrophic and acidophilic characteristics of iron oxidizing bacteria were exploited in order to prevent or attenuate the generation of acid mine drainage. Inhibition of biomass growth was performed by variation of 9K medium by increasing ferrous iron concentration (substrate inhibition), by addition of limestone (inhibition by pH increase) and olive pomace (inhibition by organic compounds). Inhibition tests of batch growth were performed according to a full factorial design with three factors (ferrous iron, limestone and olive pomace) taken at two levels. Blank tests were also performed in the same operating conditions but without inoculum. All tests were monitored by measuring cell and ferrous iron concentrations, pH and redox potential. Biomass characterization was performed by determining the sequence of 16S ribosomal RNA gene that denoted a 100% homology with the sequence of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, one of the main bacteria responsible for acid mine drainage. Experimental data of cell growth denoted a strong inhibition in all the operating conditions, except the case when larger ferrous iron concentrations were used. Blank tests allowed isolation of the effect of chemical speciation from the effect due to metabolic activities. In particular, inhibition by limestone seemed to be due not only to pH increase, but also to a reduced availability of ferrous iron substrate, while inhibition by pomace may be related to the antioxidant properties of polyphenols. Interactions among operating conditions, biomass growth and chemical parameters were specifically assessed by analysis of variance. Estimates of significant effects (95%) for cell concentration denoted that only main effects related to limestone and pomace addition determined a significant diminution of cell concentration with a dynamic increasing trend.Natural oxidation of sulphide minerals, exposed to the combined action of oxygen and water, results in one of the worst environmental problems associated with mining activities, i.e. acid mine drainage (AMD), polluted waters characterized by low pH, elevated concentrations of iron, sulphates and toxic metals. AMD can be generated in underground and open pit operating mines, but also abandoned sites can remain active generation points for decades or even centuries after mine closure. The other main source of AMD is the huge volume (about 18 AMD is generated by the biologically accelerated oxidation of metal sulphides, which results in the ore dissolution and the release of sulphates, protons and metals. The global reaction for AMD generation from pyrite (the most abundant sulphide mineral on the planet and the predominant mineral in many sulphide ores, concentrates and tailings) ( This reaction is intrinsically very slow compared with the oxidation of pyrite by ferric ions. The ferric ions are regenerated by oxidation of the ferrous by atmospheric oxygen, but this too is slow at low pH and is the rate-limiting step of the whole process ( However, the rate of this reaction can be accelerated by several orders of magnitude by the action of ferrous oxidizing bacteria such as The true scale of AMD pollution is difficult to assess, a 1989 estimate suggested 19 AMD generation can be slowed by minimization of oxygen diffusion, pH control of mineral wastes, total solidification of wastes and inhibition of iron and sulphur oxidising bacteria by biocides such as surfactants ( In this paper control and inhibition of the bio-catalytic activity of iron oxidising bacteria involved in the generation of AMD was specifically addressed. Microbial communities in acid mine drainage are characterized by a limited number of distinct species probably because of the limited number of metabolic reactions (manly autotrophic iron and sulphur oxidation) that are available in such extreme conditions ( Among these bacteria,  Another characteristic aspect, which can be exploited for growth control and AMD prevention, is the toxic effect of organic substrates on these bacteria. Obligate autotrophy still lacks a satisfactory explanation: it seems that the rigidity of obligate autotrophic metabolisms could be selectively advantageous against facultative species especially under fluctuating conditions of nutrient levels ( In this view, the specific aim of this work was investigating how the autotrophic and acidophilic nature of iron oxidizing bacteria, as the main responsible of AMD, can be exploited in order to prevent or attenuate the generation of polluted streams. The effectiveness of three different potential inhibitors (ferrous iron, limestone and olive pomace) was then evaluated by using experimental design technique and statistical analysis of data. The novelty of this work laid on this specific point of view: the metabolism of iron-oxidising bacteria was taken as reference point in order to assess the effect of some operating factors on AMD generation. In the literature there are other research studies in which limestone and organic compounds are used to treat AMD, but none of these took into consideration how the additions of such materials affect the biological cause of AMD. In fact, in general, the addition of pH increasing materials ( Other novelty aspects were both the specific amendments used (limestone and olive pomace, largely abundant and disposable according to actual legislation) and the methodological approach aiming to relate the chemical parameters of the system to the specific metabolism of the biomass by using analysis of variance to estimate the significance of each effect and interaction. The initial inoculum of AMD generating bacteria used in the experimental tests reported in this study was kindly furnished by the research group of Professor Groudev (Department of Engineering Geoecology, University of Mining and Geology, Sofia, Bulgaria), who collected it from superficial natural waters in the Curilo mine district, located near Sophia. Biomass was identified by sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. A conventional protocol of amplification by polymerase chain reaction was adopted by mixing 2 μl of DNA extract with 48 μl of a reaction mixture with the following composition: TrisHCl 10 mM, pH 9; KCl 50 mM; TRITON X-100 0.1 (w/v); MgCl Biomass cultivation was performed in 9K medium with the following final composition: FeSO 500 ml Erlenmeyer flasks were filled with 200 ml of 9K medium and 10% (v/v) of inoculum. The initial pH was adjusted to 2 by using H Inhibition of biomass growth was performed by variation of 9K medium composition by increasing ferrous iron concentration in the medium (substrate inhibition) and/or by addition of limestone (inhibition by pH increase) and olive pomace (inhibition by organic compounds). All inhibition tests were performed simultaneously taking the inoculum volume for each test (20 ml) by the same initial growing culture (500 ml). Natural limestone used in this work was mainly made up of calcium carbonates and silica (characterization by fluorescence analysis not reported here) with a mean particle size of 6 mm. Olive pomace was supplied by an Italian olive oil production plant as pressed and sundried disks, these were composed of lignin, cellulose, hemicellulose, residual fats and polyphenols ( Inhibition tests of batch growth were performed according to a full factorial design with three factors (A: ferrous iron; B: limestone; C: olive pomace) taken at two levels. The standard order of this 2 Growth tests were performed in 500 ml Erlenmeyer flasks filled with 200 ml of medium, 10% (v/v) of inoculum and with or without the selected amount of limestone and olive pomace. Three replicates were performed in condition 1 (setting all factors at the lowest level) in order to estimate data variability due to random error. Batch growths in the different combinations of operating conditions were monitored by measuring cell concentration, ferrous iron concentration, pH and potential during time (one sample every day for 7 days). Cell concentrations (cell/ml) were determined by using a Thoma counting chamber: each count was repeated three times to estimate experimental error (mean values and standard deviations were reported in graphs and used for statistical analysis). Ferrous iron concentrations were determined by the 1,10-phenanthroline method ( Blank tests were also performed in the same operating conditions reported in Both growth and blank data (cell and ferrous iron concentration, pH and potential) were analysed by analysis of variance ( Sequencing of amplified 16S ribosomal RNA gene denoted a 100% homology with the sequence of The main characteristics of AMD generating biomass can be observed ( A typical transient of biomass growth was observed ( The trend of diminution of ferrous iron concentration ( The initial decrease in proton concentration corresponded to the observed exponential phase of growth and was due to proton uptake across the membrane ( Even for this monitored variable, inoculated and blank tests showed different behaviour: blank tests presented quite constant pH values (with a standard deviations of 0.07 unit of pH evaluated by all the data of the three replicated blank tests). Different chemical reactions, which occur simultaneously, can determine the initial marginal decrease (about 8%) and the following rise of pH in blank tests. The abiotic oxidation of iron consumes protons (Eq. Where M Acid hydrolysis of ferric iron can also determine a pH decrease (Eqs. First hydrolysis constant of ferric iron is several order of magnitude larger than that of ferrous iron (logK All these simultaneous reactions, each one with its specific rate, can be reasonably assumed to be responsible for non monotonous trend observed for pH in blank replicates. Nevertheless such abiotic reactions can not explain the substantial decrease of pH observed for inoculated samples which could be due also to the release during stationary phase of metabolic products in solution. Redox potential in cell suspensions denoted a steep increase during the exponential growth due to the oxidation of ferrous iron (Eq. Experimental data of cell growth denoted a strong inhibition in all the different operating conditions, Ferrous iron inhibition on iron oxidizing bacteria (substrate inhibition) has been reported as having a variable upper limit of concentration (3, 5.6 and 6.3 g l Addition of limestone increased the pH of 9K medium to an average value of 5.4. This pH increase decreased the proton concentration gradient across cell membrane thereby inhibiting ATP production. The decrease in pH gradient could be the potential cause of the inhibitory effect of limestone ( Biomass inhibition in presence of limestone can be then caused by unfavourable conditions (high pH and low potential) and a reduced availability of necessary substrate, ferrous iron. The organic material used for autotrophic inhibition is an agro-industrial waste of olive oil production, largely available in Mediterranean area. Olive pomace could be valorised by the extraction of polyphenols (natural antioxidants) or by using as fuel on energy production ( In this specific case, the antioxidant properties of polyphenols contained in olive pomace also seemed to play an important role in preventing ferrous iron oxidation and maintaining a constant potential in the suspensions without limestone (tests Pom and Fe Experimental data of ferrous iron concentration in inoculated tests ( Interactions among operating conditions, biomass growth and chemical parameters were further addressed by analysis of variance of experimental data. A dynamic trend of the statistically significant effects (95%) on cell concentration are shown in Statistical analysis of ferrous ion oxidation by AMD generating bacteria showed that both limestone and pomace additions had significant inhibitory effects by completely preventing biomass growth. Unlike limestone and pomace, increased levels of ferrous iron did not suppress cell growth by substrate inhibition mechanisms, probably because of previous cell adaptation to concentrated 9K medium.