Zircon is notorious for its chemical inertness. Extreme processing conditions such as alkaline fusion (NaOH at 600°C or Na2CO3 at 1200°C) are used to extract the zirconium values from the mineral. In this study zircon was treated with ammonium acid fluoride (NH4F·1.5HF) by means of microwave assisted digestion. Reaction times ranged from 15 to 260min at temperatures between 120°C and 240°C. Successive microwave digestion steps, interrupted by an aqueous wash procedure, resulted in a >99% conversion of zircon to the water soluble intermediates (NH4)3ZrF7 and (NH4)2SiF6. Arrhenius rate laws are derived for both reaction control (progressively shrinking particle) and diffusion control by the product layer. Both models show reasonably good agreement with the experimental data. The derived diffusion coefficient corresponds to a solid–liquid case.South Africa is the second largest producer of zircon (ZrSiO Zircon is mainly used as an opacifier in the ceramic tile industry and this accounts for more than 80% of all zircon mined. Zircon must be milled to an average particle size of <5 Zircon is notorious for its chemical inertness Separation of the sodium zirconate from the sodium silicate is achieved by dissolution in water, filtration and precipitation. Zirconium tetrachloride is produced by carbo-chlorination of zircon at >800 The ZrCl Zircon can also be made chemically more tractable by dissociation in a plasma flame at >1700 PDZ can also be fully dissolved in 40% HF as follows The H The present work investigates the reaction of zircon with ammonium acid fluoride (AAF) under microwave assisted digestion conditions. The reaction kinetics under these conditions is reported. It is assumed that the reaction between zircon and NH The AAF and ammonium fluoride, as well as the two ammonium fluorometallates, (NH After completion of each run, and after the vessel had been cooled to room temperature, uncapped, the reaction was terminated by the addition of a boric acid (H The fact that digestion takes place during heating to temperature and during cooling complicates the extraction of kinetic data. Temperature ramp-up time ( Division by The raw (nominal) and corrected time data are displayed in Raman spectroscopy and XRD ( A number of kinetic models are possible for fluid-solid reactions The expression for the progressive conversion model is Here For the diffusion controlled model the rate expression is Here For this case, because of the experimental procedure followed, this method is not strictly correct. The particles were washed with water after each successive digestion step, effectively destroying the processing history of the material. The use of the cumulative processing time is thus not valid and For the diffusion controlled model the expression is For both Eqs. Both plots ( Zircon can be converted practically quantitatively to water soluble products by microwave assisted digestion with NH Prime grade zircon ( A CEM Mars 5 programmable microwave unit was used for digestion experiments. The system is capable of delivering a maximum power of 1600 A starting mass of 0.5 The reaction mixture was centrifuged and the supernatant liquid decanted. The solid residue was washed with propanol, dried at 80 The digestion cycles were done at 120, 140, 160, 180, 200 220 and 240 The authors wish to thank the following for their support: