Ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are important source of micronutrients despite the losses of these elements during processing. From an analytical point of view, these materials are complex heterogeneous samples containing as many as 13 constituents. It is critical that the sample be representative and grinding of the sample is essential before taking a sub-sample for subsequent steps in the analytical procedure. In this work the use of cryogenic grinding was studied as a fast and effective procedure for sample comminution and homogenization. This procedure is efficient and the powders obtained were acid-digested using a microwave-assisted procedure. Iron, manganese, and zinc were determined by flame atomic absorption spectrometry.The sample homogeneity is a problem in trace element analysis of heterogeneous complex materials and may compromise precision and accuracy of the results. Modern instrumental analysis uses samples with low masses. For attaining a representative sample with low masses it is essential to comminute samples to decrease heterogeneity. Samples can be comminuted using mechanical devices. Usually, the mechanical procedures for sample homogenization can contribute to metal contamination from the grinding apparatus and volatile constituents can be lost owing to the excessive heat generation ( Other important aspect is the amount of sample that can be treated in the cryogenic grinding equipment. Although not critical for quantitative chemical analysis taking into account the small masses needed, the mass is crucial for preparation of reference materials with strict guarantees of homogeneity as discussed by According to The present work proposes a rapid cryogenic grinding procedure to reduce particle sizes of breakfast cereal samples. Samples were prepared using a Model 6750 Freezer Mill impact grinder with Model 6751 grinding vials, (Spex Certiprep., USA), and with a self-contained liquid nitrogen bath (4–5 l). The cylindrical grinding vial assembly consisted of two ferromagnetic 440C stainless steel end plugs, a polycarbonate center section, and a 440C stainless steel impactor. The performance of this device was compared to a conventional knife grinding Willey type, model TE-048 (Marconi, Brazil). A microwave furnace equipped with PFA closed vessels (Milestone, ETHOS 1600, Germany) was used for sample decomposition. Iron, Mn and Zn were determined in the diluted digested solutions by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS, SpectrAA 640, Varian, Australia). All measurements were made with an air–C All solutions were prepared from analytical reagent grade using Milli-Q Four different breakfast cereal samples were employed for evaluating the performance of the grinding procedure. According to the sample labels the major constituents were: oat flakes, wheat fibers, corn flakes, cashew nut, peanut, wheat grain, Brazilian nut, and brown sugar (sample 1); oat flakes, wheat fibers, corn flakes, cashewnut, peanut, wheat grain, Brazilian nut, brown sugar, and raisin (sample 2); roasted oat, corn flakes, oat flakes, sugar, raisin, rice flakes, dried apple, wheat bran, malt powder, honey, iodized salt, grated coconut, and wheat grain (sample 3); and oat, sugar, raisin, and ground cinnamon (sample 4). A 1-g sample mass was inserted in the polycarbonate tube equipped with a stainless steel magnetic bar. The polycarbonate tube was closed using stainless steel end plugs. An alternating magnetic field was applied and the magnetic bar impacts each extremity of this tube according to the frequency of the field applied. This movement causes the grinding of the sample. The tube was placed in the mill container filled with liquid nitrogen. A two-step grinding program was applied. Samples were initially cooled for 2 min before the grinding for 2 min. The samples were ground using a frequency of 20 Hz. After grinding, 300 mg of each sample was transferred to the PFA microwave vessels. Three ml of conc. HNO The effect of manipulation and the stainless steel magnetic bar on contamination was evaluated using three different grinding times (60, 120 and 180 s) and with 2 min for initial cooling. This experiment was made with a corn sample owing to the hardness of its raw seeds. The effect of particle size on sample homogeneity was investigated by determining Fe, Mn, and Zn by FAAS in a cereal sample with and without grinding. For comparison two samples of breakfast cereals were also ground in a knife mill using 10 g of each sample. This mill was furnished with a 25-mesh sieve. The distribution of particle sizes obtained using both mills was determined by scanning electron microscopy. The measurements were carried out suspending the pulverized sample in ethanol and using this suspension onto a brass sample cavity holder. The sample surface was recovered with a gold film for improving electron conduction and resolution. The cryogenic homogenization procedure converts the solid frozen tissue into a powder. Frequently the total time involved is less than 5 min and the efficiency of the process is dependent on the matrix characteristics of the sample. Samples containing high contents of water, which are hardly comminuted by mechanical devices at room temperature without a previous drying step, can be easily pulverized by cryogenic grinding. Despite this possibility, it is recommended to dry or to lyophilize samples before grinding to obtain the results based on dry mass. In another study in progress, the cryogenic grinding showed unsatisfactory action only for samples containing high contents of oils or fats, as observed for Brazilian nuts that contain 68.2% of fat ( Considering the contact between samples and metallic parts of the cryogenic grinder, an experiment was performed to evaluate contamination. Owing to the difficulty of simulating a blank sample with hardness similar to the samples, an experiment was designed based on the effect of increasing the grinding time on the contents of Fe and Zn. These elements were chosen because they were determined, and contamination affects critically the determination of both at trace levels. The results obtained are shown in Breakfast cereals are complex samples containing many constituents characterized by different chemical compositions, hardness, and sizes. The contents of Fe, Mn and Zn were evaluated for the sample 1 after and before cryogenic grinding. Without grinding the relative standard deviations were high owing to sample heterogeneity ( Two different types of breakfast cereals, with (sample 4) and without (sample 1) raisins, were evaluated considering particle sizes obtained using the two tested grinding procedures: cryogenic and knife-mill. The latter mill was chosen owing to its wide use in the preparation of organic samples. The grinding procedures using the knife-mill and the cryogenic devices used 10 and 1 g of sample, respectively. Ten successive grindings of each sample were performed with the cryogenic mill, and the powders were mixed to guarantee suitable representativity and to obtain enough sample mass for all experiments carried out. Breakfast cereal samples containing raisins were difficult to grind using the knife mill, because water and fibers formed a paste that stick at the knives and affected their performance, requiring the interruption of the process and the manual cleaning of the knives before restarting. According to  Four samples were cryogenically ground and the powders were acid-digested using a closed-vessel microwave-assisted procedure. The results obtained are shown in Cryogenic grinding is an effective and fast procedure for proper particle size reduction. Contamination effects need to be better evaluated for other food sample materials. Working with harder samples and more sensitive analytical techniques, such as graphite furnace AAS, the contamination problems may become critical. Cryogenic grinding is a very effective procedure for fast sample particle size reduction. The occurrence of contamination can be a critical issue, but this is also true for other milling devices. Both the particle sizes and the homogeneity obtained from the cryogenic grinding procedure are useful characteristics that can also be exploited to preparation of slurries for direct introduction by auto-sampler or pneumatic nebulization. Investigations based on this approach are in progress. S.T.G. would like to thank PICD-CAPES for the fellowship. A.R.A.N., O.F.F, and J.A.N. are grateful to the CNPq by the research grants. The research funds provided by FAPESP (Project 98/10814-3) and the Ph.D. fellowship provided by this institution to G.S.L. are gratefully acknowledged.