Conventional carbon supports are generally treated in acid or base solutions to produce functionalized groups on the carbon surface in order to anchor active metal or metal oxide species. The use of nitrogen-doped carbon materials as supports can avoid this environmentally unfriendly step because the N atoms in the carbon materials can act as the anchoring sites. In this study, we have synthesized three different nitrogen-doped carbon sphere (NCS) supports by two different strategies: chemical vapor deposition (CVD), in either a horizontal or a vertical furnace, or using a hydrothermal approach. The three different NCSs were found to have different physical and chemical properties as revealed by TGA, XPS, Raman spectroscopy, and electron spectroscopy studies. NCSs prepared by CVD in a vertical furnace (NCSver) gave the smallest diameter and highest surface area materials. The NCSver material presented the most defected sites and the highest N content. The NCSs prepared by the hydrothermal method (NCShyd) gave the largest diameter, the lowest surface area and the least amount of defect sites and the materials with the lowest N content. The NCShor prepared by CVD in the horizontal furnace exhibited defect sites and an N content between the amounts measured for the NCSver and NCShyd materials. The surface N types, determined by XPS, varied with the synthesis strategy used. Iron species were successfully deposited on the three NCSs without a functionalization step. The Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) performances of the three Fe/NCS catalysts were found to correlate with the Fe particle size which was influenced by the different N contents, the N type, and the defect sites. It is suggested that pyrollic and pyridinic N atoms play a key role in binding the Fe atoms and that quaternary N atoms play a minor role. The Fe/NCSver contained well-dispersed Fe oxide particles on CSs that had the highest N content (made of pyrollic/pyridinic N atoms) and this led to the highest FT activity. The Fe/NCShor catalyst showed the lowest FT activity due to the presence of the largest Fe oxide particle sizes (50% quaternary N atoms).Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is an efficient route to catalytically produce liquid fuels and chemicals from syngas (CO and H Typically, these novel carbon materials, prepared by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) must be treated in acid and/or base solutions before anchoring a metal or metal oxide particle Another novel carbon material, carbon spheres (CSs), which is prepared without a catalyst, is composed of random curling graphitic flakes with sp To further explore the use of CSs in FT catalysts, we have prepared CSs with different N contents to probe the effect of N doping on Fe FT catalyst behavior. The NCSs have been prepared by both chemical vapor deposition and hydrothermal methods. Fe catalysts were synthesized using the as-prepared NCSs, without a functionalization process. The effect of the chemical and physical properties of the different NCS supports on the FTS performance of the Fe/NCSs was investigated. N-doped carbon spheres were prepared in a N-doped carbon spheres were prepared by chemical vapor deposition in a N-doped carbon spheres were synthesized by a hydrothermal method (NCS Fe catalysts (5 X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns for the catalysts were recorded with a Siemens D2 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation and a Ni filter. The scan range was 20–90° with 0.02° steps. N Fischer–Tropsch synthesis was carried out in a fixed-bed reactor (FBR) with an internal diameter of 50 N The iron phase of the three Fe/NCS catalysts was investigated by XRD. The XRD patterns of the three Fe/NCS catalysts are shown in Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) of the three NCS materials was carried out in a N TGA studies of the NCSs and the iron catalysts in air ( Raman spectroscopy was used to evaluate the defect and graphitic content of the synthesized NCSs. The Raman spectra for the three NCSs are shown in The N1s XPS spectra for the three NCSs were de-convoluted to gain an understanding of the types of the nitrogen-containing species and the chemical bonding configurations of N in the samples. As shown in The TEM and SEM images of the synthesized NCSs materials are shown in  FTS experiments were carried out at a temperature of 275 The activity and selectivity of iron catalysts can vary with different iron phases The different Fe The N type content on the Fe/NCS It is also possible that the NCS According to the above results, we can propose a possible mechanism for the synthesis of the Fe/NCS catalysts prepared by homogeneous deposition precipitation (HDP). In the first instance, the urea will initiate nucleation and commence precipitate formation. We have assumed this will be the same in all three experiments. For the NCSs, the surface contains pyridinic/pyrolloic N atoms (which provide lone pair electrons) and oxygen functional groups ( It is to be noted that no substantial change was observed for the particle size of the active phase (iron carbide) for each of the three spent catalysts after the FTS ( The Fe/NCS Due to the absence of an alkali metal promoter, all three catalysts showed high light hydrocarbon (C We report the application of iron catalysts supported on three nitrogen-doped carbon spheres in the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS). The three nitrogen-doped carbon spheres (NCSs) were prepared by two chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods and a hydrothermal method. The NCSs prepared by CVD in a vertical furnace (NCS Fe catalysts supported on the three nitrogen-doped carbon spheres were successfully prepared without a functionalization step in an acid solution. It was found that the iron catalyst supported on NCS We conclude that the amount of defects and type of doped N atoms on the NCS surface plays a crucial role in dispersing metal particles. NCSs are found to be an excellent support for studying catalysts as they have no residual impurities and do not require support functionalization. However, studies will still need to be made to establish the role of the nature of the N functional groups on the catalyst–NCS interaction. This work was supported financially by the National Research Foundation of South Africa (NRF) and the University of the Witwatersrand. We would like to thank the University of the Witwatersrand for a SPARC prestigious postdoctoral fellowship (H.F. Xiong). The Andrew W. Mellon foundation is also kindly acknowledged. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 