In iron ore concentration, reverse cationic flotation of quartz has been successfully employed for particles below 150μm previously deslimed. Amine and starch are used, respectively, as quartz collector and iron oxides depressant. Understanding the mechanisms of reagents interaction is relevant to improve the separation selectivity, especially for high amine dosages. The term clathrate was used to explain this interaction, meaning a molecular compound in which molecules of one species occupy the empty spaces in the lattice of the other species, resulting in the depression of hydrophobic minerals. Laboratory scale experiments were carried out with itabirite iron ore in three different size ranges. The clathrate formation between molecules of amine and starch may explain the increase of SiO2 content in the concentrates of the coarse size range (−150+45μm) due to an increase in amine dosage.The flotation of iron ores is performed in circuits consisting of mechanical cells, columns, or a combination of both types of machine. The feed consists of particles in the size range between 10  According to The interaction between collector and starch molecules has been reported by several researchers ( Some experimental observations by The interaction between a cationic polymer (acrylamidemethacrylamidopropyltrimethyl–ammonium chloride copolymer) and cationic and anionic surfactants (docylammonium chloride and dodecylsulphonate) on quartz was investigated by Experimental investigations of  The targets of the present investigation were to evaluate the effects of particles size range (−150 The sample utilized is an itabirite iron ore from the Iron Quadrangle, Minas Gerais, Brazil. The characterisation stages were chemical analysis (global and by size range) and size distribution determination. After desliming, the sample was screened to produce two size ranges (−150 The flotation tests conditions were:     The levels of variables used in the flotation tests of each size fraction are presented in Flotation tests were carried out using a Denver laboratory scale tests (2.6 Chemical analyses of SiO Residual amine was determined using the colorimetric bromocresol green methodology ( The mineralogical characterisation was carried out using reflected light optical microscopy. The results of the weight partition and chemical analyses of the three size fractions used in the flotation tests are presented in The size distributions of the global and coarse fractions are illustrated in   Increasing the amine dosage caused increase in the SiO  The results in The increase in the SiO The results of starch dosage for the coarse fraction are presented in   The possibility of interaction between starch and amine is supported by several findings. The effect was observed only in the case of the coarse fraction which requires higher amine dosages due to the need of reaching an ideal hydrophobicity level to keep the particles adhered to the bubble. The coarse particles present lower specific surface area, therefore they require lower starch dosages. For starch dosages 500 The amine dosage 250 A summary of the effect of amine dosage in g/t One could expect two effects of rotor speed. Higher speed during conditioning, such as 2000 The results show that, even after 29 Enhanced quartz depression as a consequence of increase in amine dosage was observed in the case of the fraction −150 Residual amine was detected only in the liquid phase of the −150