The need for scale-up of laboratory milling data to full operation is critical especially for the proper selection of design parameters. This paper investigates the extent to which full-scale milling conditions and design parameters influence the discharged product.
                  Austin's scale-up procedure for batch grinding data is used to this end and is applied to a continuous mill operated in open circuit. The circuit was simulated in steady-state regime using randomly generated parameters within predefined ranges. These enabled the iterative computation of the corresponding mill products, average characteristic sizes and standard deviations.
                  Simulation outcomes suggest that mill diameter, top-up ball diameter, in-mill flow pattern, and two scale-up correction factors in Austin's model have a greater bearing on mill product. The two correction factors account for the change in mill diameter and ball size from batch to full-scale milling respectively.Mulenga Simply put, Austin's scale-up scheme relies on the preparation of representative mono-sized feed samples. Then, a series of laboratory batch grinding tests is carried out to measure the milling characteristics of the material, that is, the breakage function and selection function parameters. The laboratory-based parameters are finally used in the scale-up model to predict the selection function, the breakage function and the overall performance of the full-scale mill under consideration. In terms of the selection function, the scale-up model can be summarised as follows Where With The breakage function, on the other hand, is expressed as follows Where Globally, Eqs. The model underpinning the scale-up scheme suffers from the fact that it was derived largely using data from mills run in batch mode There are numerous articles in the literature explaining the development of the breakage model applicable to open milling circuits, e.g. Where With And The average selection function The term The term Eq. The mill is generally assumed to behave as three perfectly mixed reactors in series: a large one of average residence time The flow pattern of material represented by Eq. With Here, Based on the three-reactors-in-series model (Eq. Where With The model described in the previous section (i.e. Eqs. The script was executed iteratively on an array of 1000 randomly-generated values of a pre-selected full-scale milling parameter. The other parameters were kept constant. Then, for a particular milling parameter, average passing sizes and standard deviations were extracted from the 1000 simulation outputs. These metrics relative to the 50% and 80% passing sizes were stored for later analysis. The batch grinding parameters and experimental conditions used in the simulation model of the open mill circuit are listed in In terms of simulation, The exceptions to the above ranges are the following parameters: Finally, concerning the feed to the milling circuit, two size distributions were considered to mimic primary and secondary milling. The Rosin-Rammler function given below was used to generate the two distributions In Eq. Similarly to the work report in the first part of this work We shall preface this section by stating that for each simulation considered, 1000 mill products were generated. From there, the 80% and 50% passing sizes (i.e. The effects of operating conditions and mill specifications on the discharged product are reported in The relevant results are presented separately in the sub-headings below for convenience. In reading Summarised in It can be seen that all the relative errors defined at 95% confidence level do not exceed the 15% set for feasibility projects Of particular note is the fact that slurry concentration Using a similar analysis as previously, it can be seen from Finally, variations due to the remaining parameters (i.e. The primary aim of this work was to find out what parameters descriptive of the geometry and operation of an overflow mill greatly influence the size of the discharged product. For that, each parameter was to be allowed to fluctuate within a range admissible in practice so as to quantify the incurred variation in the mill product. Parameters for which the propagated error exceeded 25% were deemed critical as this would lead to poor prediction of mill performance. As a result of this, the engineering project would not meet the requirements for prefeasibility studies From the results summarised in The next set of parameters that yielded variations in Coming back to parameters This brings us to discuss the parameters that yielded errors in The last topic worth discussing is the effect of slurry concentration, The sensitivity of Austin's scale-up model was tested in the context of an open ball milling circuit. The geometric parameters, the operating conditions, and the scale-up parameters of the model were investigated in this work. To do that, fluctuations in the mill product size measured at 50% and 80% passing size were characterised by varying individual parameters. Standard deviations associated with the observed fluctuations were used to identify the most critical parameters. Based on the work done in this paper, it was found that the scale-up parameters All the other parameters investigated did not incur variations in product size greater than 25%. This suggests that predictions based on Austin's scale-up model can be used at prefeasibility stage when these parameters are involved. However, the main drawback of the work is that the sensitivity analysis was done for a parameter while the others were kept constant. As such, the inferred errors on the mill product are only a partial reflection of the capabilities of Austin's scale-up model. To address the shortcoming, the contribution of all the full-scale milling parameters considered in this work should be combined. In addition to this, the effects of the selection function and breakage function parameters should be included. In the end, the overall prediction error to be expected of Austin's model will be determined for use in mining engineering projects.  Description, [units] Selection function parameter, [min Primary breakage distribution function, [−] Cumulative breakage distribution function, [−] Scale-up parameter in Eq. Matrix used for the generation of the transfer function matrix Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Scale-up correction factor defined by Eq. Concentration of solids in slurry by mass, [%] Diameter of grinding balls used in the full-scale mill, [mm] Transfer function matrix defined by Eq. Diameter of grinding balls used in the full-scale mill and falling in size class Diameter of smallest grinding balls inside the full-scale mill, [mm] Diameter of grinding balls added to the full-scale mill, [mm] Diameter of grinding balls used in the batch mill, [mm] Particle size of the mill product at 50% passing, [μm] Particle size of the mill product at 80% passing, [μm] Diameter of the full-scale mill inside liners, [m] Internal diameter of the batch mill, [m] Residence time distribution factor defined by Eq. Mass fraction of the initial feed in size class Solids flow rate at the mill inlet, [tph] Experimentally determined flow-rate of solids for a powder filling of unity as defined in Eq. Ball filling under full-scale milling conditions, [%] Ball filling for the bed of grinding media at rest reaching the level of the trunnion overflow of the full-scale mill, [%] Ball filling under batch milling conditions, [%] Centre-line length of the full-scale mill inside liners, [m] Mass fraction of balls of diameter Number of particle size classes, [−] Scale-up parameter in Eq. Scale-up parameter in Eq. Scale-up parameter in Eq. Scale-up parameter in Eq. Scale-up parameter in Eq. Mass fraction of the final mill product present in size class Slurry flow rate at the mill inlet, [m Selection function of particles of size Selection function of particles of size Selection function of particles of size Residence time or time spent by particles inside a mill, [min] Powder filling under full-scale milling conditions, [−] Powder filling under batch milling conditions, [−] Volume of the full-scale mill, [m Mass fraction of the mill product in size class Mass fraction of the initial feed in size class Mass fraction of the mill product in size class Upper size of the particle size interval Characteristic size of the Rosin-Rammler distribution function, [mm]  Description, [units] Selection function parameter, [−] Breakage function parameter, [−] Breakage function parameter, [−] Parameter describing the wear rate kinetics of grinding balls, [−] Breakage function parameter, [−] Characteristic slope of the Rosin-Rammler distribution function, [mm] Selection function parameter, [−] Breakage function parameter, [−] Rotational speed of the full-scale mill, [% of critical speed] Rotational speed of the batch mill, [% of critical speed] Fraction of material per unit time leaving the mill after time Mass fraction of feed passing size Mass fraction of feed passing size Selection function parameter, [mm] Specific density of the grinding balls used, [kg/m Specific density of the ore processed by the full-scale mill, [kg/m Average residence time of the full-scale mill, [min] Average residence time of the large reactor in Eq. Average residence time of one small reactor in Eq. The author wishes to express his gratitude to the This work is based on the research supported in part by the Thanks to Dr Murray Bwalya of the University of the Witwatersrand for sharing the data that the ball milling model used in this article was based upon as well as Dr Chris Rule of Anglo Platinum for granting permission to use the industrial data for publications purposes.