Where adequate adhesion bonds exist, thin spray-on liners (TSLs) have the potential to transfer or carry load, created by gravity falls of loose rock in contact with liners, onto stable or unfractured rock surfaces that also maintain liner contact. Liners with good adhesion to the rock can help prevent ravelling or loosening of discrete rock blocks that may otherwise be free to fall. Researchers studying the adhesive bond strength of concrete repairs, coatings or liners on concrete Surface roughness: TSLs are usually applied to the surfaces of blasted excavations, which usually have rough rock surfaces. Surface moisture: Free surface water and running water are present in many excavations. This is further exacerbated by the need to wash down the loose rock fragments from freshly blasted surfaces. Therefore, excavation surfaces can vary from dry to wet. Rock strength: The strength, especially the tensile strength of the rock can influence how well a TSL adheres to the rock surface. Weak or crumbly rock often results in poor bond strength as the rock itself is the weakest link. Weathering: Rock composed of minerals that alter on exposure to moisture in the air or flowing water can become weathered rock and possibly result in low adhesion. Contaminated surfaces: Rock surfaces may be contaminated by air borne mineral dust particles and the salts and minerals present in moisture or free water. It is believed that the most deleterious chemical conditions are those where high concentrations of sulphides and salts are present. These conditions are known to reduce the bond of a TSL to rock. In this study, the presence of oil, dust on a substrate and the roughness and grain size properties of substrate were taken into consideration. The liner materials used for these tests were Tekflex provided by Minova The selected test method is based on direct pull-off of a 33 Various types of substrate were used for the tests. These included concrete, limestone, granite and sandstone. The substrate surface was either created using a tensile fracture or a saw cut. To create a fresh fracture surface, cores of the substrate material were loaded to tensile failure in using a modified Brazilian test set-up. A steel brush was used to clean the surface of the split specimen. A circular diamond saw blade with water as a cutting/cooling fluid was used to create sawn surfaces. Standard Brazilian tensile test specimens were also prepared and tested to measure the tensile strength of the various substrate materials. The roughness characteristics of the test surface were measured using a roughness profiler ( For some tests, the specimen surface was altered by the addition of rock powder (to represent dusty conditions) or oil. The oil used as a contaminant was hydraulic oil. Measured amount of dust was homogenously sprinkled on the substrate, in the same way scaled syringe was used to spread oil across the substrate uniformly. Tekflex is a cement-based material that is prepared by mixing a dry powder component with a liquid polymer component. The dry powder and the polymer latex liquid components were measured by weight at a ratio of 1 powder to 2.5 liquid. The components were poured into a commercial food mixer and mixed at medium speed for about 15 All the coated specimens were cured under laboratory conditions with a temperature around 20 Various types of rocks and concrete blocks were used as substrates. The applied Tekflex thickness varied between 1.5 and 4 The adhesion test results are given in The rough (split) granite substrates and the flat (sawn) substrates gave an average adhesive strength of 1.3 and 1.4 The tests on cinder blocks yielded the lowest adhesive strength of 0.8 Paving stones or cinder blocks were used as substrates to assess the influence of surface contamination by rock dust or hydraulic oil on adhesive strength. The test results ( The effects on the adhesive strength of the substrate properties (tensile strength, roughness and grain size) and surface contaminants (oil or dust) were examined. The results show that under room temperature and humidity conditions, the adhesive strength between the Tekflex liner and concrete paving stones is about 1.8 For rock types such as granite, limestone and sandstone, larger grain size increases adhesive strength of liner to the substrate, while substrate roughness does not seem to increase the adhesive strength. This result should be verified with more testing data. The substrate tensile strength probably needs to exceed 2 From the test results of highly porous cinder block versus less porous paving stones, it was observed that rather than the mechanical interlocking, chemical reaction between the rock grain matrix and the liner material is more important to get higher adhesive strength. It should be noted that these results are only valid for a cement based product Tekflex. C. Wang and A. Sharifabadi helped perform some tests, and S. Watt assisted with the design and set-up of the testing equipment. P. Mills and D. Degville from Minova supplied Tekflex liner materials. Constructive suggestions from anonymous reviewers are acknowledged.