This work presents preliminary results of a study to determine the technical feasibility of heap bioleaching of copper sulfides in a mixed ore that had previously undergone a chemical leach to recover the copper from the copper oxides in the ore. The recovery of the copper sulfides is economically and environmentally important. The first step in this study was to determine the presence of bacteria in samples of both the agglomerated ores taken from the heaps and the samples from the irrigation solution used in the leaching process. No bacteria were detected in either sample, probably because of the very low pH, the high concentration of sulfate (200 g/l), and the presence of other ions in the irrigation solution. On the other hand, the cultivation of bacteria from recently crushed, fresh mixed ore (oxide–sulfide), and from cured, agglomerated ore, showed the presence of a small bacterial population, with ferrous iron-oxidizing activity. This indicates that the ore initially contained viable bacteria that were inhibited in the heap. Based on these results, a glass laboratory column containing 700 g of agglomerated ore from a partially, chemically leached heap was set up. The ore in the column was irrigated in a closed circuit with nutrient medium containing 2 g of ferrous sulfate per liter. Bacteria were detected, and the redox potential in the leaching solution began to increase on day 20 of the bioleaching experiment, indicating the beginning of the bioleaching stage of the sulfide mineral. The data indicate that the bacteria initially present on the ore can be recovered after acid curing, and also after prolonged contact with a solution containing a high concentration of sulfate. These results indicate that it is technically possible to induce a change from a chemical leaching process with high ionic strength to a bacterial leaching process, by dilution of the irrigation solution.The bioleaching of copper sulfide ores in heaps is a technology widely developed in Chile, with more than 85,000 tons of ore processed per day In the case of mixed copper oxide/sulfide ores that have been chemically treated to leach the copper oxides from them, the irrigation solutions not only contain high ion concentrations, but also exhibit a very low pH. Some authors believe that bacteria that are active in sulfide bioleaching processes can grow in the presence of high concentrations of sulfate and hydrogen We utilized a mixed ore from a copper mine in northern Chile, containing 1% copper oxide and 0.63% of copper sulfide. The ore was sampled during the following stages of treatment: untreated, immediately after crushing, after recent acid curing and agglomeration, and before, and after deposition in a heap for leaching. To determine the presence of ferrous iron-oxidizing bacteria, 10 g of each mineral sample were contacted in sterilized flasks with basal medium (0.4(NH To determine the feasibility of bioleaching of chemically leached ore, 700 g of agglomerated ore taken directly from the surface of a heap was placed in a glass column 30 cm in height and 8 cm in width. The column was irrigated in a closed circuit with basal medium at pH 1.8 containing 2 g of ferrous sulfate per liter. The irrigation solution was periodically sampled to determine the number of bacteria, the concentrations of ferrous and total iron, and the variation in pH and Eh. Raffinate and pregnant leach solutions (PLS) from the heap leaching process were analysed by atomic absorption to determine total Cu, Fe, As, and sulfate concentrations. Ferrous and total iron were determined by an  The development of bacteria at different stages of the leaching process is presented in The presence of ferrous iron-oxidizing bacteria in the enrichment solutions at the end of these experiments was demonstrated by the MPN technique The presence of Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria in ore samples from the different stages of the leaching process became evident only when the ore samples were contacted with fresh basal medium. These bacteria were not active in the heap process when the solution utilized had a low pH, and contained a high ion concentration, in particular sulfate. Starting with values of ions toxicity published by At the end of the experiment, a sample of the partially bioleached agglomerated ore from the column was used to confirm that active ferrous iron-oxidizing bacteria were attached to the agglomerated ore. A population of 4.8×10 This preliminary study, which was conceived as a contribution to the understanding of the operational limitations of the heap bioleaching processes, demonstrates that it is technically possible to bioleach a mixed oxide/sulfide copper oxide ore, starting with bacteria that are originally present in the acid cured, agglomerated ore. From the environmental point of view, this indicates that it is most important to maintain a strict control on the bioleaching of sulfide minerals present in an exhausted copper oxide ore heap because of the possibility of generating acid drainage containing ferric iron, copper and others ions, which may contaminate soils. The acid drainage results in this case from the presence of bacteria initially “inhibited”, but “potentially active” that can oxidize sulfide minerals when environmental conditions are favorable. The preliminary results presented here indicate that it is technically possible to change a chemical leaching process with high ion concentration to a bacterial leaching process. Colonization of the mineral selected for bioleaching can be initiated with the bacteria originally present on the acid cured, agglomerated ore. It is concluded that the acid curing treatment used to agglomerate the mineral does not kill the entire bacterial population, and that part of it maintains some ferrous iron-oxidizing capacity, which represents a valuable antecedent for a process of bioleaching. Besides, this bacterial population is enhanced by changing the irrigation solution, and therefore, by diluting the initial high ion concentrations.