Acute elbow instability ranges from simple dislocations without significant fractures to complex dislocations involving fractures of the coronoid and radial head (“terrible triad”). Simple dislocations for the most part are stable after reduction, managed with early mobilisation and have good outcomes with relatively low complication rates. In contrast, complex fracture-dislocations render the elbow very unstable and therefore surgical intervention is usually necessary to restore bony and ligamentous stability to allow early range of motion. The risk of complications, including stiffness, chronic instability, heterotopic ossification and arthrosis, are high and clinical outcomes have traditionally been suboptimal. Detailed knowledge of the relevant anatomy is crucial in the understanding of injury patterns and in the application of successful systematic treatment algorithms that will minimise complications and improve outcomes.
                  Chronic instability is most commonly posterolateral due to incompetence of the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL). Patients present with episodes of recurrent subluxation or dislocation. Most symptomatic patients require surgical reconstruction of the LUCL (using tendon autografts or allografts) which produces favourable clinical results.The elbow is the second most commonly dislocated major joint in adults. It is also the most commonly dislocated major joint in the paediatric population with dislocations accounting for 10–25% of all elbow injuries. Elbow instability ranges from simple dislocations with no associated fractures to more complex patterns of injuries with bony and ligamentous disruptions. Chronic instability presents with recurrent subluxation or dislocation episodes due to incompetence of the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL). An understanding of the normal anatomy and pathoanatomy of the elbow joint is vital to appreciate the variable patterns of instability, how to assess and successfully manage them, and to avoid the potential pitfalls. The aims of this article are to initially discuss the functional anatomy of the elbow with particular reference to stability. Subsequently the assessment, classification, management, outcomes and complications of acute and chronic elbow instability are reviewed. The elbow joint, although described to be the second most commonly dislocated joint after the shoulder, is one of the most inherently stable articulations of the skeleton. Stability is brought about by the osseous and articular congruency and the soft tissue components consisting of the static capsule and collateral ligaments and the dynamic muscles crossing the joint. Overall the ulnohumeral articulation, the MCL and LCL are the primary stabilizers of the elbow. The secondary stabilizers include the radial head, joint capsule, and the common flexor and extensor origins. The osseous anatomy of the distal humerus and proximal ulna provide most of the inherent stability of the elbow ( The medial collateral ligament and lateral collateral ligament complexes, in combination with the anterior and posterior capsule, provide important static restraints to elbow instability.      The anterior column comprises the bony buttress provided by the coronoid process and radial head with supplementation by the anterior capsule and dynamic action of brachialis. The posterior column consists of the olecranon and posterior capsule with dynamic contribution from triceps. The lateral column comprises of the radial head, capitellum and LCL complex with radiocapitellar contact being the key to stability of this column. The radial head is an important secondary stabilizer to both valgus stress and posterolateral rotatory instability with the AOL and LCL being the primary stabilizers respectively. The medial column comprises the MCL complex, coronoid process, the medial condyle and epicondyle. Elbow instability can be classified by the direction of instability, the absence or presence of fractures (complex) and timing (acute The main injury patterns seen in association with elbow instability include Acute Simple (small avulsion fractures may be present but no major associated fractures) Posterior dislocation with radial head fracture Posterior dislocation with fractures of radial head and coronoid (terrible triad) Trans-olecranon fracture-dislocations Anterior Posterior Chronic Posterolateral rotatory instability (PLRI) Acute injuries are considered initially followed by a brief discussion about chronic PLRI. Elbow instability in the acute setting may occur as an isolated injury or be part of a high-energy multisystem trauma. It is important to ascertain this early and appropriately assess and manage the patient according to their priorities of need. A detailed history, where appropriate, focussing on the injury mechanism and energy involved including hand dominance and the premorbid functional status of the patient will guide decision-making. The dislocated elbow will appear deformed often with the forearm held in a position of varus and supination. Examination should focus on assessing the neurovascular status of the limb, which should be documented prior to performing any reduction manoeuvres. Damage can occur with entrapment of neurovascular structures after reduction that may necessitate urgent surgical intervention. The distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) should be carefully examined to exclude an associated interosseous membrane injury. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs are usually adequate to assess and treat simple dislocations. Radiographs are required after reduction to confirm a congruent joint and look for associated fractures. A line drawn through the centre of the radial neck should intersect the centre of the capitellum, regardless of the radiographic projection. When dealing with complex dislocations computerized tomography (CT) with three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions are necessary to assess the pattern of injury, the size and position of fracture fragments and to assist in surgical planning. This is most commonly a posterior and lateral dislocation with no major associated fractures ( The mechanism for the typical posterior dislocation is a fall onto the outstretched hand; the elbow flexes slightly, the body internally rotates and the forearm external rotates to create a supination moment at the elbow. The mechanical axis being medial to the elbow in this position also creates a valgus moment which, when combined with axial forces, initiates a cascade of soft tissue injuries sequentially from the lateral to the medial side of the elbow. This progressive tissue disruption has been classified into three stages.    The goals of treatment for simple dislocations are to obtain a concentric stable reduction and allow early active range-of-motion (ROM). The elbow is expeditiously reduced under analgesia and sedation or full anaesthesia in the operating theatre. Reduction involves flexion to approximately 25° and longitudinal traction combined with supination at the forearm and counter-traction at the upper arm by the assistant. Following reduction the elbow should be examined for stability, which can be done more reliably under anaesthesia in the operating theatre with fluoroscopic imaging. The assessment involves recording the degree of extension at which the elbow dislocates as well as performing varus, valgus and posterolateral rotatory stress testing. Varus and valgus instability are performed with the elbow in full extension and 30° of flexion. Some varus and valgus instability will invariably be present as both medial and lateral ligaments are disrupted in complete dislocations. If the elbow dislocates in extension, then this assessment should be repeated with forearm pronation. If this results in a more stable elbow, a hinged brace can be applied with an extension block at the appropriate degree and forearm pronation. If more than 45° of elbow flexion with forearm pronation are required to maintain a reduction, then surgical repair of the ligaments and application of a hinged dynamic external fixator is indicated. The vast majority of patients who have a stable reduction can be rested in a sling or splint for comfort for a period of 3–7 days. Full plaster casts should be avoided as these are frequently heavy and tend to pull the elbow into a subluxated position. Active elbow exercises are begun as soon as pain allows. Immobilization exceeding 2, and especially 4 weeks, is associated with poorer outcomes with residual pain and stiffness. Dislocations of the elbow with associated fractures ( Prior to embarking on surgery, the surgeon should ensure that the necessary equipment and implants are available. Small or mini-fragment systems are required to fix the coronoid and radial head fractures. Counter-sunk screws may be needed for articular fragments around the radial head. A metallic modular radial head implant should be available if the radial head cannot be reconstructed. Bone anchors or trans-osseous sutures may be used for ligament repair and finally a dynamic or static external fixator system should be accessible should the elbow remain unstable after reconstruction.     Radial head fragments can be fixed using counter-sunk headless or mini-fragment screws or with a small pre-contoured plate if there is extension into the neck. Prominent metalwork must be placed within the ‘safe zone’, that does not articulate with the proximal radioulnar joint, to avoid a block to forearm rotation. This 90-degree arc is found most easily by applying the plate directly lateral with the arm in neutral rotation. If the radial head is deemed unreconstructable then prosthetic replacement should be performed (note that from practical point of view it is easier to prepare the radius for replacement, but not insert the definitive implant, prior to coronoid fixation). The implant must be metallic rather than silicone which is not rigid enough to support the lateral column and is prone to breakage and particulate synovitis.    Whilst in the past outcomes following terrible triad injuries have been poor, the results achieved following a standard surgical protocol similar to that outlined above have been satisfactory and more consistent. Pugh et al  Posterior olecranon fracture-dislocations, unlike the anterior types, often involve lateral ligament injuries, radial head fractures and coronoid fragments. The aim of surgery is to anatomically restore the proximal ulna with restoration of the trochlear notch and coronoid by repair or replacement of the radial head to stabilize the lateral column and possible repair of the lateral ligament complex. Chronic instability warrants discussion at this point but an in depth report is beyond the remit of this article. Although both the MCL and LCL are acutely disrupted with an elbow dislocation, residual chronic instability most commonly involves the LCL complex giving rise to posterolateral rotatory instability (PLRI). This was originally described as a clinical entity by O'Driscoll et al in 1991. PLRI typically occurs with the elbow in supination and extension with a valgus load resulting in compression at the radiocapitellar joint without the restraint of the LUCL component of the LCL. The radius and ulna rotate away from the humerus as a single unit, causing the radial head to subluxate or dislocate posterolaterally  On examination most patients demonstrate a full pain-free range of motion with negative varus and valgus stress testing. The most sensitive test for clinically diagnosing PRLI is the lateral pivot-shift test which may be difficult to elicit with the patient awake and is therefore best performed under general anaesthetic. Imaging studies include plain radiographs, stress radiographs, fluoroscopy and magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA). Plain radiographs are usually normal but may show a bony avulsion from the lateral epicondyle or widening of the radiocapitellar joint. Stress radiographs with fluoroscopy are more useful. These are taken at the point of maximal rotatory subluxation in the pivot-shift test and show widening of the ulnohumeral joint space on the lateral and anteroposterior views and posterior subluxation of the radial head on the lateral view  A lateral Kocher approach is used through the interval between extensor carpi ulnaris and anconeus The results of surgical techniques that reconstruct the LUCL overall are favourable. Sanchez-Sotelo et al       Elbow instability incorporates a vast spectrum of disorders that range from simple acute dislocations to more complex dislocations with multiple injury components. An understanding of the functional anatomy of the elbow is vital when treating these injuries to appreciate the involved components and plan a surgical strategy. The vast majority of simple dislocations are managed with closed reduction and early active motion with good outcomes and low complication rates. Complex fracture-dislocations require a stepwise surgical approach to restore bony anatomy and repair soft tissue components to provide stability, allow early motion and yield satisfactory results. The commonest form of recurrent instability is PLRI, which is primarily due to incompetence of the LUCL. Conservative treatment is rarely successful and most patients require ligament reconstruction using tendon allo- or auto-grafts.