Acidophilic microorganisms such as Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans have the capability to carry out processes of bioleaching, biosorption and bioprecipitation of heavy metal ions, which have important environmental applications. At. ferrooxidans derives the energy for their metabolism from ferrous iron oxidation, process, which can be affected by the presence of heavy metals in the medium. Moreover, organic matter produces an inhibitory effect over the ferrous iron oxidation of At. ferrooxidans. In this work, heterotrophic bacterium Acidiphilium sp. was added when the medium is supplemented with organic matter to reduce this negative effect. The purpose of this work is the kinetic study of ferrous sulphate oxidation by At. ferrooxidans in the presence of different concentrations of several heavy metal ions (Cr(III), Cu(II), Cd(II), Zn(II) and Ni(II)) and compare this kinetic behaviour with a mixed culture with Acidiphilium sp.
                  The obtained results show a non-competitive inhibition of heavy metals over bacterial oxidation of ferrous sulphate. In accordance with this kind of inhibition, a kinetic equation has been proposed to predict the behaviour of At. ferrooxidans in the presence of heavy metals in the range of concentrations studied.The accumulation of heavy metals in water, air or soils is an important environmental problem. In recent years, several technologies have been developed with the aim of reducing or removing the presence of heavy metals in contaminated media. Among these technologies, those based on the use of microorganisms are of particular interest. A number of microorganisms have the capacity to solubilize heavy metals present in aqueous solution (bioleaching)   The recovery of ferric iron by this acidophilic microorganism is an interesting process since the ferric iron is one of the most useful reagents in hydrometallurgy due to its oxidizing property. Several processes in which high concentrations of ferric iron are used (such as coal desulphurization or the leaching of arsenic, nickel, uranium and copper in acidic conditions) have been developed First studies on the kinetic behaviour of Kupka and Kupsáková The purpose of this work is to develop a kinetic equation for ferrous iron oxidation by The bacterial strains used in this work were The medium used to grow and maintain The 500-ml erlenmeyer flasks were used, containing 200 To study the influence of heavy metal ions on the cultures growth, these were exposed to different concentrations of each ion: Cr(III), Cu(II), Cd(II), Zn(II) and Ni(II). The media were supplemented with metal sulphate solution to a final volume of 200 The oxidation of ferrous iron sulphate was monitored by determining its residual concentration in the medium, using the 1,10-phenantroline method The bacterial concentration was determined by counting in a Neubauer chamber in conjunction with an optical microscope (Olympus BH-2) according to the method described by Gómez and Cantero The concentration of heavy metal ions present in the medium was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (UNICAM939 and PU7000 Philips). Samples were maintained at pH lower than 2.0 with nitric acid (60%). The study of metal influence over bacterial ferrous iron oxidation was carried out by performing several series of experiments with different concentrations of each metal in tandem with a control of a pure or mixed culture. The tolerance limits for each metal and culture were obtained, in a previous work The results obtained represent the set of values of specific growth rate for different ferrous iron concentrations measured at each time point ( A statistical analysis program was used to carry out the mathematical fitting of characteristic parameters of kinetic equation. This program operates by non-linear regression based on the Marquardt algorithm These values reveal that the presence of heavy metal in the medium exerts a significant influence on kinetic parameters calculated. In relation to specific growth rate, a non-competitive inhibition can be observed, because the maximum specific growth rate changes considerably when inhibitor concentration increases in the medium while constant of saturation does not suffer a significant variation. These assumptions can be confirmed with the representation of reciprocal specific growth rate versus reciprocal substrate concentration ( A fitting by non-linear regression for maximum apparent specific growth rate expression was performed according to the characteristic expression for non-competitive inhibition: The constants of inhibition obtained for each species and each heavy metal are showed in The results present a concordance with previous data about the tolerance of these species to the heavy metal ions studied ( If these values of In regard to mixed cultures values, it is difficult to do a comparison because of the absence of works on kinetic modelling of these cultures in ferrous sulphate solution. Finally, it can be affirmed that the growth of The authors wish to express sincere gratitude to Consejería de Medio Ambiente (Junta de Andalucía) for funding this research through Project 18.IN.PR.0010.