The effects of inorganic cations and organic polymers on the physicochemical properties and microfabrics which including the floc size distributions of kaolinite suspensions were systematically investigated by batch sedimentation tests. Kaolinite surface charges, salt concentrations and polymer polarity as well as polymer dosage were found to be the key factors that affect the particle associations, floc sizes, zeta potential, and turbidity of a kaolinite suspension. The relationship between flocs sizes, turbidity, and zeta potential of kaolinite sediments were established and the significance of understanding the polymer induced flocculation and aggregation of suspended kaolinite sediments was discussed. Assisted by the zeta potential measurements, an increase of ionic strength was found to compress the electrical double layer (EDL) of kaolinite and result in imbalance of the interparticle forces, thus the particle associations and floc sizes varied significantly. The addition of polymers was found to facilitate flocculation of kaolinite through long-range polymer bridging and short-range ion-dipole interaction, including the hydrogen bonding and Colombian interactions, which in turn affected the flocs size, zeta potential, and turbidity of the suspensions. Test results also showed that the clay-polymer suspensions possessed a unimodal lognormal particle size distribution (PSD) which leading to a more quantitative understanding of floc sizes of suspended sediments.Due to the excellent adsorption properties and promising performance, organic polymers (surfactants, biopolymers and synthetic polymers) have recently gained significant attentions in soil improvement in Geoenvironmental and Coastal Engineering ( Clay-polymer-water system by nature is complex and the microfabric and particle size distribution of the suspended clays are governed by the properties of both the suspensions and emulsions which include: viscosity, rheology, particle-particle interaction, surface characteristics, yield stress, and polymer/surfactants/ionic concentration ( Although there are a number of studies focused on the soil-polymer interactions, challenges still lie in the complex microfabrics which results in different floc sizes of organic polymer modified geomaterials. Therefore, this paper aims at evaluating the microscopic particle associations and physicochemical interactions of kaolinite suspensions modified with controlled inorganic cations and organic polymers. The effects of organic additives on the aggregate size and net surface charge of the kaolinite are investigated by zeta potential, floc size, and turbidity measurements on a series of batch sedimentation tests with different organic additives and concentrations. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images were obtained to observe the particle associations of organic polymer modified kaolinite suspensions. The observed microscopic and physicochemical properties were used to explain the macroscopic settlement behavior of the suspended kaolinite. The findings from this research may of significance in understanding the polymer modified soil and bring broad impacts to a wide range of engineering applications, such as solid-water separation, biological secondary treatment process, mineral processing, water purification, sedimentation, soil modification, and ground improvement. Due to crystal defects and isomorphous substitutions, kaolinite has permanent negative charges on face surface and pH-dependent charges on edge surface which offers chemically active sites for interacting with ions, organic polymers and adjacent charged particles ( Inorganic cations could actively interact with kaolinite and induce different particle associations. Typically, three major types of particle associations were reported under Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM): edge-to-edge (EE), edge-to-face (EF), and face-to-face (FF). An increase of the electrolyte concentration (for example, Na pH, ionic strength and valence of inorganic ions were reported to be the critical influencing factors on the formation of the clay microfabrics. Other than inorganic ions, polymer type, polymer strength, polymer charge, and polymer adsorption properties were also found to have effect on the polymer clay interactions which in turn governs the agglomeration and flocculation of suspended kaolinite particles. Polymer induced flocculation may occur by polymer bridging, charge neutralization, polymer-particle surface complex formation and depletion flocculation or by a combination of these mechanisms ( The floc sizes of suspended kaolinite have close relationship with polymer induced different types of particle associations. The zeta potential and turbidity were reported to have intrinsic relations with the floc sizes and particle associations because the zeta potential can be used to evaluate the net surface charge of colloid systems and the turbidity could indirectly reflect the solid density of the suspension ( Georgia kaolinite (RP-2, Active Minerals International) was homoionized with sodium cations in this research. The homoionization process is similar to that in Na There are different methods for determining the particle size, for example, the Microscopy, Sieving, Sedimentation, Optical and electrical sensing, Laser light scattering, and Surface area measurement techniques. In this research, the PSD of the organic polymer modified kaolinite suspension were analyzed using the dynamic light scattering (DLS) technique, the Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90 instrument. Dynamic light scattering measures the Brownian motion and relates this to the size of the particles. By illuminating a particle with laser, the particle will scatter the light and a screen is held close to receive the scattered light. The Zetasier Nano system could measure the rate of the intensity fluctuation on the screen and then use this to calculate the size of the particles. The PSD measurement was conducted in the supernatant, suspension and sediments. Samples were extracted by pipette and transferred into the measurement cuvettes. A 10 mm depth of the sample in the cell was maintained for all the measurements. Samples were pipetted carefully into the bottom of the cuvette so that it was filled from the bottom up. After filling the sample, visual inspection was performed to check the trapped air bubbles and any detected air bubbles were cleaned before measurement. The cuvette was rinsed with deionized water 3 times so that to prevent cross-contamination and samples were preconditioned to 25°C before each measurement. In order to get an average of the particle size and the standard deviation of the measurement, the raw test data (intensity-size distribution) was first converted to a volume fraction distribution by using Mie Theory (Eq. Malvern Zetasizer Nano Series zeta meter was used to test the zeta potential of the organically modified kaolinite. A pipette was used to transfer the solution from sedimentation cylinder into the Folded Capillary Cell. The cell was filled slowly with great care so that no air bubbles form being created. The Folded Capillary Cell was rinsed with deionized water three times to prevent cross-contamination after each measurement. The test temperature was set at 23.5°C during all the experiments. The zeta potential of the particle is calculated by the Henry equation: Zeta potential of supernatant (top of the cylinder at a 95 mm position), suspension (midsection of the cylinder at a 50 mm position), and sediment (bottom of the cylinder at a position of 5 mm) was measured at the end of sedimentation tests by Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90 zeta potential analyzer. The Zetasizer was calibrated prior to measurement by using the standard calibrating solution. The micro electrophoresis cell was rinsed with deionized water 3 times to prevent cross-contamination before each measurement. The test temperature was set at 23.5°C during the experiments. Because high solid concentration can exceed the measurement limit of ZetaSizer, some of the samples in the middle section or bottom were diluted 10 to 100 times for zeta potential and size measurements. Dilution was performed with de-ionized water, with the exception of NaCl-kaolinite mixture, where NaCl solution of the original concentration was used for dilution. This is because sodium was not as strongly adsorbed on the kaolinite surface as the other organics used in this study ( In this study the turbidity of kaolinite suspension is measured by a turbidity meter (HACH Turbidimeter 2100P). Samples (30 ml) were obtained by pipette from the top supernatant, middle suspension, and bottom sediments. The samples were carefully transferred into the sample cell and capped instantly so that to avoid any contamination. The sample cell then cleaned and wiped before placed into the turbidity meter. Calibration test was performed before each measurement. After each test, the sample cells were washed by deionized water up to 3 times and air dried before the next measurement.  A typical particle size distribution curve of kaolinite is shown in  The mean flocs size of the kaolinite particles in Chitosan and PEO solutions at different concentrations were shown in The Zeta potential of kaolinite suspensions at different electrolyte concentrations were shown in Turbidity has a close relationship with mass density. The higher the density, the more blur of the system is. A reference study is carried out to explore the relationship between turbidity and density of kaolinite suspensions at different salt concentrations ( The NTU values of kaolinite suspension under different NaCl concentrations (measured from the top of the cylinder at the end of sedimentation) were shown in The typical kaolinite particle associations identified from SEM images in In general, flocculation and aggregation could result in a change in the particle size distribution of suspended cohesive sediments. According to Stokes law, where only gravity and drag force apply, the calculated largest diameter of an floc in deionized water is 61 nm (as indicated in The zeta potential is closely related to the stability of colloidal suspensions. The zeta potential indicates the degree of repulsion between adjacent charged particles in dispersion. A high zeta potential of a colloidal system may prohibit flocculation and aggregation. When the zeta potential is low, the attraction would exceed repulsion and the colloidal would flocculate and aggregate. Therefore, a colloidal system with high zeta potential (negative or positive) is electrically stabilized while with low zeta potentials tend to coagulate or flocculate. The magnitude of the zeta potential was found to decrease (less negative) slightly with the addition of NaCl, Chitosan, and PEO ( The turbidity is fundamentally associated with the particle size and solid concentration. The turbidity could be directly linked with the solid density; thus, it could be served as a new tool to measure the solid density distribution during sedimentation process. The turbidity could also be linked to the microfabric of kaolinite and the sedimentation modes. Higher turbidity indicates the settling mode is in a dispersed form, and on the other hand, a lower value of turbidity shows that the flocculated zoon settling is favored. In general, the turbidity decreased as the salt concentration increased ( A correlation was made between the measured mean floc sizes (in logarithmic scale) and zeta potential of the kaolinite particles as shown in The effects of salt and polymer on the particle associations, floc sizes, zeta potential, and turbidity of suspended kaolinite in concentrated solutions were investigated in this research. Salt, PEO and Chitosan all have showed dramatic improvement in sedimentation rate, better interparticle bridging, greater settling rate and higher floc compaction behavior at optimum dosage. The floc size shows a strong dependence on polymer structure and polarity. This indicating that PEO and Chitosan have great potential in flocculating kaolinite minerals and increasing the settling rates and consolidation of kaolinite dispersions in dewatering, mineral processing, secondary treatment process (sedimentation tank), and solid-water separation. Lower zeta potential (more negative) indicates a dispersed free settling with relatively small kaolinite flocs. The settling of the flocs is governed by the Stoke’s law but the interparticle forces should be accounted when interpreting the settling velocity of the particles. Other than the gravity drag force, the interparticle repulsive force, and the interparticle attractive force, together with the shear force from the fluid should be balanced during settling. A change in the attractive force and the repulsive force among kaolinite particles will result in a change of the shearing resistance, as a consequence of the effective stress, thus the particle association and floc sizes would be changed ( The effects of inorganic cations and organic polymers on the particle associations, floc sizes, zeta potential, and turbidity of suspended kaolinite sediments in concentrated solutions were investigated in laboratory by conducting batch sedimentation tests. The SEM images, turbidity and zeta potential measurement, and dynamic light scattering technique were used to characterize and understand the mechanisms of particle associations and polymer induced flocculation and aggregation of suspended kaolinite particles. From the experimental results, the following conclusions can be drawn: (1) SEM images showed that the addition of PEO and Chitosan polymers could induce flocculation and aggregation of kaolinite in concentrated solutions, which not only increased the floc size but also yielded strong structures. On the other hand, no specific particle associations were observed from the SLES treated kaolinite. (2) Clay surface charges and organic polymer polarity as well as the polymer dosage were found to be the key factors that affect the floc sizes and zeta potential of suspended kaolinite. Compared with nonionic PEO, Chitosan could actively interact with kaolinite through both polymer bridging and charge neutralization which in turn induced larger floc sizes and faster settling rate of the suspended kaolinite sediments. On the other hand, anionic polymer SLES decreased the zeta potential of kaolinite (become more negative) where the particles are repelled and dispersed, thus relatively small floc sizes and long sedimentation period were observed. (3) The relationship between flocs sizes, turbidity, and zeta potential of kaolinite sediments were established and the significance of understanding the polymer induced flocculation of suspended kaolinite sediments is discussed in terms of zeta potential and turbidity changes. The zeta potential change could directly reflect the dispersion, aggregation and flocculation the kaolinite suspension, and correlated to the sedimentation behaviors. (4) The clay-polymer suspensions possess a unimodal lognormal particle size distribution which is largely relying on the polymer dosage. This work was supported by the