In 1981, I took over joint Editorship from Dr. N.M. Rice and since then have worked with several co-editors, including the Founding Editor Dr. Gordon Ritcey. After processing about 1700 papers, the time has come for me to retire for various reasons. Dr. David Muir and Dr. Nicholas Welham, both working in Australia, have jointly agreed to take over my post as from January 1, 2003, working with Prof. Osseo-Asare in the US. I am very pleased that the journal is in safe hydrometallurgical hands for the future. It is anticipated that much more emphasis will be placed on electronic handling of papers to help reduce time of publication. I have enjoyed the experience of reading and learning from so many papers. I thank the very large number of expert and reliable reviewers who have supported me, often giving generous advice to authors to help improve their skills in hydrometallurgy and in writing in a second language. The editor takes final responsibility for accepting papers but the responses of reviewers are vital in decision-making because an editor cannot be an expert in every topic. I also thank the staff at Elsevier who have been involved in production of the journal, a process which has seen many improvements over 20 years. This may be the end of a road for me, but many technological and scientific problems remain to be solved in hydrometallurgical practice. Significant relevant advances in analytical and computing techniques have been achieved in recent decades; nevertheless, inspired thinking is the key to real progress. The journal will continue to favour papers which address generic problems and which have a strong educational element. Papers submitted after January 1, 2003 (previously to be sent to the UK) should be sent to Dr. Welham in Australia and not to the UK. They will also receive Australasian papers rather than Prof. Osseo-Asare. David M. Muir / Nicholas J. Welham A J Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy, Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia 6150 Fax: +61-0-89334-8001 / +61-0-89360-6343 Electronic copies can be sent to either David Muir ( Papers received in the UK after this date will be forwarded to Australia. Papers on hand will be processed to completion in the UK by Dr. Slater.