The first industrial plant for refractory gold-containing ores oxidation using chemolithoautotrophic microbial association was launched in Russia at Olimpiada mining processing complex in 2001. The plant was designed to process 3 million tons of primary sulphide ore from “Vostochnyi” pit, Olimpiada deposit. In 2007 BIO-2 shop was launched. It was designed to process 5 mln tons of primary sulphide ore. Total capacity of two BIO shops was 8 mln tons per year. On the basis of industrial operation and analysis of the work of the BIO-1 and BIO-2 shops, a more advanced concept of the BIO-3 shop was developed. The concept was based on automation of the biooxidation process with the output of controlling and managing process parameters on computer monitors in the control room. This allowed personnel to keep the main process parameters within the specified limits, and enabled them to conduct the process in a stable high-performance manner. Equipment of BIO-1 and BIO-2 shops with automation systems allowed to increase throughput of all flotation concentrate treatment shops from 870 t/d to 1200–1300 t/d. Due to this reason in 2017 it was produced more than 30 tons of gold. At present Polyus Krasnoyarsk, JSC, is owner of patented refractory gold-containing sulphide ores concentrate bacterial treatment technology and patented microbial association, which perform this process, and the technology itself is protected by trademark “BIONORD”.Noble metals recovery (gold in particular) from technologically refractory ores, which are not treatable by conventional methods is of particular concern in Russia, as alluvial gold and oxidized ores reserves are being depleted and a strategic necessity of increase in refractory gold-containing ores treatment arises. Ledge gold-containing ores are about 40–60% from proven gold reserves. Refractory gold ores are determined by presence of fine gold in sulphides, harmful impurities, such as arsenic, antimony and organic carbon, which cause low effectiveness of conventional cyanidation technology (10–60% gold recovery depending on concentrate composition). Due to this reason such concentrates are not suitable for direct concentrate melting and require special treatment methods for noble metals recovery – roasting, autoclave and bacterial oxidation. All three processes are applied worldwide. However, in the context of worldwide worsening of environmental situation, while developing and selecting new and effective technological processes for extracting gold from refractory materials specialists give preference to biohydrometallurgical methods. Base material for biooxidation process is collective gold-containing sulphide flotation concentrate with total arsenopyrite and pyrrhotite content about 55%, arsenopyrite grade about 25% and gold grade 55–140 g/t. Mainly gold is presented as free impregnations with sized from portions of microns to portions of mm, and to a lesser extent - by thin intergrowth with sulphides and submicroscopic inclusions, mainly in pyrrhotite (FeS) and arsenopyrite (FeAsS), occasionally in the antimonite (Sb Concentrate biooxidation process is focused on the unique ratio of sulphide minerals in Olimpiada deposit ores. It is necessary to note the high content of carbonate component in the ore and the high content of pyrrhotite, the presence of antimony sulphides. This makes special demands on the process of obtaining concentrates and technology for conducting the bio-oxidation process itself. A unique feature of the process is fast oxidation of pyrrhotite with liberation of significant amount of heat and intensive slurry heating in bioreactors. Subsequent oxidation of arsenopyrite and pyrite proceeds with less heat release [ At present time Olimpiada mining processing complex is one of the biggest complexes in the world on refractory gold-arsenic ores treatment using bacterial oxidation of concentrates with total throughput of 9 mln tons per year. In this article the main results of research and tests on the industrial development of biooxidation technology for primary ore concentrates from the Olimpiada deposit in 2001–2017 and stages of production development and intensification for stable and high-performance work are presented. In the period 2001–2016 3 BIO shops were built and put into operation, each of them represented a stage in biohydrometallurgy process development and can be considered as a line of connected generations following one after another. The first shop for biooxidation of refractory gold-containing ores using chemolithoautotrophic microbial association was put into operation at Olimpiada gold recovery plant (Russia) in 2001. The shop was equipped with 5 lines of 6 tanks in each line. The volume of each bio-tank was 440 m There was no similar to that production in Russia, therefore, simultaneously with production tasks, technological tasks were solved and mastered. This processes included biooxidation control and management, determination of cutoff values of slurry density, flotation concentrate optimal grinding coarseness, flow rate, temperature, pH, stirrer rotations, air consumption. Different designs were considered for impellers, aeration systems, feed systems etc. The following drawbacks were discovered during the operation of BIO-1. The shop was equipped with piston compressors, which caused input of oil together with air to the bioreactors. Control of feeding and slurry density was manual, that did not allow to maintain process parameters on high level of accuracy, therefore the accuracy of control determined by experience of workers and significant role was played by human factor. Flat slope of feed pipes did not provide constant feeding to the reactors. Flotation concentrate high pyrrhotite grade (up to 40%) caused reactors overheating, and to reduce heating load a scheme with 5 charging tanks in parallel and 1 sequential tank. Despite these drawbacks, flotation sulphide concentrates oxidation rate was 88%, gold recovery rate was 92%. Shop throughput was 350 t/d. slurry density was 150–170 g/l, process time – 130-150 h. Feed rate up to 5 m In accordance with the experience of BIO-1 shop exploitation, BIO-2 shop designed to treat 5 mln tons of primary sulphide ore was commenced in 2007. Total capacity of 2 BIO shops was 8 mln tons of primary sulphide ore per year. The shop was equipped with 3 lines, 6 reactors in each line. Each reactor's volume was 1000 m Shop's throughput was 400 t/d. slurry density was 150–170 g/l, residence time – 120–140 h. Feed rate – 10 m In accordance with experience obtained in exploitation of BIO 1 and 2 shops and analysis of conducted work, a more advanced concept of BIO-3 shop was developed. The shop was put into operation in 2013 and equipped with 1 line of 6 reactors (volume of each reactor – 1000 m 2 blending tanks were installed (each tank's volume – 1000 m The system of automatic regulation of the specified density of the slurry fed to the BIO loading reactors was applied. New scheme of pulp separators were installed; it helped to control feed rate with accuracy of 0.1 m All this allowed to significantly stabilize the biooxidation process and increase the productivity of the shop. This is due to the fact that the accuracy of the slurry flow rate regulation was high and allowed to work at the boundary to the maximum flow rates, in a stable high-performance mode, preventing the process from breakdown. Automation of the process was conducted simultaneously with improving the technical side of the process. The shop throughput was 200 t/d. Slurry density – 170–180 g/l, residence time – 110–120 h. Feed rate was up to 10 m At present BIO-4 shop is being commissioned. The special feature of this shop is the The main physicochemical parameters of the process are displayed on the monitors of the system for monitoring and controlling the technological process. The main criteria for assessing the work of the BIO shops is their productivity and the quality of the resulting biocake for the subsequent hydrometallurgical treatment. The productivity of the shops is determined by the density of the supplied slurry fed to BIO and the flow rate through the biooxidation reactors. Slurry density is being determined by bioreactors' specifications, which allow to maintain uniform distribution of solids and oxygen through the reactor's volume, as well as maintaining required temperature and acidity of the slurry. The velocity of the pulp flow in bioreactors is determined by the physiological characteristics of the microbial association used in the process (in particular, the reproduction rate). The assays conducted in the Research Center of Polyus and at the production scale allowed to determine boundary and optimal values of all significant parameters of the biooxidation process. These parameters include: chemical and mineralogical composition of fed concentrate; fed concentrate solids coarseness; fed slurry density; feed rate; aeration air consumption; temperature; acidity; redox potential of the slurry. To ensure high-performance operation of bio-hydrometallurgical processes, it is necessary to maintain them in a stable state, which is provided by systems for maintaining specified parameters. Historically, in the BIO shops at Olimpiada all the main parameters of the flotation concentrate biooxidation process were manually regulated by workers. This significantly influenced the accuracy of the adjustment parameters and the time of their working. These changes in the preparation of BIO feed and automation of the main process parameters allowed us to rethink the current state of BIO and suggest further directions for its development. As it was mentioned above, the base for high-performance BIO operation lays in stability of all the abovementioned process parameters. One of the main process parameters impacting on the BIO process and its productivity is fed flotation concentrate chemical and mineralogical composition. In order to maintain a stable composition of the flotation concentrate, it is necessary to consistently blend the ore before it is fed to the ore preparation and concentration shop and blend the final flotation concentrate before it is fed to the bioreactors. After the installation of 2 blending tanks (1000 m Picture 1 presents data on changes in the content of chemical elements in the BIO feed before commissioning of the blending tanks (2013 data) and after commissioning from February 28, 2014. As can be seen from the above data, the blending tanks allowed to reduce the range of changes in the chemical elements content in the flotation concentrate, which is fed to BIO. There was a smoothing on the scatter of elements up to 5%. At an apparent insignificance of this reduction in changes, the effect on stabilizing the productivity of the shops is considerable. Picture 2 presents data on shifts in productivity of BIO shops before and after commissioning blending tanks. Data on BIO shops productivity shifts was included from 2013 and till February 27, 2014. As can be seen from the given data, the shift in the average productivity of the BIO-1 shop decreased from 340 t/d to 100 t/d. The shift in the average productivity of the BIO-2 shop decreased from 440 t/d to 125 t/d. The shift in the average productivity of the BIO-3 shop decreased from 120 t/d to 45 t/d. The data shown in After analyzing the data of industrial tests, it became clear that the advantages of the automation system were not used to the full extent. The ability to accurately regulate slurry density and flow rates allows you to work at higher flow rates and slurry density, minimizing the possibility of process failure. The first step was to increase the flow rate to 4,5 m In The maximum flow rate is determined by the rate of growth of the bacteria biomass, which should be less than the microorganisms washout rate and the quality of the biocake produced, which is regulated by the residual content of sulfide and elemental sulfur in the biocake. With an increase in the flow rate in the BIO-1 shop to 5 m In this case, as shown in If the flow rate will be limited to 4,5 m  In this case, the throughput of the BIO shops will be 1122 t/d with a slurry density of 160 g/l and 1192 t/d with a slurry density of 170 g/l. Further increase in productivity is possible due to increased slurry density. Re-equipment of BIO-1 and BIO-2 shops in 2015–2016 with automation system that proved itself in operation in the BIO-3 shop, allowed to increase the throughput of all shops for processing the flotation concentrate from 850 to 900 t/d to 1200–1350 t/d ( At present Polyus Krasnoyarsk, JSC, is owning the patented refractory gold-containing sulphide ores concentrate bacterial treatment technology and patented microbial association, which perform this process, and the technology itself is protected by trademark “BIONORD”. The most important conditions for high-performance, stable work of BIO shops are the following: Blending tanks, which are tank equipment with a stirring device, make it possible to equalize sharp variations both in sulfide sulfur and in sharp fluctuations in the ratio of sulphide minerals in the flotation concentrate. This significantly stabilizes the bio-oxidation process and allows a 15–20% increase in the productivity of the BIO shops. The application of the automatic control system for a given slurry density fed to the BIO loading reactors removes the density instability in the feed and provides stable conditions for active oxidative activity by the microorganism. This made it possible to increase the productivity of the BIO shops by 10–15%. A new design of pulp separators, which can adjust the feed rate to an accuracy of 0.1 m BIO-1 and BIO-2 shops re-equipment with feed blending system, automation system that proved itself in the exploitation of BIO-3 shop allowed to increase the throughput of all the shops from 850 to 900 t/d to 1200–1350 t/d, thereby the productivity increased by 30–50%. Due to this, in 2017, more than 30 tons of gold was produced at the Olimpiada gold recovery plant, using biooxidation technology for gold-containing sulfide flotation concentrates.