Data reconciliation considers the restoration of mass balance among the noise prone measured data by way of component adjustments for the various particle size or particle density classes or assays over the separating node. In this paper, the method of Lagrange multipliers has been extended to balance bivariate feed and product size–density distributions of coal particles split from a settling column. The settling suspension in the column was split into two product fractions at 40% height from the bottom after a minute settling of homogenized suspension at start. Reconciliation of data assists to estimate solid flow split of particles to the settled stream as well as helps to calculate the profiles of partition curves of the marginal particle size or particle density distributions. In general, Lagrange multiplier method with uniform weighting of its components may not guarantee a smooth partition surface and thus the reconciled data needs further refinement to establish the nature of the surface. In order to overcome this difficulty, a simple alternative method of reconciling bivariate size–density data using partition surface concept is explored in this paper.parameter in Eq. parameter in Eq. parameter in Eq. measured bivariate size–density mass fraction of the float stream adjustment factor for bivariate size–density mass fraction for the float stream reconciled size–density mass fraction for the float stream refined float stream size–density mass fraction marginal float distribution in terms of particle size marginal float distribution in terms of particle density flow split of feed solid particles to float stream best estimate of the flow split of feed solid particles to float stream average particle size (μm) measured bivariate size–density mass fraction of feed stream adjustment factor for bivariate size–density mass fraction for the feed stream feed stream reconciled size–density mass fraction marginal feed distribution in terms of particle size marginal feed distribution in terms of particle density flow rate of solid particles in feed steam Lagrangian auxiliary function number of density classes in the bivariate distribution number of size classes in the bivariate distribution residual for the ith size and jth density class of particles, defined in Eq. squared sum of residuals squared sum adjusting factors measured bivariate size–density mass fraction of sink stream adjustment factor for bivariate size–density mass fraction for the sink stream reconciled size–density mass fraction of the sink stream refined sink stream size–density mass fraction marginal sink distribution in terms of particle size marginal sink distribution in terms of particle density flow rate of solid particles in the sink stream partition coefficients of discrete size–density particle classes Lagrangian multipliers average particle density (kg/m pivot density of separation (kg/m Feed characteristics as well as equipment conditions of an operating plant drift slowly with time and therefore it is necessary to update the optimum operating conditions of the plant. In order to take necessary corrective actions, periodic plant audits of particle processing circuits under seemingly steady-state conditions are therefore conducted in order to evaluate performance of the plant ( Data reconciliation of measured discrete particle size or particle density distributions or assays of various chemical species in the feed and product streams of a separator are essential in order to derive meaningful conclusions from the noise-corrupted measured data. Reconciliation restores mass balance among the feed and product distributions. The noise in the measured data is due to additive errors in sampling, sieving, chemical analyses, pulp density measurements or associated sink–float tests. Reconciliation also throws light on the more appropriate solid flow split factor (also called yield or mass recovery of solid particles) from the input stream to different output streams. Traditionally the method of Lagrange multipliers is applied as one of the methods to reconcile distributions in any single attribute, either in terms of particle size or particle density, where the data are expressed over many discrete classes or assays of various chemical species in the input and output streams ( Lagrange multiplier method with uniform weighting is many a time inconsistent especially for very small measured values in the discrete size/density classes as the reconciled value may become negative (  Normally for understanding circuit performance, reconciliation of error-prone data is carried out first followed by model parameter estimation using reconciled data; say parameter estimation of a partition curve of a separator. Similar procedure is explored in this paper using Lagrange multiplier method with uniform weighting to reconcile bivariate distributions separating over a node. It is shown that the reconciled values by this method will not ensure smooth partition surface between feed and product stream components and further refinement of the reconciled data is necessary to establish this smooth surface. To overcome this problem a simple method of using the partition surface concept to reconcile product distributions is proposed. This method simultaneously fits partition surface and ensures reconciliation of the data unlike the sequential procedure of the previous method.  The marginal distributions of a given bivariate distribution either in terms of particle size or particle density can be obtained by summing the discrete bivariate distribution mass fractions, respectively across all density classes or size classes. Combining Eqs. It is normal practice to let solid flow rate of feed particles, In order to reconcile the error-prone data, where Eq. The distribution of errors/residuals generally follows a Gaussian distribution for the least squares method ( It is possible to assign different weights to each of the bivariate components during reconciliation that signify the measurement accuracy of that component. The assigned weights are the result of subjective judgment of the quality of the data or more objective statistical values obtained from multiple measurements ( Minimization of sum of squared residuals using the measured data leads to best estimate of mass recovery to float stream, denoted by Once The sum of the squares of adjusting factors to be minimized is given in Eq. A standard method of solving this type of problem is to use Lagrange multipliers wherein the equality constraints are added to the objective function that is minimized ( Using Lagrange multipliers the stationary points are given by letting the partial derivatives equal to zero as given below: Thus reconciliation of noise-prone measured feed, float and sink distributions with the objective function and equality constraints defined in Eq. In order to verify the reconciliation method, the data required is generated by conducting a column-settling test. Initially the column closed at the tapping position was filled with 3.5 The slurry inside the column was split into two fractions after a minute settling of the homogenized slurry at start, which continued to segregate due to settling of the suspended particles. The two product samples were collected in different buckets. The float sample was collected through the tapping position and the sink sample was collected through the feed opening by tilting the column and using necessary washings. Approximately it took 6   Bivariate distribution is a more general representation to marginal distributions in single attribute. Bivariate distribution carries information of the marginal distributions. The marginal distributions of the feed and product streams can be obtained from the reconciled bivariate product distributions as given below: Using marginal distributions of feed and product streams, the marginal efficiency curves (also called partition curves) of the separator can be calculated. The marginal efficiency curve represents the amount of material belonging to marginal attribute (say, either size or density) recovered in the sink stream. A better way of visualizing the efficiency of separation is to plot a 3D graph of size–density partition coefficients represented as partition surface ( The partition coefficients for the bivariate data can be evaluated by the following relation:  Eq. The best fit partition surface parameters for the partition coefficients obtained from reconciled data of  The estimated product distributions by this method are given in Moreover, if the noise in the measured data is low, it may be good enough to consider reconciliation as the evaluation of product distributions by fitting the partition coefficients to the measured data by Eq. The best fit parameters for the partition surface using the partition coefficients of measured data are  With regard to the partition surface method of reconciliation, the former method is sub-optimal as necessary calculations are done sequentially. By considering feed, float and sink stream distributions in terms of mass fractions, the sum of squared errors between the measured and reconciled values in order to give a smooth partition surface are given as 0.0049 in case of sequential approach while it is 0.0045 in case of partitions surface concept of reconciliation. Method of Lagrange multipliers has been applied to reconcile experimentally measured bivariate distributions of a settling column. The contents of the column have been split at 40% height from the bottom after a minute settling of the homogenized suspension at start. Bivariate distributions of feed and product streams have been measured by sieve analysis followed by sink–float tests on each sieve fraction. Reconciliation of bivariate distributions helps in assessing the marginal distributions also along with the bivariate distributions. Lagrange multiplier method reconciles the noise in the measured data so as to restore the mass balance. The best estimate of the flow split of solid particles is close to what has been observed experimentally. The method has been refined using a smooth partition surface concept to establish the relation between feed and product distributions without disturbing the distribution constraints. Alternatively, a simple method of data reconciliation using partition surface concept is proposed. This method seems to be more optimal than the sequential approach of Lagrange multpliers. BVR acknowledges Mr. Shivaram Kamat and Dr. Phanibhushan Sistu, EIS R&D, TCSL, Pune, India for their support and encouragement in this work.