The recycling of silver from metallic scraps can be performed through O3 leaching at an ambient temperature and low (∼0.1 M) H2SO4 concentration. The main by-product is O2, which can be recycled to the O3 generation or used as leaching agent in a pretreatment step. The stoichiometry and the effects of the stirring speed, ozone and acid concentration and temperature on the leaching of silver were investigated. Silver dissolved as Ag2+
                     (aq) in the range 10−3–1 M H2SO4, but for pH ≥4, insoluble Ag2O2 was the main reaction product. Kinetics appeared to be controlled by mass transfer of O3(aq) to the solid–liquid interface, showing first order dependency with respect to [O3]aq and PO3. Specific rates were only slightly dependent on the temperature in the interval 10–50 °C, but decreased at 60 °C due to the fall in O3 solubility. The mass transfer coefficients showed an average activation energy of 17 kJ/mol. No significant effect of [H2SO4] on mass transfer coefficients was observed for 10−2–1 M. Leaching rate gradually diminished for pH >2, as a consequence of the influence of the [H+] in the transport control.As leaching agent, ozone offers a number of environmental advantages for the treatment of concentrates and wastes containing precious metals. Ozone has one of the highest reduction potentials ( Research on ozone leaching has been relatively scarce. In recent papers ( The present paper is a base study for optimizing the step 2 of the Metalozon process: the kinetics of the reaction of metallic silver with aqueous ozone, including stoichiometry and the effects of stirring speed, ozone and acid concentrations and temperature. An analogous study on Au and Pd is currently under way. Two types of samples were used: (a) silver powder (>99.9%) consisting of aggregates of crystals of 1–10 μm and (b) silver plates (>99.9%) of 1 mm thickness and 21.1 cm The leaching apparatus consisted of an ozone generator (Ervin Sander), a leaching reactor and an absorber of residual ozone containing conc. KI solution. Volumetric flow ( The leaching reactor consisted of a stirred, thermostatted closed vessel, with a gas entrance to the solution through a fritted-glass diffuser, a gas exit connected to the KI absorber and a sampling device. Temperature and pH were monitored. The solubility of O An excess of Ag powder (2 g) was introduced into 550 cm A second method was also used. An excess of Ag powder (33 g) was treated by injecting a known input Kinetic experiments were performed in 500 cm Selected samples of attacked plates were characterized by Scanning Electron Microscopy in conjunction with Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (SEM/EDS). Insoluble layers formed at high pH were also characterized by X-ray Diffraction analysis (XRD). Preliminary tests showed that the rate of Ag leaching in O  Formation of Ag The effect of stirring speed was studied in the range 300–1600 min  The effect of ozone concentration was studied at 700 min  Temperature effect was studied in the range 11–61 °C, at 700 min In order to determine the mass transfer coefficients at different temperatures, the O  The effect of H The leaching data in the 0.01–1 M interval are presented in The experiments in the range pH 2–6 were performed by adjusting the pH continuously. At pH ≥4, a blackish layer was observed on the silver surface. XRD ( An explanation of the effect of [H Under stationary state, the rate of cathodic and anodic processes is the same, thus:  The stoichiometry of the silver leaching in aqueous ozone can be written as: In the range 10 Specific rates are little dependent on the temperature in the range 10–50 °C, but decrease at 60 °C, as a consequence of the decrease of the O Leaching rate gradually decreases for pH >2, as a consequence of the influence of the [H The authors thank the “Fundación Domingo Martínez” and “Carburos Metálicos” (Air Products) for financial support for this research and the permission to publish this paper. The support of the “Serveis Científico-Tècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona” is also gratefully acknowledged.