 In this Physiology/Sensory Discussion session David Kilcast highlighted the following three topics: The importance of in-mouth dynamic processes on texture perception and consumer preference. The effect of oral condition and changes with age on texture perception and experiences, leading to preferences. The effect of neurophysiological factors (e.g. receptor response, in-brain processing) on texture perception and processing.  In his introductory remarks on this first topic Kilcast stated that all aspects of eating food are dynamic in nature, starting with the first bite, continuing after swallowing. The components included are: initial bite; chopping, shearing, size reduction with incisors and molars; manipulation with the tongue, teeth and palate; salivary expression and bolus formation; temperature-related structural changes; release of flavor components; swallowing; residual effects like afterfeel and aftertaste. The questions are if we do understand these changes; how do they affect perception; how important are these effects in influencing preferences, and to what extent should we examine texture in conjunction with other sensory modalities?  Lawless studied the interplay between in-mouth perception (like astringency) and physiological responses. He showed a tripartite model of the astringency cues subjects who are more responsive to astringency have lower salivary protein content than less responsive subjects; turbidity can be used as an index of saliva–tannin interactions; and subjects with higher haze indices have a lower initial astringency response in the time intensity curve. According to Lawless the challenges ahead amongst others concern the complex nature of salivary proteins, the difficulty in dietary tannin analysis, the multiple origins of individual differences and the question whether multiple mechanisms exists for astringency, e.g. do acids work the same way as tannins? Civille stated in her contribution that in general texture research focuses on the mechanical properties of food during oral processing. However, what is needed is inherent variables in samples (chemical and physical) and subjects (age, dentition, expectations, culture) should be taken into account; other sensory modalities that influence perception of texture (appearance, flavor, and sound); instrumental measures need to be developed to study in mouth processes such as the effects of saliva on the bolus development and breakdown and on the swallowing process, as well as the physics and chemistry of saliva. Perception issues—Descriptive (perceived amount, thickness and stickiness of saliva, ease of chewing); perception issues—consumer (dry v. wet mouth feel, mouth watering, ease of chewing and of swallowing different foods); and protocols and timed sessions. She also noted the importance of the anthropological aspects of texture and the “Gestalt” of the product for the consumer liking. Crisps were mentioned as an example of controlled entertainment. Prinz reported on his investigation of manipulation in the mouth of two-colored chewing gum. When the two colors were applied end to end in a bar shaped gum the two colors were almost completely mixed after 30 s of chewing. When the two colors were applied side by side in the bar shaped gum, almost no mixing took place. This demonstrated a clear orientation of the chewing process. Prinz proposed to design more practical experiments like this one to proceed faster in this field where so little is known about, for example, the role of tongue, cheeks, and palate in the mastication process or of the role of manipulation in general in texture perception. Mioche noted that chewing strategies are aimed at optimizing the food degradation process. This strategy is influenced by the preferred side of chewing. For example, as a result of preferred side, the mastication or chewing process of meat might change from unilateral mastication into bilateral chewing. Up to 80% of the chewing cycle is bilateral. The ratio of uni-and bilateral chewing also depends on the texture, the sample size and the subject. Nevertheless, the significance of bilateral chews remains unclear ( Prinz started the discussion by raising the question what the relation is between chewing gum and meat in spitting experiments. Mioche commented that the texture variation in spit out meat is related to the initial variation. Kilcast posed the question whether oral mixing could be fitted into a more complete model of mastication and bolus formation. He also noted that it would be interesting to build models for other oral processes. Civille responded that food hedonics factors should be involved in such model building experiments, where for example two sweet and two savory models might be formed. She assumed that people chew more aggressively with savory than with sweet foods, depending on their strategies and attitudes. Lawless remarked that astringency could be one of the food variables. Subsequent research may focus on the interaction with tactile and irritating factors. Astringency stimulates the salivary glands, but makes the saliva at the same time less lubricating, and it cleans the mouth. No full clearance will be obtained. The viscosity of the food will drop six-fold by adding tannins. Hiiemae noted that residuals may be perceived consciously or sub-consciously. Civille added that residual fats and fat substitutes leave a film in the mouth. Removal of this film brings a feeling of freshness. It was recognized that there should be an overview of all processes related to texture, such as the astringency and tactile response to chemical stimuli in the mouth. The relevance of model foods was discussed, since in real life different flavors interact with different textures. It was remarked that it would be nice to experiment with sweet and acid flavors and their interaction with salivary flow rate and manipulation. The phase change (e.g. melting chocolate) is of importance as are the geometrical and thermal aspects of foods. It is unclear whether there is an optimum bite size, but none was found for bananas. What is known is that fat helps to swallow bigger chunks (e.g. buttered vs. dry bread). Kilcast summarized that in-mouth dynamics show large individual differences that are not well understood. Sensory scientists have little knowledge of oral management factors, such as mastication effects and salivation, that determine mastication patterns, but there is extensive knowledge in the dental research field. Sensory researchers have in general incomplete knowledge of the relevant physiological factors and physiological mechanisms underlying texture perceptions.  Oral factors such as dental condition, musculature and salivation can influence our experience of food from childhood to old age. But do we understand how texture preferences develop from an early age, or can we assess the relative importance of physiological factors and psychological factors in determining these changes? In view of the aging population in the western world this seems a topic of growing importance. For the elderly healthy eating will require tailored food, but to what criteria should we tailor these foods and how important is texture in this respect?  Köster explained the differences between implicit and explicit memory. Where implicit memory is subconscious and thereby forms intrinsic expectations, explicit memory is conscious and thereby forms extrinsic expectations. He stated that the memory for texture is implicit of nature. He illustrated that by an experiment in which subjects consumed French bread not knowing that they would be asked later to select the consumed bread from a series of breads. The women remembered the crust better, while the men remembered best the breadcrumb. His general conclusions were: Sensory methods should respect the nature of the sense modalities involved. Conscious perception is often incomplete and misleading. Implicit and behavioral methods should be used more often when lower senses like touch, olfaction and taste are concerned. Köster stated that the appreciation or liking is given a second importance, since people do not think about it. Moskowitz stated that only a small number of people notice texture. For those people texture is important, while for the others there will be no effect of texture on liking, just a reject or non-reject response. The effect of texture on liking is not clear yet, as shown by the fact that aged people, who got new dentures seem to memorize textures from the past. It was noted in the expert discussion that texture has a different function than odors, where safety is at stake. However, as with odors, aversions to textural aspects can build up. It is likely that children of 3–4 years of age already have implicit memory. They usually do not like crumbs, or fat globules or milk skins. An innate texture liking is not likely. The question was raised whether there is information content in texture. The acceptance of texture is probably dependent on the perceived complexity over time. The last remark of the discussion was that language for textural diversity is underdeveloped. Making it difficult to extract highly detailed texture information from people. Kilcast summarized that avoidance of specific textures by the elderly can have severe nutritional consequences, and a combined effort by sensory and consumer scientists and dental researchers is needed to identify the reasons for eating difficulties. In addition, the importance of memory (especially implicit memory) in the elderly in relation to texture preferences is not understood. Development of texture preferences occurs during childhood, and changes in physiological condition and response and preferences on aging need further study.  Moving from the peripheral to the central part of the human physiological system we now arrive at the third topic: the effect of neurophysiological factors. Related questions are: “To what extent do we understand the physiological basis of texture perception of all the tactile senses used” (fingers, hands, mouth). “Do we understand how in-brain processing modifies the basic physiological responses?” “How important are these factors in influencing consumer preferences; what techniques should we employ to measure texture response directly (e.g. EMG); and can we use measurement techniques such as MRI to directly measure consumer liking?”  In her contribution Vickers stated the importance of auditory for the perception of crispness. She found a good correlation between crispness and loudness, but when the auditory sensations were removed, by wearing headphones, subjects could evaluate the crispness equally good, probably due to the vibrations that still could be noticed. Sounds alone give a lower correlation. She warned that toughness can not be varied without varying other characteristics like hardness. She assumes that also in texture perception masking and synergy effects take place ( Hiiemae noted that the mouth behavior of mammals is well documented. Man and mammals differ in the processing of liquids but not in the processing of solids. Man swallows liquids with the mouth almost closed and does not consciously decide to swallow. Mouth behavior is a rhythmic behavior of the tongue coupled with activity in the cheeks. She postulated that the complete feeding sequence is subject to sensory feedback from the oral cavity, i.e. to the changing condition of the food. Her recent research showed that: All processing of ingested foods, other than liquids, involves four stages: (a) In contrast, the bolus for ingested liquids is usually formed in the oral cavity, anterior to the seal between the soft palate and the tongue, then propulsively expelled through the fauces and swallowed ( The intra-oral food manipulation consists of two types of movement, the antero-posterior and the transverse movement. Two mechanisms have been identified in the antero-posterior movement: the pullback and squeeze back. The first uses a sharp backward bodily movement of the tongue to carry food on its surface from the anterior oral cavity to the molars, at or through the time of maximum gape. The second mechanism depends on movement of the tongue surface against the hard palate. The transverse movement appears mainly after initial breakage, when food particles are moved to the balancing side of the mouth. She emphasized that the existence of two Central Pattern Generators (CPGs), (a) for mastication, and (b) for swallowing, is well established. What is not understood is, first, the genesis of rhythmic tongue movements, linked but not locked into those of the jaws, and second, the linkage between the CPGs for mastication and swallowing since their properties appear rather different. What is important is that the system is designed such that continuous sensory feedback can modulate motor output ( In his contribution Bosman raised the following questions: What is the importance of the first bite for the rest of the oral processing? Considering the oversized muscle capacity in the mouth: how do we select the muscles we will use? What is the critical sensitivity of the sensors in the mouth, or how sensitive would they be before stopping the whole process? What is the flexibility of the mouth system, how do we adapt to the loss of sensors? Mark Hector responded to the third question of Frits Bosman. He noted that the mechano receptors in the mouth are extremely sensitive sensors, that play a crucial role in understanding the sensory input. Again more questions than answers were posed. Humans can indulge on substrates, but how do we structure that? Why do Japanese people love texture? The rabbit could not stop eating chewing gum. Humans must have special senses. We do not know enough about the intra oral receptors. The movement of the tongue for instance, requires a good control system. How do the mechano-receptors in the tongue work? We know that there is no saliva secretion with anaestesized animals, but how is the quality of the saliva influenced? What happens to the mouth at nighttime? Bosman noted that people with implants eat twice as efficiently than people with dentures. Kilcast summarized that there is a general lack of basic neurophysiological mechanisms relevant to information processing available to texture researchers. First bite is recognized as being of great importance in influencing subsequent judgements and actions, but has not been studied as extensively by dental physiologists as the later stages of mastication. The effect of oral states (e.g. implants and diseased subjects) and on the effects of “sensory knockouts” should give valuable information. A matrix of potentially important texture issues related to human physiology and to sensory perception, including psychological factors, was set up by Alina Szczesniak and David Kilcast in conjunction with WCFS. The three main cells identified in this matrix of practical importance in the field of food texture were: The importance of in-mouth dynamic processes on texture perception and consumer preference. The effect of oral condition and changes with age on texture perception and experiences, leading to preferences. The effect of neurophysiological factors (e.g. receptor response, in-brain processing) on texture perception and processing.  In-mouth dynamics show large individual differences that we do not understand. Sensory scientists have little knowledge of oral management factors (such as mastication efficiency and salivation) that determine mastication patterns, but there is extensive knowledge in the dental research field. Sensory researchers have incomplete knowledge of the relevant physiological factors and physiological mechanisms of texture perception. Avoidance of specific textures by the elderly can have severe nutritional consequences, and a combined effort by sensory and consumers scientists and dental researchers is needed to identify the reasons for eating difficulties. In addition, the importance of memory (especially implicit memory) in the elderly in relation to texture preferences is not understood. Development of texture preferences occurs during childhood, and changes in physiological condition and response and preferences on aging need further study. There is a general lack of basic neurophysiological mechanisms relevant to information processing available to texture researchers. First bite is recognized as being of great importance in influencing subsequent judgements and actions, but has not been studies as extensively by dental physiologists as later stages of mastication. The effect of oral states (e.g. implants and diseased subjects) and on the effect of “sensory knockouts” should give valuable information.  There is a fundamental lack of understanding of relevant physiological factors influencing texture perception mechanisms and of mastication processes. The substantial knowledge base of dental physiologists must be integrated into sensory research studies. This can be complementary in nature; for example, dental researchers have focussed on mastication, whilst sensory researchers (and physicists) have focussed on first bite. The knowledge base of the psychological factors influencing perception and choice should be integrated with physiological factors; this can be facilitated by using the extensive experience of the use of multivariate statistical techniques in sensory science. Interactions between texture and other sensory modalities must be taken into account in understanding texture influences. Individual variation must be recognized and accounted for in measuring and understanding texture response. The development of texture preferences with age, and the change in physiological factors and relevant psychological factors such as memory, should be studied from childhood through to old age.  The discussions in this session took place in three rounds, which were directed at solids vs. perception, semi-solids vs. perception and liquids vs. perception, respectively. In his introductory remarks Malcolm Bourne stated that: Texture is a sensory attribute that only can be sensed and measured by people. Instruments measured physical properties and not textural properties. Instruments are used because they give results faster, at lower cost, are more reproducible than people are and are available 24 h per day. Instrumental measurements must be calibrated against people for their data to be a good predictor of textural quality. Instruments have the potential to be good predictors of many textural notes that use intensity scaling. They can never be a predictor of hedonic scaling (degree of liking). A rough estimate is that today a total of around 10,000 “food compression” machines are in use for determining textural attributes of foods. The question remains however if the deformation rate used in these machines is relevant to the deformation in the mouth? This led to the first item for discussion:  We can even question if it is still possible to speak of stresses and strains in the mouth. Mastication of food in the mouth involves tremendous compression. This led to the second discussion item:  Following Bourne's introduction a number of experts contributed to the discussion by giving their personal views on the subject. In the following their contributions were summarized.  Meullenet emphasized the need for a coherent program to characterize sensory properties by analytical tools. The main trust of his research is to develop instrumental methods for predicting multiple sensory characteristics. A basic assumption is that various sensory characteristics can be reliably evaluated by trained panelists (not consumers), according to the classification described by Szczesniak in 1963. Challenges in relating instrumental methods to texture perception are: Stimulus? Do we know how to measure it? Humans receive a multitude of sensory input. Mental treatment of information, influence of prior experiences or expectation? Can we hope to predict perception using a mechanical test? Tests, imitating parts of the oral processing of food are widely used. The advantage is clear, they can be standardized and interpreted in physical terms. There are also various points to consider with imitative tests: Use of teeth as a contact surface in compression tests in stead of flat plates. Three-dimensional movements, but that makes devices cumbersome and difficult to manipulate for multiple chews. Sinusoidal compression rates. How to imitate saliva. Data treatment? How can we get beyond correlation? In the literature a number of cases have been reported where a correlation between an instrumental measurement and a sensory attribute has been observed. The question remains if they account for the stimuli? Mathematical techniques used include the “multiple regression” approach, the “multivariate” approach and data mining techniques. By the latter ones it is tried to simulate the complexity of data processing by the brain. The current statistical approaches are limited however: Accurate measurement of the stimuli as yet is not possible. Instrumental measurements only mimic food manipulation, and often do not include the effects of saliva. There is a general lack of knowledge about processing of texture inputs in the brain that produces the perception. For example, what is the role of previous experience? Do we have to use sinusoidal compression rates? Why not? But where do we go with it? Vincent stated that many descriptions of texture parameters are medieval. If one cannot describe the difference between crispiness and crunchiness one asks the wrong question. Much work on taste panels and work with machines, whereby it is tried to imitate a panel, have to be considered as a part of history. Every good material scientist can show you that a test with instruments as penetrometers teach you nothing. However, there are examples how problems must be approached. A good example was the work presented by Peter Lucas in his opening lecture (i.e.: page…of this issue). The book of Ashby and Gibson [Editor: Gibson, L. J. & Ashby, M. F. (1988) Vickers addressed in her presentation, the problems associated with an often poor definition of sensory attributes from the start. In her opinion training often involves a kind of circular reasoning. What the real consumer attributes are, is still a question mark. Kilcast focused in his contribution on aspects related to the first bite. The first bite is important for the sensory evaluation of food from both a neurophysiological and physiological point of view. It is a necessary component of it, but not sufficient for a complete evaluation. Kilcast advocates focusing more on the study of subsequent processes. Turning back to the first bite, this is often the only step that is mimicked by instruments. Aspects related to simulating the first bite are: What is typical consumer behavior? Is the required mechanical complexity realistic? High strain rates are involved, implying complex events even for simple foods. The discussion centered on a number of issues, involving limitations of statistical approaches, problems in mimicking oral processing by machines and capturing relevant material parameters from panel evaluations. Meullenet started the discussion by bringing up the question of the sensitivity of machines in relation to panels? Vincent commented that this is a scale problem and not a material science problem. He argued that it was better to concentrate on research on causalities. A correlation between the results of a sensory and an instrumental evaluation says nothing about a causal relation. Moskowitz commented that understanding sensory perception from first principles will be difficult. One has to use an integrated approach. Vincent responded that integration should be done by human beings. However, a good model will help to clarify. Regarding the first question, “ Regarding the second question on “ In the second round of discussion the following questions were discussed:   During his introductory remarks Bourne stated that mechanical properties are not a textural property when they can not be detected by a human being.  Hermanson remarked that a main question is how can we relate sensory perception to the microstructure of a food whereby the key challenge is the sensory perception of texture. As an example she showed the tremendous difference in microstructure and in mechanical properties for a simple system as β-lactoglobulin gels between pH 5.0 and 7.5. A similar microcopy picture could be obtained for both systems if one let the scale differ by a factor of two. The ease of falling apart of the gels was clearly related to the size of the pores in the systems. In establishing a relation between physics and sensory perception of food texture the key challenges from a structural point of view are: the sensory perception of structure, the importance of dynamic testing including effect of temperature, deformation and time; and the role of higher structural complexity such as heterogeneity and ordering. Hurdles in this context are: the complexity of structure and sensory attributes; the fact that most test are performed under static conditions; too much correlation and interpretation is based on multivariate sorting. There is only little follow up using a combination of hypothesis and experimental design. Van der Linden stated that the first discussion item is related to the general question how the space for physical attributes relates to the space of textural attributes and what can be the contribution of rheology to answering this question. The first step must be to determine the complete set of attributes regarding texture or a relevant complete subset. Next one must address the determination of a complete physical parameter set and subsequently the transformation between the two sets. Starting out from texture one may simplify things by educated guesses regarding physics and by using scaling arguments. Moskowitz advocated the integrated product model both for product development and for understanding. First a set of profiles has to be identified as goals and factor scores, corresponding to this goal, should be determined. One should look beyond uni-variate relations but create a kind of ‘blind product map’ in which products can be identified with certain locations. The coordinates should be created by principal component analysis. These coordinates can be used in two ways (1) to locate the product and (2) as independent variable in the model. Next, the coordinates have to be related to ratings by equations. Then one can optimize an attribute and determine by ‘reverse engineering’ where the location of the new product is in the considered space. This procedure gives part of a product profile. At last it should be related to the full profile by estimating other parts of the profile. The approach may inter-relate sensory, liking, image, expert and instrument. Lawless contributed by giving an overview of texture terms from a fat substitution study. One can distinguish terms related to the initial bite, the further manipulation in the mouth and terms describing the residual mouth feel (see Dijksterhuis strongly advocated the development of dynamic measuring protocol in sensory evaluation. Human senses are geared to detecting changes. In general, food structure is related to physics and chemistry. It can be determined by instrumental measurements. Upon ingestion, oral processing changes food. The study of oral processes requires physiological methods. Such processes proceed in direct interaction with perceived texture. The latter is the field of psychologist who may use psychophysical and sensory techniques. They must not focus on the food, but on the eater, who is not a mere “consumer”. By the study of texture one has always to consider that humans first observe food, than handle it and only thereafter bring it the mouth. Therefore various senses will play a role, such as vision, odor, heat, and pain senses, next to the primary texture perceiving senses. Food texture is highly complex. One has to be aware of multi-dimensionality of the attributes, multi-modality, unconscious processes, implicit memory effects and that people have to make choices. They have to decide in a short time if the food will be swallowed or expectorated. Hermansson and Dijksterhuis emphasized the importance of dynamic aspects, in view of the continuous breakdown of food in the mouth. Lawless added that one should realize that texture is not only a matter of forces. For example, also a cooling sensation, due to for example, melting of a component, will also play a role. Civille remarked that the first question should be formulated in a different way namely “which complex texture properties can be detected by instruments and which not?” “Which one should we try to determine?” Lawless questioned if we can distinguish texture properties from for example, flavor properties? Moreover, mixing of the food with saliva and melting behavior are important aspects. How is that related to sensory perception of texture? Hermansson noted that in her experience, melting behavior can be sometimes successfully checked with an instrument. Bourne; in spite of the complexity consumers can determine texture in a reproducible way. Dijksterhuis noted that often a consumer cannot tell why he likes something. Lawless disagreed, a consumer can give hints. In general, a good correlation is observed between descriptive panels and consumer panels. Regarding the first question on “ The second discussion question was “how can we distinguish texture related attributes from other sensory aspects”. Hermansson stated that this question is much easier to answer for solid products than for soft semi-solids. For the latter products texture and other sensory parameters are more difficult to separate. Van der Linden disagreed, noting that people, working in the cosmetic industry, have experience with separating texture from other sensory parameters. They can easily make products without flavor and thus avoid the interference. Dijksterhuis remarked that the question remaining to be solved is which senses give us textural information. In his introduction to the third round of discussions Bourne mentioned a stiff solid product as a cracker that will soften in the mouth due to saliva uptake. On the other hand, solid products like nuts and almonds will not soften in the mouth. Thin fluids may even get a higher viscosity due to mixing with saliva. This brought him to the last question:   Nishinari started his contribution by showing the average composition of saliva. Besides polysaccharides and salts it contains various enzymes of which amylase (0.38 gl Civille gave an introduction about various aspects of saliva studies. These should start with the subject, with as variables age, chemical properties and physical properties of the saliva. Other input variables are the stimuli with may be chemical as acids, tannins, and others and physical. The output is on the one hand instrumental related and includes physical and chemical properties, effects on bolus and on swallowing. In this context she advocates more research in which the processes in the mouth are recorded on videotapes. On the other hand, output is perception related and must be determined by panel work. It concerns properties as amount of saliva, thickness of saliva and the ease to chew a variety of foods. On the consumer side it concerns topics as mouthwatering events and dry mouth (static). For a test protocol one should pay attention to preconditions, references and standardization. Köster emphasized problems related to saliva production. A quality characteristic of mustard is its sharpness. It has been shown that saliva production is inversely related to the burning sensation by mustard. In general, the saliva production affects the way you move products around in the mouth. People have a memory in this respect. Saliva production starts already based on expectation. If one produces a lot of saliva one notes texture in a different way then if one produce less. It is still an open question if sensations as too wet or too dry are related to saliva production.  The question to be discussed was “What are the physical (viscosity) and sensory changes due to saliva production?” Mioche raised the question if there is a relation between salivation and preference. According to Civille and Köster there are no data available, although there is a clear need for this. Moskowitz raised the question that if saliva is critical for sensory evaluation apart from pathological effects, how do we measure it? According to Civille a possibility is to take samples out of the mouth after a determined number of chews. Moskowitz questions if there a perceptual change in the mouth dependent on saliva as a function of time? Civille; the amount of saliva that mixed with a product varies greatly between products. A consumer notices very quickly when a product is ready to swallow. A relation between saliva and liking will depend on product properties. Köster agrees with the last statement. As he mentioned before the increasing saliva reduces sharpness of mustard, but it does not for pepper. Nishinari wanted to know if there are studies on the effect on viscosity of products, for example, sugar syrups, of mixing with saliva? Attendees were not aware of such a study. Bourne; the saliva production depends strongly on the internal state of the body. There is a metabolic necessity to produce saliva. People learn very fast in this respect. This reminded Nishinari of the story of the Pavlov dog. Köster explained that similar studies have been done for man. In some studies it was concluded that one has to smell a product, but now it is clear that visual inspection is already enough to produce enough saliva for digestion of the product. Moskowitz; do the physical properties of saliva change during production? This is also not known. Bourne emphases that there are three different glands producing saliva with different properties regarding viscosity. Civille; it is known that during the pregnancy the chemical composition of saliva changes. The same happens during a disease. The big question is does it also change depending on the food one eats.  Issue No. 1: Instrumentation Most test machines compress the food at a uniform speed that is considerably slower than the rapid, non-uniform compression that occurs in the mouth. This difference in operation is probably not a problem for foods that relax slowly but it causes large errors in foods that relax quickly.  The differences in compression speed (or strain rate) between machines and humans is probably more important than the difference between uniform and sinusoidal compression speeds. A new generation of texture machines is needed that operate at higher compression speeds, especially for foods that are strain rate sensitive. Multiple compression tests need to be studied more intensively because, although a single compression can mimic the first bite, sensory studies show that the first bite is often performed differently than subsequent bites. The addition of saliva (or a saliva equivalent) to the test sample is worthy of study because it should give a better understanding of the full sequence of the mastication process (see issue 3 later). A “mastication robot” that mimics the human mouth would be a useful research tool to gain a better understanding of the physics of the mastication process. Issue No. 2: Sensory Aspects Texture is a sensory attribute. Only people can sense and measure textural properties of foods.  There is a need for better training of sensory texture panelists, better selection for panelists who are sensitive to texture notes, and more time devoted to standardizing texture nomenclature. Is the time ripe for developing official international standards for sensory texture testing procedures? Time-intensity sensory studies of texture needs more attention. More studies are needed to obtain a better match between sensory texture profile analysis and instrumental texture profile analysis. Issue No. 3: Saliva Saliva plays a critical role in the process of mastication but is rarely considered, especially in instrumental tests.  More information is needed on the range of chemical composition and rheological properties of saliva from the three different saliva ducts and in the population, and how different foods affect the amount, rate, and type of saliva that is injected into the mouth. (See issue 1, item 4 earlier). More studies are needed on the interactions of saliva with foods including wetting of the food, rate of absorption of saliva by different foods, how saliva affects the structure and the type and rate of comminution of different foods, and the role of saliva in washing away fine particles in the bolus. Issue No. 4: Dysphagia Although not listed on the official program of the WCFS Food Summit, it became clear that food science can play a major role in developing special foods for people suffering from dysphagia and other vexing oral disabilities. Satisfying this niche market requires collaborative studies between medical researchers, food rheologists and product development specialists. Moderator: Robin Heath  Professor Heath started his introduction by stating that to study oral processes, physiologists need knowledge of other disciplines involved, such as the research presented by Professor Lucas. Oral processing can be studied with different methods. Chewing movements can be studied from video recordings. Oral processing and swallowing of the food can be studied with X-ray recordings. The three-dimensional movements of the jaw can be recorded with a sirognatograph that follows the position of a magnet attached to a tooth. EMG is used to record the activity of the muscles involved (   Prinz presented video motion analysis to study facial movements, for example, to study the effect of bite size on lip movements ( Hiiemae gave an overview of the different stages during oral processing of food ranging from liquid to stiff semi solids. A digitized video tape was presented to show ingestion, mastication and swallowing of food. After ingestion the following stages can be recognized: The food is transported to the postcanine area by the tongue, this is stage I transport. The food is processed by chewing or tongue-palate compression. Transport of the food through the fauces for bolus formation in the oropharynx, this stage II transport. Swallowing. The processing of the food by chewing and tongue palate interactions is dependent on the type of food, while the transport mechanisms do not differ much between types of food. Palmer concentrates on swallowing. Food can be emptied from the mouth with single or multiple swallows. Solid foods are collected, and kept in the oropharynx for several seconds before it is swallowed, while liquids need to be swallowed immediately to avoid aspiration. People suffering from Dysphagia might have problems like aspiration of the food or retention of the food in the back of the mouth. The consistency of the food is an important factor, dysphagia patients have more problems with drinking than eating. Anastassiadou presented work with gums as a test food for texture measurements. Gums with different hardness were used in a penetration test. Ultrasound images were used to determine the depth of indentation during chewing. Also the effect of different gums on the closing and opening phase of the jaw during chewing was studied.  Hector lectured on the role of saliva during mastication. Secretion of saliva is a reflex driven process and can result in salivary flow rates of 0.2 to 4–6 ml/min. The reflexes can be masticatory, gustatory or conditioned. The role of saliva is to protect the tissue, enhance taste, lubricate the food, clear the mouth from food particles, control bacterial growth and de- and re- mineralization of the teeth, digest starch and lipids. The reflexes that control the secretion of saliva are complex. Saliva production is increased mainly at the eating side. However, biting on one side without food does not induce saliva secretion. Wearing a denture does not have an effect on saliva secretion. Lowering the oral pH with citric acid results in a large flow of saliva to restore the pH. During sleep there is no clearance, which results in a much slower correction of the pH. It can take 7 h to restore the pH after a glass of cola. Hiiemae commented that saliva increased the quality of eating, but that we do not know enough of the exact interaction between the two. Anastassiadou explained the effect of different gums on saliva secretion. Saliva production varied strongly with the type gum. The saliva secretion depended on the subject, the gum (toughness, etc.) and on the number of chews. Prinz illustrated the negative effect of tannins on the lubricating properties of saliva as measured with a special device. This device comprised a rubber band around a rotating cylinder. The friction between the cylinder and the rubber band was measured with a load cell attached to the rubber band. Tannins astringency, reduced cohesion between food particles and increased friction.  Heath illustrated the importance of neurology with the sensitivity of teeth to control bite force. This control of force was much weaker when the incisor was replaced by an implant. The most sensitive part of the tongue is its tip. Bosman's research concentrated on the question of how the Central Nervous System controls muscle activity during chewing. The research is performed with the use of a chewing simulator that applied a controlled force to the jaw to simulate the (dynamic) resistance of food. This apparatus is used in combination with a jaw tracking system and EMG to monitor muscle activity. The system is used to measure the additional muscle activity (AMA) during chewing. The AMA is the activity necessary to process the food, this can be determined by measuring the muscle activity with and without food. The AMA consists of an anticipating and an induced component. This can be measured by chewing cycles without a force which were unexpectedly alternated with cycles with force. It is not yet known which receptors are involved, how they are connected and what is their role in the perception of the food. Müller measured the period of muscle inhibition (absence of muscle activity) for various muscles with the use of EMG. The duration of muscle inhibition can be up to 50 ms for very hard food. The duration of muscle inhibition was found to be related to the applied force. The muscle inhibition of crispy foods was determined with sound measurements. The crispiness was related to the period of silence between chews. Mioche presented research on the management of meat during mastication. Up to 80% of the chew cycles can be bilateral, depending on the food, the subject and the bite size. The significance of bilateral chewing can be the mechanical advantage and stimulation of saliva on both sides. The food is managed by the tongue and cheek during the opening phase. The tongue raises during occlusion to generate additional force by tongue–palate interaction. Mioche found a good relation between tenderness of the meat and the muscle work during seven cycles. Physiology essentially covers the chewing process between the incision and satisfaction; it provides all the sensory basis for perception of foods. It is therefore logical to consider how it can inform the relationship between the physical qualities of food and sensory science. Although numerous interactions between these disciplines have been studied, the workshop provided a new opening by bringing such a wide range of experts from all three disciplines together. The reviews by the experts of existing studies provided a background from which the break-out discussions successfully identified strengths, opportunities and priorities. Studies have shown that chewing variates, such as jaw closing velocity, are modulated in response to physical food quality. More cycles per sequence are used for chewing harder meats. There are wide individual differences between individuals, which explains why the correlations of sensory scores with physiological modulation are better than those with physical food properties. Further, current studies show that physiological chewing forces through dental implants correlate excellently with physical food properties. Individual differences are partly explained by dental state, particularly tooth loss and dentures. Relating sensory attributes to implant force data could extend the information gained from future studies. The tongue is an essential structure for all oral function. Its success stems from its mobility but that also makes it difficult to study. However, recent video-fluorography has shown important insight into food management which high-lights the need for collaboration between all three disciplines. These will provide bases for the design of foods to enhance pleasure for ordinary people and to mitigate dysfunction for those with oral handicaps. Saliva is fundamental to oral function: for wetting food, for lubricating the mucosa, for dissolving volatile components which provide the basis of taste and smell, for contributing muco-proteins which effect bolus viscosity and cohesion, for dissolving food elements that contribute further to bolus viscosity and cohesion, and for biochemical effects to aid food clearance following eating. Studies have shown modulation of forces and movement through chewing sequences that can be related to the progressive salivary wetting and bolus cohesion. The need for improved understanding of the complex salivary bio-physical properties became a recurring theme in the discussions. The forces used to penetrate foods are related to both their initial quality and the progressive change, particularly wetting, that is effected by chewing. Again in future studies, the relationship between these and sensory attributes will provide important insights. The video-fluorography studies of the tongue also show the way that a bolus of food is accumulated on the tongue above the valleculae long before swallowing. This further endorses the need for further study of progressive bolus quality and the role of saliva. The basis of neurological control of chewing by a Central Pattern Generator is well accepted. Because each individual has a repeatable pattern of jaw movement, modulations of this cyclical pattern can be related to stimuli from foods. Much is known of the afferent(sensory) neural input to this control, most particularly from nerve endings in the periodontium that suspends the teeth in the jaw bones. The extraordinary sensitivity and discrimination that can be achieved already provides the basis for much sensory attribution. Although chewing is such a successful physiological process, that it is normally affected without any consciousness, improved understanding of oral functions is important for those with tooth loss, the elderly and children and for mouth clearance for everybody. The current state of physiological knowledge shows considerable strength but priorities have been identified for future study. There is extensive knowledge of physiological mastication including bolus progression; the demography of the aging population and the epidemiology of tooth-loss; the extent and importance of the variability between people; and recording methodology for posture, velocity, load, displacement and their time dependence. The overwhelming consensus points were that further studies are needed of: saliva, and particularly the biophysics of saliva; lingual function; physical bolus properties related to physical forces; first bite characteristics; the effects of pathology on processing and swallowing; and oral function of the elderly and children; The final consensus was that more interaction between those involved in Oral Physiology, Physical Food Science and Sensory Food Science is essential: economy of effort and potential effectiveness make this imperative. At the end of the meeting, the key note speakers, session moderators and scientific committee jointly prepared a list of conclusions and recommendations. These were met with a general consensus. In the following, we have listed the conclusions in terms of strengths and opportunities/priorities for each of the three research areas:  understanding of consumer psychology and psychological processes; the use of sophisticated statistical tools; range of sensory tools available; and the understanding of ‘first bite’. It was clear that sensory science could greatly benefit from knowledge on the following topics: in mouth physiological and physical processes; understanding of interactions; variation between individuals; post-first bite processes; determinants of attitudes and preference in the elderly; and preference development in children.  relevance of mechanical tests for quality control and product development wealth of information from the materials community Food physcis would greatly benefit by learning more on: dynamics of in-mouth processing; materials parameter selection; scaling effects; and role/importance of saliva in testing. With regard to their input in Food physics and Sensory science, Oral physiology has much to offer in terms of their knowledge on: future ageing population and their changing dental state; variability between people; bolus progression; and recording methodology for posture, velocity, load, displacement and their time dependence. Again, Oral physiology could benefit and contribute even more to the area of food perception by a better understanding of: saliva (composition, control, interactions); tongue mechanics; first bite; bolus, physical properties; effects of pathology on processing and swallowing; and peculiarities of ageing population and of children. Finally, some general recommendations were made that underline the importance of some of the results obtained through this Food Summit: It is recommended that: Existing knowledge of the three disciplines will be integrated. Future research with respect to texture will be based on an integrated approach of the three research disciplines. Education will be adapted to implement and facilitate such integration in the future.  Dr. Vassiliki Anastassiadou, Aristotle University Dental School, 15 Pavlou Mela Street, GR55236 Thessaloniki, Greece. Dr. Andries van der Bilt, Utrecht University Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands. Ir. Frank Boerboom, Avebe BA, Avebeweg 1, 9607 PT Foxhol, The Netherlands. Professor Dr. Frits Bosman, Utrecht University Faculty of Medicine, PO Box 80037, 3508 TA Utrecht, The Netherlands. Professor Dr. Malcolm Bourne, BX 15 Kennedy Hall, NY 14456, Geneva, USA. Dr. Gail Vance, Civille Sensory Spectrum Inc., 24 Washington Avenue, NJ 07928 Chatham, USA. Dr. Garmt Dijksterhuis, KVL, Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, Sensory Science Rolighedsvej 30, DK 1958 Frederiksberg C, Denmark. Leo van Gemert, WCFS/TNO Nutrition, PO Box 360, 3700 AJ Zeist, The Netherlands. Professor Dr. Rob Hamer WCFS PO Box 557 6700 AN, Wageningen, The Netherlands Professor Dr. Robin Heath, St. Bartholomew's and the Royal London School of Medicine and Dentistry Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, Turner Street, E1 2AD, London, UK. Dr. Mark Hector, St. Bartholomew's and the Royal London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, Turner Street, E1 2AD London, UK. Professor Dr. Anne-Marie Hermansson, The Swedish Institute for Food & Biotechnology, PO Box 5401, S-402 29 Göteborg, Sweden. Professor Dr. Karen Hiiemae, Syracuse University Institute for Sensory Research, 620 Skytop Road, NY 13244–5290, Syracuse, USA. Albert Jurgens MSc, TNO Nutrition, PO Box 360 3700 AJ Zeist, The Netherlands. Dr. David Kilcast, Leatherhead Food RA, Randalls Road, KT22 7RY Surrey, UK. Professor Dr. Ep Köster, Jan van Scorelstraat 55, 3583 CK Utrecht, The Netherlands. Professor Dr. Jan Kroeze, Wageningen University/Utrecht University Heidelberglaan 2, 3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands. Professor Dr. Kees de Kruif, WCFS/NIZO Food Research, PO Box 20, 6710 BA Ede, The Netherlands. Dr. Ben Langelaan, ATO, PO Box 17, 6700 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands Professor Dr. Harry Lawless, Cornell University, Department of Food Science, Stocking Hall, NY 14853 Ithaca, USA. Professor Dr. Eric van der Linden, Wageningen University, Food Physics Group, PO Box 8129, 6700 EV Wageningen, The Netherlands. Professor Dr. Peter Lucas, University of Hongkong 5/fl., Li Shu Fan Bldg, 5 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. Professor Dr. Jean Francois Meullenet, University of Arkensas, Department of Food Science, 272 Young Avenue, AR 72704 Fayetteville, USA. Dr. Mans Minekus, WCFS/TNO Nutrition, PO Box 360, 3700 AJ Zeist, The Netherlands. Dr. Laurence Mioche, INRA, Station de Recherche Viande, Theix, 63122 Saint Genes, France. Jos Mojet MSc, WCFS/TNO Nutrition, PO Box 360, 3700 AJ Zeist, The Netherlands. Dr. Howard Moskowitz, Moskowitz Jacobs Inc. 1025 Westchester, NY 10604 White Plains, USA. Dr. Fauke Müller, Poliklinik für Zahnärztliche Prothetik, Augustusplatz 2, D-55131 Mainz, Germany. Professor Dr. Katsuyoshi Nishinari, Osaka City University, Department of Food and Nutrition, Sugimoto, Sumiyoshi-ku, Japan. Dr. Gert-Jan van den Oever, Unilever Research Vlaardingen, PO Box 114, 3130 AC Vlaardingen, The Netherlands. Dr. Jeffrey Palmer, Johns Hopkins University Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 5601 Loch Raven Boulevard, MD 21239 Baltimore, USA. Dr. Jonathan Prinz, Universitair Medisch Centrum Mondziekte, Postbus 85060, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands. Ir. Fred Rasing, WCFS/ATO, PO Box 17, 6700 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands. Dr. André de Roos, DSM Research, PO Box 1, 2600 MA Delft, The Netherlands. Dr. Ir. Jacques Roozen, Wageningen University, Laboratory of Food Chemistry, PO Box 8129, 6700 EV Wageningen, The Netherlands. Dr. Arjen Sein, Unilever Research Vlaardingen, PO Box 114, 3130 AC Vlaardingen, The Netherlands. Professor Dr. Alina Szczesniak, 22 Wilson Block, 10552 Mount Vernon, New York, USA. Professor Dr. Hans van Trijp, Unilever Research Vlaardingen, PO Box 114, 3130 AC Vlaardingen, The Netherlands. Professor Dr. Zata Vickers, University of Minnesota, Department of Food Science and Nutrition, 1334 Eckles Avenue, MN 55108 St. Paul, USA. Professor Dr. Julian Vincent, University of Reading, Center for Biomimetics, 1 Early Gate, RG6 6AT Reading, UK. Dr. Ronald Visschers, WCFS/NIZO Food Research, PO Box 20, 6710 BA Ede, The Netherlands. Dr. Ton van Vliet, WCFS/Wageningen University, Integrated Food Technology Group PO Box 8129, 6700 EV Wageningen, The Netherlands. Dr. René de Wijk, WCFS/ATO, PO Box 17, 6700 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands. Clare Wilkinson, MSc WCFS/ATO PO Box 17 6700 AA Wageningen The Netherlands Dr. Ir. Antien Zuidberg, DMV International, NCB Laan 80, 5460 BA Veghel, The Netherlands.