This paper describes the effective boundary conditions for the gas dispersion parameters of bubble size, superficial gas velocity and bubble surface area flux, in mechanical and column flotation cells. Using a number of previously derived correlations, with appropriate simplifying assumptions, and experimental data reported from plant practices, the boundary conditions were identified. Thus, it was shown that these constraints typically allow for a mean bubble diameter range of d
                     b
                     =1–1.5mm and superficial gas rate of J
                     g
                     =1–2cm/s, in order to maximize the bubble surface area flux, S
                     b
                     =50–100s−1. Under these conditions there is no carrying capacity limitation, while keeping a distinctive pulp–froth interface.Despite the use of different equipment designs and operating conditions, there are two key conditions, which must be considered in all flotation equipments, in order to be a commercially effective separator. One is the formation of a distinctive pulp–froth interface and the second is the provision of the bubble surface area flux for mineral carrying capacity at the pulp–froth interface level. Otherwise, the loss of interface or the maximum carrying capacity will limit the mineral separation. At moderate mean bubble sizes (i.e., mean bubble diameter lower than 1–1.5 The other critical constraint appears at mean bubble diameter larger than 1–1.5 Mean bubble diameter of less than 0.5–0.8 The maximum carrying capacity, required for mineral transport on the bubble surface, determines the minimum bubble surface area flux for each operation. Thus, there exists a close compromise between the mean bubble size and the superficial gas rate, in order to generate the bubble surface area flux to accomplish the mass transport requirement across the interface.  The previous conditions (loss of interface and maximum carrying capacity) are valid for any industrial flotation operation, both in mechanical cells and pneumatic cells or columns, and are independent of the bubble generation and dispersion mechanism.  From A wide review of industrial flotation data reported in the literature showed that the typical range of mean bubble diameter observed in mechanical cells and columns was  For a high gas rate, For superficial gas rates smaller than 2.5  In considering theoretical approach and flotation experiences from the micro-scale to industrial large size cells and columns, it was found that for typical superficial gas rates of Decreasing the mean bubble diameter, loss of pulp–froth interface (flooding), lower bubble surface area flux, lower mineral carrying capacity. Increasing the mean bubble diameter, lower bubble surface area flux, lower mineral carrying capacity, greater disturbance at the interface level (boiling), larger mineral entrainment into the froth. The authors are grateful to Conicyt, Project Fondecyt 1040100, and Santa Marı´a University, Project No. 270522, for providing funding for process modelling and control research.