The characterization of the bottom ashes produced by two Portuguese municipal solid waste incinerators (MSWI) was performed with the aim of assessing the feasibility of using this waste as raw material in the production of glass that can be further processed as glass–ceramics for application in construction. Density and particle size distribution measurements were carried out for physical characterization. Chemical characterization revealed that SiO2, a network glass former oxide, was present in a relatively high content (52–58wt%), indicating the suitability for this waste to be employed in the development of vitreous materials. CaO, Na2O and K2O, which act as fluxing agents, were present in various amounts (2–17wt%) together with several other oxides normally present in ceramic and glass raw materials. Mineralogical characterization revealed that the main crystalline phases were quartz (SiO2) and calcite (CaCO3) and that minor amounts of different alkaline and alkaline-earth aluminosilicate phases were also present. Thermal characterization showed that the decomposition of the different compounds occurred up to 1100°C and that total weight loss was <10wt%. Heating both bottom ashes at 1400°C for 2h resulted in a melt with suitable viscosity to be poured into a mould, and homogeneous black-coloured glasses with a smooth shiny surface were obtained after cooling. The vitrified bottom ashes were totally amorphous as confirmed by X-ray diffraction. The results from the present experimental work indicate that the examined bottom ashes can be a potential material to melt and to obtain a glass that can be further processed as glass–ceramics to be applied in construction.One of the most important problems in developed countries is the large amount of municipal solid waste (MSW) that is generated and has to be treated. The most common methods to treat non-recyclable solid waste are landfill disposal and incineration. The first is the most simple and practical method, but it causes many problems, such as groundwater pollution, odour emission and soil contamination. Also, any toxic materials present in the original waste will remain in an unknown, uncontrolled form inside the landfill ( Although incineration reduces the volume of the waste by approximately 90% and exploits the calorific power of the wastes to produce energy, it leaves considerable amounts of solid residues, such as bottom and filter fly ashes ( This study is part of a more general project about the development and characterization of glasses and glass–ceramic materials made from bottom ashes produced by two Portuguese municipal waste incinerators, VALORSUL serving Lisbon and LIPOR II serving Porto, which process 2000 Both as-received bottom ashes, which have been previously treated for metal recovery before land disposal, exhibited a rather heterogeneous macroscopic texture and had a very wide particle size range from about a few micrometers up to 10 The density of the powdered bottom ash samples obtained by the previous procedure was measured in a Micromeritics helium pycnometer (model AccuPyc 1330) using a powder sample of 6.5 Different analytical procedures were used for the chemical characterization of the bottom ashes. In one suite of analyses, denoted as (1), the composition was determined by the following techniques: loss on ignition at 1000 The crystalline phases present in the bottom ashes were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Samples of milled bottom ashes were used, and the analyses were performed in a Rigaku diffractometer (model RAD IIA) at room temperature, with Cu The thermal stability of the milled bottom ashes was characterized from room temperature up to 1100 In order to assess the melting capability of VALORSUL ashes (VA) and LIPOR ashes (LA), an amount of ∼100 After determining the heating conditions for the achievement of full vitrification, the crucible was withdrawn from the furnace, and the melt was rapidly poured out into a metallic mould, where it was allowed to cool. No visible corrosion of the refractory crucible was detected after the melting procedure. The amorphous state of the vitrified bottom ashes was confirmed by XRD analysis, using powdered samples and the same equipment and conditions reported above. The morphology of the produced glasses was examined in a scanning electron microscope (Zeiss, model DSM962). The density of the milled dried powders was 2.65 The results for the particle size distribution analysis are presented in The data from the chemical characterization of the bottom ashes were presented as a percentage of oxide, since the bottom ashes have been produced under oxidising conditions. The differences between the results obtained from analytical procedures (1) and (2) are a consequence of the different techniques and sample preparation method used in each analytical procedure. Since the determination of loss on ignition is not possible by ICP-AES, SiO According to  The mineralogical phases present in these waste materials are commonly found in glass and ceramic raw materials. The difference in phase composition for both VA and LA bottom ashes is reflected in the hardness of these waste materials, corresponding to different milling behaviours, and therefore explaining the different powder particle size distributions ( The DTA curves ( The DTA data agree with the results obtained from the TG analysis. The TG curves ( The total weight loss until 1000 The above thermal analysis results indicate that the dissociation reactions that occur during the heating of VA and LA ashes take place up to 1000 It has been reported in the literature ( Considering, in a simple way, the composition of the bottom ashes in terms of only three of the main oxide constituents (e.g., SiO The characterization of two bottom ashes, VA and LA, produced by Portuguese municipal incinerators was performed with the aim of assessing the feasibility of using these wastes as raw materials in the production of glasses. The physical characterization of samples of powdered bottom ashes, obtained after milling and sampling according to standard procedures, showed that the resultant powders have a density of 2.65 The chemical characterization revealed that these wastes are rather complex mixtures of several oxides commonly found in ceramic and glass materials. The major component is SiO Mineralogical characterization revealed that the main crystalline phases are quartz and calcium carbonate for both ashes. The minor phases were identified as anorthite, calcium magnesium phosphate and sodium calcium aluminosilicate for VA ashes and anorthite, muscovite and enstatite for LA ashes. The mineralogical phases present in this waste are commonly found in glass and ceramic raw materials. The thermal characterization up to 1000 The results from the present experimental work indicate that the examined bottom ashes are a potential raw material to be melted in order to produce glasses, which can be further used for processing glass–ceramic products, obtained from the controlled heat treatment of such glasses. Work underway is confirming this possibility. The authors are grateful to the Portuguese Foundation of Science and Technology for financial support and to VALORSUL S.A. and LIPOR II for supplying the bottom ashes.