Column flotation cells have been installed in numerous base metal operations around the world. The majority of these cells utilize conventional air-only spargers to introduce air into the bottom of the column. The recent development of instruments to measure the bubble characteristics in these columns has provided a renewed understanding of column behaviour. These new tools provided insight into why the columns at Red Dog Mine had never performed up to expectations. After efforts to optimise the spargers failed to substantially change the bubble size and air efficiency, alternate sparger systems were investigated. The Metso Minerals CISA Microcel sparger system appeared promising and was selected for a full-scale plant trial. The Microcel sparger system was originally developed for the coal industry at the Virginia Centre for Coal and Minerals Processing.
                  In October 2003, a Microcel was retrofitted into one of two 3.66m diameter flotation columns in the zinc retreat circuit at Red Dog Mine. The operation of the two different sparger systems in parallel allowed a detailed comparison.
                  This paper discusses the performance of the Microcel based on the data collected during several detailed surveys. Bubble size measurements carried out in the pulp zone using the McGill University bubble viewer showed a significant difference in bubble size. The mean Sauter diameter of the bubbles decreased from 3.4mm for the jetting-type sparger to 1.9mm for the Microcel sparger. The overall recovery and the recovery by size fraction for both valuable and gangue minerals were compared. Paired t-tests demonstrated that the Microcel column produced a higher concentrate grade (0.6% zinc absolute) and a higher unit recovery (2.8% zinc absolute) than the existing Canadian Process Technologies Inc (CPT) SlamJet column. These improvements provided a payback period of 1.5 months for the $109,000 investment.The Red Dog Mine, located in North-Western Alaska, is the world’s largest producer of zinc in concentrate. The mine is located above the Arctic Circle and is accessible only by air, or seasonally, by ocean-going barge. All operating supplies are received and concentrates dispatched during the 100-day shipping season. The operating crews are flown from either Anchorage or the local villages. Red Dog is a Mississippian to Permian, black shale hosted, zinc–lead–silver sedimentary exhalative (sedex) deposit. Silicification was a dominant component of the mineralizing event and the host shale has been silicified and locally resembles a chert. The major sulphides in decreasing order of abundance are sphalerite, pyrite, galena, and marcasite. Red Dog sphalerite is very fine grained to amorphous and is commonly intergrown with silica. The process plant consists of a primary gyratory crusher, SAG/Ball mill grinding, differential flotation and concentrate dewatering with pressure filters. The tailings are deposited in a sub-aqueous basin adjacent to the concentrator. The current milling rate is 3.2 million tonnes per year to produce 220,000 The flotation circuits at Red Dog have been modified numerous times during its 14 years of operation. The major changes and the logic for those changes are described in detail by The ore is ground to 80% passing 65 The portion of the circuit discussed in this paper is the zinc retreat circuit, which is fed by the zinc first cleaner tailings. The zinc retreat circuit consists of three flotation stages. The first stage is conventional flotation with the zinc first retreat tailings open circuited to final tailings. The concentrate goes to closed circuit regrinding with tower mills to produce a P Numerous studies have been conducted to explore the role of gas dispersion properties on column flotation. The gas dispersion properties of most interest are superficial gas velocity ( The superficial gas velocity ( The froth recovery is the ratio of the flotation rate constant to the collection zone rate constant: In work by other researchers, the bubble size was usually inferred from indirect measurements. The evaluations at Red Dog used the McGill University bubble viewer ( The latest zinc circuit modifications were completed in November of 2001. The most significant change to the circuit was the incorporation of the zinc retreat circuit to treat the fine, slow floating and poorly liberated sphalerite in a completely separate circuit. This circuit provided increased flotation capacity and applied more regrind power to the difficult to float material. Following commissioning, the retreat circuit was found to perform below target with respect to sphalerite recovery. Although the liberation characteristics of the ore feeding the retreat circuit were a limiting factor in the retreat performance, it was also found that the flotation columns were not operating as efficiently as designed. A review of the retreat circuit modal data showed that liberated sphalerite particles were not being recovered ( Testwork and surveys to identify the reasons the retreat circuit was not performing up to expectations were conducted in July 2002 as a part of the AMIRA P9M site visit. The limits of the retreat circuit performance were attributed to poor ore floatability, poor selectivity, and high entrainment. It was suggested that significant improvement in metallurgical performance could be realized through reduced entrainment and the improved flotation selectivity of sphalerite with respect to gangue minerals ( Based on preliminary column performance evaluations, Red Dog, Teck Cominco Research, and McGill University embarked on a program aimed at decreasing the column bubble size and improving the air utilization. The following parameters of the jetting-type spargers (SlamJet) in use at Red Dog were adjusted: Sparger nozzle diameter (5.1, 3.8, and 2.5 Air manifold pressure. Frother addition rate. Water and water  These results confirmed the initial findings that large diameter bubbles existed in the columns. While not the sole source of the lower than expected retreat circuit performance, the large diameter bubbles were believed to contribute to the low recovery and high entrainment. Based on the results, it was decided to look at different sparging systems. The Microcel system has found many applications in fine coal flotation ( In early 1998 Golden Grove conducted a plant trial of the Microcel system in a zinc rougher prefloat application ( Based on the experience at Cyprus and Golden Grove, Teck Cominco Research recommended that Red Dog evaluate the Microcel system to address the problem of bubble size distribution achieved with the jetting-type sparger system. The Microcel sparging system, as shown in A Microcel sparging system was commissioned in October 2003 on one of the two parallel 3.66 Since the two retreat columns were in parallel, this made for an easy side by side comparison. Bubble size measurements were conducted on both column sparging systems to determine the actual size differences. In addition, eight retreat column surveys were completed to compare the metallurgical performance of column 11 (utilizing the Microcel sparger system) with column 12 (utilizing the jetting-type sparger system). The jetting-type column operated with 24 spargers having 5.1 The bubble size measurements were completed with the McGill University bubble viewer. Four of the initial twenty-five images processed from two of the tests (one Microcel test and one jetting-type test) are shown in As discussed earlier, the change in bubble diameter ( The most notable differences in the operating parameters between the two columns were the air rates and froth depths. The Microcel air rates were intentionally lower than the jetting-type air rates with the expectation of reduced A summary of the column survey results, with respect to individual column feed, is given in The Microcel air sparging system was installed because it was advertised to give fine, uniform bubble generation capable of improving mineral recovery. The results of the eight surveys support this claim. The Microcel column consumed 25–35% less air than the jetting-type air sparging system, yet averaged 2.8% higher sphalerite recovery and achieved better selectively against pyrite and NSG which translated to an increase of 0.6% zinc concentrate grade. The finer and more uniform bubble generation appears to have increased the An evaluation of the fine particle recovery was based on detailed size fraction liberation analysis of the #13301 survey samples. This survey was analyzed since both columns had similar sphalerite unit recoveries (20.6%—Microcel, 19.3%—jetting-type) but significantly different concentrate grades; 53.2% Zn and 2.00% SiO The solids distribution of the retreat column feed shows that 38% of the mass was in the 2.5  The pyrite distribution in the retreat column feed (see An economic analysis was completed based on the overall change in plant performance from the installation of a single Microcel column. Based on 17.5% of the zinc final concentrate coming from the retreat circuit, the 0.6% grade and 2.8% unit recovery improvements translate to an overall benefit of 0.04% in zinc grade and 0.16% in sphalerite recovery. As a result of the recovery improvement, an additional 2000 The capital cost of the Microcel installation was $109,000 comprising $57,000 in labour costs and $52,000 in materials costs. At a zinc price of $1036/t (47¢/lb), the net improvement in revenue is $1,000,000 per year and after deducting increases in distribution costs, operating costs, and royalties, the net improvement in profit is $858,000. The operating cost increase includes the power to operate the recycle pump and the maintenance of the pump and the static mixers. The decrease in air consumption and the reduced sparger maintenance (from 24 spargers to 8 static mixers) has not been included as a cost saving. Attempts to optimise the bubble size of the CPT SlamJet jetting-type spargers at the Red Dog Mine only provided modest improvements. The desired bubble size target was never reached. This led to the decision to test the Metso Minerals CISA Microcel system via a full-scale plant trial on one of the two zinc retreat columns. The full-scale trial consisted of parallel column surveys and bubble size measurements of the jetting-type and Microcel systems. The bubble size measurements showed reduced diameters in the Microcel column at the same frother concentrations. The jetting-type system averaged a These improvements provided a payback period of 1.5 months for the $109,000 investment. Red Dog is currently completing the installation of three additional Microcel sparger systems; one in the zinc cleaner circuit and two in the lead circuit. The authors would like to thank the management of Teck Cominco Ltd. and the Red Dog Mine for supporting the preparation of this paper and for granting permission to publish this work. AMIRA P9M, in particular the McGill researchers, for their initial gas dispersion measurements and their continued work to optimise the jetting-type sparger system. Dr. David Lin and Dr. Barun Gorain for their initiative and valued input throughout the campaign. Trevor Houlden, Karl Reimer, Victor Steiner, Mike Mozak, and Dennis Bigras of the Teck Cominco Research, Mineral Treatment Group for their time and effort in conducting the subsequent gas dispersion measurements on the Microcel and jetting-type columns. Canadian Process Technologies Inc for their input and assistance with optimising their SlamJet system. Metso Minerals CISA—Thierry Monredon for providing his expertise of the Microcel system which enabled a flawless retrofit and a stress free commissioning, resulting in the Microcel performing near optimum at the outset.