This research was aimed to synthesize calcium carbonate nanoparticles from CaCl2 and Na2CO3 precursors by mechano-chemical route without any subsequent heat treatment of the as-milled powder. The powder mixture was once milled in a planetary ball mill with NaCl as the diluting agent and another time with KCl. CaCO3 nanoparticles were achieved after 10min of continuous milling in the planetary ball mill. CaCO3 nanoparticles were also fully formed after 10min of continuous milling by using an attrition mill. The resulting powders milled via both milling methods were analyzed to investigate the effect of the diluting agent and milling method on particle size of CaCO3. BET results calculated the specific surface area of CaCO3 nanoparticles to be 19.27m2
                     g−1. Furthermore, TEM results substantiated the fact that particle size ranges from 60 to 90nm.CaCO The use of high-energy mechanical milling in processing advanced materials is totally considered as a proven method by which multifarious types of materials are produced In this paper, for the very first time, we report a study of the impacts of several factors on the synthesis of CaCO The starting chemical high purity (Merck) CaCl NaCl and KCl were incorporated in the reaction equations to act as a diluting agent. Furthermore, the powder mixtures in accordance with Eq. The phase composition and the morphology of the milled powders were evaluated by XRD (Philips PW-1730) using Cu Kα radiation and FESEM (Hitachi S4160), respectively. The mean crystallite sizes of the milled powders were calculated by Cauchy–Gaussian method which is expressed as follows: The particle size distribution of the powders milled in the planetary ball mill were analyzed using laser particle size analyzer (LPSA) CILAS 1064. A total of 60  XRD patterns of the samples milled in the planetary ball mill in accordance with Eq. XRD patterns of the samples milled in the attrition mill in accordance with Eq. The interesting point here is that no post heat treatment process has been required for formation of CaCO The following comparative analysis was done with the aim of investigating the influence of starting materials as well as the milling methods on both crystallite sizes and particle sizes of each sample. The main trend for crystallite size in the milling process is that it tends to decrease as a function of time, while the few inconsistencies with the decreasing trend in  The main advantage of attrition mill over planetary ball mill is that the power input used for milling in an attrition mill is used directly for particle size reduction as well as contribution for progression of the chemical reaction, whereas in a planetary ball mill the power is also used for rotating the vials and grinding media. Two grinding mechanisms are concurrently taking place in an attrition mill, the impact action and the shearing forces, whereas the dominant grinding mechanism in a planetary ball mill is the impact action only and is resulted from both ball to ball and ball to vial collisions. An image analyzing software was used to analyze particle size using several FESEM images of each sample. The calculated mean particle size derived from   The data obtained from laser particle size distributions substantiates the particle sizes evaluated based on FESEM micrographs and the fact that CaCO  The results are obtained from BET analysis of the powder mixture milled for 60 Mechanical alloying appeared to be a very promising facile route by which CaCO The financial support of this work by