Backround
                  The incidence of periprosthetic supracondylar femoral fractures is 0.3% to 2.5% after primary total knee arthroplasty.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a retrospective review 17 patients managed by distal femoral arthroplasty for periprosthetic supracondylar femoral fracture.
               
                  Results
                  Mean age was 76 years (SD, 12.58). Mean follow-up was 33.9 months (SD, 10.57). Mean final range of motion was 2° of fixed flexion (SD, 5.3) and flexion of 90.2° (SD, 20.8). Mean final follow-up Knee Society Score was 67.15 (SD, 19.7). Mean Short Form–12 physical component was 36.57 (SD, 11.2), and mean Short Form–12 mental component was 42.64 (SD, 12.09). Four complications (4 patients) were managed successfully without revision of the prosthesis. Two failures (2 patients) required prosthesis revision: patellar maltracking with knee dislocation, and periprosthetric femoral fracture.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Distal femoral arthroplasty is a successful procedure. Complication rates are not insignificant, which is expected with the complexity of this clinical scenario.The incidence of periprosthetic supracondylar femoral fractures is 0.3% to 2.5% after primary total knee arthroplasty (TKA) and 1.6% to 38% after revision TKA When treating supracondylar periprosthetric fractures of the femur, the goals are to achieve a painless and stable TKA with correct alignment. Because these fractures often occur in elderly patients, early mobilization is highly beneficial both to the patient and to the medical system. The best method of management of these complex problems for an individual patient is dependent on the status of implant fixation, the quality and quantity of surrounding bone, and the proximity of the fracture to the femoral component. For fractures associated with well-fixed implants and adequate bone stock, open reduction and internal fixation are generally indicated. The 2 most commonly used fixation treatment modalities are retrograde intramedullary nail and internal fixation using a locked plate The senior author’s experience has been that treatment with revision TKA using a standard, stemmed component to bypass the fracture is only feasible for fractures with a simple pattern without ligamentous deficiency and with adequate bone stock available after component removal Distal femoral arthroplasty for the management of very distal, comminuted supracondylar femur fractures around well-fixed or loose TKA has become a common method of treatment for the senior author. This mode of treatment avoids concerns about fracture malunion or nonunion while allowing for immediate and unrestricted mobilization. There is evidence of increasing use of this method in the treatment of periprosthetic TKA fracture with compromised bone stock Although the endoprosthesis has a high initial cost, it has been demonstrated that, in the context of tumor resection and reconstruction, this form of endoprosthesis can be cost-effective The purpose of the current study was to evaluate a consecutive series of periprosthetic supracondylar femoral fractures above TKA, treated with distal femoral arthroplasty. Institutional Research Ethics Board approval was obtained for this retrospective study covering the time period from July 2011 to July 2013. The electronic patient record was searched for the patients admitted to our tertiary care, university hospital with the diagnosis of supracondylar femoral periprosthetric fractures. The inclusion criteria include distal femoral arthroplasty performed for management of comminuted periprosthetic distal femoral fracture with poor bone stock around loose or well-fixed femoral component. Exclusion criteria were any distal femoral arthroplasty performed for management of periprosthetric fracture after septic loosening of TKA, pathological fracture, or comminuted fractures without the presence of TKA. All the preoperative and postoperative radiographs were reviewed by 2 blinded fellowship-trained arthroplasty surgeons to ensure that the patients met appropriate inclusion criteria and assessed for radiographic outcomes and complications. The fractures were classified according to the classifications of Rorabeck and Taylor Surgery took place after preoperative medical optimization. All patients received 2 g of intravenous cefazolin within 30 minutes of skin incision followed by 1 g every 8 hours for 24 hours postoperatively. Spinal anesthesia was used in 5 patients and general anesthesia in 12 patients. Surgery was performed with the patient in supine position. Prior midline scars and a medial parapatellar arthrotomy were used in all cases. Resection of the femur was at the level of the fracture or proximal to it to provide the minimum 90 mm for implantation of the Zimmer Segmental Knee Revision implant system (Zimmer Orthopedics, Warsaw, IN). Resection level was determined preoperatively based on imaging. In all cases, both the femoral and tibial components were replaced with stemmed implants. This revision system incorporates a rotating hinge platform knee joint. Components were cemented in place using third-generation techniques and antibiotic-impregnated cement. No allograft, auto graft, or bone graft substitute was used in any of the Postoperatively, venothromboembolic prophylaxis with low–molecular-weight heparin was administered subcutaneously for 21 days in all cases. Immediate full and unrestricted weight bearing was permitted. Rehabilitation was commenced under the supervision of physiotherapists on postoperative day 1. Data collected included incidence of blood transfusion, postoperative medical or surgical complications, need for transfer to the intensive care unit care, and length of stay in the acute care facility. All patients were assessed postoperatively at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and then annually by an independent Advanced Practice Physiotherapist (APP) in addition to the treating surgeon. Range of motion was measured by the APP using a long-armed goniometer. Clinical and functional evaluation was collected by the APP at each visit using Knee Society Score (KSS) Final follow-up radiographs were analyzed for lucent lines, loosening, and subsidence by an independent, fellowship-trained arthroplasty surgeon. Statistical analysis was performed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences version 17.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). Between July 2011 to July 2013, 17 knees in 17 patients (13 women and 4 men) were treated for periprosthetric supracondylar femoral fractures by the senior author (DB) with distal femoral arthroplasty (Zimmer Segmental, Warsaw, IN). Mean age of the patients at the time of fracture was 76 years (SD, 12.58; range, 48-93 years). At the final follow-up, 2 of 17 patients had died at 3 and 29 months after the surgery. Patient demographics, reason of TKA, medical comorbidities, and preoperative American Society of Anesthesiology grade were obtained from the anesthetic record and were recorded in Mean follow-up was 33.9 months (SD, 10.57; range, 24-56 months). The mean tourniquet time was 89.5 minutes (SD, 14.6; range, 70-120 min); lateral retinacular releases were performed in 3 patients. A porous cone was used for bone loss restoration on the tibial side in 1 patient, and a tibial metal block augment was used in 1 patient. The mean preoperative hemoglobin was 107 mg (range, 72-136), whereas the mean discharge hemoglobin value was 95 mg (range, 83-113) ( The mean length of stay in the acute care hospital was 6.2 days (SD, 4.2; range, 3-21 days). The mean final follow-up range of motion was extension 2° (fixed flexion contracture) (SD, 5.3°; range, 0°-20°) and flexion 90.2° (SD, 20.8°; range, 30°-120°). The mean KSS at final follow-up was 67.15 (SD, 19.7; range, 35-94). The mean SF-12 physical component was 36.57 (SD, 11.2; range, 22-55), and the mean SF-12 mental component was 42.64 (SD, 12.09; range, 16-62). Four complications occurred in 4 patients during the course of the study. An 80-year-old woman developed pulmonary embolism on postoperative day 2 which was successfully managed with standard anticoagulant treatment. A 48-year-old male patient developed a temporary foot drop subsequent to the procedure, which recovered completely during the course of the study. A third patient was an 82-year-old male patient who suffered from a nondisplaced tibial shaft fracture distal to the stem of the tibial component due to a fall following surgery. This fracture was managed successfully nonoperatively. The final complication was chronic infection in an obese 80-year-old female patient, which was treated 8 months after the index procedure by irrigation and debridement with retention of the prosthesis followed by chronic suppressive antibiotics. There were 2 failures in 2 patients, which required revision of the prosthesis. The first patient was a 92-year-old woman who had patellar maltracking and a knee dislocation 2 months after the procedure. This complication was successfully managed by reoperation for open reduction, added external rotation of the femoral component, as well as medial plication and lateral release of the lateral retinaculum. There was no recurrence of patellar or tibiofemoral dislocation. The second patient requiring reoperation was a 79-year-old woman who had a periprosthetic fracture proximal to the tip of the femoral stem 21 months after the index procedure due to a fall. This complication was managed by revision TKA using the same type of prosthesis with a longer stem and augmented fixation the fracture using cerclage wire. Distal femur fracture is the most common site for the periprosthetric fracture following TKA. Unfortunately, stable fixation is difficult to achieve in many cases as a result of the very distal nature of the fracture, associated osteoporosis, and fracture comminution Prosthetic distal femoral arthroplasty is an attractive option in management of supracondylar periprosthetic TKA fractures with poor bone stock. Benefits of this treatment method include excellent and immediate TKA alignment and stability; relatively short operative times; and, most importantly, immediate weight bearing and resumption of activity. This is highly advantageous in avoidance of postoperative complications in elderly patients with multiple comorbidities when compared with standard fixation methods, which often require prolonged periods of protected weight bearing Traditionally, fixation of periprosthetic distal femoral fractures is generally achieved with locking plates or intramedullary nail devices. However, a systematic review of 415 cases of periprosthetic fracture above TKA fixed with conventional plate, locked plate, or intramedullary nail reported a nonunion rate of 9%, fixation failure in 4%, an infection rate of 3%, and revision surgery rate of 13% The purpose of the current study was to assess the outcome of management of periprosthetic supracondylar femoral fracture after TKA with a modern distal femoral arthroplasty system (Zimmer Segmental, Warsaw, IN). In the current study, patients were able to commence immediate weight bearing and rehabilitation following the procedure. This patient cohort had highly acceptable functional outcome according to KSS and SF-12 scores. The mortality rate during the first year after the procedure was 1 of 17 patients (5.8%). Review of the literature reveals other studies that reported higher mortality: 26% within the first 6 months postsurgery The complication rate for this cohort of patients was 4 of 16 patients (25%), which is a relatively high rate. However, none of these patients required surgical intervention with the exception of one, for debridement with retention of the prosthesis and chronic suppressive antibiotics for management of infected TKA. In addition, it is notable that 2 patients suffered falls and postoperative fractures during the follow-up period. This may be attributable to the patient population and a testament to the rapid and robust mobilization, which is allowable following distal femoral arthroplasty surgery. There are relatively few series in the literature assessing distal femoral arthroplasty for the management of supracondylar periprosthetic fracture. Jassim et al In contrast, Mortazavi et al The current study has several limitations. Data were collected in a retrospective manner, and because all patients were transferred from other institutions for definitive management, limited preoperative clinical data were available. Although the sample size included in this study was small, no patients were lost to follow-up, and a single surgeon treated all cases using the same, modern implant. The use of distal femoral arthroplasty is a viable option in management of distal supracondylar periprosthetic TKA fractures with poor bone stock, comminution, and/or associated ligamentous deficiency. Immediate mobilization is permissible, thus keeping hospital length of stay relatively short and minimizing complications associated with prolonged immobility. The early complication rate in this cohort of patients is comparable with that of other limb-saving procedures. In the longer term, outcomes reveal acceptable functional outcome, with an acceptable reoperation rate given the complexity of the clinical picture. The use of distal femoral arthroplasty for complex periprosthetic fractures is therefore a highly viable surgical option for this difficult clinical scenario. Conflict of Interest Statements