With the deep development of tight sand gas reservoirs, problems such as short stable production period and quick production decline of gas wells after fracturing have become increasingly prominent. Consequently, there is an increasing demand for the effective penetration and conductivity of artificial fractures. Impulse sand fracturing technology introduces a concept of discrete multilayer sanding inside fractures; joint application of pulse blender which can be switched at high frequency, intensive multi-cluster perforation and special fibrous material made it possible to ensure the flow stability of proppant slug, and placement of nonuniformly-laid sand pinnacles and grooves, which markedly upgraded the capacity of the fracture conductivity to several orders of magnitude more than the conventional method. Laboratory engineering simulation evaluation and field test show that pre-fracturing reservoir evaluation, pulse time design and the optimization of degradable fiber and support equipment are the keys to the success of impulse sand fracturing. Compared with the conventional fracturing, this technique can effectively increase well production, decrease the volume of fracturing proppant, and lower sand plugging risks. An independent sand fracturing pilot test has been conducted in 6 layers of 3 wells for the first time in Block Tao 7 of the Sulige Gasfield, Ordos Basin, as a result, the average volume of fracturing proppant dropped by 28.3%, the average sand intensity dropped by 21.88%, and the post-fracturing average daily gas output increased by 26.8%. This technology provides an efficient and environmentally friendly reservoir stimulation option for tight sand gas reservoirs in China.By means of pumping proppant carrying fluid into the hydraulic artificial fractures of formation, the conventional hydraulic fracturing technology can prop artificial fractures through continuous packing and thus make the packed fractures as channels for oil and gas to flow from the fractures to the wellbore under the action of formation closure pressure The continuous multilayer placement of proppant inside artificial hydraulic fractures is restricted by special fracture geometry This technology, by means of reducing the contact area of fracture surface, i.e., maximizing the effective channel rate of fractures, can largely reduce the fluid flow resistance inside fractures When the proppant is discretely laid inside hydraulic artificial fractures, the fluid flows through the areas unpropped by proppant sand pinnacle, with flow pressure drop much lower than that of continuous proppant packed fractures. Experimental correlation was conducted on permeability of propped fractures in a simulated fracture system in different sanding modes. The results show that the permeability of discrete packed fractures is 1–2 magnitude order(s) higher than that of continuous packed fracture ( To ensure the proppant slug to be kept stable and non-dispersible when it flows through surface pipeline, fracturing string and perforation, special fibrous material was added into the fracturing fluid to form effective envelope to the proppant particles, and thus remarkably improve the slug stability. Evaluation was conducted through field experiment on the dynamic stability of proppant slug in case of fiber-accompanied injection, and the densimeters at both ends of the flow pipe were used to determine the proppant slug flow stability ( As the most pronounced characteristic different from conventional hydraulic sanding technology, the impulse sanding technology controls the alternate injection of proppant slug and fracturing fluid by means of high frequency switch of special sand blender, in order to preliminarily separate proppant slugs, which is the basic condition for nonuniform laying of proppant sand pinnacle inside fractures. Depending on reservoir types and fracturing materials, the pulse time was adjusted to ensure that the proppant sand pinnacle can support stably under the action of formation closure pressure and the fluid flow groove is opened effectively. The calculation formula of pulse time was derived by using the pillar security assessment method that was used in mining engineering, and through the laboratory experiment on engineering simulation evaluation of stableness of proppant sand pinnacle under pressures ( The calculation formula of pulse time is as follows: Studies show that, after soluble special fibrous materials have been added into the fracturing fluid, they disperse evenly and form spatially crosslinked reticular structure with the guar gum chain. In this way, the special fibrous materials realize the enveloping and wrapping (virtual viscosity of fiber) of proppant particles, and thus ensure the proppant particles to effectively suspend in the fracturing fluid and reduce their settling rate To strengthen the dispersion effect of proppant slug inside artificial fractures, dense multi-cluster perforation was conducted in the hole interval where effective sand body is developed, so as to realize secondary dispersion of proppant slug that is ready to enter the hydraulic artificial fractures, so as to ensure full cover of proppant slug in the direction of fracture height and form effective support ( An independent impulse sand fracturing pilot test was conducted in 6 layers of 3 wells for the first time in Block Tao 7 of the Sulige Gasfield in October 2014. The results show that compared with the wells stimulated by conventional sand fracturing technology, the average volume of fracturing proppant for the test well treated by the impulse sand fracturing technology dropped by 28.3%, the average sand intensity dropped by 21.88%, and the post-fracturing average daily gas output increased by 26.8%. In this paper, Well Tao 7-A is taken as an example to conduct analysis on the field practice of the impulse sand fracturing technology. Well Tao 7-A is a vertical well, with a total depth of 3470 m, formation pressure of 20 MPa and formation temperature of 110 °C. The well depth at the position with maximum inclination (2.48°) is 1425 m. The cementing quality of production casing at perforated interval is good. The Permian Shanxi Formation is dominated by light gray gas-bearing fine sandstone, and the Permian Lower Shihezi Formation is dominated by gray white gas-bearing medium sandstone. In general, the reservoir exhibits as pore type reservoir. The information of each interval is shown in On the basis of log interpretation results, the dense multi-cluster perforation pattern largely covering the pay zones ( In order to realize effective support of proppants under the action of formation closure pressure and fluid erosion, and combining with theoretical calculation model and laboratory engineering simulation assessment results, the pulse time of the well was determined as 12 s ( To ensure the effective suspension and non-dispersion of proppants in the whole flow process, based on the liquid test viscosity curve and proppant settling rate test curve (  The designed displacement of Shan 1 Member ranges in 3.0–3.2 m The sand suspension performance of fiber-accompanied injection fracturing fluid is good, the fiber can be quickly and evenly dispersed in the fracturing fluid, and at the stage of alternate injection of proppant slug and fracturing fluid at high frequency, the single proppant slug can be effectively kept stable and non-dispersible in the pipeline flow on the ground. It is known from the fracturing operation curve analysis that the impulse blender can effectively realize high-frequency switch at pulse time of 12 s, and its performance is stable at impulse sanding stage. Compared with conventional fracturing, impulse sanding mode was adopted at principal fracturing stage, so the sensitivity of pumping pressure to the variation of sand concentration reduces. Moreover, high-frequency impulse sanding mode makes the volume of proppant less than that in conventional hydraulic fracturing mode ( Flowback rate of the well reached 42.0% after post-fracture flowback for 5 days. Furthermore, no fiber was discharged in the flowback process, indicating a remarkable sand consolidation effect. The tubing pressure is 15.2 MPa, the casing pressure is 16.4 MPa, and the gas transmission volume is 3.3 × 10  Compared with conventional hydraulic fracturing where continuous sanding is adopted, the discrete sanding technology takes the grooves among proppant sand pinnacles as fluid flow channels, which can effectively enhance the flow efficiency and reduce the volume of proppant. The dense multi-cluster perforation mode can help to realize effective separation of proppant slug along the wellbore, and intensively stimulate the reservoir vertically. Field practice shows that the fiber-suspended proppant technique can effectively ensure the flow stability of proppant slug, and the impulse sand blender can accurately control the pulse time. Field pilot test proves the advancement, effectiveness and economy of the impulse sand fracturing technology. Compared with the offset wells stimulated by conventional fracturing, this technology can effectively reduce the volume of proppant, control the cost, and enhance the post-fracturing output by means of the high-conductivity discrete sanding fracture. Compared with the conventional sand fracturing, the impulse sand fracturing achieves much higher post-fracturing initial flow rate. However, the long residual action of the discrete propped fracture is to be further identified, and accordingly further laboratory assessment and field tests are recommended. Scientific Research and Technical Development Project of