The Platinum Group Metals (PGM) are rare in the Earth's crust and in the past years their use had a considerable expansion limiting their availability, which justifies PGM's high commercial value and demand. Therefore, PGM recovery from secondary sources is very important from both economic and environmental points of view.
                  In recent years, several methods for PGM removal have been investigated. Our research group has been studying the removal/recovery of PGM using both chemical (liquid–liquid extraction) and biological methods (using anaerobic bacterial communities).
                  The aim of this study was to combine these two chemical and biological approach technologies, for PGM recovery. For that purpose, Pd(II) and Pt(IV) present in aqueous phases, were extracted to organic phases composed by N,N′-dimethyl-N,N′-dicyclohexylsuccinamide (DMDCHSA) and N,N′-dimethyl-N,N′-dicyclohexyltetradecylmalonamide (DMDCHTDMA) in 1,2-dichloroethane, respectively, with an extraction efficiency of 79% for Pd(II) and 99% for Pt(IV). The metals in the loaded organic phases were then stripped with seawater, a low-cost solution largely available in nature, with efficiencies of 100% for Pd and 86% for Pt. Finally, the metals were precipitated and recovered using metabolic products produced by a community enriched for sulphate-reducing bacteria. The palladium precipitated completely, while 86% of platinum was precipitated. During the precipitation process sulphide concentration in the solution decreased and the analysis of the precipitates was consistent with the formation of nanosized PdS and PtS2.
                  To our knowledge, this research shows, for the first time, the potential of combining liquid–liquid extraction with the use of bacteria aiming platinum and palladium recovery, as metal sulphides, from aqueous media.Platinum Group Metals (PGM), including platinum (Pt) and palladium (Pd), are a limited global resource, not only because they are rare in the Earth's crust, but also due to the increasing of their use as a primary raw material, resulting in the high PGM economic value and demand ( The exceptional properties of PGMs, such as high conductivity, thermal stability and catalytic properties ( Over the last years, the recovery and reutilization of PGM from industrial wastes have raised some interest and several methods have been pointed out and explored, such as chemical reduction ( Among the chemical methods, liquid–liquid extraction, also called solvent extraction (SX), has been used in nuclear chemistry technology for the separation of various radioisotopes and for the reprocessing of nuclear fuels ( Recently, The PGM stripping from the loaded organic phase and the subsequent recovery is not so much studied. The metals' recovery from the loaded organic phase by stripping methods is usually a difficult process, especially when the metal concentration is low, which is normally the case of PGM. The use of Na The use of biological methods mainly based on the use of bacterial strains and communities for PGM recovery from aqueous solutions has also been investigated ( Several studies have shown the potential of pure bacterial cultures for biological reduction of Pd(II) to Pd(0), such as The aim of this study was to test the potential of metabolic products (MP) from the growth of an anaerobic bacterial community, enriched for SRB, for Pd and Pt removal from aqueous solutions, namely those resulting from the stripping stage of SX processes. The use of MP presents advantages in comparison to the bioremoval techniques that occur in the presence of live bacterial cells, since the process does not require the utilization of metal-resistant bacteria. The combination of both chemical (SX) and biological methods may have potential for PGM recovery, taking into account that after the stripping stage of a solvent extraction process, the metals remain soluble in the purified aqueous phase, and thus a subsequent method is required for its recovery. Hence, this research explores for the first time, to our knowledge, the possibility of combining the use of liquid–liquid extraction with a biological process for the recovery of Pt and Pd from aqueous media. The structures of the malonamide and succinamide derivatives synthesized and used in this research work, DMDCHTDMA was synthesized according to the procedure already described by The reagents used for the DMDCHSA synthesis were succinyl chloride (Sigma-Aldrich, 95%), All reagents and solvents were used without further purification. Feed aqueous phases containing 102 The organic phases containing 0.05 The extraction and stripping experiments were carried out at room temperature and the organic and aqueous phases were placed in contact with equal volumes (A/O Four replicates were carried out for each metal (Pd(II) and Pt(IV)) in the extraction experiments. In the stripping experiments two replicates were performed for each stripping agent and for each metal. The maximum coefficient of variance estimated for the results achieved from the different extractions and stripping experiments was approximately ± The metabolic products (MP) were obtained from an anaerobic bacterial community mostly composed by bacteria closely related to the genus The bacterial enrichment was performed at room temperature (21 The culture was allowed to grow for 4 The culture was carried out in anaerobic conditions. The medium was purged with nitrogen gas, in order to reach the anaerobic conditions and after inoculation 10 The bacterial culture was allowed to grow to achieve an OD The supernatant from the bacterial growth, containing metabolic products (MP), was collected and 10 Samples were collected immediately after the addition of the Pt or Pd stripping loaded phase to the solution containing the MP and weekly during 21 Summarizing, the whole process of extraction and biorecovery of Pd and Pt is composed by three steps, two of each representing the liquid–liquid extraction stage (extraction and stripping steps) and the last one the biological step (Pd and Pt biorecovery using MP). A diagram showing the process is shown in Samples from batch cultures were periodically collected using a sterile syringe and in each sample, immediately after sampling, sulphide concentration was determined by the methylene blue method (665 The precipitates were obtained by centrifugation (2701 The precipitates were analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a PANalytical X'Pert Pro powder diffractometer and by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi, 3700 Multielemental analysis of the obtained precipitates was carried out by microwave plasma — atomic emission spectrometry (MP-AES, 4200, Agilent Technologies). For that purpose the precipitates were submitted to an acid digestion with a known volume of Pt(IV) and Pd(II) extractions were carried out with DMDCHTDMA and DMDCHSA demonstrated to be good Pt ( The results obtained in the experiments using 0.05 The results obtained in the SX assays performed with 0.05 In a SX process it is essential to find an effective aqueous solution to strip the metals present in the loaded organic phase. For that purpose, 1 According to previous studies ( Each of the two loaded organic phases containing 161 The stripping percentages, (%S), obtained for Pt(IV) with 1 Another advantage of DMDCHTDMA aiming at its potential industrial application is the possibility of this extractant to be reused after several extraction and stripping cycles, as reported by Regarding the results obtained for Pd(II) with both stripping agents (1 The metabolic products (MP) were obtained from an anaerobic bacterial community previously enriched for SRB from a sludge sample from a WWTP and then re-inoculated. The bacterial growth during re-inoculation was monitored for 4 According to the results presented in Although the culture conditions were designed to promote the growth of SRB, these bacteria were not identified by 16S rRNA gene analysis, due to the fact that SRB were present in minority. This was consistent with the low sulphate reduction, from 2300 After 4 The mixtures composed by the MP and the metal loaded solution resulting from stripping, with 795 Pd and Pt removal was accompanied by consumption of sulphide from the solution, which may indicate that both metals were removed as insoluble metal sulphides. Despite the low reduction of sulphate to sulphide achieved by the bacterial community (30%), this reduction was enough for Pd and Pt removal from the medium. As shown in In order to assess the mineralogical composition of the precipitates, their characterization by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) was performed. The analysed Pd and Pt precipitates were obtained after contact of the stripping loaded phases with the metabolic products. The stripping loaded phases chosen were those in which seawater was used as stripping agent because of the greater advantages, already mentioned associated with their use. The XRD results for both Pt and Pd precipitates were inconclusive (data not shown), due to a large number of peaks in the diffractogram. Those peaks were probably due to the presence of salts from the culture medium and/or from seawater. However, SEM-EDS and TEM-EDS analyses were also carried out and revealed important information about the samples, including external morphology, size and elemental composition, offsetting the absence of XRD information. The analysis of the precipitate obtained in the assay with the Pt loaded stripping phase (seawater) by SEM and EDS mapping is showed in The SEM-EDS analysis (supplement 1 in supplementary material) identified elements present in the culture medium and in seawater such as Ca, Mg, and Na, although the more intense peaks belong to Pt and S. The atomic percentages of Pt and S in the precipitate is 9.7% and 58.6%, respectively, which corresponds to an approximate stoichiometry of 1Pt to 6S, higher than that expected for PtS TEM analysis ( Calcium was also identified in the TEM-EDS spectrum. This element was already detected in the SEM-EDS spectrum and, as explained before, is originated from the culture medium and/or from seawater. Carbon and copper identified in the TEM-EDS spectrum are from the supporting grid, since those elements were also present in the background areas. The precipitate obtained in the assay in which Pd loaded stripping phase (seawater) was added to the metabolic products solution was analysed by SEM-EDS and the results were presented in In the SEM-EDS analysis (supplement 2 in supplementary material) the peaks with the highest intensity were assigned to Pd and S elements, with an atomic percentage of 6.6% and 21.1%, respectively, which corresponds to an atomic ratio around 3, higher than should be expected for PdS. This ratio can result from the excess of sulphide in relation to Pd in the mixed solution (0.38 The results obtained with SEM-EDS were confirmed and supplemented by TEM-EDS analysis ( The chlorine element, already detected in the SEM-EDS spectrum, was again identified in TEM-EDS spectrum and it is originated from the nutrient medium and/or from seawater. Carbon and copper identified in the TEM-EDS spectrum were from the supporting grid, since they were also present in the background areas. The multielemental analysis of the precipitates performed by MP-AES revealed that the elements Pt or Pd and sulphur were in majority. In the Pd precipitate a molar ration of 1Pd to 2.6S was obtained, which is in accordance with the ratio obtained by EDS (1Pd:3S), showing an excess of S in relation to the metal. Similar conclusions were obtained for the Pt precipitate. Although much less concentrated, Ca, Fe, K, Ca, Mg and Na were also identified in both digestion solutions by MP-AES (they were above the detection limit of the technique) probably due to their presence in the nutrient medium and in seawater. According to the literature, the synthesis of many metal sulphides is well explored due to their potential applications. The use of biological methods aiming at PGM biorecovery seems particularly promising since these methods have some advantages compared to the chemical ones, as they are cleaner and more attractive from an economic point of view, and particularly suitable for metals recovery at low concentrations ( After a literature survey, several applications of PdS and PtS The combination of both chemical and biological methods, as performed in this work by combining liquid–liquid extraction with the use of bacterial metabolic products can be a promising and economic solution for the recovery Pd and Pt as metal sulphides. In fact, liquid–liquid extraction can be a solution for the selective recovery of PGMs from pregnant solutions coming from the leaching of PGM-rich wastes, while, subsequently, the application of biological methods can be a viable alternative for the final recovery of those metals, as nanoparticles. Furthermore, the use of biogenic sulphide presents environmental and economic advantages comparing to an inorganic salt containing sulphides. Biogenic sulphide can simply be generated in situ by the growth of bacteria enriched from zero cost samples without the need of using commercial chemicals. In addition, it is known that these bacteria are able to use several wastes, such as wine wastes, as carbon sources, thus, decreasing the costs of culturing these bacteria ( The present research demonstrates a solvent extraction application of The present work also demonstrates the feasibility of coupling chemical and biological technologies aiming at Pd and Pt recovery. In fact, the mixture of bacterial metabolic products to Pd and Pt loaded stripping phases of seawater obtained from the previous application of liquid–liquid extraction, allowed the recovery of Pd and Pt sulphides. These metallic sulphides were obtained as nanoparticles or particles with sizes that do not exceed 150 The authors wish to thank