The type of diglycolamic acid extractantN,N-di-2-ethylhexyldiglycolamic acid (D2EHDGAA) was examined for selective extraction and separation of Au(III) in acidic chloride solutions containing Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III), and Cu(II). The separation factor βAu/Pt = 959.3 was observed in 7 M hydrochloric acid. The extraction of Au(III) was quick, and extraction equilibrium was reached in less than 5 min. The n-dodecane and kerosene diluents had a notable effect on the extraction of Au(III) with the D2EHDGAA, and the D2EHDGAA had excellent capacity in n-dodecane and kerosene. However, the selectivity coefficient of Au(III) and Pd(II) was better in n-dodecane (βAu/Pd = 1070) than in kerosene (βAu/Pd < 0.1) of 4 M hydrochloric acid. The extraction mechanisms of the Au(III) and Pt(IV) were investigated, and the results suggest that one metals ion is extracted with two and one extractants in 1 M HCl concentration. The D2EHDGAA-based n-dodecane extracting phase was easily activated using a low-concentration thiourea aqueous solution (0.01 M). The recyclability of D2EHDGAA for five cycles was investigated, and its efficiency decreased less than 4%.It is well-known that Au(III) is one of the most important metals ( A number of technologies, such as solvent extraction ( In this study, the extractant The extractant D2EHDGAA was synthesized as described previously (H. The aqueous phases containing 10 ppm Au(III), Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III), and Cu(II) were prepared by diluting the standard solutions with deionized water and hydrochloric acid. The concentration of HCl in the metal solutions was adjusted by 37% (w/w) hydrochloric acid. The liquid-liquid extraction was carried out by shaking equal volumes (5 mL each) of pre-equilibrated organic and aqueous phases in a temperature-controlled water bath at room temperature overnight. The metal ion concentrations in the aqueous phase before and after extraction was determined using an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, HORIBA-JobinYvon ULTIMA 2). The extraction efficiency ( The following equation generally represents the distribution coefficient ( In the present study, the separation factor β (Eq. For the thiourea back-extraction studies, the loaded the organic phases of the investigated extractant with Au(III), Pt(IV), Pd(II), Rh(III), and Cu(II) in different hydrochloric acid concentrations. A mechanical shaker was used to mix a given volume of the loaded organic solution (2 mL) with equal volumes of aqueous solution (2 mL) that contained strippants of thiourea ( The effects of two different solvents, namely, As shown in The reason for this phenomenon is probably due to kerosene contains a small amount of sulfur, which could promote the extraction of Pd(II) ( The influence of hydrochloric acid concentration on the extraction of Au(III), Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III), and Cu(II) with 10 mM D2EHDGAA was examined in Moreover, the results of calculating the selectivity coefficient as a function of HCl concentration  Since the amount of solvent in liquid–liquid extraction has a significant effect on metal extraction, the effect of the concentrations of D2EHDGAA on the selective extraction was investigated across the range of 0.1–100 mM. The extraction mechanism of Au(III) and Pt(IV) with D2EHDGAA was examined by slope analysis. At low acidity conditions, the separation of metals cations via a cation exchange mechanism. In the high acidity conditions case, the extractant form ion-pairs with metal-chloride complexes ( The back extraction of Au(III) from the organic phase prepared by D2EHDGAA extraction from 0.5 M hydrochloric concentrations using different concentrations of thiourea was carried out. To evaluate potential applications of liquid-liquid extraction, the regeneration and recycling of Au(III), Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III), and Cu(II) was studied. The extraction of Au(III), Pd(II), Pt(IV), and Rh(III) from 0.5 M hydrochloric acid solution using D2EHDGAA in The extraction equilibrium shows the extraction percentage of the precious and base metal ions by an aliquot of Au(III), Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III), and Cu(II) into 15 mL of 1 M HCl solution and added 2 mL of 10 mM D2EHDGAA in Furthermore, the estimated metal selectivity coefficients (β) as a function of time are also shown in In this study, the CHON-type extractant D2EHDGAA has been proved to be sensitive for separation of Au(III) from other precious metals (Pd(II), Pt(IV) Rh(III)) and from the impurity metal Cu(II) in HCl solutions. In this system, the extractant dissolved in  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The project was sponsored by the