In this work we demonstrate the remarkable phase control on the crystallization of calcium carbonate by the stereochemistry of carbohydrate-based polymers. The polymers (poly(2-(2,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-β-d-glucosyloxy)ethyl methacrylate) and poly(2-(2,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-β-d-galactosyloxy)ethyl methacrylate)) have been synthesized from the respective glucose or galactose containing monomers (3 step synthesis) by RAFT polymerization leading to well-defined carbohydrate-based polymers with number averages of the molecular weights (Mw
                     ) of 10,000–18,000g/mol and a dispersities (Đ) from 1.1 to 1.2. For the deprotected polymers we found differences in the phase selection of calcium carbonate. We found that this effect is based on the chelating character of the hydroxyl groups of the pyranoses and their individual orientation, as demonstrated by comparison of the protected and unprotected polymers in crystallization experiments as well as computer assisted simulations.Biomineralization is a common phenomenon in nature leading to the formation of a variety of solid inorganic structures by living organisms. In this category we classify materials such as intracellular crystals in prokaryotes, exoskeletons in protozoa, algae, and invertebrates, spicules and lenses, bone, teeth, statoliths, and otoliths, eggshells, plant mineral structures, and also pathological biominerals such as gall stones, kidney stones, and oyster pearls Up to now a large number of proteins have been identified that are involved in the control of biomineralization processes Therefore we have investigated in this work the influence of the stereochemistry of carbohydrate-based polymers on the crystallization of calcium carbonate. We synthesized two classes of carbohydrate-based polymers from galactosyloxyethyl methacrylate and glucosyloxyethyl methacrylate by controlled radical polymerization (RAFT) All chemicals were obtained either from Aldrich or ACROS and are reagent grade. The chemicals were used without further purification unless indicated otherwise. Dioxane used in the synthesis was freshly distilled from a sodium/potassium mixture. 2,2′-Azobis(isobutyronitrile) (AIBN) was recrystallized from diethyl ether and stored at −7  The 4-cyano-4-((thiobenzoyl) sulfanyl)pentanoic acid was used as the chain transfer agent (CTA) and synthesized according to the literature The 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-acetyl-α- The 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-acetyl-α- The 2-(-2,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-β- The synthesis was performed in an analogous manner to the glucose based derivative. Yield: 199.9 The synthesis was performed in an analogous fashion to the glucose based derivative. Yield: 13.9 The synthesis was performed in accordance to the glucose based derivative. Yield: 12.0 In a Schlenk flask 1.17 The polymerization was carried out under the conditions described above. Yield: 285 The dithiobenzoate end group was removed according to the procedure reported by Perrier et al. In a typical reaction 100 Glass slides were cleaned and hydrophilized using a modified RCA method The imaging of the resulting CaCO The samples of calcium carbonate on glass slides were investigated by means of a Bruker AXS D8 Discover with Cu Kα-radiation and graphite monochromator. The reflections were monitored by a 2D HiStar surface detector. All calculations were carried out with the Materials Studio 4.4 program package from Accelrys In this work we studied the influence of stereochemistry of glycoside based polymers on the crystallization of calcium carbonate. For these studies there is a need for well defined polymeric structures. Therefore we synthesized 2-(2,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-β- In the first step galactose or glucose were completely protected using acetanhydride in pyridine. Afterward the acetyl protected pyranose was treated with hydrobromic acid in glacial acetic acid yielding the 2,3,4,6-tetra-O-acetyl-α- The GPC elugrams of In the next step we have investigated the influence of protected and unprotected polymers of different molecular weights on the mineralization process. Calcium carbonate was crystallized in the presence of the polymers compiled in First the specific role of the OH-motif of the carbohydrates was tested by using 10 So far, these findings are not surprising. The protected In contrast, the polymer To investigate the role of the stereochemistry These findings are surprising, because the carbohydrates differ only in the position of one OH-group per carbohydrate. This change in the position of the hydroxy groups from As shown in We have demonstrated the syntheses of sophisticated model system for polysaccharides involved in biomineralization processes. We could synthesize well-defined glucose- and galactose-based polyacrylates by RAFT polymerization. It was possible to assign the influence of these polymers on the calcium carbonate crystallization to the OH groups of the carbohydrate units bound to the polymer. Furthermore we have shown the role of particular OH motifs in the phase selection process of calcium carbonate. Changing the position of This research was supported by the (1) XRD data. (2) 