This study explored the feasibility of utilizing industrial waste iron oxide tailings for phosphate removal in laboratory experiments. The experimental work emphasized on the evaluation of phosphate adsorption and desorption characteristics of the tailing material. The adsorption isotherm, kinetics, pH effect and desorption were examined in batch experiments. Five isotherm models were used for data fitting. The three-parameter equations (Redlich–Peterson and Langmuir–Freundlich) showed more applicability than the two-parameter equations (Freundlich, Langmuir and Temkin). A modified equation for calculation of the separation factor using the Langmuir–Freundlich equation constants was developed. The initial phosphate adsorption on the tailings was rapid. The adsorption kinetics can be best described by either the simple Elovich or power function equation. The phosphate adsorption on the tailings tended to decrease with an increase of pH. A phosphate desorbability of approximately 13–14% was observed, and this low desorbability likely resulted from a strong bonding between the adsorbed PO4
                     3−and iron oxides in the tailings. Column flow-through tests using both synthetic phosphate solution and liquid hog manure confirmed the phosphate removal ability of the tailings. Due to their low cost and high capability, this type of iron oxide tailings has the potential to be utilized for cost-effective removal of phosphate from wastewater.Phosphorus (P) is often present in low concentrations in wastewater almost solely as phosphates, including organic phosphate, inorganic phosphate (orthophosphate) and polyphosphate (particulate P). Its release to surface water is of environmental concern, because it is an essential, often limiting, nutrient for growth of organisms in most ecosystems, and therefore is a major cause of eutrophication. Phosphorus removal from wastewater has been widely investigated. The utilization of industrial wastes or by-products for phosphorus removal has been given a great attention. Several waste materials or by-products studied by different researchers include: fly ash The iron oxide tailing material to be investigated in this study is an industrial waste derived from a mineral processing industry in Canada. The tailings contain significant amounts of iron oxides that may be effective in removing soluble phosphorus, as it is well recognized that iron oxides are the important phosphorus adsorbents The objective of this work was to study the feasibility of using iron oxide tailings as an adsorbent for phosphorus removal from wastewater. In doing so, the adsorption and desorption characteristics of this tailing material for phosphate removal from aqueous solutions were evaluated in small-scale experiments. The adsorption isotherms, kinetics and pH effect were evaluated in batch jar tests by using orthophosphate solutions. The column flow-through adsorption tests were conducted with synthetic phosphate solutions and hog manure effluents. Such work could contribute to understanding the phosphate removal process using iron oxide tailings. The iron oxide tailings used in the present experiments were dark brown fine-grained solids, which were produced by drying the tailings slurry at 80°C. The elemental composition of the dry tailings is shown in The phosphate (PO For determination of phosphate adsorption, 200 Phosphate adsorption isotherm studies were carried out with different initial concentrations of phosphate and a fixed concentration of the tailing material at room temperature. Seven levels of initial phosphate concentrations (5, 10, 20, 40, 70, 100 and 150 Phosphate adsorption kinetics was evaluated at three temperatures (5°C, 20°C and 35°C) and an initial phosphate concentration of 20 To evaluate phosphate desorption from the tailings, the residual solids retained on the filter paper were collected in a 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask after filtration of the suspension from an adsorption test. To each flask 100 Column adsorption tests of phosphate removal were conducted at room temperature using both a phosphate solution containing 20–22 Orthophosphate (PO The results of the phosphate adsorption isotherm experiments are shown in In this study, the isotherm data from Although the fits of adsorption data to these isotherm models are more mathematically meaningful and do not provide any evidence for the actual adsorption mechanisms, the Langmuir constant can be used for calculating the dimensionless separation factor ( The phosphate adsorption on different iron oxides was studied by Parfitt et al. The results of phosphate adsorption kinetic experiments at 5°C, 20°C and 35°C are shown in The P adsorption kinetic data ( The pH of the aqueous solution is an important variable that influences the adsorption of anions and cations at the solid–liquid interfaces. The effect of pH on the phosphate adsorption on the iron oxide tailings for pH between 3.2 and 9.5 is presented in As mentioned before, the tailings also contained certain amounts of Al and Ca, in spite of which they were much smaller than that of Fe. Hence, the actual phosphate removal on the tailings could be a consequence of adsorption and precipitation reactions with Fe, Al and Ca, even though the phosphate adsorption on iron oxides is hypothesized for the tailing material. Since the chemical precipitation of the various forms of calcium phosphates is favored at a pH above 7.5 The tests of phosphate desorption were conducted with three initial phosphate concentrations (20, 30, and 40 Column flow-through adsorption using KH Another column flow-through adsorption test was conducted for 31 days using liquid manure with a 25% TA column. In this test, the influent liquid manure tank was magnetically stirred. The influent pH was 7.5–8.3 and the effluent pH was 7.5–8.4 during the test. The dissolved P (DP) concentrations in the influent and effluent were measured every day, while the total P (TP) concentration was measured every other day. The experimental results are shown in Phosphate removal from aqueous solutions was studied using a type of waste tailings that contained more than 30% iron oxides. Based on the results of this study, the following conclusions can be drawn. The isotherm data were well fitted with five adsorption isotherm models by non-linear regression. The three-parameter equations (Redlich–Peterson and Langmuir–Freundlich) provided better fitting than the two-parameter equations (Freundlich, Langmuir and Temkin). The applicability of the used two-parameter isotherm models for the present phosphate adsorption data approximately followed the order: Temkin≈Freundlich>Langmuir. A modified equation for calculation of the separation factor using the Langmuir–Freundlich equation constants was developed. The initial phosphate adsorption on the tailings was rapid and the adsorption rate was slightly higher at a higher temperature between 5°C and 35°C. The adsorption kinetics could be best described by either the simple Elovich or power function equation. In contrast, the first-order, second-order, and parabolic diffusion kinetic equations were not applicable for describing the kinetics of phosphate adsorption on the tailings. The phosphate adsorption on the tailings tended to decrease with an increase of pH, from 8.6 A phosphate desorbability of approximately 13–14% was observed. The low desorbability likely resulted from a strong bonding between the adsorbed PO The strong ability of phosphate removal by the tailings was also confirmed by column flow-through adsorption tests using both synthetic phosphate solution and liquid hog manure. Particularly, in tests using liquid manure, total P was also reduced mainly due to the removal of particulate P by slow infiltration through the fine particle layer. However, the small particle size of the tailings would cause a column clogging. It is demonstrated that the iron oxide tailings are an effective adsorbent for phosphate removal. Due to their low cost and high capability, the iron oxide tailings have the potential to be utilized for cost-effective removal of phosphorus from wastewater. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from Alberta Agriculture Research Institute (AARI) for this project. Thanks are also extended to Mr. A. Chambers for providing the iron oxide tailing material and Mr. D. Adams for assistance with experiments in this study.