An original process aiming at selectively extracting REEs from the hyperaccumulator plant Dicranopteris dichotoma was developed. This process relies on an enhanced ion exchange leaching step carried out in 0.5 M nitric acid solution. Once ion exchange resin is transferred into a column, REEs purification is carried out by percolating successively three solutions through resin bed: two washing steps, with water and 0.75 M nitric acid to remove competing ions and one elution step using 3 M nitric acid. These operating conditions led to 81.4% REEs purity and 78% recovery.Rare earth elements (REEs) demand by new technologies is sharply increasing. They include the 15 elements of lanthanide group from lanthanum to lutetium, coupled with chemically similar yttrium and infrequently scandium. These elements are split into two subgroups, the light rare earth elements (LREEs) from lanthanum to europium and the heavy rare earth elements (HREEs), which include the rest of lanthanide elements along with yttrium [ Phytoextraction is a phytoremediation process consisting of the use of hyperaccumulator plants to extract the bioavailable fraction of trace elements from soils. It can be applied to decrease the toxicity of contaminated soils and/or to extract trace elements from soils for their recovery. Agromining is the whole chain of agricultural and hydrometallurgical processes aimed at recovering strategic elements from various substrates with accumulating plants [ Some plants, mainly ferns, are able to extract REEs at concentrations higher than 0.1% of dry biomass. Agromining could be used to extract REEs from small concentrated secondary resources, like tailings, sterile heaps or industrial wastes ( The present work aims at extracting REEs from the biomass of REEs extraction and separation has been mainly investigated from primary ores and secondary ores such as urban mines [ In the present work, an ion exchange process has been designed to extract REEs from Samples of Sulfuric acid (H The particles of crushed biomass were observed with a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) coupled with Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) (JEOL-JSM-6490LV) after being coated with a gold/palladium alloy deposited by low-vacuum sputter coating. Particle size distributions were measured with a laser diffractometer (Malvern Mastersizer hydro 2000SM), the particles being dispersed in ethanol. Biomass samples ( The biomass was leached using HNO Once the extraction step is over, resin was transferred into a column (XK 16 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences), 20 cm of length and 16 mm of diameter). The bed height was between 2.5 and 15.5 cm and the volume between 5 and 31 mL. The experimental set-up is illustrated on DI water (500 mL) was percolated to remove the residual solution of the leaching step. HNO The third step aimed at eluting REEs. Elution conditions (acid type, concentration, volume) will be studied in Section Elementary analysis of Regarding other elements, Al was accumulated at high concentration in the plant (0.20 to 0.25% ± 0.03). Others elements were less concentrated, EDX characterization of biomass highlighted a high Si concentration ( The influence of the presence of resin on the final equilibrium concentrations of leaching was investigated. The analysis of the REEs residual content in the biomass after 0.5 M HNO Two protocols were successively used to carry out enhanced ion exchange leaching. First, crushed biomass was placed in a fiber bag whereas ion exchange resin was dispersed in acidic solution. The time required to reach a stable final concentration proved to be very long ( Therefore, it was chosen to work with dispersed biomass, the resin being placed in the fiber bags. The time needed to reach equilibrium was A kinetic study was carried out in the case of this second configuration in order to determine the limiting step in the transfer of REEs from the plant to the resin. The involved transfer steps are illustrated in First, ionic release occurs due to acid attack of biomass. Ions (REEs and others) diffuse throughout biomass and then from biomass towards the solution. The global mechanism including reaction, internal and external transfer for biomass is called step 1. Convective transport then occurs in solution. Ions are transferred from solution to resin, diffuse into the resin matrix and are adsorbed. This global mechanism including external and internal transfer as well as adsorption is called step 2. The objective of the present part is to determine the rate-determining step. Both steps are therefore studied separately. Concentration solution evolution over time during the leaching step C  According to Once REEs are fixed onto ion exchange resin, it is necessary to optimize the elution steps in order to find a compromise between REEs purity and recovery. Preliminary experiments were carried out to determine the type of acid to use, H Using H The objective of this step was to eliminate others ions as much as possible while limiting REEs co-elimination. To achieve this goal, acid concentration and volume were determined, considering that all elements to be eliminated have a lower affinity for ion exchange resin than REEs, except Al, which is trivalent in solution and behaves similarly to REEs. Moreover, as observed previously on In order to determine nitric acid concentration and volume required to eliminate competiting elements while minimizing REE loss, elution curves were carried out after the adsorption and rinsing step previously described. Elution were carried out using 0.5 M, 0.75 M and 1 M HNO To elute the totality of Al (and other ions) with 0.5 M HNO This last step aimed at choosing HNO Competing ions fraction (%) in biomass, Competing ions (%) in leachate solution, Competing ions (%) eluted by 750 mL 0.75 M HNO Competing ions (%) eluted with REEs by 300 mL in 3 M HNO Competing elements were mainly eluted with 0.75 M solution ( The mass balance of the solution showed an 81.4% REEs purity. A higher purity could be obtained by increasing the elution volume (0.75 M) during the impurity removal step, but this would have led to a decrease in the recovery rate. A compromise between purity and recovery rate must be found. Elementary analysis showed that This flow sheet has been designed at the bench scale, with small amounts of plants, but it can be easily scaled up for industrial application in such a way that the leaching of the biomass is directed to a column of resin, which will be followed by sequential elution to extract REEs. The enhanced ion exchange leaching process could for instance be carried out using a Stirred Tank Reactor (STR) provided with a recirculation loop. Biomass would be in suspension in the STR while ion exchange column would be inserted into the recirculation loop. This process required thorough studies of each step in order to obtain the simplest flow sheet as possible at a low cost. The conclusions drawn from this work are given below: Resin presence during acid leaching shifts equilibrium and enhances extraction. This hybrid process enables us to obtain REEs solution with 70–96 % extraction yield. Placing the plants freely in the solution instead of placing them in a bag increases extraction kinetics. Hence crushed biomass must not be compacted, as it seems that, because of high Si content, a “vitrification” mechanism occurs in acidic media. This mechanism leads to low diffusion of REEs within the plant matrix. A better elution of REEs is obtained with nitric acid than with sulfuric acid. A 0.75 M HNO The authors thank