New stratigraphic data along a profile from the Helvetic Gotthard massif to the remnants of the North Penninic basin in eastern Ticino and Graubünden are presented. The stratigraphic record together with existing geochemical and structural data, motivate a new interpretation of the fossil European distal margin.
                  We introduce a new group of Triassic facies, the North-Penninic-Triassic (NPT), which is characterised by the Ladinian “dolomie bicolori”. The NPT was located in-between the Briançonnais carbonate platform and the Helvetic lands. The observed horizontal transition, coupled with the stratigraphic superposition of a Helvetic Liassic on a Briaçonnais Triassic in the Luzzone-Terri nappe, links, prior to Jurassic rifting, the Briançonnais paleogeographic domain at the Helvetic margin, south of the Gotthard. Our observations suggest that the Jurassic rifting separated the Briançonnais domain from the Helvetic margin by complex and protracted extension.
                  The syn-rift stratigraphic record in the Adula nappe and surroundings suggests the presence of a diffuse rising area with only moderately subsiding basins above a thinned continental and proto-oceanic crust. Strong subsidence occurred in a second phase following protracted extension and the resulting delamination of the rising area.
                  The stratigraphic coherency in the Adula's Mesozoic questions the idea of a lithospheric mélange in the eclogitic Adula nappe, which is more likely to be a coherent alpine tectonic unit. The structural and stratigraphic observations in the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone suggest the activity of syn-rift detachments. During the alpine collision these faults are reactivated (and inverted) and played a major role in allowing the Adula subduction, the “Penninic Thrust” above it and in creating the structural complexity of the Central Alps.The Alps, as a mountain belt, are the result of Cretaceous convergence and Tertiary collision between European and African derived plates following the closure of oceanic domains ( The pre-orogenic evolution of the Alpine realm leads to the creation and differentiation of several paleogeographic domains whose remnants have subsequently been stacked in the orogenic belt during Tertiary collision ( This repartition and its paleogeographic significance are not devoid of discussions. Of particular interest and a matter of passionate debates is the role played by the units currently stacked in a Lower Penninic position. A portion of the Lower Penninic of the Western Alps (the “zone de Sion-Courmayeur-Tarentaise”, Valais Based on the presence of MORB-type metamafics, several workers (e.g. Currently two hypotheses are the most widely accepted to explain the significance of Lower Penninic units and the connection Valais-North Penninic. The first one considers the North Penninic and the Valais as one domain, located between the Helvetic margin and the Briançonnais domain, that experienced hyper extension during the Jurassic rifting, at the same time that the Liguro-Piemontese ocean opened to the south ( In this contribution we will investigate the aspect and the distribution of pre- syn- and post-rift facies on the distal European margin in the Central Alps in order to shed light on the tectonostratigraphic evolution of the North Penninic rifting and to understand the Helvetic–Briançonnais relationship. The refinement of the stratigraphic record coupled with structural and metamorphic information is used as a tool to extricate the extremely complex tectonic around the eclogitic Adula nappe. The study area is located at the northeastern edge of the Lepontine dome, SW of the Gotthard massif, astride northeastern Ticino and western Graubünden ( The Gotthard massif is the lowest tectonic element in the study area. It consists of Paleozoic and older gneisses covered by Permian “Verrucano” and Triassic dolomites ( The Stgir Formation: above a quartzite layer (“Lias Basis Quarzite”), it is composed by the Basal Stgir (shales), the Lower Stgir (marls, marly limestones and shales) and the Upper Stgir series (richer in sandstones and quartzites). The Inferno Formation: rich in belemnites, it is divided into a Lower (alternation of marls and marly limestones), a Middle (marls) and an Upper series (marls and marly limestones). The second half of the Formation is richer in detrital content. Locally the homogeneity of the Formation prevents the distinction of the three subdivisions. The Coroi Formation is a homogeneous thick series of black non-calcareous shales. The Lucomagno–Leventina nappe is the next higher gneissic-body. Its thin Triassic cover, formed of arkosic sandstones and dolomites, is of Helvetic type ( The Molare synform ( Apparently in the core of the Claro syncline, there is the thinner Soja unit, whose precise tectonic position is still an open question ( The Adula nappe is a large tectonic unit that overlies the Simano and Soja units. Its internal structure is extremely complicated (e.g. Above the Adula nappe and below the Middle Penninic (and Briançonnais) Tambo nappe, there is the Misox zone ( To the north the Grava nappe is folded by the Lunschania antiform (a fold formed during a post-nappe folding phase) below the Adula nappe ( We present 10 synthetic stratigraphic sections from 7 units located in the Lower Penninic of the Central Alps ( We introduce a new group of Triassic facies that we name “dolomie bicolori”. This group consists of a characteristic alternation of cm to metric yellow and grey dolomitic beds. The colour of the yellow beds is a pale pastel yellow or locally a more accentuated lemon yellow. The grey in itself is an ash grey, sometimes darker with a drift towards a grey-violet tint. Careful observations in the “dolomie bicolori” reveal that the chromatic alternation is partly enhanced by folding, but it is also an original sedimentary feature. A first dark-grey, locally marly, dolomitic bed marks the beginning of the bichromatic alternation. The “dolomie bicolori” are also exposed in the Campo Lungo area (Western Simano nappe), where they are described in detail by Two different groups of facies characterise the sedimentary cover of the Simano nappe: one is observed along the upper and normal flank in the SE of Val Soi (lower limb of the Claro syncline, The stratigraphic column described for the Soja unit The unit is complexly folded and shows a core of old polycyclic gneiss. Cover sediments are best developed in the upper part of the unit, above the polycyclic basement, but the presence of arkosic sandstones and conglomerates (the so-called Soja Verrucano) on both sides of the polycyclic gneiss suggests the existence of an anticline folding the Soja unit. The “dolomie bicolori” characterise the Triassic cover ( Among the several occurrences of the Mesozoic cover of the Adula, we describe the most significant and best-exposed outcrops. These are: 1) the area around the Plattenberg summit (3041 Noteworthy are the stratigraphic nature of the contact between basement and cover and the presence of the “dolomie bicolori” in the three sections. At the Plattenberg and at the Hennasädel, where the stratigraphic column is more complete, there are several lines of evidences suggesting important sedimentary gap and the presence of syn-sedimentary faults. The stratigraphic content of the Lower Valser slice differs from that of the Upper Slice. Triassic lithologies and well-known marker horizons are missing in the Upper Valser slice, thus we focus especially on the Lower Valser slice, where the “dolomie bicolori” are well developed. The stratigraphy of the Luzzone-Terri nappe has recently been discussed by The arkosic sandstones in the Luzzone gneiss display clear analogies with the Moosalp Formation (Permian) in the external part of the Briançonnais paleogeographic domain ( In the Liassic cover we recognise the Helvetic Stgir, Inferno and Coroi Formations that characterise the so-called Gotthard-Massivisher-Mesozoikum in the Lukmanier-Pass area ( Detailed fieldwork and mapping in the core of the Lunschania antiform around the Luzzone lake reveal the existence of several tectonic objects below the thrust plane of the Luzzone-Terri nappe ( Our mapping suggests that the Verrucano of the Luzzone-Terri nappe, that on its back transport the whole Piz Terri–Lunschania zone, is only partly folded by the Lunschania antiform and does not constitute its core at all ( Moreover the Verrucano body of the Luzzone-Terri nappe (the former Northern Soja nappe, An independent confirmation to our new interpretation arises from the stratigraphy, which is different from that established in the Luzzone-Terri nappe (absence of the Embd member as well as the Champcella and Clot-la-Cime Formations, which are replaced by an analogue of the “dolomie bicolori”). The small river east of “Alp Garzott” is filled with blocks of breccias and conglomerates fallen down from the Garzott slices exposed in the cliff south of the river. Some megaclasts embedded in a pelitic or sandy matrix show a strong hydraulic fracturation or even a cataclastic fabric, features not observed in the surrounding matrix (perfectly preserved). Fracturation, comminution and fluids precipitation occurred prior to the incorporation of the block into the matrix. Moreover in the uppermost part of the Triassic series (which is cut by an erosion surface) it is possible to observe a deformed tectonic breccia preserving former “jigsaw puzzle” structures ( These observations strongly suggest the presence of a paleofault that controlled the sedimentation in the Garzott slices. The Güida-Alpettas zone is divided in two parts. These are the Alpettas zone in the upper limb of the Lunschania antiform and the Güida zone in the lower limb. The two zones are interpreted to merge in only one zone at the hinge of the fold ( The Güida zone is characterised by two metric to hectometric quartzitic beds, the so-called Gneissquarzite ( If looked under this perspective, the stratigraphic content of the Güida zone is straightforward; above a remnant of Triassic rocks it is possible to recognise the Stgir (with its Sinemurian ammonites occurring in a limestone bed at the top of the Formation), the inferno and the Coroi Formations. The described sequence is folded in-between the Gneissquarzite (see above). The contact between the detrital formations and the underlying shales (Coroi Formation) is always sharp (in the original upper limb of the “Güida anticline” the basis of the Gneissquarzite can be erosive below the Coroi Formation). In contrast the upper part of the Gneissquarzite passes in a transitional way into an alternating series of marls and marly limestones. On the other side of the Lunschania antiform, in the more internal Alpettas zone the stratigraphic content is similar ( For the stratigraphic correlation only few paleontological data are available. However some correlations can be proposed based on a highly variable vertical record, several marker beds and the possibility to compare our sections with similar well-dated stratigraphic sections located elsewhere in the Alps. Therefore we are able to trace some lines of correlation among the different sections ( The restoration of the different units to their original relative positions in the Mesozoic is a combination of both stratigraphic and structural criteria. With the exception of the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone and the Soja unit positions it does not differ substantially from already published restorations (e.g. The “eotriassic quartzites” are the first well distributed marker bed. Some sections show a thick sedimentary formation already below this level. These sediments can be seen as a “Verrucano” and considered late Paleozoic to early Lower Triassic in age ( In the Briançonnais basin the quartzites are Lower Triassic. For the Helvetic realm, in the Mont Blanc area the arkoses are Lower to early Middle Triassic ( In some sections, there is a clear transition from silicoclastic to carbonate sedimentation, which spans from few centimetres to some metres testifying ephemeral conditions (Dorchaux Member, The progress of the carbonate front can be followed from the Luzzone-Terri nappe, where the Dorchaux Member spans 5 The St-Triphon Formation is clearly present in the Luzzone-Terri nappe but it can be followed only in the Garzott slices till the Valser slices, then it is progressively reduced, first to few limestone beds almost intercalated into a more dolomitic formation and finally to dark yellow or brown dolomitic beds located directly above the calcareous micaschists (Dorchaux Member). The St-Triphon Formation is completely absent in the Simano and Lucomagno nappes. The St-Triphon Formation in the Middle Penninic is dated as Lower to Middle Anisian ( The Champcella Formation, present in an already reduced form in the Luzzone-Terri nappe is only a far kin of the “dolomie bicolori” of the Garzott slices. Some of its characteristics can still be observed in the Lower Valser slices but then they vanish in the “dolomie bicolori” of the Adula nappe. The age of the Champcella Formation is Upper Anisian to Lower Ladinian ( The Clot-la-Cime Formation has been recognised only in the Luzzone Terri-nappe, In the Middle Penninic its age spans from the Upper Ladinian to Carnian ( The arkoses at the base of the external Simano Triassic are partly dolomitic, especially in their upper part and they are directly followed by a thick pale yellow dolomitic formation. Considered the massif encroachement of the “dolomies blondes” (mor or less the Briançonnais equivalent of the “Haupt Dolomit”, Norian) we suggest that most of the dolomitic deposition in the external Simano and northward is a direct consequence of this phenomenon. A confirmation to this scenario is suggested by a few thin and extremely rare ash-grey marly dolomites (already reported by The close association of quartzite, sandstones, dolomites, shelly-limestones, micaschists and black, non calcareous, shales is typical for the “Infralias” of the ancient authors, dated as Rethian-early Hettangian in the Glarus Alps ( The attribution to the Hettangian and Sinemurian is based on the recognition of the Stgir Formation, which is dated by Gryphea The Inferno Formation is Post-Sinemurian and correlated with the Pliensbachian–Toarcian Sexmore series in the Glarus Alps ( The Aalenian Dugny Formation in the French Alps ( The Gneissquarzite is deposited directly above the Coroi Formation of probable Aalenian age and its detrital content (qtz The Plattenberg Formation and the breccias in the Garzott slices ( Moreover the Plattenberg Breccia reworks siderolithic pebbles, contains crinoids and follows a quartzitic microconglomerate above an eroded Triassic dolomite. From this we deduce that its formation is subsequent to an emersion phase and happened during a drowning phase. The most suitable period for these formations is the Middle Jurassic, a period during which generalised emersion is observed in several domains (e.g. The thick and extremely pure marble at the Hennasädel recalls the Kimmeridgian–Thitonian marbles in the Quinten Formation (e.g. This situation is identical to the stratigraphy of the Antabia group, recently established in the Lower Penninic Antigorio nappe ( The sandstones below the “Upper Jurassic” marble can be considered as late Middle Jurassic or even early Upper Jurassic (drowning phase, see above). Prior to discussing the integrated interpretation of the tectonostratigraphic record and its eventual contribution towards a better understanding of both pre-orogenic and orogenic history of the Central Alps we need to highlight some important aspect of some sections. The discovery of the Garzott slices is important for the regional tectonics of the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone and adds important information even on the pre-orogenic significance of the zone. The stratigraphic record around the Luzzone lake indicates the presence of paleo-faults. In rifted margin the existence of high angle normal faults related to extension is known since the beginning of modern basins analysis (e.g.  In the light of these analogies we propose that the Garzott fault and the associated sediments testify the presence of a “supra-detachement” basin bordered by allochtones (the Garzott slices and maybe even the biggest Luzzone-Terri nappe). The Ultra-Adula origin of the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone ( The Gneissquarzite in the Güida-Alpettas zone has previously been interpreted as derived from the erosion of a southerly located emerged land. Since the proximity to the Adula front, the different authors proposed the Adula as a potential source ( Curiously the interpretation of an emerged Adula is still valid. In fact the stratigraphic record in the “Internes Mesozoikum” strongly supports the activity of distributed Normal faults allowing the emersion of at least part of the Adula. Emersion is in particular proved by the siderolithic near the Plattenberg and suggested by Triassic erosion followed by drowning under high-energy conditions (crinoids). Another interesting point outlined by the new stratigraphic results is the coherency of the stratigraphic record in the Northern Adula nappe. This coherency speaks against a lithospheric mélange created in a subduction channel (e.g. The proposed mechanism could prevent sediments' off scraping and allows the preservation of the cover even in highly deformed nappes submitted to eclogitic conditions. The Briançonnais character of the Permo-Triassic in the Luzzone-Terri nappe has been demonstrated recently by The scarcity of limestones and the abundance of dolomites in the North-Penninic-Triassic argue in favour of a Helvetic character. On the other hand, thanks to its sedimentological characteristics, the “dolomie bicolori” evoke the Champcella Formation at Fanee, which in turn is an external equivalent of the Champcella Formation typical for the Briançonnais Triassic. The Valser and the Garzott slices are instructive in this regard. With the vermiculated limestones, they share the same basis with the Luzzone (Briançonnais) Triassic but continued upward with the “dolomie bicolori”. Then, toward the more external units (Adula and Simano), the St-Triphon Formation is progressively reduced, but the “dolomie bicolori” are still present. The age of the “dolomie bicolori” is probably Ladinian, as testified by the exceptional fossils founding of Moreover the following aspects are noteworthy: a) the adjacency of the North-Penninic-Triassic to the Fanee (Briançonnais) Triassic, b) the extremely reduced St-Triphon (Briançonnais) Formation at the basis of the most internal (Valser and Garzott slices) North-Penninic-Triassic and c) the fact that this reduced (or disappeared) equivalent is stratigraphically followed by a family of Ladinian facies that mimic a reduced Champcella (Briançonnais) formation. Therefore several lines of evidences suggest that the North-Penninic-Triassic was deposited on the banks of the great Briançonnais basin. We propose that the units bearing this kind of Triassic represent the external limit of the Briançonnais Triassic paleogeographic domain. In its most external part, the Simano nappe (which is characterised by the “dolomie bicolori” in its internal part) shares the same Triassic that is normally ascribed to the Helvetic domain. A clear Helvetic Triassic is omnipresent over the immediately adjacent Lucomagno nappe and just to the north in the Gotthard massif (see These observations indicate that, during the Triassic, the Briançonnais paleogeographic domain was located southwards from the Helvetic domain. It has probably been separated from the European plate sensu stricto by Jurassic rifting (see An apparent astonishing situation that results from the stratigraphic record in the distal European margin, south of the Gotthard, is the absence of strong subsidence during the Middle Jurassic, a period that corresponds with the onset of magmatic activity in the Penninic oceans (e.g. In this section first we focus on the timing of rifting and subsidence evolution in the internal Helvetic and Lower Penninic nappes and then we propose some working-hypothesis in order to explain our observations (keeping in mind that, as highlighted by The Jurassic stratigraphic column of the Scopi and Peidener zones in the “Gotthard Massivischer Mesozoikum” finds a natural continuation in that of the Luzzone-Terri nappe ( At the beginning of Middle Jurassic, the area south of the Aar massif was being filled by the Aalenian shales, whose thickness is still remarkable in the Scopi zone (500 This wide zone of emerged land is intimately associated with oceanic crust: the Misox zone and the Valser slices are rich in MORB-type metamafic ( The combination of our tectonostratigraphic data with existing geochemical data suggests that, in the North Penninic basin, in the most distal part of the European margin, crustal thinning, break-off and magmatic activity were coupled with uplift and only moderate localised subsidence. Classical rifting models ( A first hypothesis to account for the observed paleobathymetric evolution is that in the distal European margin the crust was not homogeneously thinned. Several unthinned high (preserved) separated several fault-bounded “deep” basins (mostly subducted) characterised by stretched crust. A second hypothesis is that progressive lithospheric thinning could be compensated by increasing buoyancy, it results in a delayed subsidence even in the most internal part of rifting. Some recent developments in understanding rifting dynamics seem to support our second hypothesis: The above-mentioned effects on the evolution of distal margins could explain the generalised presence of emerged lands (or islets) during the Middle Jurassic in the Distal European Margin of the Alps and in the Briançonnais domain. In fact there is evidence for several highs in the distal part of the margin even further to the west of our study area ( The “rising area” in the middle of the Alpine rifting and extending from the distal Helvetic margin to the Briançonnais (already splendidly illustrated by In the distal European margin the end of the subsidence inhibition and the beginning of generalised subsidence started probably just before the Upper Jurassic. The omnipresent Upper Jurassic limestone (Quinten Formation) on the proximal and distal Helvetic margin testifies the accomplishment of this event. The recently reported hydrothermal activity at ~ At the Hennasädel the Adula shows post-Triassic erosion, drowning and subsequent sealing with Upper Jurassic post-rift sediments of South-Helvetic type (Quinten Formation or even better the Antabia group, see The Garzott slices show an analogue scenario. The two units were probably separated by the Valser slices (see later), which contain “ophiolitic” material originated from a depleted mantle source ( Even if located further to the south the Güida-Alpettas zone shares some analogies with the Adula-Garzott problem. There the post-Aalenian clastic sequence is separated in two parts by several metres of marls and marly limestones (see The basaltic manifestation in the North Penninic domain is followed by thousand of metres of mostly Cretaceous calcschists ( The Middle Jurassic uplift and the late Jurassic generalised subsidence are separated by a spasmodic distensive phase during which submarine breccia (Plattenberg and Garzott), MORB (Misox) and allochtones (Garzott and maybe Luzzone and Güida-Alpettas) were created. This particular protracted history is not unique to the studied transect. Noteworthy are the analogies existing between the Niesen Middle Jurassic substratum in the Prealps ( Thus since the scale involved is larger than the local or regional context, the explanation should be of first order ( We explain this protracted history as follows (partly inspired by The early phase of rifting is responsible for delocalised crustal thinning and the formation of the Helvetic basins. The Lower and Middle Jurassic lithospheric thinning is responsible for the creation of the rising area between the internal South Helvetic and the Briançonnais domains by the mechanism evocated in Given the complex tectonic situation around the Adula front ( The Ultra-Adula origin of the zone, suggested by The Grava unit is thrusted above the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone and is rooted in the Misox zone, above the Aul unit, the Valser slices and the Adula nappe. However it is folded below the Adula front for several kilometres. To the north, the Grava unit is thrusted above the External Massifs and the Infra-Helvetic nappes. The part of the unit folded below the Adula nappe is a portion of the thrusting plane and it is probably not the original front. The rootless units located below this plane could be part of the same tectonic system: an “overriding-complex” that, originated from the North Penninic basin, has been thrusted above the distal and the proximal Helvetic margin. The Piz-Terri–Lunschania zone could be part of the “overriding-complex”. In fact the “root-zone” of the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone is apparently sandwitched and smashed between the Adula nappe above and the overturned Grava unit below, a situation that gives to the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone a rootless character. The pre-rift stratigraphy from the Briançonnais carbonate platform to the Helvetic lands is extremely coherent if an Ultra-Adula origin of the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone is considered but become too complex and partitioned for the quiet Triassic period if the zone is regarded as rooted below the Adula nappe. For paleogeographic coherency the Luzzone-Terri nappe should be rooted between the Aul unit (where the Triassic comprises several tens of metres of (vermiculated?) limestones) and the Garzott slices, the Garzott slices on their side should be rooted between the Luzzone-Terri nappe and the Valser slices. The Valser slices are rooted between the Aul unit and the Adula nappe. Thus the tectonic order from below to above is: Adula nappe, Valser slices, Garzott slices, Luzzone-Terri nappe, Aul unit and Grava unit. The Güida-Alpettas zone is tectonically intercalated between the Luzzone-Terri nappe and the Grava unit. Its precise position, relative to the Aul unit is still unknown. The Darlun zone consists of several imbricated slices thrusted above the Luzzone-Terri nappe. Northeastward it's flexured around the Adula front above the overturned internal Alpettas zone ( In summary, the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone is considered as a klippe of Ultra-Adula origin that, together with the Grava unit, “climbed over” the Adula nappe during early subduction and then has finally been overtaken by the Adula front during the final uplift of the eclogitic nappe. The Piz Terri–Lunschania zone is thus part of an “Internal Klippen Belt” ( The existence of the Luzzone-Terri fold ramps suggests us the manner in which the Luzzone-Terri nappe achieves the difference in displacement with the Adula nappe. Fold ramps obviously need a ramp. The latter is in direct contact with the deepest part of the developing thrusting complex. In the case of the Penninic nappes of Ultra-Adula origin, the deepest portion of the complex is represented by the Garzott slices, in an advanced position, and by the Lower Valser slices in a recessed position. Both are slices (Schuppenzones) and both share the same typology of North-Penninic-Triassic facies (which evolve quickly from internal to external area), thus they can be seen as adjacent during their pre-orogenic history (Triassic) and then genetically linked during the orogenesis (Schuppenzonen). We have suggested a supra-detachment affinity for the Jurassic stratigraphic record in the Garzott slices ( Considered the evolution of the Piz Terri–Lunschania zone and that of the Grava unit (see above) the most suitable scenario is that the Garzott slices together with the Valser slices are part of the ramp that allowed the overriding (from an Ultra-Adula to the current position); they have been “sampled” by the advancing penninic mass. During the pre-orogenic history the Garzott slices are part of a supra-detachment system, thus they are separated from an underlying exhumed basement by a detachment system (of which the Garzott fault is part). Since this basement is not currently present (the peculiarity of the Misox zone, compared to the South Penninic ocean, is the scarcity of preserved exhumed mantle rocks) we speculate that it has been subducted with the Adula nappe below the ramp (the rodingite of Alpe Duria and Cima di Gagnone are good candidates, as the Alpe Arami or Chiavenna peridotite and the mafic and ultramafic in the Southern Steep Belt). Thus a logical conclusion is that the Jurassic detachment, which allowed crustal thinning during rifting, acted as a ramp for the “detached” units during the Tertiary collision. In this contribution we reported new tectonostratigraphic information from the Central Alps, along a profile located between the Helvetic External Massifs and the Briançonnais Middle Penninic units. Our results suggest that the Jurassic rifting separated the Briançonnais paleogeographic domains from the Helvetic margin by complex and protracted extension. The future deep-water rifted margin stayed at shallower conditions during rifting paroxysm and the first magmatic activity. The distal margin was characterised by a diffuse rising area with only moderately subsiding basins above a thinned continental and proto-oceanic crust. This apparent contradiction is explained by the isostatic response of the lithosphere to density changes in the mantle by heating, mineral phase transition and liquid trapping and by the fact that extreme thinning occurred in a second protracted step. The resulting system is isostatically buoyant. The lost of the buoyancy forces and the protracted extension are responsible for the delamination of the rising area followed by strong subsidence. The hints of this second phase are recorded in the enigmatic “Callovo-Oxfordian” breccias distributed in the Penninic domain all along the chain. The northern border of the rising area was characterised by a Triassic substratum different from the typical Briançonnais Triassic and even from the Helvetic one. This new group of Triassic facies is defined here for the first time and is called the North-Penninic-Triassic. This particular Triassic, characterised by the Ladinian “dolomie bicolori” was deposited on the banks of the Briançonnais basin directly south of the Helvetic domain, thus is likely to have acted as connection between the Briançonnais carbonate platform and the Helvetic lands. The eclogitic Adula nappe is characterised by this particular stratigraphic association, this, together with the coherency of the stratigraphic record in the Northern Adula nappe and surrounding areas, questions the idea of a lithospheric mélange in the Adula nappe. The great and famous eclogitic nappe is more likely to be a coherent alpine nappe that during Mesozoic time experienced a peculiar geodynamic history in the frame of alpine paleogeography. During Tertiary collision the Adula nappe acted as a single tectonic object in a coherent tectonic context. In this scenario the reactivation of Mesozoic extensional structures played a major role in allowing Adula subduction, the Penninic overriding above it and in creating the structural complexity of the Central Alps. FG acknowledges support of the