The degradation of twenty-one low-molecular-weight organic carboxylates has been studied at 90 and 180°C, in a synthetic Bayer liquor consisting of 6mol kg−1 aqueous NaOH solution, for periods of up to 36days. The reactions were monitored and the major degradation products identified by HPLC and NMR spectroscopy. The carboxylates chosen for the study were either possible intermediates or known products arising from the decomposition of organic matter in the Bayer process. Aliphatic carboxylates without hydroxyl substituents were stable at 90°C but decomposed at 180°C, except for formate, acetate, oxalate and succinate. The corresponding aromatic carboxylates were stable even at 180°C. Both aliphatic and aromatic carboxylates with hydroxyl substituents were unstable at 90 °C except for lactate and 4-hydroxy-benzoate. The most frequently detected decomposition products for both aliphatic and aromatic carboxylates were formate, acetate, oxalate, succinate and lactate. Phenolate was also observed for some aromatic carboxylates. These products are briefly discussed with reference to possible mechanisms for the degradation reactions.Organic matter enters the Bayer process during dissolution of bauxite ore in concentrated sodium hydroxide solution at elevated temperatures. This is significant as it is well known that the presence of some organic species, particularly oxalate, in Bayer process liquors has deleterious outcomes with respect to both product quality and quantity ( Organic matter in Bayer liquors is derived from two main sources: plant root systems that penetrate deep into the bauxite deposits from overlying vegetation ( Most information currently available in the public domain about the LMW organic compounds in Bayer liquors is related to their qualitative identification. Only a few studies have reported on their reactivity or the mechanism(s) by which they are transformed into the more stable species, such as oxalate, acetate and formate, that are routinely found in these liquors ( Previous studies of the degradation of organic compounds in highly alkaline aqueous solutions used gas chromatography (GC) as the analytical method ( To provide insights into the long term degradation of LMW organic carboxylates in Bayer liquors the compounds chosen were allowed to react in a synthetic Bayer liquor consisting of 6 Experiments were conducted at 90 and 180 Reactions in aqueous concentrated caustic solutions at 90 °C were carried out in 50 At 180 The reactions of all compounds were performed in duplicate; no significant differences in the degradation products were detected. The sodium salts of twenty-one organic carboxylates were chosen initially for investigation. All compounds were analytical grade, purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA), Fluka (Germany), or BDH Chemicals (UK). A preliminary study of the sodium salts of caprate (decanoate) and myristate (tetradecanoate) showed that they were essentially insoluble in 6    The  The data obtained from the two analytical techniques (HPLC and NMR) were complementary and provided insights into the behaviour of the selected LMW organic species in highly alkaline solutions ( The complementary nature of the HPLC and NMR data is demonstrated by detailed examination of the reaction of malate. The chromatograms of malate after several days of reaction in caustic solution under various conditions are shown in It is notable that the amount of fumarate formed is not as great as appears from visual inspection of the chromatograms (Fig. ). This is because the UV absorptivity ( At 180 °C degradation of malate occurred much more rapidly than at 90 A quantitative analysis (mass balance) of the present results was not possible for three reasons. First, gaseous and/or highly volatile products (H It is well known that oxygen can have a significant effect on the rates and mechanisms of degradation of organics in concentrated alkaline solutions ( First, the degradation of malate was studied in an autoclave filled with N Of the 19 compounds investigated in detail, only six (acetate, oxalate, succinate, benzoate, phthalate, and terephthalate) were found to be stable at both 90 By monitoring the target compounds over periods of up to 36 A number of general trends are apparent regarding the decomposition products. All decomposing carboxylates, except 4-hydroxy-benzoate, produced oxalate and formate. Acetate was formed from all carboxylates containing hydroxyl groups, except for 4-hydroxy-benzoate (no acetate detected) and malonate (no hydroxyl group but acetate formed). Lactate and phenolate are intermediates in some of the degradation reactions. Lactate was observed as a degradation product of aliphatic hydroxy-carboxylates but itself degrades to oxalate, acetate and formate ( Under such circumstances intermediate phenolate may degrade to aliphatic carboxylates or react with itself or the starting material to produce condensed aromatic compounds. This is particularly likely for gallate which is known to oxidise easily ( The formation of thermally stable C The results presented above show that the LMW carboxylates formed in plant Bayer liquors from the degradation of biopolymers present in bauxite ores, will decompose further in hot caustic solutions to acetate, oxalate, and formate. However, there does not appear to be a single degradation pathway. Two mechanisms have been proposed to explain the degradation of C Results from the present study indicate that aliphatic and aromatic mono- and di-carboxylate ions without secondary hydroxyl groups are stable in 6 The decomposition of malate in the absence of oxygen provides further insights into the mechanisms of the degradation of LMW aliphatic carboxylates in concentrated NaOH(aq). At 90 When reacted with 6 Of the 19 compounds studied in detail only acetate, oxalate, succinate, benzoate, phthalate, and terephthalate were stable at temperatures up to 180 This work was funded by Australian and international alumina companies (Alcoa World Alumina, BHP Billiton/Worsley Alumina, Hydro Aluminium Metal Products, Rio Tinto Alcan, and UC Rusal) through the AMIRA International collaborative research project P507C entitled “Thermodynamic Characterisation of Organics in Bayer Liquor”, and by the Australian Government through the Australian Research Council (Linkage Grant No. LP0776541). The authors thank Dr Kate Rowen for advice regarding the mechanisms.