Use of fluidization phenomenon is increasing day by day in the mineral beneficiation. Owing to the physical properties of the mineral particles, misplacement happens during the segregation. The present study aims at understanding the effect of fin type vertical baffle along with parameters such as superficial velocity, overflow height, feed composition and Mean Particle Size Ratio (MPSR) on the particle misplacement and separation in a liquid solid fluidized bed separator. The particle misplacement was evaluated quantitatively using “Misplacement Index”. It was found that the fin type vertical baffles have negligible or no effect on the particle misplacement. Moreover, change in the superficial velocity, overflow height, feed composition and MPSR substantially affects the particle misplacement. Further, there exists a critical feed composition where the misplacement is low. In addition to this, there also exists a critical MPSR where the fluidized bed operates in a completely mixed state and the point could be considered as the starting of the layer inversion.Liquid-solid fluidization has numerous industrial applications such as mineral processing, catalytic cracking, pharmaceutical etc. Unit operations such as jigging, spiral separator, fluidized bed separators, magnetic separations, floatation, selective flocculation etc. are used for enrichment of mineral/coal values during beneficiation A density separator is required to separate the particles based on the difference in the density. However, owing to the wide size and density difference of the feed mineral particles in the fluidized bed separators, misplacement of the particles occurs during separation. One of the major causes of particle misplacement is the occurrence of partial layer inversion phenomenon inside the fluidized bed separator However, complete layer inversion leads to the complete segregation of particle      The misplacement index can be negative or positive value. The fluidized bed separator operates in a complete mixing state when the misplacement index value is zero. When the value of misplacement index is away from the zero i.e. positive or negative bed operates in a segregated state. Further, when the value of misplacement index is more towards the positive or negative maxima (extreme values for complete segregated condition) better is the degree of segregation and less misplacement of particles. Three extreme values of misplacement index is possible when particles are completely segregated, when particles are completely mixed, when particle are completely segregated due to complete layer inversion, The heavier particles are considered as the component for determining the misplacement index extreme values mentioned above. Normalized misplacement index takes only the positive values between “0” to “100” unlike misplacement index. For complete mixing, the value is zero and for complete particle segregation, the value is 100. The detail about the “misplacement index” and “normalized misplacement index” for their determination and applicability can be found elsewhere The literature review on particle segregation in a fluidized bed separator revels the following Internals such as baffles, packing etc., were used to enhance the particle segregation. Horizontal baffles were predominantly used in gas-solid fluidized bed separators. Use of baffles in liquid-solid fluidized bed separators is limited. The baffles are used to restrict the particle movement inside a fluidized bed separator. This restriction sometimes helps in reducing the unwanted particle mixing The present study aims at understanding the effect of baffle on the particle misplacement and segregation. Fin type vertical baffles were used for the present study. Iron ore, and quartz binary mixtures were used for the misplacement study. The degree of particle misplacement is studied using “misplacement index” and “normalized misplacement index”. The binary mixtures of iron ore and quartz having specific gravity of 5.16 and 2.61 respectively were used for the misplacement and segregation studies. The specific gravity of the particle were determined using specific gravity bottle. Superficial velocity, size ratio of particles, composition of mixtures and number of vertical fins are varied for performing the experiments. The experimental set up used for performing the hydrodynamics and misplacement studies consists of fluidization column having diameter of 10 cm, and height of 150 cm. Outlets along the axial direction of column used for collecting the samples. The outlets are at a distance of 12 cm, 37 cm, 62 cm, 87 cm and 112 cm from the distributor present at the bottom of column. The details about the experimental set up are available elsewhere in literature Fin type of vertical baffles is used for the present study. The fluidization experiments were carried out using binary mixture of iron ore and quartz particles with different particle sizes. All experiments were performed in batch condition. During each experimental run, the requisite binary mixture sample with a specific composition was pored into to the column before starting the water flow into the column. For hydrodynamic studies pressure drop and expanded bed heights were noted down with the increase of superficial water velocity. For understanding the particle misplacement, samples were collected from the different collection points along the axis of the column. The collected samples are dried in an oven at 110 ± 10 °C. The iron ore particles present in the dried samples were separated out in PERMOROLL magnetic separator. The non magnetic fraction is the quartz. The weight of the iron ore and quartz particles were noted down. The weight values were used to determine the concentration of iron ore and quartz. These data were used for determining the misplacement index and/or normalized misplacement index. The results from the use of baffles were compared with the no baffle system. Some of the results of no baffle system (i.e. when no baffle is used) were taken from the author’s previous work for comparison reported elsewhere The effect of vertical fin type baffles on the fluidization hydrodynamics of binary mixture of iron ore and quartz particles were investigated. The hydrodynamic studies were carried out using 70:30 (iron ore:quartz) binary mixture and two different MPSR i.e. 7.4 and 1. The With further increase of superficial velocity an intermediate zone is created. Increasing the superficial velocity to 0.71 cm/s, it was observed that there exists three zones i.e. top, intermediate and bottom with clear interfaces. Quartz particles with very low terminal velocity will report to the top zone. This top zone may contain few ultrafine iron ore particles whose terminal velocities are very low. However, the top zone is dominated by quartz particles. Similarly, iron ore particles with very high terminal velocities will report to the bottom zone. This bottom zone may contain few large size quartz particles whose terminal velocities are very high. However, bottom zone is dominated by iron ore particles. Apart from above two extreme cases there are many quartz and iron ore particle whose terminal velocities are same (having intermediate terminal velocities) exists in same layer create an intermediate zone of mixed particles. Hence, there exists a zone dominated by quartz, another zone dominated by iron ore and another intermediate mixed zone with two clear interfaces. One interface is between the zone dominated by quartz with the intermediate mixed zone. Similarly, the other interface is between the zone dominated by iron ore particles with intermediate mixed zone. Further, with the increase of superficial velocity to 1.06 cm/s, it was observed that three zones exists as earlier but there is no clear interface. The transition from one zone to other is smooth and continuous. Moreover, at superficial velocity of 1.06 cm/s, the height of top zone can be considered as more compared to the superficial velocity of 0.71 cm/s. With further increase of superficial velocities more and more number of quartz and iron ore particles is reporting in the same layer along the axial direction of the fluidization column. This phenomenon triggers the disappearance of the clear interface gradually. Furthermore, at higher superficial velocity the bed density decreases and no more hindered condition prevails. Because of which separation of particles are not sharp and clear interface disappears. The misplacement and separation of the particles were evaluated using misplacement index or normalized misplacement index. Iron ore particles were taken as the desired component for the calculation of the misplacement index. The axial concentration profile of iron ore and quartz particles for different baffle system are shown in Further, it was also observed that although the separation of particles is not fully complete, it is possible to separate out pure quartz particles from the binary mixture. For the binary mixture with 70% iron ore and 30% quartz maximum separation will happen when misplacement index value is 1.429 or −1.429 Overflow height is the bed height from the distributor above which all the particles present are considered as the upper zone particles and below this height all the particles present are considered as the bottom zone particles. In other words, one can consider this height to be cutoff height for separation.  In this particular case the MPSR was maintained at 7.4 (i.e. Iron ore size = −150 + 100 µm, quartz size = −1000 + 850 µm) and velocity was maintained at 2.12 cm/s. for experimental run. The quartz particles are sufficiently larger than iron ore particles. The results from Superficial velocity was varied from 0.35 to 3.12 cm/s for observing its effect on the misplacement index in the fluidizing column fitted with 3-fin vertical baffle. MPSR was varied (0.13, 1.0 and 7.4) to observe the effect on the misplacement of particles in the fluidizing column fitted with 5-fin vertical baffle. The significance of critical MPSR is that for every binary mixture there exists a critical MPSR beyond which layer inversion happens. This is the point where the bed is in completely mixed state. The real ores may contain more than one mineral in such cases the wanted mineral can be considered as one component and rest all minerals would be considered as the gangue mineral. This group of gangue minerals together can be considered as the 2nd component. Then we can say MPSR would be the mean particle size ratio of gangue particles (2nd component) to the wanted mineral (1st component).  Iron ore concentration in the feed was varied (i.e. 50%, 60% and 70%) to observe the effect on the misplacement of particles in the fluidizing column fitted with vertical baffle. The effect of fin type vertical baffle on the particle misplacement and separation was studied in a circular cross-section column. Further, effect of other parameters such as superficial velocity, overflow height, feed composition and MPSR was also studied in a circular cross-section column fitted with fin type vertical baffle. The following conclusions could be drawn: The number of baffle fins have little or no effect on the particle misplacement, when baffle fins are below five. The fin type of vertical baffles used in the study does not provide sufficient wall effect for affecting the particle misplacement. The particle misplacement increases with the increase of the overflow height and superficial velocity. There exists a critical feed composition where the particle misplacement is low and separation is high. It is possible to collect a pure component (either iron ore or quartz in the present study) in a binary mixture even if the complete separation has not taken place. The overflow height and superficial velocity has to be adjusted to achieve the above. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support given by