The paper is concerned with a simple hydrometallurgical method for selective recovery of copper and cobalt from industrial copper converter slag. The following consecutive stages are proposed: roasting of the slag in reduction conditions to produce Cu–Co–Fe–Pb alloy, electrolytic dissolution of the alloy in an ammonia–ammonium chloride solution, ammoniacal leaching of the slime, selective copper and cobalt electrowinning. Cu27–Co6–Fe64–Pb1.5 alloy was a five-phase system and did not dissolve uniformly during electrolysis. This resulted in the separation of the metals, wherein iron remained in the slime, while copper and cobalt were components of slime, electrolyte and cathodic deposit. A mechanism of the alloy dissolution was developed. A series of secondary processes took place in the system: precipitation of iron compounds, copper cementation with cobalt and iron; adsorption of copper and cobalt ions on the iron precipitates. Final products were metals of high purity (99.9% Cu, 92% Co).At the present time economical and environmental requirements impose the development of effective and inexpensive methods for the recovery of valuable metals from secondary sources. Significant amounts of copper and cobalt are present in low-grade metallurgical wastes, which are produced in the thousands of tons per year in copper smelters. Various methods were used to extract the metals from the copper converter slags. Hydrometallurgical treatment of the slag, including direct leaching in sulphuric acid ( To develop a new method for the recovery of copper and cobalt from the copper converter slags, cooperation between the Faculty of Non-Ferrous Metals of the AGH University of Science and Technology in Cracow and the Institute of Non-Ferrous Metals in Gliwice (Poland) was established. The following method for the processing was proposed. In the first stage, the copper converter slag was subjected to roasting in an electric furnace. The pyrometallurgical tests were performed at the Institute of Non-Ferrous Metals. Products of the reduction roasting were Cu–Co–Fe–Pb alloys with various chemical and phase compositions, which were dependent on temperature, reduction time and amounts of reducing additives. The second stage of the processing was the hydrometallurgical treatment of the reduced material in ammoniacal solutions. This research was realized at the AGH University of Science and Technology. Preliminary studies with synthetic Cu–Co–Fe alloys ( The Cu–Co–Fe–Pb alloys obtained from the industrial slag were multiphase materials. It affected the mechanism of their electrolytic dissolution in the ammoniacal solution. The results of that research are described elsewhere ( The copper converter slag used in this experimental study was taken from the copper smelter in Legnica (Poland). The chemical composition of the slag was (in wt%): Cu (1.70–5.60); Co (0.90–1.45); Pb (3.42–7.61); Fe (30.40–38.00); As (0.05–0.12); Zn (3.10–6.40); Ag (0.005–0.014); S (0.17–0.78); Ni (0.045–0.095); SiO A cuboid alloy anode (with a total area of 30 Copper and cobalt were recovered from the slimes and ammoniacal electrolytes. The slime (obtained in 8 The product of the reduction roasting was the iron base alloy with a general composition of Cu27–Co6–Fe64–Pb1.5 (in wt%). Since the slag was an industrial material, the alloy contained a few other elements (e.g. S, Ni, Si, Sn). Microstructures of the alloy are shown in The alloy was a five-phase system. The alloy matrix (phase I) was a copper rich (90%) solid solution with iron (6%). Some amounts of tin (2%) were also detected. Main components in irregular gray precipitates of phase II were iron (80%), copper (10.5%) and cobalt (8%). Microscopic observations showed the presence of fine precipitates (phase IIa) within the area of the phase II, however, their composition was not analyzed in details. Light gray oval precipitates represented phase III, which was a iron–copper solid solution (87% Fe, 12.5% Cu). Large black precipitates of phase IV were iron rich (75%) with addition of cobalt (10%), copper (6.5%) and nickel (3.5%). Some amounts of sulphur (3.8%) and oxygen (detected, but not analyzed) were also present. It seems that the phase IV represented a mixture of chemical compounds, i.e. sulphides and oxides of copper and iron as the residues of the copper converter slag from the pyrometallurgical treatment of copper matte. White precipitates of phase V were visible only in SEM images. They were rich in lead (91%) with some amounts of iron (5%) and copper (2%) as well as cobalt and sulphur (1%). Detailed compositions of the alloy and the individual phases are present in The volume fractions of the phases in the alloy were determined with the image analysis. These are: I – 21%, II – 25.5%, III – 24%, IV – 28% and V – 1.5%. Molar masses and densities of the main components in the alloy are similar, hence, it was assumed that the volume fractions of the phases corresponded to their mass fractions. It worth also to note, that the total contents of Cu, Co, Fe and Pb in the alloy calculated according the percentage fractions and compositions of the alloy phases were in very good accordance with the results of AAS analysis. The Cu27–Co6–Fe64–Pb1.5 alloy was dissolved during electrolysis in the ammonia–ammonium choloride chloride solution. Anodic current efficiencies were 84–100%. The dissolution of the alloy resulted in the transfer of the metals into the electrolyte, the slime and the cathodic deposit. The distribution of elements at the end of the process is given in The electrolyte contained copper, cobalt, nickel and zinc ions in the form of ammonia complexes produced in the anodic processes:  The alloy dissolution resulted in transfer of copper, cobalt, nickel and zinc into the electrolyte. Different behavior of copper corresponded with the changes of the anode potential ( Some amounts of copper and cobalt were deposited on the cathode. It was found that the cathodic deposit was a copper rich (64%) alloy with comparable percentages of cobalt and iron. Detailed compositions of the slime (total), the electrolyte and the cathodic deposit is shown in Copper and cobalt contents were, respectively, 22% and 5% in the slime (total) and approx. 72% and 23% in the electrolyte. Hence, both materials were used in further recovery stages. Detailed analysis of the experimental results allowed to propose the mechanism of the Cu27–Co6–Fe64–Pb1.5 alloy dissolution in the ammoniacal-chloride solution. In order to develop the model, some preliminary calculations were made. It was accepted that the decrement of the anode mass (Δ The masses of the metals in each phase (( Theoretical data from To determine the activity of the individual phases during the electrolytic alloy dissolution some experimental facts were taken into account: Cu Lead was detected only in the slime. Pb-rich phases did not dissolve in the ammoniacal-chloride solution ( The changes of the anode potential were accompanied by the increase in the copper ions concentration in the electrolyte. Lower amounts of copper dissolved from the alloy were accompanied by higher cobalt dissolution. The presence of metallic copper in the slime was probable, since the surface of the samples at the end of the electrolysis was copper-colored (fresh sample was gray). Mass of the insoluble solid residues corresponded to the mass of sulphur present in the dissolved alloy sample. In consideration of the above the following model of the system behavior was proposed: Copper and cobalt were dissolved anodically only from the phases I–III, according to Eqs. Iron was dissolved anodically from the phases I–IV, according to Eq.   The oxidation of   Calculated and experimental data summarized in Copper and cobalt accumulated mainly in the slime during electrolysis. Therefore, it was necessary to transfer both metals into the liquid phase for further recovery. Preliminary trial of the slime leaching with the ammonia–ammonium chloride solution was performed. 1 Larger amount of the slime (19 Ammoniacal solutions from previous stages (electrolytic dissolution of the alloy, ammoniacal leaching of the slime, filtrate after Fe Copper electrowinning was carried out from 0.5 Copper deposited in the form of spongy metal, while the cobalt deposits were deep-gray powder. The purity of deposits were 99.9% Cu with 0.1% Co after first electrolysis stage and 92.3% Co with 7.7% Cu (3.3 The method of the copper and cobalt recovery described above allowed to propose the general scheme of the slag treatment, without redundant stages. It includes: reduction roasting of the copper converter slag, the electrolytic dissolution of the obtained alloy in the ammonia– ammonium chloride solution, leaching of the slime and, finally, selective recovery of copper and cobalt from appropriate solutions. A schematic flow diagram is presented in The Cu27–Co6–Fe64–Pb1.5 alloy was dissolved anodically in the ammonia–ammonium chloride solution. It resulted in the distribution of metals with iron remaining in the slime, while copper and cobalt were components of the slime, the electrolyte and the cathodic deposit. The correlation between the alloy structure and the dissolution results was found. The mechanism of the process was also proposed. It was found that the alloy did not dissolve uniformly. A series of the secondary processes took place in the system: the precipitation of the iron compounds, which were the main components of the slime; the cementation of the copper ions with cobalt and iron; the adsorption of the copper and cobalt ions on the iron precipitates. Copper and cobalt were recovered selectively by electrolysis from the electrolyte prepared from ammoniacal and acidic solutions. The copper deposit was of high purity (99.9%), while the purity of cobalt deposits was 92%. The cathode current efficiencies were low. This research work was supported by the Polish Committee for Scientific Research under Grant No. 3 T08B 040 26.