The Neoarchaean Kalgoorlie Gold Field contains the giant Golden Mile and world-class Mt Charlotte deposits, which have been the subject of much research for over 100 years. The Golden Mile deposit is a complex array of ductile to brittle vein and breccia lodes that are predominantly hosted in the highly-fractionated Golden Mile Dolerite sill. The Fimiston lodes comprise an array of narrow lodes that evolved broadly syn- to late-formation of the regional D2 NW-trending foliation. The lodes are characterized by pyrite veinlets and disseminations, quartz veinlets and breccias, and banded quartz-carbonate veins with sericite, carbonate, and pyrite-dominated alteration. Bonanza Green-Leader, or Oroya-style, lodes, with grades in excess of 1000 g/t Au, are similar to the Fimiston-style lodes, but are characterized by abundant visible gold, native tellurium and more abundant telluride minerals within roscoelite-bearing alteration zones. The arguably structurally younger Mt Charlotte-style lodes are characterized by a pipe-shaped, coarse-grained quartz, carbonate and scheelite vein-stockwork with distinct vertically-zoned, carbonate-sericite-albite-pyrite ± pyrrhotite dominant alteration assemblages around veins within Unit 8 of the Golden Mile dolerite and porphyry dykes. The network of steep- and gently-dipping extension and shear fracture-fill veins are associated with NE-trending fault sets that cross cut the regional NW-trend. The deposit area is intruded by swarms of porphyry dykes, including syn-volcanic mafic dykes, early and volumetrically most significant c. 2.67 Ga feldspar-phyric porphyry dykes, as well as later c. 2.66‒2.65 Ga calc-alkaline hornblende-phyric dykes associated with younger c. 2.65‒2.64 Ga lamprophyre dykes. All post-volcanic dykes have similar orientations to the Fimiston lodes. The feldspar dykes are clearly overprinted by all styles of mineralization, although the relationship between hornblende-phyric and lamprophyre dykes and gold mineralization is more ambiguous. Most agree that gold mineralization was post-peak regional metamorphism of host rocks, although its relative structural timing is controversial.
                  Direct timing constraints on gold mineralization indicate that Fimiston- and Mt Charlotte-style mineralization formed within a relative short period of time around 2.64 Ga, and, as such, support a model of progressive deformation of a rheologically heterogeneous rock package late in the structural history. Fluid characteristics, combined with the structural, metamorphic and absolute timing, support description of gold mineralization at the Golden Mile as orogenic and mesozonal, and this allows direct correlation with orogenic gold deposits worldwide, which classically formed during accretion along convergent margins throughout Earth history.The Kalgoorlie Gold Field lies approximately in the centre of the well-endowed, Neoarchaean, Kalgoorlie granite-greenstone Terrane in the eastern Goldfields Province of the Yilgarn Craton in Western Australia ( Gold has been continuously produced since June 1893, when three Irish prospectors, Dan Shea, Tom Flanagan and Paddy Hannan made the first discovery of gold in surface samples of quartz in the north of the Gold Field, near the current Mt Charlotte mine. After Paddy Hannan lodged the claim on 17 August, 1893, a gold rush ensued and the Golden Mile was discovered and exploited. Production in the Gold Field peaked in 1903 with 38.124 t (1,225,700 oz) of ore at an average grade of 41.1 g/t (1.32 oz/t) mined from predominantly gold-telluride lodes ( The Gold Field has been continuously studied since gold was discovered, with the first mineralogical reports (e.g. The majority of gold deposits in the many gold fields within the well-endowed Kalgoorlie Terrane, and those elsewhere in the Province, can be directly compared to other Neoarchean gold deposits around the world (e.g. in the Superior Province of Canada). The deposits are characterized by similar host-rock associations, potassic alteration, low sulphide- and telluride-bearing ore assemblages, a post-peak metamorphic timing in mostly greenschist-facies rocks, and gold grade and lode geometry that are strongly structurally controlled within lower-order structures adjacent to first-order crustal-scale faults (see summary in The Kalgoorlie Terrane is one of several north-south elongated terranes ( Two main models have been proposed for the tectonic setting during deposition and deformation of the arc-related, 2.72‒2.69 Ga rocks of the Kalgoorlie and Kurnalpi Terranes: (1) a combination of both plume- and arc-related volcanism in an autochthonous rift developed above a westward-directed subduction zone that extended beneath the current Youanmi Terrane to the east, followed by closure and accretion of both terranes to the Proto-Yilgarn craton at 2.66‒2.63 Ga (recent references by With respect to gold mineralization, geological evidence, together with precise geochronology, shows that deposits in the majority of gold fields in the Kalgoorlie Terrane formed during accretion of the Kalgoorlie Terrane to the Youanmi Terrane, prior to stabilization of the Yilgarn craton (e.g. The Kalgoorlie Gold Field is located within the Kalgoorlie Terrane ( The Kalgoorlie Gold Field is hosted within the Kambalda Domain, in an outlier of komatiites and basalts of the Kambalda Sequence, overlain by a >3000 m-thick succession of mostly dacitic, with lesser andesitic and rhyolitic volcaniclastic, sedimentary and volcanic rocks of the Black Flag Group ( The Kambalda Sequence is unconformably overlain by four unconformity-bounded sequences of tonalite-trondhjemite-dacite (TTD) volcaniclastic and epiclastic rocks with subordinate rhyolite, dacite, andesite and tholeiitic basalt of the Kalgoorlie Sequence (Black Flag Group), and intruded by subvolcanic rhyolite and dacite sills and dykes, dolerite-gabbro sills and I-type granitoids that are spatially and temporally associated with the younger Kalgoorlie Sequence ( In addition to the synvolcanic c. 2.67 Ga rhyolite and dacite sills and dykes that are associated with the Kalgoorlie Sequence ( The Kalgoorlie Gold Field is hosted in a thrusted and folded sequence of rocks that are dissected and offset by the regionally NNW-trending Boulder Lefroy-Golden Mile Fault zone that can be traced over a strike length of about 100 km (e.g. The widespread structural geometry of the Kalgoorlie Gold Field is the result of D2 deformation, when the regional stratigraphy and D1 thrusts were tilted into the current steep attitude, overprinted by a penetrative, subvertical foliation, sheared, faulted and folded. Shearing is variably described as sinistral ( Gold mineralization is hosted in all rock types within the Gold Field, but the Golden Mile Dolerite is the principal host to ore. The distribution and style of gold mineralization and lode geometry in all deposits is controlled by a complex interplay of structural development, rheological and chemical contrasts in host rocks, and dyke intrusion (e.g. In the Golden Mile, gold is mined from an array of ductile to brittle-style, stringer-, vein- and breccia-lodes that have been classified into four groups based on orientation; namely Main (320/90-85SW), Caunter (280–300/70SSW), Easterly (160/70-90ENE), and Cross (220–230/65-80SE) lodes. In contrast, gold at Mount Charlotte is mined from stockworks of coarse-grained sheeted veins that are spatially associated with brittle dextral-reverse faults. The other deposits of the Gold Field contain at least one of these two “end-member” ore types, which have been described as Fimiston- and Mt Charlotte-style ( Fimiston-style ore comprises approximately-planar, steeply-dipping lodes of fine-grained silica-sericite-sulphide-telluride bearing quartz-carbonate veinlets, crackle- and cockade- breccias, banded chalcedonic quartz-carbonate veins, and stringer zones that define millimetre- to centimetre- scale proto- to ultramylonites that are interlayered with, or grade into, lenses of microbreccia and cataclasite ( Gold is typically refractory, either as micron-scale inclusions in fine-grained (less than 0.1 mm) inclusion-rich pyrite or as inclusion-poor auriferous pyrite. Hence, the occurrence of fine-grained pyrite is directly related to gold distribution. In high-grade zones (up to 10,000 g/t, typically >50 g/t), native gold, tellurium with a range of telluride minerals ( Local bonanza grade shoots (up to 100 000 g/t Au) are spatially related to carbonaceous metasedimentary units, and are characterized by abundant free gold associated with native tellurium and rarely, mercury ( Zoning within the Golden Mile is evident, with an overall increase in Sb/Au in the tennantite-tetrahedrite group minerals, as well as an increase in Au/Ag ratio in the free gold with depth ( Charlotte-style ore describes stockworks of locally coarse-grained, open-space textured, dilational, quartz-, carbonate-, albite- and scheelite- bearing sheeted veins with distinct alteration haloes (     The rock sequence at Kalgoorlie is metamorphosed to upper greenschist facies mineral assemblages (350‒400 °C; Petrographic studies indicate that the gold-related alteration assemblages in both the Golden Mile and Mt Charlotte just postdate peak regional greenschist-facies metamorphism ( At Mt Charlotte, temperature and pressure estimates calculated from mineral stability fields and compositions indicate temperatures and pressures of 325 to over 400 °C and 100–400 MPa with a deposit-wide thermal zonation of up to +100 °C from top to bottom ( Several fluid inclusion studies have been carried out on the Golden Mile and Mt Charlotte deposits. However, the quality of the data is variable, and in the Golden Mile, in particular, the data are not all geologically well constrained as samples are from different lodes within this extensive orebody, hence making it difficult to reconcile all the results.  Different generations of quartz from Mt Charlotte stockwork veins (as defined by Conventional sulphur isotope analyses on pyrite from Golden Mile mineralization have been performed by In contrast with the Golden Mile, conventional sulphur isotope analyses of pyrite from Mt Charlotte ore yield a relatively restricted range of dominantly positive  Oxygen isotope ( The Pb-isotopic character of the ores from the Golden Mile ( Lead isotope compositions of samples from Mt Charlotte show a restricted range of mixing between host-rock and ore-fluid Pb (  Strontium compositions in samples of Mt Charlotte ore cluster tightly between 0.7013 and 0.7016 ( Carbonates from the No. 4 lode in the Golden Mile (mean = −3.3 ± 0.6‰; The distinct There is a longstanding controversy regarding the timing of gold mineralization in the Kalgoorlie Gold Field. Some authors describe Fimiston-, Oroya- and Mount Charlotte-style gold as products of multiple overprinting mineralizing events during about 45 m.y. of deformation (e.g. Most agree that gold mineralization was post-peak regional metamorphism but the structural timing of the Fimiston lodes is disputed. Some workers conclude that the lodes formed early (pre to early D1) as they are supposedly cut by all structures in the deposit area including the gentle west-dipping D2 thrusts that locally host bonanza Green-Leader, or Oroya-style, lodes (e.g. The Mt Charlotte-style stockworks are generally described as a network of fracture- and shear- veins within faulted blocks of rheologically-contrasting Unit 8 of the Golden Mile Dolerite or porphyry dykes within Hannans Lake Serpentinite, and are spatially associated with, or bound by steep- and gently-dipping fault sets that cut the regional D2, and are variably described as D3 or D4 and include reactivated earlier structures ( Problems in interpreting both the timing relationships between the gold lodes and the porphyry dykes that intrude the area, as well as zircon ages from the more mafic dykes, have fuelled the controversy on the timing of the Fimiston gold mineralization (see discussion in This giant ore system therefore formed after c. 2.69 Ga basic magmatism, emplacement of the Golden Mile Dolerite at c. 2.68 Ga, and deposition of volcano-sedimentary Black Flag Beds and coeval intrusion of feldspar-phyric porphyry dykes at c. 2.67 to 2.66 Ga ( Direct dating of ore-related, hydrothermal monazite and xenotime in ore samples from the structurally late, brittle Mt Charlotte deposit yield ages of 2655 ± 13 Ma ( A late chlorite-stable event overprints the Golden Mile and Mt Charlotte deposits and has been dated at 2603 ± 18 Ma (xenotime U-Pb; Many hypotheses have been proposed for the genesis of the giant accumulation of gold at Kalgoorlie Gold Field. They have variously been considered to be: (1) synvolcanic deposits associated with the overlying felsic volcanic sequence or felsic porphyry dykes ( The Golden Mile is a synvolcanic, epithermal gold-telluride deposit where hydrothermal activity is related to synvolcanic felsic magmatism, with fluids derived from either seawater or low- latitude meteoric water, and gold deposition resulted from fluid desulphidation during interaction with chemically-favourable wall rocks. Mt Charlotte, on the other hand, is described as more akin to other epigenetic lode-gold orogenic deposits that are associated with regional metamorphism and deformation ( Both deposits are epigenetic, but formation was separated in time by a discrete deformation event (D3: The Fimiston lodes represent shallow-level epithermal-style gold-telluride mineralization that formed from deep crustal-derived, magmatic-metamorphic hydrothermal fluids that experienced phase immiscibility due to dramatic pressure fluctuations during repeated seismic events, and mixing with downward penetrating seawater. The Fimiston lodes were overprinted by both epigenetic epi- to meso-zonal gold veins (Green Leader) that formed from a magmatic fluid associated with a granite body buried beneath the deposit, and later mesozonal orogenic style veins (Mt Charlotte) that resulted from ascending, homogeneous, low-salinity fluids that also underwent phase immiscibility, fluid reaction and equilibration with interflow black shale units containing synsedimentary pyrite ( Both deposits formed in an epigenetic setting where gold deposit formation was purely the result of orogenic processes, with no significant direct involvement of local magmatic fluids, but rather a single, deeply-sourced, relatively homogeneous, mineralizing fluid that was sourced during regional metamorphism within the greenstone lithologies lower in the continental crust (e.g. Despite the differences in the two deposits, they have many characteristics in common ( Furthermore, precise geochronology indicates that both styles of mineralization formed at roughly the same time, within about 10 m.y. of each other, around 2.64 Ga: that is, about 20‒30 m.y. after the peak of intrusion of the feldspar-phyric porphyry dykes (c. 2.67 Ga) and after deposition of the Black Flag volcaniclastic-sedimentary rocks in the area (c. 2.69 to 2.655 Ga; The systematics at the site of gold deposition, and how the gold-bearing fluid interacted with the host rocks to produce a gold deposit are well described at Kalgoorlie. It is known that the system operated on a kilometre scale (at least), next to an active crustal-scale fault system that accommodated rapid uplift and erosion of several kilometres of strata before deposition of volcanic and clastic sedimentary basinal rocks. These faults also provided an extremely efficient plumbing system for magmas, including lithosphere-derived lamprophyres, and hydrothermal fluids from the deep crust/lithosphere to reach the interconnected mesh of upper crustal structures in an uplifted block (inlier) of ultramafic to mafic greenstone rocks within the giant Gold Field. The syn-deformation, syn-accretion, structural control on mineralization is also well described as is its late timing relative to regional metamorphism of adjacent host rocks. Ore fluids consisted of an originally reduced, low-salinity, CO Another important factor to consider is the relationship of the Kalgoorlie Gold Field relative to other deposits in the Terrane and indeed the Province. A regional geochronological study showed that the period of gold deposition at Kalgoorlie overlaps that of gold deposition at all other dated deposits in the Kalgoorlie Terrane, but is about 10 m.y. younger than deposits in the neighbouring Kurnalpi Terrane to the east (  At the tectonic scale, Kalgoorlie lies close to a major lithospheric boundary separating the Kalgoorlie Terrane with young (c. 2.7 Ga) lithosphere to the east from older (>3.0 Ga) lithosphere to the west ( Hence, the giant Kalgoorlie Gold Field was formed by a fortuitous conjunction of highly favourable parameters, with the Golden Mile located in the most favourable structural position where there was duplication of a competent block of Golden Mile Dolerite in a locked-up NW-trending anticlinal hinge segmented by NE-trending cross faults. In all prospectivity mapping studies, using a variety of derived critical parameters and a variety of methodologies to combine them, the Kalgoorlie Gold Field inevitably stands out as the only district where all parameters were in alignment, as summarized by The Kalgoorlie Gold Field comprises two dominant ore types, both of which are consistent with deposition from a juvenile, potassic, low salinity, CO Most of the research carried out by NMV on the eastern Goldfields Province of the Yilgarn Craton was as an ARC Linkage- and AMIRA P680-funded postdoctoral research fellow at the Centre for Global Metallogeny, now the Centre for Exploration Targeting, at the University of Western Australia (UWA). Contributions by DIG and NJMcN are based on the culmination of over 30 years independent research and collaborative work with others in the gold research group at UWA, and with Dr. Rich Goldfarb of USGS and late Prof. Rob Kerrich of the University of Saskatchewan. Dr Richard Vielreicher is also thanked for his encouragement and proof reading skills despite extremely difficult personal circumstances. Two anonymous reviewers and Prof. Santosh from the GSF Editorial Board are thanked for comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript.