The coarsening behavior of copper nanopowders (50–150nm in size) during mechanical milling was investigated as a function of milling atmosphere and milling time. Pure copper powders were milled under argon and air atmospheres for up to 80h and the crystal structure, microstructure, and composition of the milled powders were investigated. It was shown that on milling the powders for 80h under air atmosphere, the particle size was in the range of 7 to 80μm due to sphere-to-sphere and/or sphere-to-flake welding and from the aggregation of the copper particles during milling. On the other hand, the particle size was only 7 to 35μm, when milled under argon atmosphere even after 80h of milling. There was no difference either in the crystal structure or lattice parameter of the copper powder after milling in the two atmospheres. The powders got contaminated with oxygen; the oxygen content increased with increasing milling time, reaching up to 4.97wt.% when milled in air for 80h. The oxygen got incorporated into the copper powders to form oxide layers, which were broken down during milling and thus played an important role in determining the final particle size and microstructure of the powder. A viable explanation was provided to explain the differences in the microstructure and sizes of the powder particles milled under the argon and air atmospheres.Copper powders have been used for a long time in a wide variety of applications such as electronic devices including hybrid integrated circuits and multilayer ceramic capacitors, paints to make a non-metallic material appear to have metallic-like luster, catalysts, coatings to prevent wear and corrosion, and printer electronic technology A number of different methods have been used to synthesize copper metal powders. These include atomization Pure monolithic copper powders and composites based on copper have been synthesized by milling methods Even though the morphology and microstructure of copper powders synthesized by mechanical methods were reported earlier, there have been only a few studies on the effect of process parameters such as milling atmosphere and the role of oxygen contamination on the microstructure of the milled powders. Furthermore, while there have been some investigations on the milling of coarse copper powders to synthesize finer and nanocrystalline powders, there have been no studies on the effect of milling on the structure of nanocrystalline powders. There have been some studies on synthesizing nanocomposite powders by milling of coarse-grained metal powders and nanocrystalline ceramic powders In this paper, we report on the structure of mechanically milled nanocrystalline copper powders milled at room temperature and report on the contamination, particle size, and microstructural features of the copper powders. The main intention was to analyze the effect of ambient atmosphere (air and argon) and milling time on the structure of the copper powder. Further, the influence of oxygen on the coarsening behavior of the copper nanopowder during MM was also studied. Mechanical milling of copper nanopowders (purity better than 99.0%) with a particle size in the range of 50 to 150 The milled powder was collected at the end of milling and weighed in order to determine the powder yield. More than 90% of yield was achieved in all the milling experiments under both the air and argon atmospheres. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, MiniFlex-600) with Cu Kα radiation. The morphology of the copper powders was studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM-MIRA LMH II (TESKAN)). The contamination in the milled copper powders was analyzed using two different techniques. One was the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) method in the SEM. The other was by using the PC-controlled ONH-2000 oxygen/hydrogen/nitrogen analyzer (ELTRA-ONH-2000). But, because of the better accuracy, only the results of analysis by the oxygen/hydrogen/nitrogen analyzer will be reported here.   To study the influence of the milling atmosphere on the size and morphology of the copper nanopowders, MM was also carried out under argon atmosphere and the results are shown in   As may be noted from  There have been instances in the literature where the mechanically alloyed powders exhibit changes in crystal structure due to phase transformations The contamination in the milled copper powders was analyzed using the ONH-2000 oxygen/hydrogen/nitrogen analyzer.  The effect of milling atmosphere and milling time on the coarsening behavior of copper nanopowders during mechanical milling were examined in the present work. Coarse and plate-like thin solids with a maximum diameter of about 75–80 This research was supported by the