There is a growing awareness that effective repair of historic buildings and monuments requires detailed knowledge of the component materials. In the case of repair or replacement the technical properties of the building stone are of particular importance. Macroscopic examination in isolation is not sufficient and can lead to incorrect specification of the replacement stone. Petrographic examination forms a crucial part of the repair process. Knowledge of currently available resources is equally important. The BRITPITS database contains over 17,000 sites of mineral extraction in the UK, including historical and currently active sites. Approximately 2350 entries cover active mineral workings, yet only 460 quarries are currently producing building stones. The database is used to help identify the original quarry source of a stone, and locate currently available matching stones for repairs. Research projects are underway to identify building stone resource requirements for specific areas in the UK. Detailed stone surveys of 230 buildings in Glasgow provide an assessment of the requirements and quantities of stone for the future maintenance of the stone built heritage of the city. A project with English Heritage is aimed at providing a systematic assessment of local stone sources to ensure the supply of appropriate building stones in the future.Over the past decade in the UK there has been a resurgence in the demand for building stones in the construction and conservation repair industry, partly as a result of the need for repair to high profile ‘heritage’ building stock and the growing appreciation that original materials are commonly the most appropriate ones to use in conservation work. Some of the initiative for this has come from the government. A recent consultation paper concerning Planning and Minerals in England ( This resurgence has led to a number of issues becoming apparent, namely how to identify the provenance of an original stone and, perhaps more importantly, where best to source an appropriate replacement. The British Geological Survey (BGS) has been collecting data and samples from stone quarries and mines since the 1830s and is in a unique position to provide the public and professionals with information regarding building stone resources. Records held include information on historic quarries, working sites and also planning permissions for unworked sites. This information coupled with petrographic analysis of stone samples helps conservators to identify original building materials and also to determine the best available replacement stone type. In Northern Ireland an on-line stone database (www.stonedatabase.com) has been developed by Queen's University Belfast and Consarc Conservation, documenting over 2000 listed buildings and monuments and 117 quarries. Until recently many buildings in the UK were repaired using a stone that was considered to be a good visual match on a macroscopic scale, if aesthetic issues were considered at all. The closure of the majority of the historic building stone quarries means that in many cases there are few options for a replacement stone available and some local authorities have accepted the use of ‘high quality replica block’ (i.e. artificial stone) in conservation areas ( Petrographic analysis is an integral part of stone analysis and is of value not only in identifying an aesthetic match for a building stone but also in determining any potential geotechnical incompatibility that might lead to accelerated decay ( Petrographic analysis is part of the BGS stone matching service which, along with other building stone-related enquiries, forms part of the online BGS GeoReport system which is available through the BGS web site. The Building Stone Assessment GeoReport provides a service for users of stone ranging from repair and conservation of existing buildings to new-building requirements, and masonry and stone artefact identification in archaeological projects. One of the most regular requests is stone matching for restoration projects where a sample of the existing masonry is characterised in order to determine the most suitable replacement stone types. If a like-for-like replacement stone is required it is important to characterise the composition and petrographic characteristics of the original stone ( The BGS has a number of databases and collections relevant to building materials. Some of these include data collected 150 years ago and throughout the second half of the 19th century when building stone quarrying in the UK was at a peak. While the long term intention is to collate data into one resource, available to the public, at present there is a range of data sources. Despite this, most of the data are now held in digital format, and much have been linked to a Geographical Information System (GIS) allowing easy retrieval of information. The principal building stone databases and information sources held by BGS are outlined below. The BRITPITS database is the main repository of data on UK mines and quarries. It includes data on surface quarries and underground mines, including known active and recently inactive sites. The database is continuously updated through links with government and industry. Data on historic sites are also collected, including mines and quarries throughout the UK. The database currently holds about 2350 entries covering active mineral workings. The number of quarries currently producing building stones, however, is much smaller — approximately 460 in the UK. The number of inactive sites is much larger and in total BRITPITS contains over 17,000 entries. Many historically important building stones are not being produced at present and sourcing a matching stone for repairs can be problematic. The BRITPITS database of quarries is an invaluable tool in identifying both the probable original source for a building and the most appropriate replacement stone from currently active quarries. The database is linked through a GIS to information on environmental sensitivity, such as Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (England and Wales) and National Scenic Areas (Scotland). Much of the information is available digitally and in GIS format, providing a national resource for planners. Data from BRITPITS make important contributions to studies of industrial and aggregate mineral resources and assist in regular statistical surveys carried out by the government in the UK. This database, begun in the late 1990s by BGS, is currently being validated in a GIS with the assistance of funding from the Technical Conservation Group of Historic Scotland ( It is anticipated that these validated data will be transferred to the BRITPITS database to enable easier access to the information. The directory is a published compilation of the 2500 active mineral workings in the UK, including those in Northern Ireland, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands (  Much of the information described above can be accessed through the Minerals UK website at In addition to these data resources described above the BGS maintains a physical collection of building stone samples from current and historic quarry sources at its offices in Keyworth (Nottingham) and Edinburgh, together with the National Petrographic Thin Section Collection which includes a large proportion of UK's historic building stones. The BGS also holds the UK National Roofing Stone Collection at its Keyworth headquarters. BGS has also produced a wide range of publications concerned with the building stones of the UK. The ‘UK Building Stone Resources Map’ was published in 2001 with the support of English Heritage, Historic Scotland, CADW Welsh Historic Monuments, the Stone Federation, the Scottish Stone Liaison Group and British Stone ( Research into the performance of sandstone repairs in Edinburgh New Town, part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site, has shown that due to the closure of the original quarries, recent repairs have been carried out using sandstones from the north of England ( Some of the differences between the original stone types and the replacement stones are illustrated in While the two sandstones are superficially similar, the differences in grain size, grain composition and pore structure will have implications for the durability and appearance of a building where original and replacement stones are juxtaposed. There is also a danger of differential weathering at contacts between the two stone types. A recent initiative to address this issue, spearheaded by the Scottish Stone Liaison Group, resulted in the re-opening in 2004 of Cullalo quarry in Fife to the north of Edinburgh which historically supplied stone similar to that from Craigleith quarry to Edinburgh from the 1820s until its closure in the early 20th century ( BGS has recently undertaken a pilot study in collaboration with English Heritage aimed at defining a methodology for identifying former building stone quarry sources and assessing their potential for possible future stone production. The project involved an assessment of distribution, condition and sources of white sandstone used in the buildings of Shropshire, Warwickshire and Worcestershire ( The majority of conservation repair work in the UK is carried out on a building-by-building basis, with little appreciation of the resource requirements of the entire towns and cities on a larger scale. To address this BGS is contributing to a project on Glasgow's Built Heritage managed by the Scottish Stone Liaison Group and commissioned by Scottish Enterprise Glasgow ( A representative sample of 230 buildings from Glasgow city centre were chosen for study. All of these building façades have been photographed, and images compiled and orthorectified to allow quantification of building stone volumes and the condition of the stone assessed. Following the digital photographic survey and assessments, samples have been extracted from 100 ‘landmark’ building façades, in order to allow petrographic description of the stone and identification of the source quarry. The stone samples have been categorised into ten distinct sandstone types, depending on their petrographic and macroscopic characteristics. The analysis of samples from buildings is designed to allow the most appropriate replacement stone types to be identified for future repairs, as well as providing information on the main mechanisms for stone decay. The project aims to provide a ‘stone health-check’ for the 230 chosen buildings which can be extrapolated to enable the city to plan a strategy for the future maintenance and repair of its valuable built heritage. This long-term and large scale project provides a template that might be transferred to other cities and towns, and provide planners with a means to make a quantitative estimation of what resources will be required over a scale of decades. Results from the study are also being used to ensure that the training of sufficient stonemasons and associated trades for the future is undertaken. The masonry skill shortage in the UK is one aspect that also needs addressing in the long term. There is a need for a systematic approach to the collection and maintenance of data on UK building stones. These data should be available to builders, architects, conservators and other professionals in an accessible and easily understandable format in order to provide information on the decision-making process for the selection of replacement stone. The need for improved provision of data is being driven both by increasing awareness of conservation issues within the profession and by tighter legislation and planning controls. Effective stone matching requires both petrological analysis of the original material, and knowledge of replacement options through the availability of regularly-updated databases of currently available stone types and quarry sources. Local, regional and national-scale studies of the condition of building stones and the identification of stone types allow the long term prediction of stone repair requirements, both in terms of the supply of stone from quarries and future masonry skill training requirements. Such studies also identify the potential market for stone to be used in sympathetic new developments that will help to maintain the diverse character of the UK's built heritage. This paper is published with permission of the Executive Director, British Geological Survey (NERC). The authors are grateful for reviews by Dr Jim Floyd of BGS and two anonymous reviewers.