This work describes how a ring mill is used as a friction coefficient analysis system for granular materials during grinding. This assessment method was mainly created to analyse energy consumption in comminution processes in friction mills. A ring mills consists of a cylindrical jar containing the grinding masses as coaxial cylinders and rings, made from high strength materials, moved by an oscillating movement caused by eccentric masses arranged on the mill motor axis. Inside the jar the masses rotated by the jar's eccentric oscillation rotate freely, at a speed that depends on the friction between the grinding bodies and the jar's inner surfaces. The work checked how the grinding masses rotate, the mechanism causing coupling and the relations between these movements and the friction coefficient. With this model it is possible to measure grinding energy consumed instant by instant and the energy lost through heat and average pressure generated by the thrust of the grinding masses; and, lastly, the friction coefficient between the mass and the material interposed.A ring mill ( live analysis of grinding mass movements identification of the mathematical relations between the rotation speeds of the grinding masses and the mechanical parameters (definition of the mechanical model) creation of a non invasive electronic system to detect and analyse movements of the grinding bodies inside the jars, enabling us to observe rotation speed inside the grinding masses, obtaining the values of the mechanical parameters. Naturally, knowing the rotation speed of the free masses inside the grinding jar, you can obtain the other useful mechanical parameters. As we will see in the work, the approach used paid off. To implement analysis in vivo, we used a ring mill (P9 Retsch) with its grinding jar left uncovered and placed in an orbital shaker with adjustable speed. The grinding bodies were placed in the jar. The rotating jar and moving grinding bodies were filmed using a HD digital camera (Head 3 GoPro) and grinding body movements were analysed using a commercial video editing software. Tests performed, first with single grinding bodies and then with the two bodies together, both dry and with oil, unambiguously prove that the movement is that of a mechanical system of " In real operations the drive torque will lose power because of the friction: So if the non-slipping condition is achieved, the peripheral speeds of the contact point are equal to each other: As we can see in friction from slipping (grinding bodies that slip on the jar's flat surfaces) rolling friction (grinding bodies which, if coupled, roll into each other) In the calculation model of the rotation frequencies of the ring mill's grinding masses we need to consider that the rotation of ring and cylinder come from an eccentric rotation of the jar around a centre, which is moved compared to the jar centre and which increases its rotation radius. This also affects the radius of coupling between jar and ring and between ring and cylinder. For the jar-ring and the ring-cylinder couples, coupling ratios can be expressed as: Relations from  The ring itself, considering the eccentric radius, 15% greater of the jar radius, generates an even greater frequency pulsation ω2εː This rotation frequency is visible as the reference system of the reading device is outside the jar and stationary. The cylinder will be characterised by a frequency ω3 in the ring rotation direction, due to the coupling of the cylinder and the ring which rotates at speed ω2: This rotation frequency is visible too as the reference system of the reading device is outside the jar and stationary. Obviously, each of these pulsations generates harmonics which can extend up to a few kHz of frequency. From the rotation speeds calculated you obtain a maximum value of the centrifugal force exercised by the grinding masses which, compared to the jar reference systems, take on the expression: The normal force value is variable: from a minimum equal to The “Total friction coefficient” f of the cylinder-ring-jar complex will then be calculable as: The total amount of work spent in heat can be calculated by measuring the temperature of the body of the jar, which increases due to friction: From the angular speed of the grinding masses (ring and cylinder) we obtain the peripheral speed [m/s], then the displacement L [m] over time T [s]. Therefore, the resistance work will be equal to tangential force, F: The temperature is measured using a normal thermometer probe applied to the jar and a similar probe that measures the workplace temperature, to correct the jar temperature, instant by instant. From the data obtained by applying the model indicated, you can obtain the overall friction coefficients of the jar-ring-cylinder system, both averaged for the entire time, and instant by instant. Naturally, the friction coefficients found are those related to the ring rotation movement on the internal jar wall and the sliding on the jar's lower and upper surfaces. The rolling coefficient of friction is generally a very small fraction of the sliding coefficient and is calculated as f=b/r, where b is the thickness of the contact line between the grinding mass (cilinder or ring) and the rolling surface and r is the radius. In a two-dimensional presentation, b is in fact a surface, S, and in our case is calculated observing the friction streaks by observing the grinding bodies through a binocular microscope. It was found that the area crushed during grinding equals the average width of the contact point, between 50 and 100 The method described is not immune to errors. First, the quality of measure of CoF depends on the accuracy of the measurements of the speed of grinding masses and on the accuracy of the measurements of temperature of the jar, with the evaluation of the heat losses and other contributions to heat than friction: the accuracy of the friction coefficient evaluation depends, in equal recording quality of the speeds, by the evaluation of “real” heat from friction. Assessment and strategies to mitigation of these errors are discussed in the next chapter. From the same mill it is also possible to derive the total friction coefficient through the measurement of the total power absorbed by the motor of the mill, using the theory developed by Founti et al. The mill used for the tests is a ring mill, make Retsch Pulverisette P9 ( The audio signal is recorded with a sampling frequency of 11025 the main rotation signal (jar, ωl) signals due to the internal grinding masses (ring, ω2 and ω2ε and cylinder, ω3 and ω4) - the signal harmonics up to a few kHz of frequency. Analyses of materials before and after grinding were made with X ray diffraction (XRD) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). XRD analysis were performed with a Bruker D2 instrument (Bruker Corporation, The problem of wrong values of energy consumed by attrition during grinding and traduced in heat, has been studied and solved with the evaluation of the different heat contributions. The heat developed during the grinding is due to several contributions: The total friction coefficient, calculated by the measuring of the total absorbed power, is representative of all the friction contributions, including those of the motor and of the mechanical linkages. The subtraction of the no-load power from the power absorbed under load, enables to distinguish the effects of friction of the individual grinding masses and the interposed materials. Results obtained show that the grinding jar, equipped with the internal rotations analysis systems, is a true measurement instrument. The empty jar, rotated at 1500 RPM, generates a primary pulsation at 25  The friction coefficient for steel dry is more jagged, with higher peaks and average values of 0.49, 0.43 and 0.33 at the three speeds of 1000, 1200 and 1500 RPM ( We then analysed the friction coefficients of various materials and minerals. The aluminium flakes (5 Aluminium The aluminium in chips ( Graphite The graphite granules ( Quartz It show immediately a significant reduction in particle size, which leads to the formation of a homogeneous layer on the surface of the jar. Note the remarkable roundness of the particles at the end of the milling at 20 Several amounts of the same material, with the same grinding mass, determine different increments of temperature. The differences in the coefficient of friction calculated indicate different sliding conditions, resulting from different thickness of layers of the material interposed. From the numerous tests carried out, it can be observed that the minimum weight of mineral to be ground for the measure of its coefficient of friction, corresponds to the quantity necessary to obtain a total coating of the internal surfaces of the vessel. The vessel inner surface includes both the inner side surface that the surface of the base and the inner surface of the cap, for a total of 0.053 The system presented here is dedicated to evaluation of the coefficient of friction of granular materials during their grinding in a ring mill: the main purpose is to provide a tool able to indicate whether the CoF of the powder tends to vary during the frictional grinding, in order to correlate such variation with variations of crystallographic and chemical parameters of the material subjected to grinding. The various dynamic friction coefficients detected for the steel of the grinding masses, at different rotation speeds and in dry conditions, are of the same order as magnitude as values reported from various bibliographic sources, although the instruments are different. The same happens for the friction coefficients of aluminium, graphite and quartz against steel The main element in the evaluation of the total friction coefficient is based on the measurement of the speed of grinding masses, which is realized in this grinding mill, by means of an inductive measurement device. The measure of the energy expended in friction can be made by two methods: the first based on the measurement of the temperature of the mill, the second through the measurement of the total power absorbed by the motor during grinding. In both cases one can derive the "total friction coefficient" of the mill system and, by subtracting the power contributions arising from the grinding masses is possible to determine the trend of friction coefficient of the interposed materials during grinding. To conclude, we have prepared a simple, real-time, direct evaluation of friction coefficients on materials subjected to grinding, that could easily be used to monitor the trend of mechanochemical reactions, in the synthesis of nano-materials and in the preparation of powders for industrial use. We acknowledge very useful help by Mr. Stefano Mastrototaro, for developing of inductive device and Mr. Riccardo Silvestrini for the comments on our manuscript See The calculation of the coefficient of friction, achieved on a mill rings is based on two main information: the speed of the milling masses the amount of energy fed into the mill or the amount of energy spent in frictional The measure of spent energies in friction is obtained from the temperature increment (ΔT) of the jar. In alternative, it is possible to measure the total power absorbed by the motor of the mill, with a device (for example, directly from the inverter that control the electrical motor). In our case, we have used a new firmware and software developed by Fritsch for P9 mill, to control the inverter. This appendix explains the calculation of the coefficient of friction by means of the acquisition of the power required by the motor. The model was developed by Founti et al. During mill operation, the ring is pressed against the material due to the centrifugal force Q and overcomes the force K In this way it is possible calculate the “total friction coefficient”, during the milling process, with the measure of ring speed and total power absorbed by the motor. The values of Cof calculated with two methods, are resumed in table 1. In it we can observe differences of about 17–21%. (