The Yandong porphyry copper deposit is located in the southern part of the Dananhu-Tousuquan Island Arc belt in Eastern Tianshan (Xinjiang, NW China). The Dananhu-Tousuquan belt contains a number of large and medium Cu deposits, among which the Yandong deposit (∼2.0 Mt Cu @ 0.67%) is the largest. The Yandong Cu deposit is hosted by plagiogranite porphyry and the Carboniferous Qi’eshan Group mafic to intermediate calc-alkaline volcanic and pyroclastic rocks. According to the crosscutting relationships and mineral assemblages, the alteration and mineralization processes at Yandong comprise three episodes: the porphyry mineralization episode (including potassic, propylitic, early phyllic and late phyllic stages), the overprinting mineralization episode (including main- and post-mineralization stages) and lastly supergene alteration episode. Fluid inclusions (FIs) in quartz from the potassic, early/late phyllic and post-mineralization stages, and anhydrite from the main-/post-mineralization stages include four types: 1) vapor-liquid two phases (W-type), 2) daughter mineral-bearing (S-type), 3) pure liquid (PW-type), and 4) pure vapor (PV-type). The potassic stage contains W-, S- and PV-type FIs, which yielded homogenization temperatures of 304–445°C (mainly 340–400°C) and salinities of 3.1–16.4 (mainly 4.0–10.0)wt% NaCl eqv. At the early phyllic stage, three types of FIs are identified, i.e., the W-, S-, and PV-type. The S-type and W-type FIs homogenized at 213–441°C (mainly 280–300°C) and 241–352°C (mainly 300–320°C), respectively, with corresponding salinities of 33.1–52.0 (mainly 34.0–40.0)wt% NaCl eqv. and 0.9–15.9 (mainly 0.9–4.0)wt% NaCl eqv., respectively. The late phyllic stage contains W-, S- and PW-type FIs, which homogenized at 146–248°C (mainly 160–180°C), with salinities ranging from 3.9 to 18.2 (mainly 4.0–8.0)wt% NaCl eqv.
                  Mineralization depths calculated from FIs are: 0.8–1.2km (Stage I), 0.6–1.8km (Stage IIIA) and 0.4–0.7km (Stage IIIB). Fluid boiling and mixing likely occurred during the porphyry mineralization period, leading to the precipitation of pyrite and chalcopyrite. During the overprinting mineralization, the W- and PV-type FIs occur in the main-mineralization anhydrite, with homogenization temperatures and salinities being 248–421°C (mainly 300–340°C) and 5.3–13.8 (mainly 8.0–10.0)wt% NaCl eqv., respectively. The post-mineralization quartz and anhydrite homogenized at 105–195°C (mainly 120–140°C), with salinities of 0.5–13.6 (mainly 8.0–10.0)wt% NaCl eqv. The ore-forming fluids may have predominantly been entrapped at 0.8–1.6km (Stage IV) and 0.3–0.6km (Stage V). The decreasing temperature may have led to the sulfides and sulfate precipitation and enrichment.
                  Sericite 40Ar/39Ar dating of the altered plagiogranite porphyry yielded a plateau age of 332.8±3.8Ma, consistent with the age of the early ore-forming plagiogranite porphyry (339–332Ma). Re–Os dating of molybdenite, coexisting with chalcopyrite-anhydrite-chlorite-calcite assemblage, yielded an age of 324.3±2.7Ma (weighted mean), consistent with the late quartz albite porphyry age (zircon U-Pb: 323.6±2.5Ma).
                  Consequently, we propose that at least two mineralization episodes may have occurred at Yandong, with the second episode contributing to the majority of the Cu-Mo resources. Such overprinting mineralization style at Yandong may represent a good example of the Paleozoic Cu deposits in the Central Asian Orogenic Belt.The Central Asian Orogenic Belt (CAOB) is the largest accretionary orogen in the world ( The Tuwu-Yandong camp, discovered in the 1990s, is the most important porphyry Cu district in Xinjiang ( However, the Yandong deposit is different form typical porphyry Cu deposits and in conflict with the current ore deposit model in some aspects. For instance, fluid inclusion (FI) homogenization temperatures at Yandong were determined to be 160–180 In this contribution, we present new data obtained from fluid inclusions microthermometry study, molybdenite Re–Os dating and sericite Ar–Ar dating, based on the newly-established, detailed paragenetic sequence of the Yandong deposit. These results indicate that there are two Cu-Mo mineralization events at Yandong, i.e., the porphyry mineralization and overprinting mineralization episodes, with the latter one being more important. The Eastern Tianshan belt adjoins the Junggar plate in the north and the Tarim plate in the south ( The Bogeda-Haerlike Belt, situated north of the Qincheng fault, consists of the Ordovician-Carboniferous volcanic rocks, sedimentary rocks, granites, and mafic-ultramafic complexes ( The Jueluotage Belt, bounded by the Qincheng fault and the Aqikekuduke-Shaquanzi fault, is made up of Paleozoic volcanic and sedimentary strata ( The Dananhu-Tousuquan belt ( The Yandong Cu deposit is located in the southern part of Dananhu-Tousuquan belt, about 80 Carboniferous diorite porphyry intruded the Qi’eshan Group at southern Yandong. Plagiogranite porphyry, generally covered by the Jurassic Xishanyao Formation, intruded the diorite porphyry and was locally crosscut by quartz albite porphyry ( The Cu mineralization is mainly hosted in the plagiogranite porphyry and the Qi’eshan Group, and less in the quartz albite porphyry (Figs. In this study, 561 hand specimens were collected from 19 drill holes, among which 291 doubly polished thin sections were prepared and analyzed. According to crosscutting relationships and mineral assemblages, the newly established paragenetic sequence for the Yandong alteration and mineralization comprises three episodes, i.e., porphyry mineralization, overprinting mineralization and supergene alteration ( Stage I—Potassic alteration: This stage contains mainly magnetite, quartz and biotite ( Stage II—Propylitic alteration: This stage is featured by the presence of abundant epidote, chlorite, with minor calcite and chalcopyrite ( Different from typical porphyry Cu mineral systems, the propylitic alteration zone at Yandong is locally overprinted by potassic alteration. The propylitic-altered volcanic rocks are crosscut by potassic alteration veins (quartz–magnetite Stage III—Phyllic alteration: Phyllic alteration occurs pervasively in plagiogranite porphyry, and locally overprints the potassic and propylitic alterations ( In the plagiogranite porphyry, the feldspars are completely replaced by fine-grained quartz and sericite, and minor calcite and anhydrite. Cleavage and twinning of plagioclase are preserved in some samples. Well-oriented sericite grains are distributed along primary quartz, accompanied by a small amount of chalcopyrite, pyrite and molybdenite. Mafic minerals are replaced by disseminated chlorite and magnetite. Weak phyllic alteration occurs in the Qi’eshan Group volcanic rocks, overprinting on the propylitic and potassic alterations. Randomly oriented microcrystalline quartz and fine-grained sericite, replacing disseminated plagioclase, occur around epidote or magnetite–quartz According to the mineral assemblages and textural relationships, the phyllic stage can be further divided into two substages: the early phyllic (IIIA) and late phyllic (IIIB) stages. Stage IIIA is characterized by abundant sericite–quartz–chalcopyrite–pyrite assemblage and quartz–chalcopyrite Stage IV—Main-mineralization stage: Represented by chalcopyrite, anhydrite, chlorite, calcite and molybdenite, with minor quartz, pyrite, sphalerite, muscovite and galena, this stage may have contributed most of Cu and Mo in the Yandong copper deposit (estimated based on the hand specimens and thin section studies). Chalcopyrite occurs generally as assemblage of chalcopyrite–chlorite–anhydrite–calcite ( Molybdenite at Yandong is present in the molybdenite–chalcopyrite–anhydrite–calcite Stage V—Post-mineralization: Major minerals at this stage include chlorite, calcite, quartz and anhydrite, with minor epidote. Calcite–anhydrite Supergene alteration episode: Supergene alteration is characterized by the appearance of hematite, atacamite, malachite and montmorillonite. Montmorillonite primarily replaces feldspars, whereas malachite, atacamite and hematite replace sulfides. Samples used for fluid inclusions (FIs) study were collected from 19 drill holes at Yandong. Sixty-five doubly polished thick sections (100 Microthermometric measurements were conducted using a Linkam MDS600 Heating-Freezing System at the Key Laboratory of Mineralogy and Metallogeny, Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry (GIG), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). Thermocouples were calibrated in the range of −196 Salinities of aqueous FIs, expressed as wt% NaCl eqv., were calculated using the data of Vapor and liquid compositions of the individual FIs were analyzed using the LabRam HR800 Laser Raman microspectroscopy at the Key Laboratory of Mineralogy and Metallogeny, GIGCAS. An argon laser with a wavelength of 514.5 Two molybdenite samples from drill holes ZK3107 and ZK007 were chosen for Re–Os isotopic dating. The molybdenite occurs as fine euhedral platelets in quartz-sulfide or anhydrite–chalcopyrite–chlorite–calcite Molybdenite for Re–Os dating was magnetically separated and then handpicked under a binocular microscope to obtain a >99% purity. Re–Os isotope analyses were conducted at the Key Laboratory of Isotope Geochronology and Geochemistry, GIGCAS. The Carius tube method was used for the dissolution of molybdenite and equilibration of samples and tracer The sericite sample used for The Abundant fluid inclusions (FIs) in quartz and anhydrite have been recognized based on their compositions, phases present at room temperature (20 W-type FIs: Liquid-vapor two-phase FIs. These FIs show two visible phases at room temperature, i.e. liquid H S-type FIs: These daughter mineral-bearing FIs ( PW-type FIs: These pure liquid FIs (diameter: 1–8 PV-type FIs: These pure vapor inclusions (diameter: 2–8 About 180 FIs were measured and the measurements included the eutectic temperatures, ice-melting temperatures, dissolution temperatures (of halite or vapor) and total homogenization temperatures, depending on the FI types. The microthermometric data are summarized in At stage I, the WL-, WV-, PV- and SM-type FIs ( Primary W-type FIs in Stage I quartz were measured and mostly homogenized to liquid (and rarely to vapor) at 304–445 At Stage IIIA, W-(30–35%) and S-(60–65%) type FIs are prevalent, with minor PV-type (<3%) FIs. The S-type FIs, commonly 3–7 At Stage IIIA, all the SH-type FIs showed consistent microthermometric behavior, i.e. halite dissolution after vapor bubble disappearance. The liquid-vapor homogenization by vapor bubble disappearance was observed at about 100 FIs in the Stage IIIB consist of WL-(70%) and SM-type (30%). The WL-type FIs are isolated and regular in shape. They are typically 2–6 The Stage IIIB WL-type FIs in quartz homogenized at 146–248 Stage IV FIs are observed in anhydrite and dominantly W-type (>90%). These FIs (size: 3–8 The W-type fluid FIs yielded ice-melting temperatures of −9.9 to −3.2 Only WL-(80%) and PW-type (20%) FIs were observed at Stage V. These FIs are randomly or clustered distributed in quartz and anhydrite crystals, typically 2–6 For the WL-type FIs, the eutectic temperatures are −55.4 to −36.5 Representative FIs were systematically measured by laser Raman spectroscopy, and the results show that the vapor phase in W-type FIs from the porphyry mineralization episode is mainly H Sericite Ar–Ar analytical results are shown in Re–Os data for the two molybdenite samples are presented in The FIs petrographic and microthermometric results described above indicate that different FI types are present at different alteration/mineralization stages during the Yandong Cu metallogeny. There is a clear decreasing trend of pressures from the early to late stages for both the porphyry mineralization (Stages I and III) and overprinting mineralization (Stages IV and V) episodes. Using the NaCl-H As presented before, five different FI types occur at Stage IIIA, i.e., the WL-, WV-, PV-, SH- and SM-type. The coexistence of halite-bearing (SH) and aqueous (with high phase ratios) FIs with similar homogenization temperatures (303–314 If the fluid system is closed (lithostatic) and the density of upper curst rocks is assumed to be 2.5 Previous studies indicated that the brittle-plastic transition temperature of rocks is about 360  To conclude, the mineralization depths at the Yandong Cu deposit evolved from 0.8 to 1.2 Metals are generally accepted to be transported as complexes in aqueous liquids ( Recent experiments show that quartz-host FIs can lose or gain Cu after the entrapment through diffusion ( From our new Yandong data, we demonstrate that brines may have been the predominant Cu transportation medium in both the porphyry mineralization and the overprinting mineralization episodes, because: 1) In the porphyry mineralization episode, S-type (with chalcopyrite daughter minerals) FIs only occurred in the Stage IIIA brine inclusions, and chalcopyrite daughter minerals were absent in the coexisting WV-type or PV-type FIs, indicating that the brine phase was the major metal transportation medium. 2) Although the addition of sulfur may cause a 10- to 100-fold Cu enrichment in the vapor relative to other chloride salts ( Fluid inclusions in the early stage hydrothermal minerals are believed to have the potential to reflect the nature and genesis of the original ore-forming fluids in many hydrothermal deposits ( The Stage IIIA quartz contains S-, W-, and PV-type FIs. Fluids of this stage are characterized by medium to high temperatures (280–320 In general, fluid boiling can cause widespread hydraulic fracturing, leading to the mixing of the ascending boiled fluids with meteoric water. Therefore, the Stage IIIB fluids are characterized by low temperature (160–248 Different from Stage IIIA, the Stage IV FIs are of medium to high temperature (248–421  At Yandong, the homogenization temperatures concentrate on 280–320 Previous age dating at Yandong by Moreover, It is generally accepted that the subduction of the Kangguer ocean basin occurred during the Silurian to Carboniferous, and formed the Dananhu-Tousuquan and Aqishan-Yamansu magmatic arcs ( Based on our new geological, age and FI data, a modified genetic model of the Yandong Cu deposit is proposed ( Subduction slab rollback (ca. 323  The Yandong Cu deposit is a porphyry deposit that was influenced intensely by later overprinting Cu-Mo mineralization, with its Cu and Mo mainly contributed by the later episode. The mineralization process comprises three episodes: the porphyry mineralization (i.e., the propylitic, potassic and phyllic stages), overprinting mineralization (i.e., the main- and post-mineralization stages) and supergene alteration. In the porphyry mineralization episode, the hydrothermal fluids responsible for the potassic alteration (Stage I) were probably magma-derived and of high temperature and medium to low salinities. The ore-forming fluids for the early phyllic alteration (Stage IIIA) were probably high to medium temperature, oxidized and with bimodal salinities. However, fluids for the late phyllic alteration (Stage IIIB) may have been low temperature with medium to low salinities. In the overprinting mineralization episode, the ore-forming fluids may have experienced a transition from high-medium temperature to low-temperature with similar salinities at both Stages IV and V. At Yandong, the porphyry mineralization episode likely occurred at ca. 341.2–332.8 As the Kangguer Ocean basin subducted at ca. 340 This study was financially supported by the Chinese National 973-program (2014CB440802) and the CAS-SAFEA International Partnership Program for Creative Research Team (20140491534). We are gratefully acknowledged the Dengfeng Li, Weifeng Zhang, Liandang Zhao, Wanjian Lu for providing field work assistance. We also thank a number of technical staff for assistance during this study, especially Niu Hecai for assistance during fluid inclusion microthermometry; Sun Shengling for assistance during molybdenite Re–Os isotopic dating. This is contribution from GIGCAS No. IS–2382.