Foams have been widely used in flotation, but they stabilized solely by surfactants was unstable. Nanoparticles (NPs) can improve the performance of aqueous foams. It is interesting to evaluate and understand the effect of NPs on foam property in column flotation. In this paper, silica nanoparticles (SNPs) with three different sizes (20, 100 and 500 nm) were chosen as model NPs; the performance of foams stabilized by SNPs and two surfactant, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and anionic sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), were investigated experimentally. For CTAB/SNPs dispersion, although the foamability was lower, SNPs obviously improved static foam stability. Moreover, smaller SNP exhibited a more effective improvement for foam stability because of its low adhesion energy and high number concentration. For SDS/SNPs dispersion, even if SNPs were hydrophilic, the foam stability was still enhanced since these particles induced congestion in the node and slowed down drainage. Larger SNP had a greater ability to delay the liquid drainage and enhance the foam stability. Besides, CTAB/SNPs and SDS/SNPs foams also maintained their dynamic stability through weakening the foam drainage. These results provided theoretical supports for the usage of NPs in practical application such as flotation.As the importance and popularity of foams in industrial and engineering processes, such as food industry, flotation and enhanced oil recovery Flotation is an important separation technology for the recovery and concentration of valuable minerals from ores With the advances in nanotechnology, nanoparticle (NP) has been emerged as an excellent candidate to stabilize aqueous foams and emulsions. Binks and Horozov The key to set up NP-stabilized foams in flotation is to have a clear understanding the effect of NPs on foam property. The degree of NPs hydrophobicity is generally considered the foundation of aqueous foam stability In this study, SNPs were chosen as a model stabilizer in a column flotation, on account of their favorable attributes, including large surface energy, easy modification, good chemical stability and low cost Spherical silica nanoparticles (SNPs) with three different sizes (20, 100 and 500 nm) were purchased from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd., China. Their hydrodynamic diameters and zeta potentials were measured using a Zetasizer (Nano-ZS90, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). Additionally, their contact angles were measured with sessile drop method using a contact angle meter (DAS30, KRÜSS, Germany) CTAB, SDS, NaOH and HCl were supplied by Tianjin Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd., China. All reagents were analytical grade. Ultrapure water was used in all the experiments and it was obtained by using a Millipore Milli-Q system from Barnstead International, Dubuque, IA, USA. Glass containers were cleaned with ultrapure water before use. Experiments were conducted at room temperature unless specified otherwise. Firstly, each of the three kinds of SNPs was dispersed in ultrapure water and then treated by an ultrasonic cleaner (SK3200H, Shanghai Kudos Ultrasonic Instrument Co. Ltd., China) for 40 min to obtain a highly dispersed suspension. The concentration of SNPs was fixed at 0.1 wt% in all of the experiments unless specified otherwise, to avoid the formation of agglomeration. Subsequently, different concentrations of CTAB or SDS solutions were prepared by dissolving them in ultrapure water. These solutions were then added to the SNP dispersion dropwise under continuous stirring, to make the dispersions homogeneous. After that, dispersions were shaken by a shaker (150 rpm) for 12 h to ensure adsorption equilibrium. Ultimately, the resulting mixtures were sealed for use. Moreover, the pH levels of them were adjusted to 7.0 ± 0.4 using a pH meter (pHS-25, Shanghai Jingke Instrument Co. Ltd, China). The characterization of static foams was performed using a DFA100 foam analyzer (KRÜSS Germany) as shown in supplementary information (Fig. S1). Fig. S2 shows the schematic diagram of a laboratory flotation apparatus for producing dynamic ( The weight percentage ( The dynamic foam stability (Σ), which was defined as ratio of the maximum volume of foam generated in an aerated pulp/solution to the air flow rate, was expressed as Bubbles near the column wall were photographed at the middle of foam phase by using a digital camera (Nikon CooLPIX P6000), which was connected to a personal computer where the images were stored and analyzed. Next, the size of the bubbles was determined using a commercial software (Scion Image). The Sauter-mean bubble diameter ( The liquid flux out of the column, Each experiment was at least triply repeated. An analysis of variance of the data was performed by using Microsoft Excel. The  In In In order to evaluate the ability of the SNP on the foams stabilization, different combinations of surfactants and SNPs have been tested, and the results are shown in  Regarding CTAB/SNPs dispersion, cationic CTAB molecules adsorbed on the negatively charged SNPs surfaces The positive impact of SNPs on the foam stability went up first but then went down with the increase of CTAB concentration. To explain this phenomenon, a schematic of the influence of CTAB concentration on the adsorption behaviors of SNPs at the interface are shown in Besides, the large NP size played an important role in impeding its adsorption. The escalation in adsorption energy with the increasing SNP size implied that more energy was needed to attach a larger particle onto the interface. But beyond that, the number concentration of NP increased as its size decreased under the same mass concentration With regard to SDS/SNP dispersions, the particles were so hydrophilic that no adsorption of SNPs on the interface occurred.  To more clearly observe the effect of SNP on the liquid discharge from foams, the liquid contents in surfactant and surfactant/SNPs foams were studied by Foam analyzer. From From From   From Furthermore, the irregular foam morphology enhanced the drainage pressure, leading to rapid thinning of foam film and bubble coalescence  Besides, there were no remarkable influences of SNP and its size on the bubble size. This may be attributed to the fact that a high dynamic foam stability meat a high Among above mechanisms governing the foam stability, foam drainage was crucially important in a column flotation. The predicted liquid fluxes versus liquid fraction for the foams stabilized solely by CTAB as well as SDS, and by SNPs in synergy with CTAB and SDS are given in Fig. S7. It seemed that the predicted values for the surfactant foams with SNPs were higher than these without SNPs, and they were found to be related to the size of SNP. This trend was consistent with the above section. To inspect and verify the actual liquid flux in a column flotation, The following conclusions can be drawn from this work: For CTAB/SNPs dispersions, the foam volume was greatly reduced because of the adsorption of CTAB on the SNP surface. Accordingly, the small size of SNP had a worse impact on the foamability. For SDS/SNPs dispersions, SNP mainly adversely affected the foamability by cause of the increase in the dispersion viscosity. Moreover, the large size of SNPs had tougher limits on the foamability. SNPs-CTAB adsorbed at the air–water interface and a thick, compact, NP-enhanced bubble film was formed, which significantly slowed drainage, gas diffusion, and coalescence and then increased the foam stability. Among the three SNPs, 20 nm SNP exhibited the most effective improvement for the foam stability. Even if the SNPs in the existence of SDS were fairly hydrophilic, the foam stability was still enhanced since these particles presented in the aqueous phase of the foam film and slowed down drainage. 500 nm SNP created a greater “obstacle” in the liquid channel or intersection, so it was a most effective NP to delay the liquid drainage and improve the foam stability. The column flotation experiments revealed that CTAB/SNP and SDS/SNP foams maintained their stability through weakening the foam drainage. The results were meaningful for the application of NPs-stabilized foams in flotation. This work was financially supported by Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 