The effects of microwave power, irradiation time, particle size of coal samples, and gas flow rate on temperature-rising characteristics and yields of products in the low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis reaction under CH4 atmosphere were analyzed. The solid and liquid products under N2 and CH4 atmospheres were detected by proximate and ultimate analysis, Fourier transform infrared spectrometry, and gas chromatography–mass spectrometry. Results showed that the evident effects of the tested parameters were observed, and maximum yield of the liquid product was obtained under 800 W of microwave power, 40 min of irradiation time, 5–10 mm of particle size, and 0.4 L/min of CH4 gas flow rate. These conditions resulted that the yields of bluecoke, coal tar, and water were 60.16%, 13.74%, and 6.25%, respectively. Compared with the products under N2 atmosphere, the final temperature under CH4 atmosphere was obviously higher, resulting in increasement of the molecular unsaturation of bluecoke and the content of light-weight oil in tar, especially the content of light-weight oil with difference of 11.34%. Meanwhile, the good mass balance showed excellent experimental operation and error control in low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis reaction.Coal resources are evidently beneficial in China, where the proven reserves of coal are 138.819 billion tons in 2017 [ The yields and quality of coal products are obviously affected by pyrolysis conditions [ Because of its noncontact heating, selective heating, rapid heating, volumetric heating, and easy-to-control process, microwave pyrolysis is widely applied in the pyrolysis of several materials, such as coal, biomass, and oil shale [ The coal mined from the north of Shaanxi province in China were employed as experimental coal samples, and its proximate and ultimate analysis of coal samples were listed in The experimental system of the low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis reaction under CH 1.Microwave device; 2. Ceramic insulation sleeve; 3. Quartz tube reactor; 4. Low temperature recirculation cooler; 5. Condensate bottle; 6. Electrical tar precipitator; 7. stop valve; 8. Gas collecting bag; 9. CH After pyrolysis experiment finished, the yields of coal tar and pyrolysis water and weight loss rate of coal sample were calculated using weight difference method via Eqs. According to the national standards of P. R. China of GB/T 30732-2014 and GB/T 31391-2015, the compositions of coal and bluecoke were detected by the proximate and ultimate analysis of coal. Fourier Transform infrared spectrometer (FT-IR, VERTEX70, BRUKER) was used to analyze the organic functional groups of tar and bluecoke, and the analysis was recorded between 4000 cm As we shall see below, some key important factors were discussed on effect of temperature-rising profile and products yields of microwave pyrolysis under CH The low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis experiments using different microwave powers (480, 640, 800, and 960 W) were performed to analyze the effects on yields and quality of products. Other pyrolysis conditions were irradiation time of 40 min, coal particle size of 5–10 mm, and CH At the beginning of microwave pyrolysis, microwave energy was transformed to thermal energy because of the fixed carbon and ash in the coal sample, and this process resulted in the rapid rise in pyrolysis temperature. The ability of coal sample to absorb microwave was limited [ The low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis experiments using different irradiation times (10, 20, 30, and 40 min) were conducted, andother pyrolysis conditions were microwave power of 800 W, coal particle size of 5–10 mm, and CH The reaction temperature of the coal sample quickly increased to the required pyrolysis temperature in a short time under microwave irradiation, but the pyrolysis reaction needed enough time to react. With prolonged irradiation time, products with higher dielectric losses were generated by breaking the large coal molecules, and these products facilitated the transformation of microwave energy to thermal energy. The temperature of the pyrolysis reaction gradually increased, and temperature was eventually maintained at approximately 900 °C. When the microwave pyrolysis reaction was in the 20–30 min stage, the pyrolysis temperature reached 750–800 °C ( The low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis experiments were carried out with different particle size of coal sample (5–10, 10–15, 15–25, and 25–35 mm). Other pyrolysis conditions were microwave power of 800 W, irradiation time of 40 min, and CH The evident effects of the particle size of the coal sample on the temperature-rising rate and final pyrolysis temperature were probably due to the low microwave reflection, good uniformity, and heat conductivity of the small particles of coal. Most of the microwave energy was absorbed by the small particles and transformed to thermal energy. The temperature range for coal tar formation was 400–800 °C, especially at 450–650 °C [ The low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis experiments were carried out with different CH At the beginning of the microwave pyrolysis, the electrically neutral plasma CH The experimental results showed the high yield of liquid product (coal tar and pyrolysis water) under microwave power of 800 W, irradiation time of 40 min, coal particle size of 5–10 mm, and CH The temperature-rising profiles of low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis under CH Compared with the pyrolysis products under N The proximate and ultimate analysis of bluecoke under N FT-IR analysis was further carried out to verify the influence of atmosphere on bluecoke in the microwave pyrolysis process. As shown in According to the number of carbon atom in the coal tar, tar components with 5–10 carbon atoms were defined as light oil, whereas those with 11–18 and more than 18 carbon atoms were defined as intermediate and heavy oil, respectively [  According to calculation of experimental conditions, the total used volume of CH Mass balance calculations of pyrolysis reaction under CH The yield of tar under CH In this paper, the effects of microwave power, irradiation time, particle size of coal sample, and CH Microwave power, irradiation time, particle size of coal sample, and CH Considering the yield of coal tar and saved energy, the more beneficial conditions of low-rank coal microwave pyrolysis under CH Compared with N Higher yield and quality of coal tar was obviously obtained under CH This work was supported by the