Human milk fat analogues containing stearidonic acid (SDA) were produced by enzymatic acidolysis reactions between tripalmitin and free fatty acids (FFA) obtained from hazelnut oil and commercial oil mixture containing Echium oil. Lipozyme® TL IM, immobilized sn-1,3 specific lipase was used in the enzymatic reactions. Response surface methodology (RSM) was applied by using central composite circumscribed design with five levels and three factors. The factors chosen were: Reaction temperature [55–65 °C], reaction time [4–12 h] and substrate molar ratio [3–5 mol/mol (total FFA/tripalmitin)]. Good quadratic models were obtained for the incorporation of SDA and oleic acid. Optimal conditions generated from the models were determined as 60 °C; 8 h, 4 mol/mol for temperature, time and substrate molar ratio, respectively. The models were verified at optimum conditions and furthermore scale-up synthesis of structured lipids (SLs) was performed. Stearidonic and oleic acid contents of the SL from scale-up production were found to be 2.0 and 22.9 mol/100 mol total FA respectively, with 46.2 mol/100 mol total FA of palmitic acid content located at sn-2 position. Besides, oxidative stability and melting profile of final SL were determined for characterization. SL had 6.1 h of induction time, and also had a wider melting range compared with tripalmitin.Lipids have an important role in infant nutrition since energy requirement of new borns are more than that of adults ( Human milk also contains omega-3 long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFA) like eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) in small quantities (0.0–0.6 g/100 g and 0.1–0.6 g/100 g, respectively) ( Among these fatty acids, SDA is very important since it is an intermediate metabolite of omega-3 pathway in which ALA is converted to EPA and DHA ( Structured lipids (SLs) containing similar fatty acid structure as HMF and which also contains SDA can be used in infant formulae to mimic HMF and provide the health benefits associated with omega-3 PUFAs. These SLs can be produced by interesterification reactions using a sn-1,3 specific lipase and many studies about production of human milk fat substitutes and analogues have been conducted ( The purpose of the present work was to produce human milk fat analogues resembling HMF and containing SDA by enzymatic acidolysis reactions. RSM was applied to model and optimize the reaction conditions. The products were characterized by their fatty acid content and their sn-2 positional composition, as well as their oxidative stability index and melting profiles. Hazelnut oil used in this study was purchased from a local grocery store in Turkey. A commercial oil mixture (COM) of Hazelnut oil and COM were saponified to obtain free fatty acids according to Reaction mixtures were consisted of 5 mL of n-hexane, a mixture of tripalmitin and free fatty acids of hazelnut oil and COM at different substrate molar ratios determined by RSM design generated by Modde 9.0 (Umetrics, Umeå, Sweden) software program. Lipozyme TL The enzymatic reactions were stopped via filtering the mixture through an anhydrous sodium sulphate column by removing the enzyme from the synthesized products as described earlier by Response surface methodology was used to investigate the effects of chosen parameters on incorporation of SDA and oleic acid during the enzymatic acidolysis reactions. Factor combinations were obtained by the application of a three-factor, five-level central composite circumscribed design (CCC) by using Modde 9.0 (Umetrics, Umeå, Sweden) software. Variables used in this study were temperature (T, °C) (55–65 °C), reaction time ( The reaction mixture was concentrated to half of its volume under nitrogen gas. 50 μL of synthesized product was spotted on a TLC plate (20 × 20 cm) coated with silica gel G. The solvent system containing petroleum ether, diethyl ether, and acetic acid (80:20:0.5, v/v/v) mixture was used to separate the TAG band which was further visualized under UV light after spraying with 2,7-dichlorofluorescein in methanol (0.2 g/100 mL). The TAG band was scrapped off and transferred into a screw-capped test tube. Then, 40 μL of heptadecanoic acid (10 mg/mL) was added as an internal standard. Thereafter, 3 mL of HCl in methanol (6 g/100 mL) was added and the mixture was methylated by incubating at 75 °C for 2 h in the oven. After incubation, 2 mL of n-hexane and 1 mL of KCl (0.1 mol/L) was added two times to the mixture, and the upper layers (hexane layer) were decanted after centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 3 min. Hexane layers were then passed through anhydrous sodium sulphate columns ( Fatty acid compositions of substrate oils and reaction products were analyzed by using Thermo Quest Trace GC 2000 gas–liquid chromatography (GLC) (Milan, Italy) equipped with a flame-ionization detector and DB-Wax capillary column (30 m × 0.32 mm ID × 0.25 μm film thickness) (J&W Scientific Folsom, CA). The injector and detector temperatures were held at 250 °C and 260 °C, respectively. The oven temperature was initially held at 150 °C for 3 min, and was then programmed to 225 °C for 10 min at a rate of 10 °C/min, and helium carrier gas flow rate was 1.5 mL/min. A 2 μL sample was injected into the GLC and relative amounts of FAME were calculated as mol/100 mol total FA by computer, using heptadecanoic acid as the internal standard. Average values from the results of duplicate analyses were reported. The fatty acid composition at sn-2 position of SL was determined according to the method described in After verification of models at small scale (mg-scale), synthesis of the structured lipids was carried out by scaling up the substrate amounts approximately 50 times. Enzyme and hexane levels were also scaled-up to levels those agreed with the increased levels of tripalmitin and total free fatty acids. Enzymatic reactions were performed in duplicate in a shaking water bath at 200 rpm, at 60 °C with 4 mol/mol substrate molar ratio for 8 h. The reaction products of scale-up process were purified according to the procedure outlined by The oxidative stability index (OSI) values of hazelnut oil, COM, and SL product from scale-up process were determined by Metrohm 743 Rancimat instrument (Herisau, Switzerland) according to the The melting profiles of tripalmitin and the SL product from scale-up process were determined by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) DSC Q10 model (TA Instruments, New Castle, DA) according to the The regression analysis, statistical significance, analysis of variance (ANOVA), and response surface applications were carried out by using Modde 9.0 (Umetrics, Umeå, Sweden) software. Second-order coefficients were generated by regression analysis. The goodness of fit of the model was evaluated by the coefficient of determination ( A second-order polynomial model was used to fit the data obtained from the experimental design as shown in The fatty acid composition of hazelnut oil used in this study contained 74.2 mol OA/100 mol total FA, 16.9 mol LA/100 mol total FA and 6.0 mol PA/100 mol total FA. In the COM of The target of this study was to produce human milk fat analogues containing stearidonic acid via enzymatic acidolysis reactions between tripalmitin and free fatty acids of hazelnut oil and COM. For the purpose of optimizing reaction conditions, a three-factor, five-level CCC design was used. The design points together with the responses [SDA incorporation (mol/100 mol total FA), and oleic acid incorporation (mol/100 mol total FA)] observed for the reactions are given in As can be seen from The contour plots were drawn to investigate the relationship between the responses and the reaction parameters. The contour plots obtained by interaction of temperature, time and substrate molar ratio on incorporation of SDA and oleic acid into tripalmitin catalyzed by Lipozyme TL In As a result of the investigation of Experiments were performed using the optimal conditions to verify the models at small scale. After the confirmation of the model, production of SL was scaled-up. The results of total FA composition and sn-2 positional analysis of the resulting SLs are given in The induction time of hazelnut oil, COM and SL obtained by scale-up production was determined by rancimat test, and the results were found as 21.8 h, 1.3 h and 6.1 h, respectively. In addition, for tripalmitin, induction time was not determined during 22 h of rancimat test due to the presence of saturated fatty acids at higher levels. Besides, hazelnut oil showed the highest resistance to oxidation among the substrate oils tested, whereas COM had the lowest oxidation stability in comparison to hazelnut oil and SL, because of its higher polyunsaturated fatty acid content, which causes an increase in susceptibility to oxidation ( The melting thermograms of tripalmitin and SL produced in scale-up process were obtained to investigate the melting behaviors of these lipids. Human milk fat analogue obtained as a result of this study contained SDA as well as other omega-3 and omega-6 PUFAs such as ALA and GLA that would place these SLs as important ingredients for inclusion in infant formulae. It is believed that these SLs would also have the potential to deliver the health benefits of important fatty acids for infant growth and development. This research was financially supported by the grant from İTÜ BAP Project No.33579 (