This paper presents a combination of different useful techniques to identify the fundamentals of the infiltration and chemical degradation of the refractory used in the lining of an anode furnace for fire refining of blister copper. In practice, this work was carried out at the Atlantic Copper Smelter (Huelva; Spain) by a post-mortem study of the refractory used in a one-year campaign, and thermochemical calculations using the FactSage® database. The combination of both techniques created enhanced value thanks to their synergy.
                  The infiltrations and the formation of new phases in the reaction layer were identified using microstructural analyses. The nature of these infiltrations were identified; all the refractory brick samples had been substantially infiltrated by copper and slag elements (mainly copper and iron oxides). The new phases formed were the result of the complex chemical interaction between the slag and the constituent of the refractory. Additionally, copper was incorporated to the spinel.
                  In order to propose a model to represent this complex process, thermochemical calculations were carried out to define a baseline to explain the microstructures obtained as a consequence of the interactions between the bath and the refractory.The copper industry operates in two main streams: pyrometallurgy is used to produce 82% of the world's copper, and hydrometallurgy accounts for 18%. In the hydrometallurgical process, copper is extracted from low-grade oxide ores (and some sulfide ores), through solvent extraction and electrowinning (SX‐EW process). The typical pyrometallurgical copper-making process includes the following steps (applied at Atlantic Copper in Huelva, Spain) [ An oxidative smelting of the concentrates in a flash smelting furnace (FSF) to produce matte (60–64 wt% Cu), fayalitic slag and SO Conversion of the matte into blister copper (>98.5 wt% Cu) using Peirce Smith Converters (PSC). The air for the conversion reactions is blown in through 50 tuyeres, and the oxygen content is 21–23 vol.%. Fayalitic slag and SO Fire refining of the blister copper in order to remove the remaining sulfur content (ppm). This consists of two sub-processes to produce the anodic copper: oxidation and reduction. Oxidation involves blowing air into the bath through one or two tuyeres in order to decrease the sulfur (and other impurities) content of the blister copper. A chemical reduction (de-oxidation) is necessary to eliminate the copper oxide inevitably formed during the previous oxidation sub-process; usually natural gas is blown into the bath for this purpose. At the end of the fire refining, the copper obtained (anodic copper; about 99.5 wt% Cu) is tapped and cast using a casting wheel to produce the anodes. The anodes are the “raw material” used in electro-refining to obtain commercial copper (99.99 wt% Cu). The efficiency of electro-refining is affected by the anodes' oxygen, sulfur and impurity content (the main impurities being lead, zinc, nickel, bismuth, antimony and arsenic). The presence of slag in the anode furnace derives from the final slag that has accompanied the blister copper from the conversion step, and the slag generated during fire refining in the anode furnace. The latter is generated during the oxidation sub-process of the fire refining, and contains impurities from the blister copper and copper oxide that have inevitably formed due to over-oxidation. Part of this slag is separated from the copper because of differences in density, and another part is reduced by the reducing sub-process in the fire refining. All the furnaces used in the pyrometallurgical process are lined with refractory materials, mainly magnesia chromite-based. The main materials used in the production of this refractory include: dead-burned magnesite (sintered MgO), chromite ore, electrofused magnesia and electrofused magnesia-chrome. Fused magnesia (or magnesia-chrome) is made by melting the oxides in electric-arc furnaces at 1800-2400 °C; after cooling, they are crushed, sized and mixed with other raw materials to reach the required refractory rate for users [ The refractory lining is renewed periodically due to wear. Refractory wear is the result of the combined effect of the chemical interaction of the molten bath (mainly the slags), and mechanical and thermal shocks. The thermal shocks are provoked by the batch nature of the firing process; the furnace is filled and emptied several times a day. The mechanical shocks are a consequence of the pouring of the blister copper into the furnace when filling, and the rotary movement of the furnace. The refractory can be manufactured by different techniques: direct bonded, re-bonded and fused grain. Direct bonded was first used in the 1950s, in which the union of the chromite-magnesia spinel is direct (there is no silicate between them) by means of a firing process at 1650-1800 °C and followed by controlled cooling, which minimizes porosity and strengthens the refractory brick. Re-bonded was a step forward; first firing at >2000 °C, then crushed, ground and mixed with chrome, and fired again at a lesser temperature. Very different is the fused grain technique, which is the result of melting a mix of chrome ore and dead-burned magnesite in an electric furnace at 2400 °C and cooled. The product is crushed, graded into grain, mixed and fired at 1600 °C. Beyond this process, a fused cast was developed in which the mixed materials are melted in an electric furnace at 2500 °C and the product is cast. Direct bonded refractories are the most commonly used due to their good performance-cost ratio. In this process, Mg dissolution in the slag, copper infiltration by porosity and formation of new phases (magnesio-wüstite, forsteritic olivine and iron-enriched spinels) take place, damaging the refractory by altering its properties thus causing volume expansion and internal crack formation [ The studies of other authors were focused on the chemical degradation and thermal and mechanical stress [ Different techniques are used to analyze refractory wear: multiphysics modeling, laboratory tests, thermochemical calculations and post-mortem studies. Multiphysics modeling is a useful tool for estimating wear under different operating conditions, due to its low cost and risk; for example, in thermal shocks, to predict crack formation and spalling [ In laboratory tests and post-mortem analyses, real samples are used to analyze refractory wear. In the laboratory tests, industrial or synthetic molten phases can be used [ This work focuses on the identification of the fundamentals of the degradation mechanisms in the magnesia-chromite refractory used in an industrial anode furnace (AF) used for fire-refining operations in the copper-making industry ( Refractory brick samples were collected from different areas of an AF after a one-year working campaign at the Atlantic Copper smelter, the exception being refractory bricks from the gas area installed five years ago. The samples taken were located in the following areas ( Mouth area: the refractory samples were collected from the lower lip. This refractory is mainly in contact with slag when the anode slag is removed by skimming, and when the level of the bath is adjusted to the lower lip of the mouth to maximize furnace capacity in operation (oxidizing and reducing steps). By contrast, the refractory located in the upper lip is in contact with the gas phase. Gas area: in contact with the gas phase. The samples were collected in the upper part of the mouth. Slag area: this area corresponds to the lining in contact with slag floating on the bath surface. Bottom area: the lower part of the lining is mainly in contact with blister/anode copper. Tuyere area: in contact with slag and blister/anodic copper. This is the area that suffers most turbulence because of air and natural gas injection during the oxidizing and reducing steps of fire refining. A central slide (perpendicular to the hot face) was cut from each refractory brick sample for analysis using EPMA. These final samples were cut with a diamond saw, embedded in a resin and ground and polished with diamond suspensions. Finally, the samples' surfaces were covered with evaporated carbon (conducting layer). The polished samples were quantitatively analyzed using an Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer with a wavelength-dispersive spectrometer, (EPMA-WDS) JEOL model JXA-8200. The accelerating voltage was 15Kv, current 20nÅ and spot within the 1.0–5.0 μm range. Additionally, thermochemical calculations were carried out using thermodynamic databases from the FactSage It is worthwhile investigating the as-delivered refractory prior to post-mortem analysis [ Refractory type A: 56.5 wt.% MgO, 24.0 wt.% Cr Refractory type B: 66.4 wt.%MgO, 20.0 wt.% Cr From the microstructural analysis, the following was observed ( Chromite spinel grains (Chr) [general formula: Mg(Cr,Fe,Al) Secondary chromite located in the intergranular areas (Chr-S). Its morphology is adapted to the intergranular area which is filled by secondary chromite, thus demonstrating that it has been fused (or partially fused) during the firing step in the refractory-making process. Electrofused magnesia-chromite grains (EMC) are present in different forms: as simple grains (EMC1), or multiple grains with intergranular monticellite or chromite (EMC2). The EMC grains have a matrix of MgO and a dispersed secondary chromite phase of variable size ( Sintered magnesia grains (Mgs), mostly with an external rim that contains dotted secondary chromite, formed via ex-solution precipitation on cooling during the refractory-making process (EMC3 in Monticellite [CaMgSiO Pores of variable size are present in all areas of the refractory brick, forming an interconnected network. Porosity was calculated using image software (Image J), and the value (15.65 vol.%) matches that of the supplier datasheet (16 vol.%). The differences between both types of refractory are based on the content of EMC, Mgs and Chr. EMC and Chr content in refractory type A is higher (and the Mgs content lower) compared to refractory type B. The Mtc in the intergranular areas is lower in the case of refractory type A. The different grains (magnesia, chromite and EMC) are within the 1–3 mm range, according to the BSE images processed. The common factors of all refractory samples are the presence of a reaction layer on the hot face and deep infiltration of copper (oxidized or not) in the structure ( Two profiles are noteworthy: one corresponding to the reaction layer and the other to infiltration ( Micro and macro cracks running parallel to the hot face are present near the hot face. Most are filled with copper, copper oxide or slag. The remaining length of the refractory varies depending on location in the furnace ( The area of the tuyeres shows the most significant wear, but the heaviest infiltration was observed in the samples from the deeper areas of the bath (the entire refractory had been infiltrated by copper species, mainly metallic copper). Large cracks filled with copper, and to a lesser extent copper oxide, were observed in the samples collected from the splashing area and the tuyeres. Samples of the anode slag were collected and analyzed using Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy: 48.3 wt% Cu, 22.6 wt% Fe, 15.4 wt% Fe The microstructural analysis of the anode slag shows that the following phases form after cooling the samples ( Particles of copper oxide in a wide range of sizes (point 1). They usually contain copper oxide, with some iron (point 2). Delafossite crystals [(Cu,Fe)O] of variable size, elongated, and Cu Glass of variable amount of copper and iron oxide and silica (point 4). Magnetite crystals with a large quantity of nickel oxide (point 5). The results of the microstructural analysis of the refractory samples collected are presented in this section. The main aim of this analysis is the identification of the infiltrations (nature and depth) and chemical interactions with the molten phases as a function of the location of the refractory bricks in the furnace. The reaction layer generated as a consequence of the chemical interaction of the refractory with the slag is wider than in other areas (the same as in the slag line). The presence of high Mg# olivine is observed not only in the reaction layer but also in the inner areas. The olivine in the inner areas is located in the intergranular areas. The iron content of this olivine is residual (point 1 in Most of the copper is present in the reaction layer on the hot face of the refractory, and the predominant specie is Cu The high presence of EMC and the olivine formed as a consequence of the chemical reaction between the fayalite from the slag and the magnesia from the refractory prevents the copper from penetrating the inner parts of the refractory. In addition, this area of the furnace is not affected by metallostatic pressure because the entire bath hangs in a relatively low position. In the reaction layer, the magnesia-chromite grains of the as-delivered refractory were transformed into an extensive spinel network (Chr-M in The refractory bricks located in the gas area present copper species (metallic copper and Cu The copper is found as elemental copper or copper oxide (Cu In the external slag layer on the hot face, the copper appears as Cu In the reaction layer, iron-enriched chromite appears as a consequence of the chemical interaction with the slag from the bath (point 2 in A progressive chemical degradation of the EMC grains in contact with the slag is evidenced in High Mg# olivine formed as a consequence of the magnesium enrichment of the fayalite of the slag (point 3 in High Mg# olivine solid solution phase occupies the intergranular areas and pores in the regions on the hot face. The iron content of the olivine is extremely low (point 2 in Additionally, copper species on the hot face fill the intergranular areas but in very low proportion. This copper is mainly present as Cu In the reaction band of the hot face, large interconnected chromite grains are found ( There are also specific areas of this newly formed macro-spinel on the hot face with higher iron content, due to the incorporation of iron from the slag (point 2 in This area suffers from high metallostatic pressure from the bath and erosion caused by the operations in which the blister copper is poured into the furnace. According to the BSE images, the refractory bricks located in this area of the furnace present deep copper infiltration; large amounts of elemental copper drops were found, most of them over 100 microns in length ( Small amounts of Cu Components from the slag phase in contact with the refractory were present: residual silica was observed in the external area of the hot face (detail A The input for the thermochemical calculations was the slag composition from the analyses shown in this work (section The pO The chemical interaction between the slag and the refractory was evaluated at different conditions of pO The dissolution of the monticellite located in the intergranular areas among the refractory grains The dissolution of the magnesia to form high Mg# olivine The incorporation of iron into the spinel phase to form new spinels (measured as Fe/Mg weight ratio in the spinel) and the reduction of the MgCr The dissolution of the monticellite in the copper and Cu According to the anode slag composition of the samples obtained and using thermochemical calculations, the pO Regarding the magnesia dissolution process ( The chemical degradation of the spinel phase of the refractory (chromite spinel) was studied by evaluating the variation of the Fe/Mg weight ratio in the spinel and the decrease in the MgCr The species from the bath infiltrates the refractory through the pores and by dissolving the intergranular phases among the refractory grains. This infiltration mainly depends on the type of infiltrating material (copper, copper oxide, slag), size and geometry of the pores, type of porosity (open or closed) and metallostatic pressure and temperature (affecting viscosity and density) [ The complex microstructure with the internal channels of the pores in zig-zag form makes it necessary to analyze the infiltration, taking into account various assumptions. Using the BSE images obtained in this work and ImageJ software, porosity and pore characteristics were determined ( The imbalance between capillarity, gravity, internal pressure and inertial forces boosts the infiltration velocity of the molten phases in the refractory through open porosity [ The results for all the infiltration phases studied are summarized in  The variables in A: Normal pressure a: Pressure constant g: Gravity H: Height of the liquid L: Pore length P R: Pore radius x: Penetration of the pore (Infiltration) σ: Surface tension ρ: Density of the molten phase θ: Contact angle (wettability) μ: Viscosity of the molten phase χ: Pore correction factor. The maximum penetration of the infiltration phases is limited by their solidus. Thermochemical calculations were carried out for this work to determine the solidus of the copper and the Cu According to the crystallization fraction values as a function of the temperature ( Very few works were found in the literature regarding previous studies of refractory degradation in the fire-refining process in the copper-making industry [ According to the analyzed samples collected in this work, refractory wear of the slag-level area and the tuyeres determines the duration of the campaign; about 40% of the original refractory remains at the end of a one-year campaign. The refractory lining in the gas area and the bottom suffers less wear, and it could withstand at least another one-year campaign or more ( The slag of the anode furnaces is substantially different from the fayalitic slag from other furnaces in the copper-making process. The anode slag contains a higher proportion of copper oxide (section Dissolution of the intergranular phases (monticellite and secondary chromite) of the as-delivered refractory due to the infiltration of the slag and copper. Dissolution of the magnesia as a consequence of the fayalite and copper oxide. Increase in the Fe/Mg ratio in the spinel phase as a consequence of the Fe These three chemical effects have been evaluated and quantified using thermochemical calculations ( The dissolution of the intergranular phases is the most relevant effect of the molten bath of the anode furnace on the magnesia-chromite refractory lining. This effect is responsible for the disintegration of the original structure of the refractory provided by the bonding ( The size and distribution of the pores determines the infiltration capacity of the species. For example, infiltration in refractories with higher EMC content is limited because of their low porosity. Elemental copper has greater infiltrating capacity compared to the anode slag (Fig. 20). It matches the BSE images in this work ( Since the presence of magnesia grains in the as-delivered refractory is very low, the degradation of this phase has little specific influence on the overall wear. The magnesia interacts with the fayalite from the slag, increasing the Mg# of the olivine solid solution and leading to solidification of this phase without the need to reduce the temperature because of the higher forsterite proportion in the new olivine solid solution (the solidus of the forsteritic olivine is higher than the fayalitic). Regarding the EMC, a low-level and very gradual chemical attack is evidenced ( The chromite grains in contact with the infiltration phases from the bath are enriched with iron and copper as a consequence of ionic exchange, but their chemical degradation is partial in most cases (fig. The slag-refractory chemical interactions described, combined with the mechanical and thermochemical shocks that occur during normal operations, can raise the risk of spalling of the reaction layer on the hot face of the refractory bricks. This spalling allows that internal areas of the refractory to become the new hot face, so degradation continues cyclically. When comparing the different areas of the furnace, the greatest wear was observed in the refractory from the tuyere area. This is a consequence of the higher pO There were found presence of high Mg# olivine and modified spinel networks, mainly in the samples collected from the tuyeres and splashing areas as a consequence of the contact with the slag on the surface of the bath. Additionally, it was found in the mouth area due to the operations of removal of the slag through the mouth. Residual olivine was found in the samples from the bottom and gas area. The copper infiltrations differs from one to other location of the bricks in the furnace. Since the metallostatic pressure is higher in the bottom deeper infiltrations and larger copper particles were found in the samples from this area; the copper was mainly as metallic copper because the Cu The combination of the post-mortem analysis of the industrially worn refractory, thermochemical calculations and the infiltration theory allowed to achieve a more precise understanding of the refractory degradation caused by anode furnace operations. The main conclusions are the following: The wear of the lining differs according to the location of the refractory bricks in the furnace. The gas area presents very low chemical degradation, and by contrast, the tuyere, mouth and splashing areas suffer from high levels as a consequence of contact with the slag. The refractory located in the bottom area is deeply penetrated by copper and, to a lesser extent, by copper oxide (reaching the cold face in most cases). Infiltration of copper species (Cu and Cu The chromite is enriched with iron due to the Fe Chemical dissolution of the magnesia, leading to the formation of high Mg# olivine, located not only in the reaction layer on the hot face of the refractory but also in areas behind the reaction layer, occupying the intergranular areas, pores and cracks. It was found mainly in the tuyere, mouth and splashing areas and only residual in the bottom and gas areas. All these chemical mechanisms lead to the weakening of the infiltrated part of the refractory and to differences appearing in the physical properties (higher density of the reaction layer) between the non-infiltrated and infiltrated parts. Hence, this affected part of the refractory is more sensitive to mechanical and thermal stresses caused by standard AF operations and, subsequently, spalling happens more easily. None. This work was carried out with financial support from