The growth in height of the bone plate is a result of endochondral proliferation in epiphyseal growth plates and the conversion of chondrocytes into new bone. The control of chondrogenic differentiation and hypertrophy is critical for these processes. The present study was aimed to demonstrate the chondromodulating activity of Genkwadaphnin. ATDC5 cultures treated with Genkwadaphnin produced cartilaginous nodules that were greater in number and larger in size than control cultures. Genkwadaphnin treated ATDC5 cells also stained more intensely with Alcian blue than control cells, suggesting greater synthesis of matrix proteoglycans in the former. Genkwadaphnin markedly induced the activation of alkaline phosphatase, as well as the expression of chondrogenic marker genes such as type II collagen, aggrecan, type I collagen, type X collagen, osteocalcin, and bone sialoprotein in ATDC5 cells. The expression of signaling molecules involved in chondrogenesis including Smad4, Sox9, and β-catenin was also induced by treatment of ATDC5 cells with Genkwadaphnin. Furthermore, Genkwadaphnin induced the activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). To analyze the role of Genkwadaphnin in growth plate chondrocyte in vivo, we analyzed chondrogenesis in mice treated with Genkwadaphnin. The significant expansion in growth plate and hypertrophic zone and numerous numbers of chondrocyte positive cells in hypertrophic and proliferative bone areas were observed. These observations provide the first evidence that Genkwadaphnin has chondromodulating activity and may open new therapeutic avenues to treat a variety of skeletal diseases, such as dwarfism.Endochondral ossification is the process responsible for bone formation in most vertebrates. During skeletal development, chondrogenesis leads to the formation of cartilage templates that are eventually converted into bone ( Several plants and herbs have long been used for prevention and treatment of various bone disorders as folk medicine in Asian countries. We screened chondrogenic modulators from plants and a chemical compound library using ATDC5 cells, as these cells are easy to handle and their differentiation into chondrocytes is easily detectable ( Genkwadaphnin was supplied by the Korean Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (Daejeon, Korea). PD 98059, 2′-amino-3′-methoxyflavone, and SP 600125, Anthra[1-9- Twelve male ICR mice were purchased from the Orient Korea. They were housed; four per cage, under 12 Mice were stratified into three groups as control, low and high dose groups containing four mice in each group. Control group was intraperitoneally injected with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) whereas low and high groups were injected with Genkwadaphnin (0.125 and 0.250 For histopathological examination, tibias from sacrificed mice were collected and kept in 10% formalin (10% formalin-0.1 Pre-chondrogenic ATDC5 cells were purchased from the RIKEN Cell Bank (Ibaraki, Japan). ATDC5 cells were cultured in a 1:1 mixture of Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) and Ham's F-12 medium (Invitrogen, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) containing 5% FBS, penicillin (100 ATDC5 cells were cultured for different periods for up to 21 Total RNAs were isolated from cultured cells using TRIzol (Invitrogen) and cDNA synthesis was performed using SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Primer sequences and PCR condition used in this study are listed in Cells were harvested and redissolved in lysis buffer [20 Cells (5 Cell extracts were separated by 8–10% SDS-PAGE and then transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (Bio-Rad). Membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat skim milk in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.25% Tween-20 (TTBS) at room temperature for 1 All the experimental data shown are expressed as means To evaluate the chondrogenic potency of Genkwadaphnin, we used 1 Matrix proteoglycan production was verified by staining cells with Alcian blue dye, as shown in A number of extracellular matrix marker molecules such as type II collagen are expressed during chondrogenesis Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity is used as a marker of hypertrophic chondrocytes that are involved in the mineralization process ( To understand the molecular mechanisms controlling the rate of chondrocyte differentiation, we then examined the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), which are involved in signal transduction networks and have been demonstrated to contribute to a diverse portfolio of cellular events, including cell differentiation ( To determine the roles of ERK and JNK in the Genkwadaphnin-mediated differentiation of ATDC5 cells, we pre-treated cells with MAPK inhibitors before adding Genkwadaphnin. First, matrix proteoglycan production was verified by staining cells with Alcian blue dye, as shown in To analyze the role of Genkwadaphnin in growth plate chondrocyte In vertebrates, longitudinal bone growth occurs by a process called endochondral ossification, which takes place in the growth plates of long bones. Chondrocytes secrete cartilage matrix, proliferate, and differentiate into hypertrophic cells during this process, resulting in progressive widening of the growth plate ( In this study, we demonstrated for the first time that Genkwadaphnin has chondromodulating activity in clonal cells and mice. ATDC5 cell cultures treated with Genkwadaphnin produced more and larger cartilaginous nodules than cell cultures treated with vehicle only or cell cultures treated with insulin. The cells treated with Genkwadaphnin also showed more intense staining with Alcian blue, suggesting greater synthesis of matrix proteoglycans. Genkwadaphnin markedly induced the activation of alkaline phosphatase as well as the expression of chondrogenic marker genes such as type II collagen, type X collagen, type I collagen, aggrecan, osteocalcin, and bone sialoprotein. To delineate the molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of Genkwadaphnin on chondrogenic differentiation, we analyzed multiple signaling pathways that are known to regulate chondrocyte differentiation. Insulin, a major regulator of endocrine signals, activates various intracellular signaling pathways, thereby regulating development in various tissues ( The expression of signaling molecules involved in chondrogenesis including Smad4, Sox9, and β-catenin was also induced by treatment of ATDC5 cells with Genkwadaphnin. The level of chondrocyte-specific markers, such as collagen and aggrecan is modulated by Sox9, a key transcription regulator of chondrogenesis ( Similarly, Genkwadaphnin promotes mRNA expression for different chondrogenic gene markers such as aggrecan, osteocalcin, and bone sialoprotein which regulate chondrocyte differentiation ( In summary, Genkwadaphnin markedly induced the synthesis of matrix proteoglycans and the expression of chondrogenic marker genes such as type II collagen, type I collagen, type X collagen, aggrecan, osteocalcin, and bone sialoprotein in ATDC5 cells. Genkwadaphnin also induced the expression of Smad4, Sox9, and β-catenin and activated ERK and JNK. Significant expansion in hypertrophic bone area and the detection of numerous numbers of chondrocyte positive cells support the hypothesis that Genkwadaphnin might regulate chondrogenic differentiation This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant funded by the