A thermodynamic model for the extraction of tungstic acid from sodium tungstate in sulfuric acid using the primary amine N1923 diluted in toluene has been developed. The liquid–liquid extraction equilibrium data were determined by performing a series of experiments at 293.15K. The activity coefficients of the ions and molecules in the aqueous and organic phases were calculated using the Pitzer equations. Nonlinear regression, based on the balance equations of chemical, mass and charge equilibria and the experimental data, was used as the optimization method. Next, the thermodynamic equilibrium constant and the new Pitzer parameters for sodium tungstate electrolytes in the aqueous phase and the binary interactions between the species in the organic phase were obtained. The new model was used to predict the extraction efficiency from different initial conditions. Experiments were performed to verify the new model. The results indicated that the model could moderately predict this extraction system. Furthermore, the extraction reaction mechanism was investigated using the new model, and the scope of the new model is discussed.Molybdenum has been widely used in metallurgical applications in recent decades. In part, the common usage of this element is due to its intrinsic characteristics, such as its ability to withstand extreme temperatures without significantly expanding or softening, its ability to significantly resist corrosion, its high degree of weldability, and its low density. In addition, Mo has had a very stable market price ( Most researchers have addressed the problem of separating molybdenum and tungsten by primarily focusing on removing molybdenum from tungstate solutions ( Our group previously proposed a method for the removal of tungsten from sodium molybdate solution using primary amine N1923 as an extractant ( In this paper, the extraction of tungsten from sodium tungstate using primary amine N1923 was investigated. We subsequently established a thermodynamic model to predict the performance of this extraction process. A feed solution of W was prepared by dissolving sodium tungstate dihydrate (analytical grade, Beijing Chemical Works, Beijing, China) in ultra-pure water. Dilute sulfuric acid, prepared from concentrated sulfuric acid (95%–98%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China), was used as the pH modifier. The extractant, primary amine N1923, i.e., C As shown in The initial pH of the aqueous solution of tungsten was adjusted to the desired value using dilute sulfuric acid and measured using a pH meter (Delta320, Mettler, Switzerland) with an accuracy of ± The mass concentration of W ranged from 0.1 According to our previous report ( The corresponding thermodynamic equilibrium constant, According to the general experimental procedure, dilute sulfuric acid was slowly added to the feed solution of W to adjust the initial pH of the aqueous phase. Therefore, the following reaction equilibria should be taken into consideration in the aqueous phase (Eqs. The secondary ionization thermodynamic equilibrium constant of sulfuric acid, In our system, On the other hand, the aqueous phase is relatively dilute, so the value of It is worth noting that the molality of SO As we discussed above, only the WO Meanwhile, electric neutrality of the aqueous phase can be determined using Eq. In recent years, a large number of studies on thermodynamic models of extraction processes were reported ( The activity coefficient of the cation M is given by the Pitzer equation for mixed electrolytes in aqueous phases as shown in Eq. The term The ionic strength, The function ∑ Terms When the activity coefficient of the anion X is needed, M, As previously discussed, the aqueous phase mainly contains the Na The value of the equilibrium pH depends on the activity of the H In the organic phase, the activity coefficient of a solute species A fitting program was developed based on Eqs. Objection function: The experimental data for the extraction system Na The corresponding parameters associated with the experimental data were acquired and are shown in Most experiments were performed in duplicate, and some were performed in triplicate. Based on the experimental results, the equilibrium pH values had moderate differences, while the extraction yields showed nearly no change. These data suggest that the equilibrium pH is the most unstable factor in this extraction system. Moreover, further analysis of the data led us to hypothesize that a small deviation in the equilibrium pH of the aqueous phase can lead to a large difference in the thermodynamic equilibrium constant, which was calculated using Eqs. By applying the new model, we obtained predictions of the extraction based on the initial conditions without conducting any experiments. These results are shown in the present paper using graphical methods. These graphs can be used as instructions for conducting experiments. This model also has wide applicability to the study of reaction mechanisms.  According to the theoretical analysis, the extraction yield and equilibrium pH only depend on the initial pH of the aqueous solution when the initial W and N1923 molalities are fixed; there should be a one-to-one function between the extraction yield, equilibrium pH and initial pH. First, the chemical speciation of tungsten in aqueous solutions is very complicated. As shown in Second, the solubility of the primary amine N1923 in the aqueous phase was ignored in our system. N1923 is an organic base that is highly sensitive to changes in dissolved load. The slightest change in the dissolved load may have a significant influence on the value of the equilibrium pH. Third, sulfuric acid could also be extracted by primary amine N1923 according to our previous report ( Finally, the error in the pH values from the pH meter is also a factor. We used two or three pH meters to determine the pH value of the same aqueous phase during the experiments to ensure the accuracy of our pH measurements.  Experiments were performed to verify the predictive performance of the model. The experimental results indicate that the new model could moderately predict the extraction W by N1923 as shown in One of the advantages of a thermodynamic model compared to the traditional method is that the chemical reaction mechanism can be easily retested without doing any experiments. In addition, the slope method is a general way of determining the chemical reaction mechanism. Therefore, we used this method to study the chemical reaction mechanism by applying it to the new model. As shown in The liquid–liquid extraction equilibrium data on tungsten extraction from sodium tungstate using the primary amine N1923 in a sulfuric acid medium were obtained at 293.15  activity of species Debye–Hückel parameter of water size parameter Pitzer function for Pitzer function for Debye–Hückel long-range electrostatic term ionic strength thermodynamic equilibrium constant primary ionization constants of tungstic acid secondary ionization constants of tungstic acid secondary ionization thermodynamic equilibrium constant of sulfuric acid molality of species primary amine N1923 complex H charge of the subscripted species numerical value in Pitzer equation for binary interaction parameters between solute species binary interaction parameters between solute species activity coefficient of species activity coefficient of species ternary interaction parameters among ternary interaction parameters among atom number of species anion cation experimental data calculated data organic phase The authors sincerely appreciate the