Prostatic lithiasis represents a common pathological entity but with reduced clinical implications. Prostatic stones are usually identified during other diagnostic or therapeutic procedures and are rarely symptomatic. This is why the literature usually treats this subject superficially.Prostatic lithiasis represents a common pathological entity but with reduced clinical implications. Prostatic stones are usually identified during other diagnostic or therapeutic procedures and are rarely symptomatic. This is why the literature usually treats this subject superficially. Prostatic lithiasis occurs only exceptionally in children, is rare before the age of 40, and becomes frequent in male patients over the age of 50. It usually appears as a conglomerate of small stones ( The first description of prostatic stones belongs to Donatus, who made these observations in 1586 during a series of autopsies. Donatus was followed by other anatomists who tried to describe this condition as best as they could. In 1861, Sir Henry Thompson described, for the first time, the corpora amylacea at the level of the prostatic acini, suggesting that these represent the nuclei for the formation of bladder stones. One of the largest series of patients with symptomatic bladder stones was also published at the beginning of the twentieth century – 305 cases, analyzed by Thomas and Robert ( The modern classification of prostatic stones divides them into two large categories, depending on their origin: endogenous, developed inside the prostatic acini ( exogenous, located in the prostatic urethra ( Electronomicroscopic studies have shown the existence of two distinct types of endogenous prostatic stones. The first type is composed mainly of sodium, sulfur, calcium, zinc, and phosphorus, suggesting its origin in the corpora amylacea, which have gone through a mineralization process. The second type of endogenous prostatic stone has a polyhedral structure composed of calcium phosphate under the form of hydroxyapatite crystals. Spectroscopic analysis supports the theory that this type of stone is formed by precipitation of the components found in the prostatic fluid ( The corpora amylacea have a laminated structure composed of lecithin and epithelial cells. The cells of the prostatic acini, found at the end of their life cycle, pass successively through the phases of atrophy, degeneration, and death. In this moment, the cells will be in suspension in the acinar fluid, which is rich in albumin. DNA and other proteins coming from the cells’ nucleus will become nuclei on which the other compounds of the acinar fluid will attach, generating amyloid bodies or corpora amylacea. Thompson’s theory supports the existence of an antigen–antibody type reaction, which will lead to the release of calcium and phosphates from the epithelial cells. These ions will subsequently be included into the structure of the growing corpora amylacea ( Although old, this theory is still accepted today, even though molecular medicine could probably offer a different vision on prostatic lithogenesis. The mechanism through which the calcification processes start has still not been completely elucidated, although there are many hypotheses, from the simple precipitation of salts in the prostatic fluid to mechanisms similar to those involved in osteoid calcification. During urination, a small amount of urine Regarding their location, prostatic stones are most frequently found toward the cephalic extremity of the median lobe ( The diameter of these stones is variable (they may reach 4–5 cm) while their shape is usually spherical or ovoid ( Prostatic lithiasis is usually discovered during investigations for prostate adenoma, adenocarcinoma, or urethral strictures. Some authors state that any subvesical obstructive syndrome may be considered responsible for the development of prostatic stones, but this theory is not supported by evidence ( The incidences of prostatic lithiasis are not fully known, although there are many case reports in the literature. Prostatic stones are usually discovered by chance following an ultrasound or radiological exam of the prostate It is accepted that any pathological status involved in the etiopathogenesis of urinary lithiasis could also be responsible for the development of prostatic stones. The most typical situation is hypercalcemia, which induces hypercalciuria, and which determines the development of both urinary and prostatic lithiasis. This is the only mechanism that can explain the existence of prostatic stones in children ( The diagnosis of prostatic lithiasis can be taken into consideration in any male patient over the age of 40 with lower urinary symptoms. In patients with recurrent infections of the urinary tract, extraction of the stone and its microbiological exam may diagnose the germ responsible for the urinary infection; this suggests the favoring role of prostatic stones in maintaining urinary infections ( Statistical analyses show that over 70% of men with prostatic lithiasis also present an increase of the gland’s size, and in 20% of cases the lithiasis can be palpated. However, a link between an occurrence of lithiasis and the increase in the prostate’s size has not been proven. It is important to note that a large stone can determine an aspect suggestive for prostate cancer during a rectal exam. When prostatic lithiasis is voluminous, forming a cavity inside the prostate ( A histopathological exam of the prostatic tissue, which comes into contact with calculi, shows an aspect of chronic inflammation with a predominance of lymphocytes and histiocytes. Larger stones are responsible for the dilation of the prostatic ducts and for the disappearance of the epithelial tissue shell of the acini. Sometimes, stones may be included in the nodules of prostate adenoma, although most frequently they are located in the islands of healthy prostatic tissue from between the nodules. In acute inflammatory diseases, the development of polymorphonuclear infiltrate may lead to the appearance of abscesses and periprostatic inflammation. Prostatic stones are usually asymptomatic and are frequently discovered during endoscopic interventions for prostate adenoma ( When symptoms occur in patients with prostatic stones, these are frequently secondary to other concomitant diseases, such as prostate adenoma or prostatitis. Symptomatology may include terminal hematuria, hematospermia, perineal discomfort, and ejaculation disorders ( Treatment is not recommended in the case of asymptomatic prostatic lithiasis. If the disease is symptomatic, transurethral endoscopic resection may evacuate the stones ( Lithiasis of the seminal vesicles is extremely rare. Stones are usually smooth and tough and may be associated with hematospermia. When multiple stones are present, palpation during the physical exam describes the classical aspect of “bag of nuts.” Sometimes, in the case of lithiasis of the seminal vesicles, differential diagnosis with tuberculosis should be performed.