The termination of a fruit orchard generates a considerable amount of residues that can be used as fuel in biomass-fired power plants. Various studies have explored the separate collection of the above-ground tree portion and the rootstock. The present work analyses the potential of complete-tree harvesting (aboveground biomass and rootstock) from a depleted peach orchard and compares this technique with the collection of the aboveground biomass (pruning residues and stems) only. Complete trees were extracted and piled, then ground into chunks and cleaned to reduce contamination with dirt and stones. As an alternative, trees were cut, stacked and chipped, leaving the rootstocks in the ground for later disposal. Extracting complete trees and piling them at the field's edge proceeded at a pace of ca. 1 ha day−1. Grinding and cleaning allowed reducing soil contamination by 10–15%. The study showed that complete-tree harvesting is a viable approach to containing the costs of biomass recovery from depleted orchards. Supply chain efficiency is maximized by including biomass compaction during the loading of trucks.Regardless of crop type, the termination of permanent crops yields significant volumes of wood biomass, which can be exploited as a renewable fuel in bioenergy plants along with the periodic prunings on which an important research activity was carried out [ The handling of whole trees (aboveground biomass and stump) at the time of termination is an interesting new approach to recover all the available biomass in one single pass, thus simplifying the operation and possibly increasing operational efficiency. Usually, the complete termination of an orchard requires at least two passes: with the first pass, the above-ground tree portion is cut and removed, while in the second pass the rootstock is pulled out, cleaned and disposed of. Rootstock disposal after orchard termination is a very challenging task, and the same techniques used for forest crops [ Harvesting complete trees (above-ground portion plus rootstock) of depleted orchards in one single pass seems an interesting alternative. In Italy, experiences on depleted plantation are rather limited and have been carried out with different types of mechanization, but never in one single pass. Most commonly, two separate units are used, one for felling (by a hydraulic shear on the front lift of the tractor) and windrowing the trees and the other for chipping (a drum type chipper) accompanied by a tractor and a trailer unit (shuttles), for hauling the wood chips to a roadside landing or directly to the end user [ This still left the rootstocks behind, which could be recovered with an excavator or a dedicated rootstock harvester [ The present study was conducted on a peach ( While the comparison of different biomass recovery techniques has led to interesting results [ The study took place in San Bartolo, Ravenna, Italy (44°21′30.77″N 12°11′50.54″ E) in Northern Italy. The plantation was a peach orchard established at a 6 × 3.5 m spacing, and grown according to the “Italian delayed vase” system. The orchard was 14 years-old at the end of the cycle. The total surface area covered by the experiment was 0.90 ha. Two systems were studied. The first concerned the collection of the aboveground biomass only, without the rootstocks (left on the ground for later handling). The second focused on the extraction and management of complete trees (aboveground biomass plus rootstocks). In both cases, trees were collected and piled at the field's edge, and then moved to a central yard within the farm. This was done using either a truck-trailer unit with 55 m Productivity data for extraction, piling, and loading were collected according to the CIOSTA (Comité International d’Organisation Scientifique du Travail en Agriculture) methodology and to the recommendations of the Italian Society of Agricultural Engineering (A.I.I.A.) 3A R1 [ Previous research had shown how the type and form of woody biomass can be influence the chipper performances [ The bulk density of the ground comminuted biomass was calculated in compliance with the standard UNI EN 15103:2010, while as far as the means of transport are concerned, the density has always been obtained from the ratio between transported weight and volumetry. Random samples were collected before and after cleaning in the rotary sieve and analyzed for the presence of soil contaminants. At the same time, contamination before sieving was estimated by determining the mass getting into the sieve, as well as the mass of the two main piles produced by the sieve, and namely: the clean chip pile and the contaminants pile. During hauling, the average speed of three trips was recorded for each of the 4 hauling treatment (articulated truck or truck-trailer, transporting compacted or loose feedstock). Overall, the vehicles travelled on 39 unpaved roads, 85 ordinary roads, and passed through 48 inhabited centers. Where available the drivers recorded fuel consumptions using their on-board fuel meters. The total cost of the mechanical intervention was calculated on the basis of working capacity (h ha Data processing was carried out with the PAST software. Statistical analysis consisted of extracting descriptive statistics and then checking the significance of any differences between treatments through the one-way ANOVA test, after checking the dataset for compliance with the homoscedasticity and normality assumptions. Post hoc comparisons were conducted using Tukey's HSD test. To our knowledge, the topic of the present work is rather specific because no other work about complete-tree harvesting of terminated orchards can be found in the recent bibliography. So far, all works about complete-tree harvesting come from the forest sectors, and the most recent one is over 10 years old [ The productivity of extraction and piling of complete trees at the field's edge ( Complete trees needed cleaning from soil particles. The presence of contaminants (soil and stones) in wood fuel is a problem both on the pruning collection [ The experiment demonstrates the successful application of industrial machines borrowed from the earthmoving and demolition sectors [ Rootless tree elements were comminuted with a forestry chipper and the final product was deemed ready for direct delivery to the biomass power plant without any need for additional processing. In both cases there was the need to set up a separate area inside the farm to optimize the efficiency of the machines. Transport of loose or compacted complete tree biomass could influence the reduction of soil particle pollution of the biofuel following the partial breakage resulting from rootstock compaction. In the open field, biomass compaction had a significant influence also on loading time. On average, loading a truck-trailer combination took longer than loading a articulated truck, although the truck-trailer combination present a smaller volume capacity (55 m Loading time was shorter for the truck compared with the truck-trailer combination, both when compacting the load (0.36 vs 0.47 min m Hauling time was unaffected by biomass compaction ( During the surveys, the transport of different biomass treatments (complete-tree, pre-ground and wood chips) was monitored on ordinary working conditions. Each load had a different density which, in turn, led to a variable capacity for biomass delivery ( Once harvested and loaded, complete trees were moved to the farm centre and then followed two different paths ( The shredder operated a rough comminution (pre-grounding) of the complete plants and the product was then processed by a rotary sieve which removed much of the contaminants. The combination of these two machines showed a working capacity of 33.3 t h The wood biomass obtained following chipping (wood chips) or the pre-treatment (shredding) were transferred to the energy plant using the same transport logistics (truck-trailer and/or articulated truck). An exception may be the case when the pre-ground material was reprocessed to produce wood chips for specific needs. The present study represents the first case of application of pre-ground having a cleaning function, previously limited to wood chips [ In the present work, the recovery of complete trees from orchards at termination was studied and an optimized collection chain was analyzed. The collection of complete trees in a single pass appears as a promising technique to reduce delivered cost. However, unlike the rootless trees that are directly chipped, the proposed system included an additional step in which the complete trees were pre-grounded and cleaned. This passage allowed to abate the contamination from 18-20% to 5–7%, well below the threshold of acceptability by most power plants For shredding and cleaning, it was necessary to identify a dedicated area within the farm in order to allow an efficient processing of the biomass, to reduce the permanence in the field, to limit the cost and the environmental impact. Finally, the compaction of the biomass inside the truck brought positive results in terms of transport cost and cleaning efficiency. The step of pre-grounding allowed to attain a payload (18.6 t on the road train and to 25.03 t on the articulated vehicle) comparable with the complete comminution in wood chips. As a result, the advantages in relation to the distances to be covered can make this collection and delivery system even more effective. The work represents just a preliminary experience, which should be repeated on a range of different environmental, agronomic and logistical conditions. However, to our knowledge, th is the only available experience of complete-tree harvesting in terminated orchards. In fact, this early experience has encouraged some companies to design and implement different collection systems for a better exploitation of biomass. Reference to specific makes and models is solely made to help readers to assess the study correctly, and it does not involve any endorsement of specific makes and models to the exclusion of similar machines produced by other manufacturers. This work was supported by the