The work outlined the hardness characteristics of thermally aged high chromium sodium modified A356.0-type Al–Si–Mg alloy using the multiple-step thermal ageing treatment (MSTAT) approach. This novel approach consists of double thermal ageing (DTAT) and single thermal ageing treatment (STAT). The investigation also includes the development of a new temperature-compensated-time parameter, P, for the studied alloy at different ageing temperatures and time considered. The results obtained in the DTAT developed for the A356.0-type Al–Si–Mg alloy showed an improvement in the precipitation hardening (PH) ability and hardness characteristics as compared to the convectional STAT temper. The observations were evidenced from the X-ray diffractometry (XRD) pattern indicating the possible strengthening phases. Equally, the hardness behavior was correlated with the microstructures using optical microscope (OPM) and scanning electron microscope equipped with energy dispersive spectroscope (SEM-EDS).Aluminium alloys consisting of the Al–Si systems are widely used in the automobile field, since they show excellent fluidity and castability, high-strength to density ratio, good corrosion resistance, better mechanical properties or combination of these properties  This alloy; however have the disadvantage of low elastic module and precipitation hardening ability in the T6 temper condition The A356 alloy used was prepared according to the method described elsewhere The results of hardness measurement (HVN) and yield strength (YS) are presented in The results of STAT at 150 From the results of DTAT of the A356.0-type Al–Si–Mg alloys studied, (see Following the discussion above and comparing the STAT results with DTAT, it is evident that the DTAT treatment have improved the hardness and YS of the A356.0-type Al–Si–Mg alloy studied and the reason for these improvement have been well discussed previously. During ageing, the kinetics of ageing is controlled by the dissolution of the solute atoms. For example, at 180 Hardness data have been reported as a function of a temperature–compensated-time parameter, Recently, Kliauga et al. The activation energy for volume diffusion of atoms through the matrix ( In this work a new approach have been developed using the Kliauga et al. The slope of the curves can be obtained using the equation of a curve and the equations for the DTAT and STAT were obtained with the mathematica 4.2 software version. However, the following assumptions were made; That the interval between each point on the 1/ That the peak temperatures and times for the studied alloy were considered independently.  Using the equation for the slope of a curve For From ln( From Eq. At 150 At 180 At 210 Therefore, the numbers of kinetic jump during artificial ageing of the studied STAT A356.0-type Al–Si–Mg alloy are 10, 4 and 23 For DTAT treated A356.0-type alloy, the equation of the curve is established to be; From ln( From Eq. At 150 At 180 At 210 Therefore, the numbers of kinetic jumps during artificial ageing of the studied DTAT A356.0-type Al–Si–Mg alloy are 4 and 14 From the data analysis above, it can be found that the value of Despite efforts toward the development of new method(s) for improving the hardness of A356 alloy in this research, little significant different exist between the role of T7 (DTAT) and T6 (STAT) as method of improving the hardness of the alloy; even though the achievement in the properties studied are similar to those reported DTAT have been outlined as one of the possible ways to improve the hardness of A356.0-type Al–Si–Mg alloy within the studied ageing temperatures and times. The improvement of hardness and YS associated with the DTAT developed for A356.0-type Al–Si–Mg alloy have been attributed to the finer dispersion of precipitates obtained in the pre-ageing stage of 105 The peak hardness value obtained at 180 The temperature-compensated-time parameter, Since the cost of heat treatment play a major role in the selection of type and route for treating an alloy, the T6 (STAT) treatment remain the most economical temper in terms of hardness for A356 alloy studied. The authors wish to thank M.W. Markus at the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgical Engineering, University of Pretoria for his technical assistance during the course of heat treatment and Mr. Beniad, S. at the Department of Chemistry, Tshwane University of Technology, Pretoria for the XRD patterns.