The rational synthesis, comprehensive characterization, and mechanical and micromechanical properties of a calcium phosphate cement are presented. Hydroxyapatite cement biomaterial was synthesized from reactive sub-micrometer-sized dicalcium phosphate dihydrate and tetracalcium phosphate via a dissolution-precipitation reaction using water as the liquid phase. As a result nanostructured, Ca-deficient and carbonated B-type hydroxyapatite is formed. The cement shows good processibility, sets in 22±2 min and entirely transforms to the end product after 6 h of setting reaction, one of the highest conversion rates among previously reported for calcium phosphate cements based on dicalcium and tetracalcium phosphates. The combination of all elucidated physical-chemical traits leads to an essential bioactivity and biocompatibility of the cement, as revealed by in vitro acellular simulated body fluid and cell culture studies.
                  The compressive strength of the produced cement biomaterial was established to be 25±3 MPa. Furthermore, nanoindentation tests were performed directly on the cement to probe its local elasticity and plasticity at sub-micrometer/micrometer level. The measured elastic modulus and hardness were established to be E
                     
                        s
                     
                     =23±3.5 and H
                     =0.7±0.2 GPa, respectively. These values are in close agreement with those reported in literature for trabecular and cortical bones, reflecting good elastic and plastic coherence between synthesized cement biomaterial and human bones.Calcium phosphate cements (CPCs) belong to a very important class of biomaterials because of their potential to be utilized in the human body for bone repair and substitution From a fundamental and an application point of view, it is important to design a rational synthesis route to a cement with setting time not more than thirty minutes (surgeons' requirements) and a rapid conversion rate to the end product, preferably thermodynamically stable hydroxyapatite (HA) — the inorganic component of mineralized bone tissues. It is noteworthy that in many cases the rapid conversion of the CPC precursors to HA not only leads to the rise of the appropriate physiological properties, but also results in the strengthening of the mechanical properties. In particular, rapid conversion accelerates achievement of the final compressive strength value, which is almost linearly dependent on the extent of the CPC setting reaction Bones are hierarchically organized biological systems originated at the nanometre scale Herein, we present the rational synthesis of a cement together with the detailed characterization of the structure at the micrometer and at the nanometer level. Elastic modulus and hardness of derived biomaterial were also investigated and compared to those of bone tissue and composite biomaterials. Ca(H Dicalcium phosphate dihydrate (DCPD) was synthesized CPC was generated by the dissolution-precipitation reaction between DCPD and TTCP The products were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Rigaku RINT 2000 diffractometer. The phases were identified by comparison with the data reported in the ICDD database. The morphology was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and field-emission environmental SEM (FE-ESEM) using Hitachi S-4500 and FEI Quanta 600F microscopes operating at 15 and 5 kV, respectively. Average particle sizes and particle size distributions (PSD) of the ball-milled powders were determined using dynamic light-scattering (DLS) technique on a Malvern Instruments Zetasizer Nano-ZS. For DLS measurements, a small amount of the powder was fully dispersed in water using high-power ultrasonication, and the resultant stable suspension was subjected to the DLS analysis. Final setting time (ST) of the cement was determined according to the American Dental Association Specification No. 9 using the Vicat needle method. ST value is the average of at least six replicates. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) for semiquantitative Ca and P content determination was performed with a EDAX DX-95 spectrometry system. The room temperature Raman scattering measurements were carried out on a confocal Raman microscope WITEC CRM200 with linear polarized laser light (  Biocompatibility was studied Compressive strength (CS) measurements were performed using a Shimadzu Autograph AG-I universal testing machine. Prior to CS experiment, the CPC test pellets with an aspect ratio of 2 (diameter: 6.9 mm; length: 13.8 mm) were allowed to set for 1 h at ambient conditions and then immersed in distilled water for 23 h at 37 °C. CS value is the average of at least six replicates. Elastic modulus and hardness of the cement were measured using nanoindentation technique (NI). For this purpose, the CPC pellet was epoxy embedded in a solution formed by 77% of methylmethacrylate and the polymerization initiators — 1.4% of benzoylperoxid and 21.6% of nonylphenylpolyethylenglycol acetate. To fill up the pores, epoxy embedding was achieved by gradual polymerization of methylmethacrylate to poly(methylmethacrylate) applying a low temperature profile [(39 °C, 12 h) Evaluation of the load-displacement data obtained by NI was performed using the software program implemented in the TriboScan, which applies Oliver and Pharr method wherein According to the XRD analysis, phase-pure DCPD and TTCP compounds were produced by precipitation and high temperature reactions, respectively ( The average molar ratio of Ca to P elements (Ca/P) in stoichiometric HA is 1.67, while Ca/P ratio in the 24 hour-derived CPC was established to be ~ A SEM image of cement product after 1 h of setting is shown in Low-magnification and high-resolution TEM images of 24 hour-derived CPC are shown in Electron diffraction of the CPC shows a very dense ring pattern, exhibiting a lack of distinct diffraction spots, typical for a nanocrystallite clustering ( Furthermore, there are several interesting aspects concerning the phase composition of 24 hour-derived CPC product resulting from the TEM investigation. A direct measurement of the To the first approximation, the potential bioactivity of the CPC – ability to form a direct chemical bond with surrounding bone tissue – was explored throughout soaking in SBF solution. This bone-bonding capacity was evaluated by analyzing the formation of an apatite layer on the surface of the test pellet, revealing the cement apatite-inducing ability Cell culture experiment was used to elucidate the biocompatibility of the derived cement biomaterial. For this purpose, the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) enzyme activity measurements were carried out as a function of time to probe the differentiation of MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells, and the results are represented in The ultimate compressive strength value of the CPC was determined to be 25 The inset in In reported literature of HA CPCs syntheses, the TTCP precursors are not entirely converted to the apatitic cements even after 1 day of setting and in all cases the produced biomaterials still contained unreacted TTCP The mechanochemically-derived sub-micrometer DCPD and TTCP precursors are capable to store a certain amount of the received mechanical energy, therefore, they exhibit enhanced reactivity owing to their capability to consume this extra energy in different ways The potential bioactivity of the as-synthesized cement biomaterial is revealed applying The lack of literature related to NI probing of CPCs on the basis of the dicalcium and tetracalcium phosphates, did not allow us to compare the observed results with reported data. In this context, few reports have been published where tested biocomposite materials include HA in a complex composition Ideally, Advanced calcium phosphate cement was effectively synthesized from ball-milled DCPD and TTCP powders. This approach yields a CPC product that sets in ~ The authors thank C. Pilz and K. P. Kommareddy for help with cell culture experiment. We also thank Dr. A. V. Olenev, Dr. K. A. Kovnir, and T. P. B. Cotter for helpful discussions. This work was partially supported by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science (MAT2002-03857), the European Union Marie Curie EST Fellowship on Biomimetic Systems (MEST-CT-2004-504465) and the European Union Framework 6 Program under a contract for an Integrated Infrastructure Initiative (Reference 026019 ESTEEM).