An azo dye (Acid Violet 7) and an anthraquinone dye (Acid Green 25) were degraded in aqueous solution using titanium dioxide as photocatalyst. Their fate was studied through dyes decomposition, identification of the main and secondary transformation products and assessment of mineralization. Carbon complete mineralization was achieved in both cases together with the total conversion of the sulphonic groups into sulphate ions; nitrogen was recovered as nitrate and ammonium ions.
                  The transformation intermediate products were identified by means of HPLC/MS and GC/MS techniques. Acid Violet 7 transformation involved the detachment of sulphonic group, hydroxylation, and detachment of the amino acetic moiety, with the formation of hydroxyl naphthalene. Conversely, Acid Green 25 transformation proceeded through the formation of 19 initial compounds and involved the detachment of one (or two) sulphonic groups and/or hydroxylation, followed by the detachment of the benzenic ring.Among synthetic compounds of possible environmental concern, dyes represent a very important category, because of their extensive, widespread use. They have found application in many fields (photochemical, textile, photographic, foodstuffs, etc.) thus causing their presence in wastes to be carefully considered. Besides classical waste waters treatment (flocculation, adsorption on active carbon) not even biological degradation was effective in their elimination, the efficiency largely depending on the dye structure. Moreover, biodegradation of dyes is in general not efficient enough, due to the presence of complex and stable aromatic structures. For these reasons, an increasing appeal grew for the use of advanced oxidation processes in order to obtain the complete abatement of dyes and possibly the mineralization of the organic carbon. Among these technologies, TiO The reactions taking place when an aqueous suspension of TiO There are several classes of dyes that do not favour donation from excited states, such as anthraquinonic dyes, because of the presence of two electron-withdrawing carbonyl groups which are susceptible to accept, rather than donate, an electron. Among the different dye families, azo and anthraquinone dyes are the mostly used for industrial purposes. Azo dyes cover about one-half of the dyes employed in the textile industry and are structurally characterized by the presence of one or more azo bonds; their degradation by means of TiO Depending on the chromogenes, chromophores and auxochromes, dyes exhibit different physical and chemical properties, such as water solubility, colour, brightness and light absorption characteristics. The existence of a conjugated system increases the stability toward photocatalytic treatment, as assessed by the enhancement in the photo-stability shown at the increasing of the number of aromatic rings. In particular, as regards azo dyes the structures not adjacent to azo bond showed higher reactivity but lower decolourization rate at the increasing number of azo groups The present research deals with the photocatalytic degradation of Acid Green 25 (AG25), an anthraquinone dye, and Acid Violet (AV7), an azo dye ( We have focused our study mainly on the assessment of the degradation of the two dyes, the identification of intermediate products as well as the evaluation of the mineralization process. For this reason, powerful analytical techniques such as gas and liquid chromatography coupled to mass-spectrometry and ion chromatography were employed. The use of GC–MS technique to identify intermediates coming from the photocatalytic degradation of azo dyes has been documented Acid Violet 7 (purity The irradiation experiments were carried out in Pyrex glass cells, filled with 5 The chromatographic separations followed by a MS analysis were run on Thermo Finnigan instrument using a C18 column Lichrosphere, 250 A Surveyor mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan) equipped with an atmospheric pressure interface and an ESI ion source was used. The LC column effluent was delivered into the ion source using nitrogen as both sheath and auxiliary gas. The cone voltage was set at 30, 70 and 100 50 A GC/MS spectrometer (Agilent 6890, series II) equipped with a 5% phenylmethylpolysiloxane column (Agilent HP-5; 30 A Dionex instrument was employed equipped with a conductimetric detector. Determination of ammonium ions was achieved using a CS12A column and 25 Total organic carbon (TOC) was measured on filtered suspensions using a Shimadzu TOC-5000 analyzer (catalytic oxidation on Pt at 680 Preliminary experiments were carried out to evaluate the extent of hydrolysis and photolysis on the dyes transformation. Dark experiments showed that adsorption on the catalyst can be disregarded for both dyes. Conversely, upon light exposure the dyes photo-bleaching occurred; as displayed in Looking closer to the photocatalytic process, the concentration abatement for both dyes occurred with an half-life of 5 The study of the dyes transformation products was performed by HPLC/MS and GC/MS. Negative-ion electrospray ionization is the most suitable ionization technique for the molecular mass determination of polysulphonated dyes or other dyes carrying a negative charge AG25 transformation proceeded through the formation of 19 main intermediate compounds, whose Four products with a nominal mass of 594 Two transformation products at Five transformation products at The detachment of SO The detachment of SO The detachment of SO The isomer 513-B followed the second transformation route, while the isomer 513-C was subjected to the latter transformation as comes up by The isomer 513-B yielded several structurally-diagnostic product ions that arised from: (i) the detachment of a methylaminobenzene sulphonic acid molecule, with the formation of a product ion at The structural isomer 513-C eliminated a benzene molecule with the formation of a product ion at Four structural isomers at 531-A showed a product ion at Finally, the formation of the transformation product of Two species were formed at The detachment of a sulphonic group, followed by hydroxylation and oxidation of a methyl to formyl group or: SO For the isomer 527-B unfortunately no product ions were formed, even at high cone voltage, so that no consideration can be done. Conversely, the isomer 527-A yielded mainly a product ion at All the intermediate compounds detected by HPLC/MS still hold the chromophore moiety, so that the photo-bleaching cannot be linked to their formation, but could be reasonably due to the formation of smaller molecules. Conversely, GC–MS analysis showed the formation of an uncoloured compound: benzene 1,2-dicarboxylic acid, whose identification was obtained by using an identification program by NIST library (see Along with the dye decomposition, the formation of several intermediate compounds occurred. Four initial transformation products were identified by HPLC/MS and two secondary transformation products were detected by GC/MS. In addition to the product ion at [M−2H] Two compounds at The compound at The last recognized transformation route involved the amino moiety, with the detachment of an aminoacetic group and the formation of a compound at The transformation products identified by HPLC/MS were still coloured, while the two products detected by GC/MS had lost the chromophore moiety and contributed to the observed photo-bleaching. Organic carbon was completely mineralized in both cases (see Looking closer to the inorganic ions formation, in both cases sulphur was easier released than nitrogen. Sulphur atom was recovered as sulphate and its stoichiometric concentration was reached within 2 In both cases, the release of nitrogen as ammonium ions was favoured. It is particularly marked in the case of AV7, due to the presence of an amino group. It is in agreement with literature data, as it is known that tertiary and quaternary amino groups are mainly transformed into ammonium ions Acid Violet 7 and Acid Green 25 were degraded in aqueous solution using titanium dioxide as photocatalyst. The results from this study had shown that TiO