This paper provides data on the split of liquid/liquid two-phase flow at a horizontal T-junction. Phase maldistribution was measured for kerosene–water flow at the T-junction with equal pipe diameters of 67.4mm. Data were taken with both stratified flow with a mixture at interface and dispersed flows approaching the junction. The degree of phase maldistribution was not very great but preferential emergence of either phase from the side-arm was observed depending on the flow rates of the two-phases. There are similarities with the limited split data from liquid/solid flows and the degree of separation is seen to depend on the dispersed/continuous phase density ratio. The data were compared to predictions from the correlation by Seeger et al. The Seeger equation gives but reasonable agreement.When two-phase flow in a pipe encounters a T-junction, the two-phases very rarely emerge in the same ratio as they enter. This phase misdistribution has been known since the 1960s. Research on phase redistribution of two-phase flows at junctions has two motivations: One is to prevent the detrimental effect the maldistribution has on downstream equipment when a T-junction is used as a simple fluid divider; Another is to provide effective phase separation when the junction acts as a partial phase separator. For all these purposes it is essential to understand and predict the flow behaviour of the mixture at the junction for various equipment and operating conditions. Studies of the phase redistribution have been reported for gas–liquid, gas–solid and liquid–solid flows but hitherto there has only been one study published on liquid/liquid flows. There is a substantial literature for gas–liquid two-phase flows with considerable understanding of the important parameters influencing the phase misdistribution for some geometries and flow patterns. Significant quantities of experimental data for gas–liquid flow have been collected and considerable efforts in flow modeling have been made. Extensive reviews on this subject have been published by Work on other phase combinations is more limited. Much of the published work on gas/solids flows concerns itself with the additional pressure losses across the junction. The split of liquid/solids flows at T-junctions was examined by The only publication on liquid/liquid division at a T-junction is that of In considering the behaviour of a liquid/liquid flow dividing at a T-junction it is important to appreciate the way in which the phases approach the junction. Stratified flows, stratified flows with a mixed layer at the interface (also referred to as three layer flow by e.g., This paper provides data on the division of liquid/liquid flows at a junction where all pipes were horizontal. Both three layer and dispersed flows approaching the junction were studied. The experiments were carried out on a facility in the laboratories of the School of Chemical, Environmental and Mining Engineering, University of Nottingham which had been used previously for studies of phase separation for a junction with a vertically upwards side-arm ( A schematic diagram of the experimental system is shown in The liquids used in experiments were kerosene and deionised water whose properties are listed in All observations of phase split indicate that the behaviour of two-phase flow at a T-junction highly dependent upon the flow patterns approaching the T-junctions. Therefore, data have been taken for a number inlet flow rates covering the major flow patterns. The superficial velocities of the kerosene and the water for these conditions are plotted on the flow pattern map of The flow patterns observed in the experiments reported here have been identified as either stratified with a mixed interface layer (three layer) or dispersed. In the former case, the factional area occupied by each of the three layers, water, mixed layer and kerosene, have been quantified using direct observation of the interface positions. Example results for fixed water cut (55.6%) and constant mixture velocity (0.56 The simplest description of the mechanism of maldistribution is that the continuous phase will try and drag the dispersed phase into the side-arm whilst the dispersed phase tries to continue along the main pipe. This description holds for both the dispersed and three layer flows as the latter has a significant dispersed layer as shown in The phase split from those runs with dispersed flow at inlet might be expected to have similarities to the solid/liquid data of Results for the horizontal side-arm are compared with the equivalent results of a case of a T-junction with a vertically upward side-arm in Equivalent data has been sought for comparison within the large database available for gas–liquid division at T-junctions. The available models for phase split at T-junctions were originally developed for gas/liquid two-phase flows. Obviously, for most gas/liquid flows the physical properties are significantly different from those of the present experiments tabulated in  From above comparison, it can be seen that no existing models can be directly applied to full range of the separation results for the liquid–liquid two-phase flow at the T-junction with a horizontal side-arm. The equation of Kerosene–water two-phase flow has been investigated in a T-junction with equal pipe diameters, horizontal main pipe and side-arm. There is little phase maldistribution and hence this configuration of T-junction would not be efficient as a partial separator. The comparison of the phase redistribution between the experimental results and correlating equation of