The relatively high cost of manufacturing and the inability to produce modular implants have limited the acceptance of tantalum, in spite of its excellent in vitro and in vivo biocompatibility. In this article, we report how to process Ta to create net-shape porous structures with varying porosity using Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS™) for the first time. Porous Ta samples with relative densities between 45% and 73% have been successfully fabricated and characterized for their mechanical properties. In vitro cell materials interactions, using a human fetal osteoblast cell line, have been assessed on these porous Ta structures and compared with porous Ti control samples. The results show that the Young’s modulus of porous Ta can be tailored between 1.5 and 20GPa by changing the pore volume fraction between 27% and 55%. In vitro biocompatibility in terms of MTT assay and immunochemistry study showed excellent cellular adherence, growth and differentiation with abundant extracellular matrix formation on porous Ta structures compared to porous Ti control. These results indicate that porous Ta structures can promote enhanced/early biological fixation. The enhanced in vitro cell–material interactions on the porous Ta surface are attributed to its chemistry, its high wettability and its greater surface energy relative to porous Ti. Our results show that these laser-processed porous Ta structures can find numerous applications, particularly among older patients, for metallic implants because of their excellent bioactivity.Metallic biomaterials currently in use for load-bearing orthopedic applications are bioinert and lack sufficient osseointegration for implant longevity Among metallic biomaterials, tantalum is gaining more attention as a new biomaterial. Tantalum has been shown to be corrosion resistant The development of porous tantalum is in its early stages of evolution, and in this work we have fabricated net shape, bulk porous Ta structures using high-power lasers in Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS™). The specific advantages of using laser processing in conjunction with LENS™ are: (i) the ability to control the melting of the high-melting-point Ta, thus creating fully dense or tailored porosity implants; (ii) the net-shape fabrication of complex shaped implants; (iii) the retention of a high purity of the initial power feedstock in the final product; and (iv) the production of fine and uniform microstructural features as a result of localized melting and subsequent solidification, which improve the mechanical, physical and biological properties. In recent years, we have extensively used LENS™ to create fully dense, porous, compositionally and structurally graded materials for load-bearing metal implants Ta metal powder (Grandview Materials Inc., Columbus, OH) with 99.5% purity and particles size between 45 and 75 At each process parameter combination, three samples were prepared separately for bulk density, open pore volume and mechanical properties evaluation. Statistical analysis was performed on the experimental data using Student’s Compression tests for mechanical property evaluation were carried out using a servo-hydraulic MTS (axial/torsion materials test system) machine with 250 The in vitro cytotoxicity behavior of laser-processed porous Ta with 27% and 45% porosity and a porous Ti control sample with 27% porosity was evaluated and compared for a maximum incubation period of 11 Cell morphology was assessed after 3, 7 and 11 The proliferation of viable hFOB cells attached on porous Ta and Ti sample surfaces was assessed by the MTT assay (Sigma, MO, USA) after 3, 7 and 11 Vinculin (Sigma, MO, USA) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP), the specific protein expressions respectively relevant to focal adhesion formation and osteoblast cell differentiation, have been assayed for test samples by fluorescent staining and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) observation. Briefly, different test samples were cultured for 3 MTT assay results are presented as mean  Representative cross-sectional, i.e. perpendicular to build direction, microstructures of porous Ta samples showing variations in pore size, distribution and their connectivity are shown in The 0.2% proof strength and Young’s modulus of porous Ta samples as a function of relative density are shown in SEM observation revealed the hFOB cell attachment, growth and spreading on different porous Ta and Ti sample surfaces. The MTT assay was used to quantitatively determine the proliferation of viable hFOB cells on the porous Ta and Ti surfaces. Osteoblast adhesion and response to material surfaces after 3 ALP protein expression was assessed as a differentiation marker for hFOB cells and observed under a confocal microscope. LENS™-processed parts are produced via layerwise deposition, each layer consisting of a number of consecutive overlapping tracks/scans. The final density of a LENS™-processed part can be considered as an average of the density of each track/scan. Therefore, the extent of powder melting in each track/scan determines the achievable porosity in the final part, as a function of laser parameters. The present results show that the total porosity of the Ta samples can be tailored by changing the laser energy input via the LENS™ processing parameters. High levels of porosity observed at low specific energy input are due to lower working temperatures, which partially melts the Ta powders during LENS™ deposition. These partially melted powders join together in the presence of the liquid metal at the particle–particle interfaces, leaving some inter-particle porosity. Particle bonding during LENS™ processing is a direct result of localized melting and subsequent solidification, in contrast to solid-state sintering in the powder metallurgical route. Therefore, the inherent brittleness associated with solid-state sintered metal powders is completely eliminated in the laser-processed samples. Increasing the energy input increases the working temperatures and consequently melts the powder completely, leading to dense deposits. Melting of powders also depends on feedstock powder size. In general, it is difficult to control the melting of fine powder, which can melt completely during deposition, leading to denser parts. However, coarse powders, when used, do not melt completely during deposition and can therefore attain a higher level of porosity with identical laser energy input. In our earlier work Laser processing is characterized by extremely high cooling rates, of the order of 10 The present in vitro bone cell–material interaction results clearly indicate that the porous Ta samples have superior biocompatibility over porous Ti samples with identical porosity, as assessed qualitatively by SEM cell morphology, immunochemistry and confocal microscopy analyses, and quantitatively using the MTT assay. The superior cell adherence with numerous cellular micro-extensions on the porous Ta samples compared to the Ti samples clearly suggests that Ta surfaces are biocompatible and cause no inhibition to bone cell (hFOB) adhesion and growth. The presence of a relatively high ECM mineralization on porous Ta samples also indicates that osteoblast cells have started to differentiate and the ECM to remodel The pore volume fraction and the surface morphology of porous Ta samples have been shown to have significant influence on hFOB cell adhesion, growth, mortality and differentiation. The MTT results clearly show that cell attachment and proliferation depend on sample porosity in addition to material chemistry. The results show that, after 3 The immunochemistry and confocal microscopy results show strong green fluorescence, indicating strong focal adhesion sites on the Ta-45 (45% porosity) samples compared to the other two samples. It is hypothesized that the increased surface area of the 45% porous Ta samples helped in providing better anchorage and allowing stronger bonding of the cells to the Ta-45 sample surfaces. Moreover, the higher wettability and higher surface energy of Ta (55 Our in vitro results show that the porous Ta samples not only enhanced cell adhesion and proliferation, but also stimulated cell differentiation in comparison to the porous Ti samples. This was confirmed by the enhanced ALP activity on the Ta surface, which indicates later stages of differentiated osteoblast function and can be linked to osteoid production and the matrix mineralization process Our experimental results on fabrication and in vitro biocompatibility of porous Ta indicate that modular all-tantalum implants with tailored porosity and superior biocompatibility can be fabricated using LENS™. As a result of the high wettability and surface energy of Ta, early integration of bone tissue with Ta implants can occur. Fabrication of porous Ta structures with total porosities between 27% and 55% has been successfully demonstrated using LENS™. The experimental results show that this process has the potential to create modular all-Ta implants with tailored porosity. The Young’s modulus and 0.2% proof strength of Ta have been tailored in the 2–20 The authors would like to acknowledge the Certain figures in this article, particularly Figures 8 and 9, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at doi: