Broad expression: Intestine Lung (alveolar type II epithelial cells)   Hypophosphatemia disorders can be divided conceptionally into those with increased fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) levels (caused by mutations of extrarenal factors or by tumors) and those with normal or suppressed FGF23 (due to mutations tubular phosphate transporters). Rickets are the consequence of dysregulated phosphate transport and/or FGF23 excess. X-linked hypophosphatemia is due to a hemizygous dominant mutation of the Disease manifestations (rickets, leg bowing, growth delay; osteomalacia, enthesopathies, tooth decay; tertiary hyperparathyroidism), differential diagnoses (inherited forms, tumor-induced osteomalacia), and therapeutic goals change with age. Conventional treatment with phosphate supplements and pharmacologic doses of active vitamin D may require the addition of growth hormone and calcimimetics. New biological therapeutics, including FGF23 targeting monoclonal antibodies or recombinant receptor blockers, are being developed and becoming available. Lastly, identification of genetic mutations associated with hypophosphatemia syndromes has contributed to our understanding of the pathogenesis and potential treatment of hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and renal stones disease. The endocrinologist Fuller Albright has been credited with the first description of hypophosphatemic rickets (HR) that failed to respond to high doses of vitamin D. The diagnostic label vitamin D–resistant rickets was later changed into X-linked HR (XLHR). The currently preferred term is X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH). XLHR is the most common of genetically defined hypophosphatemic disorders and serves as the prototype of hereditary PO Phosphorus, the most abundant anion in the body, The average adult body contains about 700 g of phosphorus: 85% is found in skeletal bones and teeth, 14% in soft tissues, and only 1% is present in the extracellular fluid, which is in equilibrium with the major phosphorus stores. The primary organ involved in the maintenance of the serum PO Intestinal absorption of phosphorus is nutrition dependent. Only 30% of PO The major site of Pi excretion is the kidney (900 mg daily in adults consuming an average diet). PO Reabsorption of PO Physiologically, expression of NaPi-IIa and NaPi-IIc is highest in early convoluted proximal tubules (S1 segment) and in juxtamedullary nephrons but spreads to the late proximal tubule (S2/S3 segments) and to superficial nephrons during PO Multiple mechanisms regulate Pi transport. PTH, calcitonin, glucocorticoids, and other drugs, such as calcineurin inhibitors, as well as acidosis inhibit tubular reabsorption. In contrast, growth hormone, IGF-1 and insulin, thyroid hormone, and hypocalcemia and PO Important regulators of the serum PO FGF23 is a glycoprotein of 32 kD, produced and secreted by osteoblasts and osteocytes. The precise mechanism underlying FGF23 dysregulation, for example, in XLH and tumor-induced osteomalacia is still being worked out. αKlotho has been originally described in 1997 as the product of a gene named In humans, αKlotho exists as a full-length, single-pass (trans)membrane form and a pleiotropic, soluble (shed) extracellular form (sKlotho).  PTH is an important hormonal effector of PO PTH binding to its receptors on proximal tubular epithelial cells leads to diminished abundance of apical proximal tubular NaPi-II cotransporters and diminished reabsorption of filtered Pi along the proximal tubule. The clinical presentation of hypophosphatemia syndromes depends on the duration of hypophosphatemia and the age of patients (infancy and childhood vs adulthood). Different forms of hypophosphatemia cause similar, albeit not identical, clinical features and radiographical changes. Bone pain and deformities, fractures, disproportionate short stature, and dental abscesses are predominantly seen in chronically hypophosphatemic children. Adults may present with osteomalacia, bone pain, stiffness, and enthesopathy. Osteoblasts regulate the synthesis of bone matrix and bone mineralization, including the deposition of hydroxyapatite (Ca  From a mechanistic and conceptual viewpoint, hypophosphatemia syndromes can be divided into those with increased FGF23 levels and those with normal or suppressed FGF23. Hypophosphatemia with increased FGF23 levels is caused by extrarenal factors, whereas hypophosphatemia with normal or suppressed FGF23 is due to mutations in genes encoding tubular PO The most common inherited form of hypophosphatemia and rickets is X-linked dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH or XLHR; OMIM XLH is caused by loss-of-function mutations in X-linked hypophosphatemia is a dominant genetic disease. Hemizygous females who inherit a dysfunctional (mutated) Early intervention with balanced oral PO Oral PO Oral PO If urine calcium/creatinine levels are consistently elevated, this may reflect excessive PO Interestingly, secondary hyperparathyroidism can also be offset by oral cinacalcet (a calcimimetic) in XLH. When oral therapy is started late or adherence is poor, skeletal deformities may become severe enough to require orthopedic intervention. In this case, surgery should be performed after a 3- to 6-month period of intense therapy to achieve good metabolic control and lower alkaline phosphatase levels. Close postoperative monitoring is equally important to maintain axial leg alignment. Whether the addition of D-mimetics (eg, paricalcitol) improves outcomes, especially in patients with XLH and secondary hyperparathyroidism, requires further studies During early to midadolescence, adherence to prescribed dosing may be suboptimal. The growth spurt at this time may further alter calcium/PO Mild secondary hyperparathyroidism is evident in some affected patients before any oral PO The PHEX gene is not expressed in the kidney but is strongly expressed in parathyroid tissue, implying a role in normal PTH gland biology. Excessive oral PO Tertiary hyperparathyroidism occurs in the second decade of life in a minority (20%–30%) of patients with XLH and with higher frequency in some families more than in others. It is recognized by the onset of gradually increasing total serum calcium levels with inappropriate serum iPTH. Often, a single benign parathyroid adenoma may be identified by a combination of technetium-99 m sestamibi (sesta methoxyisobutylisonitrile) single-photon emission computed tomography imaging, and neck ultrasound. Hypercalcemia induces a shift from mild medullary nephrocalcinosis (associated with therapy) to a broader pattern of cortical nephrocalcinosis. When hypercalcemia is severe, there may be progressive loss of GFR, leading to end-stage renal failure. Predictably, the characteristic FGF23-driven phosphaturia recurs in renal allografts. To avert the consequences of sustained hypercalcemia, cinacalcet may be used temporarily to suppress serum calcium for months at a time. However, this strategy does not seem to cause involution of the offending benign adenoma, so subtotal parathyroidectomy with or without subcutaneous autotransplantation of any normal-appearing resected tissue is eventually required in most cases. Intraoperative measurement of serum iPTH is important to ascertain whether the offending tissue has been removed. Postoperative bone hunger may require calcium supplementation. Adolescents are at risk for dental abscesses due to defective dentin formation. Careful dental care to prevent caries is important. As linear growth comes to an end during adolescence, the primary rationale for oral PO Although early calcitriol/PO Based on the improved understanding of the central role of FGF23 in XLH and other hypophosphatemias, treatment with specifically designed inhibitors is a rationale and promising approach. Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemia (ADH) is caused by activating missense mutations of arginine residues at (R) 176 or 179 in Treatment of ADH includes PO Autosomal recessive forms of hypophosphatemia have been linked to inactivating mutations in several genes ( ARHR2 results from an inactivating mutation of the gene encoding This form of hypophosphatemia is caused by a de novo translocation with a breakpoint on chromosome 13q13.1, close to the Klotho gene, which leads to high plasma levels of αKlotho, the FGFR coreceptor for FGF23. Patients with this chromosomal abnormality also have increased FGF23 levels, in keeping with the importance of αKlotho in the regulation of serum PO Fibrous dysplasia/McCune-Albright syndrome (FD/MAS) is due to somatic (noninherited, mosaic) activating mutations in the GNAS gene in bone, endocrine glands, and skin. The phenotype is highly variable. Patients with FD/MAS develop fibro-osseous masses, café-au-lait spots, precocious puberty, and other endocrine disorders due to hypersecretion of various hormonal molecules. Additional features are hyperthyroidism, pituitary gigantism (growth hormone), and Cushing syndrome (cortisol) due to adrenal hyperplasia, among others. The skeletal abnormalities are described as monostotic (Monostotic fibrous dysplasia, usually asymptomatic) or diffuse polyostotic changes polyostotic fibrous dysplasia that cause substantial morbidity or even death. Fibrous bony lesions are rich in FGF23-producing cells. Excess FGF23 causes PO Therapeutic interventions for patients with FD are mainly surgical, that is, correction/stabilization of fractures and deformities. Medical treatment with (antiresorptive) bisphosphonates has been successfully tried. A homozygous mutation in Schlingmann and colleagues Larger deletions, including Heterozygous variants in Initially described in a Bedouin kindred, Persons carrying one mutated allele are generally healthy and have a normal PO Tumor-induced osteomalacia is a paraneoplastic disorder caused by the secretion of phosphatonins (phosphaturic hormones), including FGF23 (see Hypophosphatemic rickets, most due to the X-linked dominant form caused by pathogenic variants of the Conventional treatment consists of PO We thank Giuseppe Pascale for help in the design of the figures.