The average bubble size and the amount of acid mist generated during copper electrowinning were measured under a variety of operating conditions. In the absence of surfactants, the amount of generated acid mist decreased as the average bubble size increased. In contrast, in the presence of FC-1100, a surfactant typically used to supress acid mist, acid mist showed little correlation with the average bubble size. The significant change in the bubble burst mechanism, due to the presence of surfactant molecules in the solution/air interface, is believed to be the reason for the suppression of the effect of bubble size on acid mist.There are 57 copper electrowinning tankhouses worldwide producing more than 4.5 In our previous publications we studied the effect of five different parameters on the amount of acid mist and on the size of oxygen bubbles separately ( The copper electrowinning process was replicated in a bench scale tank. Pb–Ca–Sn alloy and 316 Acid mist was captured by nitro cellulose filters (HAWP04700 by Millipore) placed 50 For each experiment, live images of bubbles were captured and later analysed by image processing software. The average bubble sizes shown in The average acid mist and bubble size measurements from 64 experiments are shown in In electrowinning, both bubble size and acid mist are strongly influenced by the presence of a surfactant such as FC-1100 ( When a bubble bursts at the free surface of a solution, it usually produces two types of drops: film drops and jet drops. Film drops are created from the shattering of the film cap of the bubble whereas jet drops are created from the disintegration of a liquid jet which is formed after the collapse of the bubble cavity ( When FC-1100 is present, Contrary to one of the most widely accepted understanding, a reduced surface tension will not necessarily lead to less acid mist. For example,  When a surfactant is present in a solution, surface viscosity and surface elasticity are two measurable parameters and are often utilised to characterize the dynamics of monolayer. Surface viscosity represents the resistance to deformation of the film to a stress imposed on the system ( In the absence of a surfactant, such as FC-1100, surface viscosity in the solution/air interface does not exist or is negligible. Hence, the bubble film offers little resistance to burst. Consequently, only a small portion of a bubble's kinetic energy, which is due to its buoyancy force, is required to produce high number of fine droplets. The remainder of the bubble's kinetic energy is transferred to the droplets that are generated upon its collapse. This leads to the generation of droplets with higher initial velocities, increasing their chances of becoming airborne (i.e. generation of higher amounts of acid mist). This is why bubble size has a noticeable effect on the amount of acid mist in the absence of surfactant molecules. In the presence of surfactant molecules, when a bubble reaches the free surface of the solution, the thinning of the liquid film that is formed between the bubble and the ambient air leads to the creation of a gradient in the concentration of the surfactant molecules. To balance the concentration gradient, the surfactant molecules move towards the thinner section of the film, presenting resistance to the film thinning process in the form of surface viscosity and/or surface elasticity. A large portion of the bubble's kinetic energy is therefore dissipated to overcome the surface viscosity and surface elasticity of the solution. Hence, the liquid droplets produced from the burst have less energy and travel at lower speeds in comparison to those generated in the absence of a surfactant leading to lesser amounts of airborne droplets (i.e. lesser amounts of acid mist). In addition, the resistance to burst also implies fewer number but larger volume of droplets. In summary, the presence of a surfactant in the solution changes the bubble burst behaviour to the extent that the effect of bubble size on the amount of acid mist becomes negligible, hence the near horizontal trend line for the No FC-1100 data in In the copper electrowinning industry there are two frequently asked questions in regard to acid mist. The first question is whether smaller bubbles generate less acid mist or big bubbles. The second question, which follows naturally, is that how the process parameters can be changed to favour the generation of bubbles that will result in less acid mist? In our studies, we have shown that in the absence of surfactants, an increase in the average bubble size does indeed decrease acid mist generation. However, it should be noted that even most extreme changes in the process parameters, within operational limits, can only result in at most 10–20 In the absence of a surfactant, bubble size has a noticeable negative correlation with the amount of acid mist being generated in that larger bubbles result in less acid mist. In the presence of a surfactant, however, the effect of bubble size on acid mist becomes negligible. The change in the bubble burst mechanism, due to the presence of surfactant molecules at the solution/air interface, is proposed to be the reason for the suppressed effect of bubble size on the amount of acid mist.