Nano-crystalline grains of about 100nm were obtained in a metastable austenitic steel by a repetitive thermomechanical process consisting of conventional cold rolling and annealing. The nano-grained austenite was transformed on annealing from the strain-induced martensite, which had formed during cold rolling. The nano-structured austenitic steel exhibits not only high strength (above 1GPa) but also good elongation (above 30%).In recent years severe plastic deformation (SPD) processes, such as high pressure torsion (HPT), equal channel angular pressing (ECAP), and accumulative roll-bonding Some researchers have tried to fabricate nano-crystallines of 200–500 As the process is carried out only by conventional cold rolling and annealing, it seems more appropriate for large-sized sheets, and has more potential for actual applications, as compared with other SPD techniques. It is wondered, however, whether a repetitive application of the thermomechanical process, as schematically shown in An Fe-0.1%C-10%Cr-5%Ni-8%Mn alloy in nominal composition was prepared using a high frequency vacuum induction furnace. The actual chemical composition of the alloy is listed in The ingot was homogenized at 1200 The microstructures were observed using a transmission electron microscope (TEM). Thin foils for TEM investigation were jet-polished in a solution of 10% perchloric acid +90% ethanol at −40 Tensile tests were performed at ambient temperature using an Instron 1127 machine at a crosshead speed of 2 The microstructural changes investigated by X-ray diffraction at each stage of the repetitive thermomechanical process are shown in After the second cold rolling (X-ray pattern (D) in  After the first annealing ( After the second cold rolling, consistent with the results of X-ray diffraction, the SAED pattern ( After the second annealing, the grain size is successfully reduced further, as shown in Considering overall microstructural changes during the repetitive thermomechanical process, there is an obvious relationship between the width of the martensite lath and the austenite grain size. The smaller the initial  The engineering stresss–strain curves of the nano-crystalline steels are shown together with that of the solution treated sample in The solution treated sample shows low yield strength (120 A metastable austensitic steel, containing less Cr and Ni, and higher Mn contents than those of typical austenitic stainless steels, repeatedly underwent a cold rolling and annealing process. During the repetitive thermomechanical process, γ austenite decomposed to α′-martensite on cold rolling and its reverse transformation to austenite occurred during annealing just above the austenite finish temperature. The repetitive thermomechanical treatment generated nano-crystalline austenite grains of about 100 This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy of Korea. The authors acknowledge the support.