The carbonaceous matter (CM) in gold ores behaves similarly to activated carbon in its ability to adsorb aurocyanide ions. This phenomenon is termed preg-robbing as the adsorbed gold cannot be recovered from the CM. The mechanism of gold adsorption depends, among other things, on the surface functional groups, pore structure and maturity of CM, and hence the development of graphitic structure. In this study, the fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium was used to biomodify the surface and alter the gold adsorption ability of anthracite coal, which was used as surrogate for CM. Characterization, employing FTIR, XANES, Raman and TEM analyses, showed more oxygen-containing groups and enhancement in the amorphous nature of carbon, following fungal transformation. As well, pore structure measurement indicated drastic reduction in surface area and micro pore volume, and enlargement in average pore diameter. The results suggest a number of theories by which P. chrysosporium biotransforms CM: (a) surface oxidation, which disrupts the continuous graphitic structure, thus decreasing the active sites necessary for adsorption; and (b) reduction in surface area via (i) plugging of pores possibly by fungal biomass and/or slimy substances formed through fungal interaction with the growth medium, and hence decreasing accessibility of gold to the adsorption sites, and (ii) cleavage of bonds leading to pore enlargement, thus rendering the pores too large for adsorption of the aurocyanide ion which are known to adsorb into micropores.Natural carbonaceous matter (CM) forms an integral part of refractory carbonaceous gold ores, and is composed mainly of hydrocarbons, humic acids, and graphitic/amorphous elemental carbon. The elemental carbon component behaves like activated carbon and thus adsorbs gold, and the humic acid may form complexes with gold, while the hydrocarbon fraction has negligible interaction with gold ( Unlike CM, activated carbon is a microcrystalline form of carbon having graphitic structure and functional groups on the surface. Activated carbon adsorption is one of the major techniques used in gold recovery after cyanidation. The adsorbent is also effectively used in the carbon-in-pulp process for gold adsorption during cyanidation, because activated carbon’s granular size of 2–4 The mechanism of gold adsorption onto activated carbon and the elemental carbon associated with the natural CM is thought to be similar ( Several techniques have been employed in an attempt to reduce preg-robbing by CM, and these include roasting, blanking with organic agents, activated carbon adsorption and microbial transformation (  In a previous study by Anthracite coal was obtained from the Coal Bank of the EMS Energy Institute and fungal spores of In order to better understand the adsorption mechanism, characterization was performed on both as-received and 14-day fungal treated anthracite using various techniques. The changes in surface characteristics of anthracite were observed by measuring surface area, pore volume and size and the presence of oxygen groups were determined by XANES and FTIR, and structural features by Raman and TEM. BET and pore size analyses were conducted using a micromeritics ASAP 2000 Multi-Point BET, and homogenized samples were analyzed for pore size and volume by high pressure nitrogen adsorption. For XANES analysis, the samples were dried and ground with a mortar and pestle to achieve homogeneous thickness ( FTIR analysis was conducted by diluting milled samples of both as-received and biotreated anthracite with spectroscopic grade KBr in the ratio of 1:100 (  The effect of fungal transformation time on gold adsorption as presented in It is thus very clear that The adsorption sites for gold are associated with the pores of the adsorbent and hence it was necessary to know how fungal transformation changes the nature of these pores. The surface area and porosity measurements are presented in The micro pore volume and average pore diameter of the as-received sample were 15.09 The micropore surface area on the other hand reduced by about 80% following fungal treatment to 0.61 The photomicrograph of  The C In this study, X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy was utilized in observing changes in the surface functional groups on anthracite. Further analysis of the structure of anthracite using TEM indicated a more amorphous surface following biotransformation as compared to the as-received anthracite ( On the other hand, The degree of graphitization of carbonaceous materials such as anthracite, can be studied by Raman spectroscopy. There are various peaks that have been assigned to graphitic and disordered structures in various ways by different researchers but the two most distinct ones are the peaks around wavelengths of 1580 It can be seen from the figure that all the peak intensities reduced following fungal-treatment. Considering the two major peaks (1580 The current theory of gold adsorption from alkaline cyanide solution favors adsorption of the gold dicyano complex on the surface of graphitic planes of carbon via donation of delocalized pi electrons from the graphitic planes to the empty 6s shell of gold ion ( In a review by It can be estimated from work done by The hyphae of Surface area and pore size measurements as shown in The white rot basediomycetous fungus, Investigations showed that BET surface area and micro pore volume reduced by 76% and 80%, respectively, whereas average pore diameter increased from 5.75 The authors are grateful to Dr. Yongsheng Chen of the Energy and Mineral Engineering Department, Penn State University, for his assistance in acquiring the XANES spectra, and to Prof. Ming Tien of the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Penn State for providing the fungal spores. The authors also acknowledge the University of Mines and Technology, Ghana Education Trust Fund and the Schlumberger Faculty for the Future for financial assistance. The enormous assistance of Prof. Yaw Yeboah of the Energy and Mineral Engineering Department of Penn State is very much appreciated.