This paper presents the results from a statistical study of a continuous solution purification procedure. The purpose of the work was to study the role of various reagents acting simultaneously and their correlations with the calculated deposition efficiencies of impurities.
                  Cobalt cementation is the second part of the electrolyte purification section at Outokumpu Kokkola Zinc, Finland. At Kokkola, zinc is produced by an aqueous electrowinning process. The zinc sulphate solution is processed in a three-part electrolyte purification process where impurities more noble than zinc are removed. In the second part of the purification, arsenic solution and zinc powder are added to create conditions where aqueous impurities are reduced to solid metals/arsenides. The deposition process is, in principle, simple, but purification results show that there are large variations in the calculated deposition efficiencies. The deposition efficiencies depend on several accelerating and decelerating components, of which copper is the best known and documented.
                  The data is collected from a pilot scale continuous purification process. The significance of the composition of the incoming solution, the deposition components, together with zinc and arsenic feeds are evaluated by using a feed solution consisting of variable amounts of the impurities under study. Process data is evaluated by calculating correlations to the impurity deposition efficiencies. Results reveal that the success of purification is a combination of several components and that all of these components have a fairly low correlation to deposition efficiencies by themselves. In the purification process, deposition efficiencies tend to decline more slowly than components affecting them in the feed solution. Positively affecting components are a high copper content in the feed solution, combined with a high zinc powder feed and low arsenic feed. Weaker positive effects are formed by high aluminium with low calcium and silicon contents in the feed solution.The most important feature of zinc is its ability to prevent the rusting of iron by galvanising. A thin zinc layer prolongs the lifetime of low grade steel markedly by slowing corrosion and therefore it saves energy and the additives used in the production of stainless steel. At the Kokkola plant, metallic zinc is produced by reducing it electrochemically from an aqueous solution. Before electrowinning, zinc is leached in a sulphate-based process, partially directly from concentrates and partially from calcine. The second part of the production is the solution purification step where harmful elements are precipitated. Finally, zinc is deposited electrochemically, stripped from cathodes, melted and cast In the electrolytic zinc production process, the purification of zinc sulphate solution plays an essential part. During purification, all elements nobler than zinc are deposited from the sulphate solution. These elements lower the efficiency of electric currents drastically and cause zinc dissolution even in small amounts. Impurities such as copper and cadmium can be removed easily, but the addition of zinc powder alone is not effective in removing cobalt, nickel, germanium and antimony. Therefore these elements are reductively deposited using zinc powder with cupric ions and alternatively arsenic trioxide (As In the case of Kokkola, the removal of impurities is done hydrometallurgically in three steps using zinc powder and As Some Cu is deposited at the first stage of solution purification using zinc powder. Cu precipitates in two ways: Zn dissolves and Cu precipitates to elemental copper (1), while part of deposited Cu precipitates soluble Cu to copper oxides (2). The process also contains side reactions The copper removal process generally follows these reactions: A high copper content in the feed solution increases the formation of copper oxides and speeds up the precipitation. The copper oxide formation In the second-stage cobalt removal process, the residual Cu along with Co, Ni, Ge and Sb are deposited using As In the batch reactor process, cobalt removal In the final stage, Cd is deposited by cementation with zinc dust. Cadmium removal currently follows the reaction: Of the metals which can be deposited electrochemically from aqueous solutions, only iron group metals (Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Co, Ni) begin to deposit on cathodes at potentials which are several tenths of volts smaller than their equilibrium potentials The deposition has several alternative mechanisms of which the most important are the formation of an intermetallic compound (Co To find out the importance of different reagents, deposition testing was done by At the Kokkola plant, cobalt removal was carried out earlier in a batch process Earlier studies presented in literature concentrated on ensuring the basis of the deposition process of cobalt and nickel by specific laboratory testing evaluate the representative power of analyses and collect measurements that had been used; develop a method of evaluating the success of the continuous purification process (calculate deposition efficiencies for the four different impurities); find out the influence of solution and deposition components on the deposition efficiencies. This work evaluates the influence of the quality of the feed solutions, the deposited components and the amounts of acid and arsenic solutions. In process conditions, these components are interactive and cause even tenfold changes in deposition efficiencies. When aiming at quality and cost optimisation, the control of mill processes plays a more and more important role. The deposition process described in this paper occurs in pilot-scale equipment and consists of four series-connected 580-L stirred tank reactors and one 250-L thickener. The supply stream is 650 L/h, the return feed from the thickener is 220 L/h and the process temperature is 80 °C. Solids were periodically discarded from thickener to keep the recycling load approximately constant. Amount of this circulated deposit was one of the studied parameters, but according to the results, deposits composition is more important than the total amount. Also, reliability of these results is weak, so this parameter is not included to the results. The study was a continuation of the laboratory tests and meant to be one step closer to process conditions. The amounts of reagents and circulated deposit were part of the studied parameters (not constants). The zinc powder used was special high grade (SHG) quality. Solution samples from each tank and one combined deposition sample from all reactors were normally collected once a day and in intensive research every 4 h. Deposition samples are pulverized, compressed into briquettes and analysed by X-ray fluorescence. Al, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ge, As, Cd, Sb, Si and Ca are all analysed at once. In the solution samples, in the concentration range of 1–2 mg/L, Al, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, Si and Ca are analysed with an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES). As and Sb (concentration<1 mg/L) are analysed using the hybrid ICP-AES technique. Co, Ni (<1 mg/L) and Ge are precipitated with an organic reagent and analysed by X-ray fluorescence. Fe Other measured components are the potential level, zinc powder feed and arsenic solution feed. The potential level is controlled to the desired value with the zinc powder feed. The arsenic feed is controlled by the copper, cobalt and nickel concentrations of the incoming solution. The dependence of the deposition rates on process conditions varies with different impurities. Traditionally, it is thought that in the deposition process of Co, Ni and Ge, it depends on the temperature and potential level, whereas in the deposition of Sb, it depends only on temperature (Sb occurs at oxidization levels 5 and 3 from which Sb In the batch process, the deposition rate is generally represented by In practice, the deposition surface is expressed as a function of the deposit amount, although dependence is normally complex and nonlinear. Old cobalt deposition works in the reactor as the driving force together with zinc powder, and the measurement of this amount is important for the controllability of the process. In the pilot tests, the solution flow is continuous through the reactors and the deposition rate calculation needs to be changed to correspond to new conditions. Instead of The first task was to find out how significantly the measured concentrations of solution and deposit elements affect the deposition efficiencies. The calculated correlation measures how variables or rank orders are related One of the most common measures of correlation is Pearson's correlation. Pearson's correlation coefficients reflect the degree of relationship between two variables Two variables can be perfectly related, but if the relationship is not linear, Pearson's correlation coefficient is not an appropriate statistic for measuring their association and, for example, Spearman's correlation should be used. Like the In both correlation methods, calculation is done to The composition of the feed solution fluctuated during pilot tests causing variations in the most important solution and deposit components Arsenic feed is controlled by the calculated combination of the Cu, Co and Ni of the feed solution. The most dominant part is the copper concentration and the arsenic feed mainly follows variations in it. To remove this copper dependence, the difference between the amount of arsenic solution used and the target value was also calculated and called in this case the arsenic shortage. In the pilot test, the efficiencies of the deposition rate tended to slowly degenerate. This was explained by changes in the deposit's quality and this development was compensated by raising the copper level in the feed solution. In this way, copper concentrations in the feed solution and deposit increased and the deposit regenerated more quickly (part of the deposit was removed from the thickener and part returned to the process). This copper level change was repeated later on. The effect of the copper concentration on the deposition efficiencies was also tested by shorter copper additions Cobalt, nickel and germanium reacted quite similarly to the changes in copper concentration. At the first copper level increase, deposition efficiencies rose at short notice to a level nearly 10 times higher, causing total deposition already in the first reactor. At the second copper level increase, effects on efficiency were slower and smaller. Short-term copper additions are seen in the cobalt and nickel, but the effect on the deposition of germanium and antimony was very small. Before calculating correlation coefficients, the data was screened for outliers (which can cause misleading results) and evidence of a linear relationship. This linear–nonlinear behaviour of data defines which analysing method is used. Interactions between the variables used were plotted and they were found to be partly nonlinear. This was taken into account by using Spearman's nonparametric correlations Nearly all the deposited elements have equally strong correlations to the deposition efficiencies, which is In Secondly, the As-feed was adjusted to correspond to the variation in the feed solution. The As-feed gets a positive correlation with the deposition efficiencies of Co and Ni and a negative correlation with Ge and Sb. Instead, arsenic shortage correlates positively with all deposition efficiencies (values are higher and at the same level). According to this positive correlation The above results were the inspiration behind the development of variables that better describe the real effect of the depositing components of feed solutions. This was done by calculating weighted moving averages (accumulation) for the depositing elements. Calculation concerns linearly the last 100 h The idea behind this is that the weighted moving average reflects the effect of the elements on the deposition process at the grain surface (time before they are buried into the inner part of the grain). Correlations are calculated again between the deposition efficiencies and Results from In the reaction kinetics chapter, the suggestion was made that deposited Cu would provide a cathodic place where Co can deposit more easily and that cobalt deposition stays efficient as long as fresh deposition plates are available. The role of As According to the results, Cu and Al get positive correlations for all efficiencies while Si and Ca both have negative correlations Al, Si and Ca concentrations are dependent on changes in previous parts of process, and those concentrations in the feed solution are not easily changed. It is much easier to affect the copper concentration in the feed solution and the amount of arsenic solution feed. Cobalt and nickel behaved quite similarly during pilot tests. Co reacted more clearly to the changes in copper concentration, while Ni behaviour was more independent of the measured components. When the feed solution copper level was raised for the first time, the Co deposition efficiency rose at short notice to a level nearly 10 times higher. Short-term copper additions caused peaks in efficiency The deposition efficiency of nickel also rose quickly when the copper level was raised for the first time. Short-term copper additions did not significantly affect the efficiency. At the second copper level increase, efficiency rose more quickly compared with Co, but still with a remarkable delay in comparison with the first time Germanium behaved in pilot tests mainly in the same way as Co and Ni, with only a couple of extra changes The deposition efficiency of Sb was estimated beforehand to be mainly independent of process conditions (efficiency is determined by reduction reaction rate between Sb This study determines how different components affect the behaviour of the continuous cobalt removal process. Deposition efficiencies are calculated for four harmful deposited elements. According to earlier studies (made only on Co and Ni), deposition depends on the temperature and reagents used, which lower deposition over potentials and catalyse deposition efficiencies. The effect of temperature was not studied in this work, and the assumption was that raised temperatures do not essentially improve the purification results if other conditions are not right. Deposition efficiencies varied strongly with all deposited elements, and efficiency correlation to the solution constituents was quite weak. The strongest effect was generated by copper concentration. Deposited elements got higher correlations than solution constituents, but strong cross correlations and simultaneous changes in several feed solution elements made it difficult to evaluate the total effect of each component. Calculating the weighted moving averages of feed solution components offered a more reliable way to evaluate correlations between depositing components and deposition efficiencies. In this case, moving averages were calculated over the latest 100 h. This calculation represents more reliably how deposited elements participate in the deposition process on the grain surface before they are buried in the inner parts or removed from the process circulation. Positively affecting components were a high copper content in the feed solution combined with a low arsenic feed compared to the target value. Cu and As shortage got positive correlation values between 0.242 and 0.465 in all cases. Increasing copper content catalyses the reaction by offering active deposition sites. As stabilises the deposition process, but it seems that slightly lower amounts would lead to better results. More unreliable components affecting deposition efficiencies are the Al, Ca and Si contents in the feed solution. High Al, low Ca and low Si contents seem to have a positive effect. Overall, all of the components have fairly low correlation to deposition efficiencies by themselves. Low correlations seem to result partly from the strong interaction between components and partly from process delays. Delays are seen in the deposition efficiencies, which tend to decline more slowly than the components producing them in the feed solution. In problematic purification conditions, high Cu would act as a short-term solution by causing faster circulation and displacing of old and inactive deposit. Feeding of higher copper amounts is not a permanent solution because a higher amount of Cu also leads to a growing amount of removed deposit. In conclusion, this study underlines the benefits and difficulties of real process analyses. Analyses done in process conditions show how different components interact and affect the results. At the same time, mainly uncontrolled and partly simultaneous changes in the solution components make interpretation difficult and lead easily to miscalculations. However, a more precise understanding of reaction efficiencies would decrease the occasional overdosing of reagents and ensure the required purification rate. This work was financed by Finland's National Technology Agency (Tekes) and Outokumpu Research Oy. The general support and authorization from Outokumpu Kokkola Zinc and Outokumpu Research to make operational data public is highly appreciated. I would particularly like to acknowledge my gratitude to Björn Saxen and Kai Judin for their interest and ideas during the project and to my colleagues for their invaluable proposals.