Tensile testing was performed on a 4mm thick sheet of the aluminum–lithium alloy AA2195 in T87 (solution treatment+water quenching+7% cold work+peak aging) temper which was subjected to 7% cold working by combination of cold rolling and stretching, over a temperature range from ambient to liquid hydrogen (20K) conditions. Properties were evaluated in longitudinal as well as transverse directions to characterize anisotropy with respect to strength and ductility. Strength and ductility were compared to the conventional aluminum alloy AA2219-T87, developed for similar cryogenic applications. Decreases in test temperature led to higher strengths with little or no change in ductility. As the temperature decreases, the differences between ultimate tensile strength as well as yield strength for two different combinations of cold roll and stretch studied in the present work, narrows down and become equal at 20K.Industrial studies have shown that low density and good mechanical properties such as moderate to high strength, good weldability, good elevated temperature and cryogenic mechanical properties, high corrosion resistance and amenability to superplastic forming In the last few years the mechanical behavior at cryogenic temperatures has been reported for many aluminum–lithium alloys such as AA2090, AA2091, and AA8090 In order to obtain improved mechanical properties and reduce the mechanical property anisotropy, aluminium alloys are given a combination of stretching and cold rolling while imparting T87 temper. Despite extensive studies, there has been no systematic study on the effect of cold working followed by stretching for exploiting the maximum mechanical properties with decreased anisotropy in the alloy AA2195 at cryo temperatures and its microstructural correlation. Accordingly, the present investigation is aimed at obtaining an understanding of the effect of combination of cold rolling and stretch prior to artificial aging on cryogenic mechanical properties and correlation with microstructures. Al–Cu–Li alloy AA2195 of average chemical composition Al–4.37Cu–1.2Li–0.6Ag–0.3Mg–0.17Zr was used for the present study. Near peak-aged alloy was examined in the form of rolled 4 Preparation of specimens for metallographic examinations was done by conventional polishing on a series of emery papers followed by disc polishing using alumina and one micron diamond paste. The freshly prepared specimens were etched with Keller’s reagent. Fractographic analysis of tensile tested samples was carried out using Carl Zeiss EVO scanning electron microscope. The composition of large intermetallic particles was measured by energy dispersive X-ray analyzer attached to the scanning electron microscope. Sub-microscopic characterizations of the samples taken from the sheets were carried out using an FEI G Representative micrographs of samples from the AA2195-T87 sheets subjected to condition A and condition B are shown in Tensile test Further, It can be observed from the plot (  Trends of ductility vs. temperature are not as pronounced for the alloy studied here, though a slight increase in% elongation with decreasing temperature for alloys in longitudinal direction is noted.   The serrated yielding occurs below a specified threshold temperature depending on the stacking fault energy of the material under study. The transition temperatures below which serrations occur are strongly material dependent and have been reported to be maximum of 35  At cryo-temperatures, localization of failure at the grain boundary takes place as the grain interior is strengthened relative to the grain boundary. Large number of scattered secondary cracks was found and these appear unusually deep. Minor variations in dimple size or morphology were observed depending upon the percentage of cold work and stretch combinations of the specimens. Close inspection at high magnifications indicated that the fracture surfaces were characterized by a bimodal distribution of dimple sizes. Larger voids were observed to nucleate mainly at small constituent particles, while void sheeting was observed to occur in the locally deformed regions between the larger dimples. Two types of particles are visible in the voids. The EDAX analysis of these particles ( In the present work, a study has been made on the effects of cold work and stretch combination prior to aging on the mechanical properties at RT, 77 Tensile and yield strength increase dramatically with decreasing temperature for both conditions examined. Ductility, however, is relatively unaffected over the cryogenic temperature range investigated. Strength levels of AA2195 are consistently superior to the conventional aluminum alloy 2219 at all temperatures, with no compromise in ductility over the range of temperatures examined. The ratio of UTS at cryo-temperature to room temperature in longitudinal as well as transverse directions is higher for condition A of AA2195 than condition B. As the temperature decreases, differences between UTS as well YS for two conditions narrows down and UTS for both conditions becomes equal at 20