In this study, laboratory experiments are conducted to investigate the rapid decompression and desorption induced energetic failure in coal using a shock tube apparatus. Coal specimens are recovered from Colorado at a depth of 610 m. The coal specimens are saturated with the strong sorbing gas CO2 for a certain period and then the rupture disc is suddenly broken on top of the shock tube to generate a shock wave propagating upwards and a rarefaction wave propagating downwards through the specimen. This rapid decompression and desorption has the potential to cause energetic fragmentation in coal. Three types of behaviors in coal after rapid decompression are found, i.e. degassing without fragmentation, horizontal fragmentation, and vertical fragmentation. We speculate that the characteristics of fracture network (e.g. aperture, spacing, orientation and stiffness) and gas desorption play a role in this dynamic event as coal can be considered as a dual porosity, dual permeability, dual stiffness sorbing medium. This study has important implications in understanding energetic failure process in underground coal mines such as coal gas outbursts.The sudden and violent ejection of coal and gas from a working face and surrounding strata in an underground coal mine is known as a gas outburst and represents a major coal mining hazard. In the last 150 years, more than 30,000 outbursts have occurred in the coal mining industry worldwide ( Scientific research on the mechanism of gas outbursts has been conducted for more than a century. Some of the earliest studies on this phenomenon were reported by Gas is stored primarily by sorption into the coal ( Although various models and theories have been proposed, the mechanisms of the energetic failure remain to be poorly understood for either the flow phenomena or the rupture processes. Among many parameters that contribute to the initiation of outbursts, gas desorption rate in conjunction with the gas pressure gradient ahead of the face is thought to be the important one ( To investigate the fragmentation of coal induced by rapid gas decompression and desorption, we perform fragmentation experiments in a vertical shock tube apparatus designed by We use specimens obtained from the Upper B seam, Colorado, USA.  The second type is the vertical fragmentation after the rapid decompression. Shock wave theory as a potential mechanism accounting for gas outburst was first proposed by The purpose of this work is to explore the dynamics of such an event. Our study is based on the hypothesis that the coal is internally pressurized, as previously postulated to explain the high gas pressure driven eruption phenomena ( In the fragmentation process we described above, the fragmentation criterion is assumed to be the tensile strength criterion. If the gas pressure differential after rapid decompression is larger than the tensile strength of the coal, the fragmentation occurs until the pressure differential across the fragmentation front is less than the tensile strength. Coal specimen exhibits a lower permeability magnitude in the range of 10 In summary, we conduct laboratory experiments using a shock tube apparatus to examine the energetic explosion behavior related to underground coal gas outbursts. Bituminous coal specimens recovered from Colorado at a depth of 610 m are used in this study. CO The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work is a partial result of funding by