Aphrons are surfactant stabilized microbubbles with thick soapy shells. Stability is a key feature of microbubbles. Colloidal gas aphrons (CGAs), with an average diameter of 50μm, offer particular advantages where the stability of microbubbles is of interest. Various factors that affect on CGA stability such as surfactant type, concentration, and processing parameters have been extensively studied. However, there is no simple and accurate stability index for characterizing the stability of microbubbles dispersion. In this study, the stability of CGAs dispersion has been examined based on the drainage curve by four stability indexes. The surfactant of choice was nonyl phenol ethoxylate (NPE), a nonionic surfactant. The results show that the one-tenth of drained liquid life (T
                     0.1), the time elapsed when the drained liquid from CGA dispersion reaches ten percent of its final height is the best indicator among the other stability indexes for characterizing the CGAs dispersion.Colloidal gas aphrons (CGA) or aphrons for short, first described by Sebba in surface phenomena literature, are surfactant stabilized gas microbubbles with diameters of the order of μm. They have two main components: a spherical core filled with gas and a relatively thick protective aqueous shell CGAs dispersion is generated by intense shearing force of a spinning disc in a surfactant solution at high speeds of around 6500 Aphrons appear to have an average diameter of about 50 CGAs have some unique properties: high interfacial area because of their small sizes, soapy thick shell and high stability compared to the conventional foams, flow properties similar to those of water, gas content of 55–65%, make it the lightest compressible liquid at ordinary temperature and pressure conditions Although the coalescence and shrinkage rate for aphrons are very low, the CGAs dispersion is gradually separated into a clear liquid phase and a foam phase in which the aphrons are inevitably crowded together more closely than the original dispersion. Details of clear solution interface rise versus time (i.e. drainage curve) provide a very useful insight into the structure of CGA dispersion. This is the basis of the method for the characterization of CGA dispersions that has been developed by Amiri and Woodburn There are several applications of CGAs such as removal of organic components from wastes The stability of a CGAs dispersion indicates its ability to resist changes in bubble size distribution Various factors affecting the stability of CGAs including temperature, pressure, electrolyte type, pH, concentration, type and structure of surfactant, and nanoparticle have been widely investigated by other researchers It has been generally accepted that the stable colloidal gas aphrons are difficult to form when either concentration of surfactant ( However, studies on the effect of geometric specifications of aphron generator on the CGA stability are limited. Lee et al. produced microbubbles of approximately 50 Amiri and Valsaraj investigated the influence of disc position in the surfactant solution on the separation efficiency in aphron flotation process In this study, the nonionic surfactant, nonyl phenol ethoxylates (NPE), was used. This surfactant has a worldwide production of around 700,000 The main objective of this work is to study the stability of CGAs dispersions with particular focus on the influence of disc size at various concentrations of surfactant and mixing times. Pure water with a resistance of 18  Drainage curve is an established method to characterize CGAs dispersion. In this work, the drainage curve method was used to study the effect of disc diameter, surfactant concentration, and mixing time on the CGAs performance. The method is based on determining the volume of drained liquid as a function of time in ambient conditions. Generated CGAs in each test were immediately transferred to a 0.5 To plot the drainage curve, the dimensionless height of interface or normalized height ( Various stability indexes can be considered: A standard method for evaluation of conventional foam stability is called the time half life, The one-tenth drained life can be considered as an indicator for evaluating the performance of CGA dispersion. Therefore, a new stability index, one-tenth drained life, Initial slope of drainage curve can also be considered as an indicator for aphron size. Therefore, another stability index, initial slope was introduced: the slope of the best line fits three initial recorded drained volumes versus time. Linear slope of any drainage curve can also be considered as an indicator for aphron size. Therefore, another stability index, linear slope, was introduced: the slope of the linear section of drainage curve (including at least 8 points with coefficient of regression, Measuring of all stability indexes have been demonstrated in It was done using The initial rising part of drainage curve is a good indicator of aphron bubble creaming rate It should be noted that the density of an aphron bubble depends on its size according to Young–Laplace equation: Δ The equation of state for an aphron bubble of radius It should be noticed that the importance of Eq. In this work, a low surface active agent, NPE20 is used which can cause a little change in the surface tension when the concentration of surfactant is above 500    Comparing  Comparing For producing new surfaces (smaller bubbles), a certain amount of energy is required (as work of spinning shaft), but surfactant molecules can reduce the amount of required work by reducing the surface tension of aqueous phase. Therefore, it can be imagined when surfactant concentration is sufficiently high, then the smaller size disc is also able to supply the threshold required energy. The developed rise velocity of microbubbles in this work, Eq. In the experiments, the effect of spinning disc diameter on the characteristics of generated microbubbles has been investigated in various surfactant concentrations and mixing times. Increasing in disc diameter enhances the availability of greater area for accommodating the surfactant molecules at solid/liquid interface in addition to promoting the turbulency. Increasing the turbulency and interfacial area facilitate the formation of microbubbles. Furthermore, mixing operation must supply enough energy to the system for producing new surfaces (as bubbles) and surfactant molecules can reduce the amount of required energy by decreasing the surface tension of aqueous phase. Hence, mixing time, surfactant concentration, and spinning disc size may play roles in the size of generated colloidal gas aphrons in addition to baffle position that affects on turbulency progress. Nonetheless, for conciseness of discussion, only one baffle position has been reported in this work. To quantify the effects of various parameters, a collection of experimental conditions and results based on the presented drainage curves is summarized in Any referred selected parameter can play a role in the stability of generated microbubbles.  The first two rows (belongs to The rows 3 and 4 (belongs to The The initial slope and the linear slope indexes are unable to detect such a fine discrimination.  To appreciate the role of mixing time, Comparing rows 5 and 6 ( Analyzing the data obtained from  Four possible stability indexes (half-life time, one-tenth drained liquid life, initial slope, and linear slope of drainage curve) have been considered for analyzing the performance of CGAs dispersion. The ability of each of these stability indexes has been examined in various mixing times for aphron generation and surfactant concentrations with two spinning disc diameters. It was found that the one-tenth drained liquid life is the most suitable for characterizing the CGAs dispersion. In other words, the time elapsed when the drained liquid from CGA dispersion reaches ten percent of its final height, The authors wish to acknowledge and appreciate the research deputy in Isfahan University of Technology for the financial support of this work.