The 6th Engineering Foundation Conference on Control of Particulate Processes was held from September 19–24, 1999 at Kingfisher Bay on Fraser Island off the coast of Queensland, Australia. Fraser Island is the largest sand island in the world and presented many of its own examples of particulate processes, albeit at a longer time scale than most delegates were used to. The conference brought together three distinct research communities: particle characterisation, modelling of particulate processes, and process control. The best discussions at the conference were generated at the interfaces between these disciplines. In the spirit of Engineering Foundation Conferences, there was also a good balance between academic and industry representatives. The first day was set aside for invited industry speakers to challenge the researchers on their future needs. Despite the wide range of industries represented, there were some common drivers. Industry is looking for quantifiable benefits from process improvements and improved quality control (the “six sigma” concept). There are clear opportunities here for better instrumentation and control. Developments in the life sciences were a second driver that is widely recognised. Thirdly, the move from traditional process orientation towards particle engineering and product design highlighted a broader view of “control” of particulate attributes that includes In line measurement of particle size distribution in dilute systems is well established technology and equivalent measurement in concentrated suspension is current state of the art. For many users, on line measurement of other properties that contribute to product attributes are now important, particularly the three S's: structure, strength and surface properties. Robust sensors for these properties are not yet available. A large process control toolbox is available for use. Combined with the present availability of robust sensors, the paucity of examples of industrial application of process control to particulate processes was surprising. In this area, the mineral processing industry is the clear exemplar of good practice. So the conference highlighted opportunities for smart companies to take advantage of recent improvements in understanding of particle science and sensor development. For researchers, the take home message was the need for an interdisciplinary and multiscale approach to controlling particulate attributes. Fifty-eight papers were presented at the conference. Thirteen presentations have been selected to be expanded to full refereed journal standard for this special edition. These papers give a good representation of the topic areas covered by the conference and demonstrate the breadth of coverage of this challenging and interdisciplinary area.