Whereas the prospective benefits of formalization programs are well-understood and received, less attention has been placed on the feasibility of such actions. This paper studies titling under China’s Collective Forest Tenure Reform. We employ the Formal, Actual, and Targeted (FAT) Institutional Framework, based on the ‘credibility thesis’, to examine whether titling increases tenure credibility. To do so, we draw upon interviews and surveys collected in the Wuling Mountain Area (Southwest China), and compare formal policy objectives to households’ targeted (desired) preferences and actual forest rights. Our findings show divergences between formal and targeted versus actual rights. While titles were widely issued, socially supported, and farmers deemed boundaries and plot sizes clear, there is a paradox: (i) half of forest titles did not record boundaries; (ii) boundaries were not uniformly recorded; (iii) no on-site surveying had taken place; (iv) plot data were based on replicating older data, estimates, or averages; (v) titles had not been issued in contested areas; (vi) farmers had a weak legal understanding of ownership and lease rights. We argue that due to pressure from the central government to complete titling in five years, forest registration has emerged as an 'empty institution': an institutional compromise where spatial complexities were disregarded and neglected during implementation. Although seemingly credible at present, such outcomes of formalization bear the risk that future changes could easily dampen the reform’s institutional efforts and intentions.Registration based on 1980s situation Registered size is according to villagers’ estimation, only boundaries are confirmed At least 90% issued Implementation took about one year Registration was based on 1983 forest title The task of registration was too heavy, many people working outside. Most villagers do not know the actual size, and in some villages, distribution was based on trees Young people do not know the plot size and boundaries At least 90% issued Some conflicts remain, no title issued Distributed in 2004, officially announced in 2002 Based on the situation of 1981–1987 Only one to two percent does not have a new title yet Financial resources and staff were too limited for realistic implementation, no on-site verification Young people not aware of boundaries Some workers did just register based on the original title, or recorded more for friends The reform started in 2009 Boundaries not clarified because there are too many small plots so the workload would be very high No on-site verification was performed due to the “hurried pace” of the reform Resources were sufficient For about 181.000 households only 1.000 did not receive a title yet Wide distribution of a new unified title On-site clarification and verification of forest rights Implementation in five years No clear on-site surveying due to human, time, and financial constraints No clear physical boundaries of forest parcels No uniform standard for rendering of forest boundaries No titles issued in contested areas Farmers’ display weak understanding of ownership and lease rights Titling supported by relevant local actors Boundaries and plot sizes perceived as clear by farmers Land titling programs have become increasingly popular as development policy. The main justification, as proposed by The above ideas have been met with acclaim by governments and multilateral organizations such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund ( With currently over 100 million titles issued and 1.8 million km In addressing this, our paper capitalizes on the recent advances made by the ‘credibility thesis’ ( The next section introduces the theoretical concepts and the analytical framework of this study. While the prospective benefits of formalization are well-understood on a theoretical basis, actions of formalization have also raised major objections. For titling, criticism has particularly problematized its use as a blueprint or institutional ‘fix’ for development ( An imminent risk but one that has remained difficult to observe, is that titles are issued as a symbolic token that remains inconsistent with its stated objectives ( In this regard, the empty institution possesses three features that need to be considered. First, it often emerges as compromises over political issues that are sensitive ( It needs to be stressed that the empty institution is not necessarily ‘bad’ or in lack of credibility, and its role may actually render positive outcomes for actors involved. For instance, To determine under what conditions land formalization achieves its intended effects – reflected in ‘credible’, ‘empty’, or ‘non-credible’ institutions – an analytical shift that goes beyond form is valuable. Deductive efforts have remained largely normative and deterministic, given its fixation on determining the ‘right’ form of institutions for development. Accompanying theories and models are found largely inadequate to explain why institutional interventions succeed or fail in achieving their intended effects ( In this light, the mooting of the ‘credibility thesis’ ( Conceived in this way, the credibility concept allows us to critically examine formalization beyond the widely accepted notions of its form. Previous studies using the credibility thesis have looked at various institutional arrangements, such as slums ( The credibility thesis builds on the seminal work by Elinor Ostrom, and is in various ways complementary to her research. Whereas In methodological terms, the credibility thesis relies on multiple sources of techniques and evidence (qualitative and quantitative) based on ‘multi-angulation’ ( The framework is constructed along three dimensions ( It needs emphasis that the FAT framework – like the object of institutions it studies – is to be regarded and employed in a dynamic manner. This is underscored by the fact that institutional arrangements over time may shift in and out of different states of being (e.g., an actual right can be formalized, or vice versa, a formal right may shift towards being an actual right). Important is also to include the aspect of time into the analysis through the contemplation of institutions at numerous time points: the proverbial t Well into the first decade of the twentieth-first century, about sixty percent of China’s forests are collective-owned (with the remainder state-owned), distributed among the homes of over 400 million people ( The success of leasing (termed ‘contracting’ or Within five years after implementation, nearly seventy percent of collective forests had been contracted or leased to households ( Observers have pointed out that failures and inconsistencies in the first round of reform resulted from the state’s inadvertent approach, weak economic capacity, and a lack of prior experience in forest reform ( Forest titling regained momentum in the early 2000s when Fujian province approved a measure that closely resembled the core principles of the Three Fixes policy ( The CFTR targets to grant households greater rights and autonomy over forests, with the underlying rationale that this allows for more individual economic benefits and incentives ( The majority of empirical studies have focused on the immediate effects of the reform, and have associated it with improved tenure security ( This is the area in which our study aspires to make a significant contribution, based on empirical insights from the Wuling Mountain Area. Whereas This study is empirically situated in the Wuling Mountain Area (WMA). The area stretches over four provincial-level administrations – Chongqing, Hubei, Hunan, and Guizhou – and includes 71 counties. The area has a size of 172.000 km Previous studies on the CFTR have focused on key forested areas or places where the reform was initially introduced (e.g., Yunnan, Fujian, and Jiangxi). Much less is known about the areas where the implementation started later, including the four provinces in the WMA that feature dominant collective-owned forest sectors (at least 90% of forests are collective-owned). Three main data sources were used. Our primary source is a household survey (N = 331), which was first pre-tested during a pilot study in early 2017 with 47 households in two-centrally located counties (Xiushan and Fenghuang). After careful review, a full survey was conducted in Fall 2017 with tablets using the EpiCollect5 application (version 1.1.4) that also logged GPS coordinates for every survey. Due to illiteracy amongst farmers, all surveys were conducted in-person, carried out by a research team of Chinese assistants led by the main author. With the absence of an accessible sampling frame (such as a household register) and the difficulties to create one, a household-to-household convenience sampling method was chosen. We aimed to collect five surveys per village, with about ten villages per county (totaling 40 to 50 surveys per county). We deliberately kept the number of surveys per village low, not only because data saturation tended to occur at this point, but also to reduce bias towards larger villages (small village sizes and outmigration made it difficult to find more than five respondents in one village). While the survey sample is non-representative, we aimed to enhance representation by visiting different and random villages within each county (with varying spatial attributes such as proximity to urban centers and accessibility of roads). The household survey was complemented with qualitative insights derived from our second source of data, which consists of semi-structured interviews with stakeholders (N = 29). Complementing quantitative data from the survey with qualitative insights, generally known as the mixed-methods approach, not only improves the robustness and validity of our findings ( While the above may provide a sufficient basis from which the Actual and Targeted can be understood, our third source consists of a range of officials documents (including policy texts, related laws, official reports) to account for the Formal. Taken together, the mixed-methods approach and the three sources of data enables us to interpret our findings according to different interest groups ( This part begins by stating the formal objectives of titling in a historical perspective (Formal, Recalling from Not much later, titling also was included in China’s Forestry Law in 1984 (and later reiterated in its 1998 amended version). With the initial results of the titling efforts that ensued in various places, in 2008, forest titling became a major component of the CFTR. It promoted titling on a national scale and provided detailed guidelines for its implementation: From the above, it is clear that formal objectives not only call for distribution of titles, but also for on-site clarification and verification of tenure rights. After rights have been confirmed, new and uniform forest titles must be issued to its respective holders. The new forest titles include detailed information considering the parcels’ location, size, type of trees, tenure term, and specific boundaries. The policy text further stipulates that forest rights that are disputed must also be mediated, before a new title may be issued. The authorities responsible for implementation, in most cases the State Forestry Administration at the county-level, are given five years to complete the reform. We begin our empirical inquiry with the Actual to scrutinize how the formal objectives of titling have been carried out. Starting with the titling rate, local officials admit that not every household received a title, but that titles have been issued to at least 90% of eligible households in their administration. Although the survey results point to a figure that is lower, they confirm that 75.6% of households under individual management currently possess a forest title. However, not all titles are derived from the recent reform, and titling is subjected to variation between the counties ( In spite of the high titling rate in their administration, officials from the five county bureaus acknowledged that in most places no actual on-site surveying and investigation had occurred ( In spite of national standards for boundaries based on GPS coordinates, there is a marked variation of how boundaries were recorded in the new titles ( The high workload and difficulties of forest clarification stem from factors that are both spatially- and historically-determined. Officials and local leaders argued that during the Three Fixes period, the concept of boundaries was not prevalent. Parcels were initially distributed by ‘pointing the finger’ ( Not only were there difficulties in clarification, but registration was also carried out via diverse methods and parameters. The initial distribution in the 1980s was based on household size. To guarantee fairness and avoid distributional conflict, villagers would receive different parcels with varying types and qualities of trees, giving way to a fragmented land structure. Also in this study’s sample, households have on average 3.2 forest parcels with each an average size of only 5.5 Another common issue was that during the registration process many households were not at home. In this survey, about one out of four household members have permanently migrated elsewhere for work ( A final and more sensitive barrier to implementation is the prevalence of forest conflicts. In accordance with the main policy text, titles would only be issued after a prevailing conflict over forests is resolved. The observed case of one township in Hunan – where the new titles are not distributed yet – illustrates the complexities of titling vis-à-vis conflicts. Various local leaders conceded that titles in the local administration had been delivered to their office in 2011, but the titles have yet to be distributed as of the survey date (September 2017). They were instructed by higher authorities to delay the issuance of the document, over concerns that its distribution would spark new conflicts as happened in the pilot area. One of the leaders reasoned that in the absence of the new title, forest boundaries and size are deemed less crucial by households. However, once these aspects are formalized and recorded, many farmers will readily object. This observation is particularly evident in cases where farmers opposed the practices of unequal distribution during the 1980s, or where some leaders distributed larger and more profitable plots of land to themselves or relatives. Those practices are still widely perceived as unjustifiable by villagers, and formalization of these would risk legitimizing past decisions and fuel new contestations. As the example illustrates, without a new title, the status quo is preserved without further escalation. In dealing with the abovementioned complexities, authorities lament that these were not taken into account by central leaders and that the situation was exacerbated by the expeditiousness of the reform. Most county officials bemoan the fact that financial resources were insufficient, together with a lack of staff members to assist in the clarification process: In spite of the local complexities that surround titling, as made clear in the previous section, interviewed representatives from the county forest bureaus attach great importance to the new title. All emphasized that to establish a market for forestry, the document is a necessary constituent. Even though market demand for forests may be lower in mountainous areas, the title is perceived as a critical element to develop China’s forest sector: Furthermore, it is maintained that the title helps to increase awareness among the farmers of their rights, and improving tenure security. This is closely tied to the legal function of the title, which has been alleged to resolve conflicts: At the same time, local authorities argued that not many economic benefits are derived from household forests, and therefore the delineation of boundaries and estimation of size is not prioritized or considered necessary, with the costs of clarification outweighing the prospective benefits. Similarly, for farmers, despite the absence of clear confines on forest parcels most maintain that the demarcations (79.9%) and plot sizes (66.3%) of their forest parcels are clear. At the same time, even when boundaries are considered unclear, it is not considered an issue by most farmers (83.1%). Actions of titling were also largely supported by households ( So far, we have seen that the Actual has been constrained due to mostly spatial complexities at the local level, and hence, on-site surveying, clarification, and verification did not occur in most places. Although the Targeted showed that this has not led to increased concerns amongst farmers who still valued the title, the implications of such nonconforming practices still need further exploration whether titling increased tenure credibility for China's case. As a first step, we assess the impact of the titling outcomes by comparing the group of new titleholders with a (small) group still possessing the title distributed in the 1980s. Here, bivariate analyses using cross-tabulations were performed ( In addition, households with a new title were asked directly as to what impact the new title has brought about. The results also show no evidence that the reform has changed or clarified the rights of titleholders. Only few agreed that the reform has led to clarification of rights (4.3% agreed), clarification of boundaries (16.5%), income increments (10.6%), and enhanced investment incentives (9.6%). Closely related, because the new title did not clarify rights, households have remained unaware of their stipulated rights. Most strikingly, of those with a new title, only 27.0% recognize collectives as the rightful owners of forest, and only 39.1% correctly understood that the lease term is 70 years. With rampant unawareness of rights and ambigious demarcation of boundaries, the reform was implemented with little friction. Although invalid and overlapping land claims have remained unnoticed during and after implementation, they may become more pronounced over time. To illustrate, two examples point to the vulnerabilities that have remained after the reform was implemented. In WMA, payment for ecological services (PES) programs were introduced after titling occurred. The subsidy provided households an annual compensation designated for ecological purposes. As the title is used to determine one’s plot size, the program sparked concerns over stipulated parcel sizes. In another case, contestation over the title only emerged when farmers received compensation for the construction of a highway on forest land. This phenomenon is also acknowledged by respondents: Formalization is often regarded as a panacea for economic development and has gained popularity in development discourses. Whereas the pronounced benefits of formalization might be appealing, this study ascertains that strong claims for formalization must be interpreted with caution, as the mere ‘form’ of titles only account for a fraction of the actual impact, and hence, the success of formalization and titling policies. The case of China’s forest titling is a textbook example, which we demonstrated through an analysis along three dimensions – the Formal, Actual, and Targeted property rights. During a protracted trajectory of titling, another attempt was introduced under the 2008 Collective Forest Tenure Reform (CFTR) to improve forest tenure and management. The CFTR’s initial phase effectuated the formalization of land, forming the basis for subsequent phases of forest reform. At first glance, from the perspective of the Formal, such institutional interventions appear successful in our area of study. The formal objectives have been carried out by the local authorities and new, unified titles had been issued in most places within the stipulated deadline of five years. From the perspective of the Targeted, titling garnered strong support from both households and local officials, while boundaries and plot sizes were perceived as clear by households. By merely considering the form of formalization – i.e., the title as its most tangible result – the forest reform thus appears credible. However, the above should be understood with its caveats. As Moreover, in spite of national standards and guidelines, the implementation of the reform displayed considerable regional variety tied to historical complexities and spatial conditions. This was clearly appearent from the substantial variation in the registration of boundaries (hand-drawn, based on older maps, without individual boundaries, or only described in words). In areas where the initial forest distribution was poorly recorded and registered, the reform formalized previous decisions but left critical and potentially controversial issues unresolved and intentionally ambiguous. In places where conflicts over forests had already erupted, the titles were generally not issued, even if they had already been printed. This does not explain yet why there is such a marked divergence between the Formal and Targeted on the one hand, vis-à-vis the Actual on the other hand. At this point, we ascertain that the forest titling under the CFTR represents for what has been termed an ‘empty institution’. First, the current manner of titling does not upturn or in any way affect the forest boundaries and rights as they have been perceived and existed for decades at the local level. In fact, in most cases, local authorities did not perform on-site surveying, measuring, and verification of boundaries and rights. As Second, as a result of the above, the level of conflict around forest rights is actually minimized and to a high degree “socially accepted, relatively rarely contested and, in effect, credible” ( Three, perhaps a legitimate way to describe the current situation of forest titling is as an China’s most recent instance of forest titling initially appears credible at present, and thus considered a better alternative than formalization programs witnessed elsewhere that led to the imposition of non-credible institutions ( Findings in this paper suggest that when the use and value of forests are changing, the credibility of the titles may also shift. Such a change may, for instance, occur in the case of the (partial) lifting of cutting bans, new carbon trading schemes, new Payment for Ecological Services (PES) programs, or when rural-urban migrants return home in the face of economic crises. Research has shown that under such circumstances disputes may erupt over inaccurate parcel sizes and ambiguous boundaries ( As the related vulnerabilities and inconsistencies associated with form-focused approaches frequently remain unnoticed or disregarded by policymakers and property rights analysts, this paper has shown that increased attention to credibility – as a dynamic concept that considers change over time and space – may be useful. To better understand this, more longitudinal and contextualized research is needed to assess how formalization and titling unfold in real times and spaces. This may further reveal that the success of formalization programs is not merely determined by their form, but contrarily and equally, by how their function is negotiated in light of endogenous and spatial complexities.  The authors wish to thank Tan Jing Min, Leon Hermans, Aad Correljé, Xiuyun Yang, Thong Anh Tran , David Sims, Thorsteinn Kristinsson, and the participants of the Fourth Annual FLARE meeting for their helpful comments to earlier drafts of this paper. We also thank the three anonymous reviewers. This research has been supported by the