Kinetics of atmospheric leaching molybdenum from metalliferous black shales by air oxidation in alkali solution was investigated. The effects of temperature and sodium hydroxide concentration on the rate of molybdenum leaching were studied. The results of the kinetic analysis of the leaching data for various experimental conditions indicated that the reaction is controlled by diffusion with the activation energy of 15 kJ/mol higher than 65 °C, and controlled by chemical reaction with the activation energy of 57 kJ/ mol lower than 65 °C and molybdenum recovery of about 90% can be reached in about 30 min. In addition, increasing concentration of sodium hydroxide has a positive effect on the dissolution of black shales and reaction order with respect to sodium hydroxide concentration were approximately1.9 lower than 65 °C and 1.8 higher than 65 °C, respectively.Metalliferous black shales are organic-rich rocks that are commonly enriched in metallic elements localized in specific horizons. For example, in South China, the Lower Cambrian black shales sequence of the Niutitang Formation was deposited over several thousands of kilometers 9 ( Although this type of polymetallic Ni–Mo–PGE–Au mineralization has been known for over 30 years, and its origin has always been studied( Numerous studies have been shown that the chemical composition of molybdenum can be expressed as molecular formula of MoS Owing to the above-mention reasons, to date, there is no suitable process to treat this kind of ores. According to the mineralogical properties of metalliferous black shales, a new process has been proposed by our group—atmospheric leaching molybdenum from black shales in alkali solutions by air oxidation process. Air is an environmentally safe reagent and cost efficient during the dissolution of sulphide minerals. So the process is cost efficient and environmental friendly. The oxidative action of oxygen in alkali is based on the reaction according to the equation given below: By using the process, the following results can be obtained: Selectivity leaching of molybdenum can be achieved with the recovery of 98%; Nickel was enriched in the leaching sludge that can be further treated. As above, although the new process was proposed, some theoretical problems are still not resolved. Accordingly, the objective of this work was to assess the effects of some parameters such as temperature (30–90 °C) and sodium hydroxide concentration (66.7–200 g/L) on dissolution kinetics of metalliferous black shales. The equal recovery method was used to determine activation energy and reaction order, and rate-controlling step was also concluded. The metalliferous black shales used in this study were collected from GuiZhou province of Southern China. The ore was crushed to produced the 38–45 μm particle size fraction. The main chemical analysis of black shale is given in For leaching, the solution of sodium hydroxide and air supplied by an air compressor were used. Leaching experiments were carried out at atmospheric pressure in a 2 L stainless steel cylinder reactor, which was fitted with a diaphragm pump replaced the stirred equipment to circulate the pulp, a thermometer, and a stainless steel tube for injection of air by an air compressor. In addition, the reactor was heated with a thermostatically controlled disc-type electric cooker and withdrawal of liquid samples during the course of a run. For each run, 1500 ml of sodium hydroxide solution was charged into the reactor and heated to the desired temperature. 9 g sample was added and the contents were well-agitated by a diaphragm pump. Solution samples of 2 ml were withdrawn at appropriate time during a run. The slurry was removed and filtered. The residue was washed and dried, and both solid and solution samples were collected and analyzed for molybdenum by visible spectrophotometry. If the leaching curve is just like T3 at temperature T It can be seen from T3 that, the rate of leaching is very fast at the initial stages of leaching and decreases with time. The possible reason for this phenomenon is that there are at least two reactions at the same time in system, one is quick reaction, and the other is slow. Under these conditions, the equal-recovery method reported by Mo (1987) should be modified as follows: When the kinetic laws are consistent at different temperature and the recovery is x, the relationship of t When recovery is x′, the equation can be written as: According to the law of equal ratio, we have: For the same reasons, we can formulate the same relationship as follows: As a conclusion, According to Eq. As to reaction order under the same kinetic conditions, the similar equation also can be obtained as follows: Therefore by constructing the plots of ln( Where E is the activation energy, R is the ideal gas constant, n is the reaction order. The experiments were carried out in the 30 °C–90 °C temperature range in solutions containing 5 M NaOH. The results are given in It can be seen that, at all the temperatures investigated, the rate of leaching is very fast at the initial stages of leaching and decreases with time. After about 10 min, about 50% molybdenum recovery at all the temperatures was achieved. The possible reason for the phenomenon is the characteristics of occurrence states of molybdenum. The efflorescence degree of black shales is greater, thus a part of molybdenum is oxide or molybdate ( According to the Eq. Obviously, from However, as temperature decrease below 65 °C, the molybdenum extraction is relatively slow in the experiments carried out at 30 °C but significantly increases as the leaching temperature rises, which indicated that the effects of temperature are significant. And the activation energy takes on much higher values as the reaction rate becomes increasingly more sensitive to temperature, with an activation energy exceeding 57 kJ/mol. In general, a high value of activation energy indicates that the process is significantly influenced by temperature and the rate determining step would be the reaction at the mineral surface. As above, the value of activation energy is different in the different range of temperature. Accordingly, it is possible that the reaction order at the different temperature may be also vary. As a result, the reaction order of high temperature and the reaction order of low temperature are determined, respectively. The experiments were carried out for different concentration of sodium hydroxide at 70 °C and 50 °C, respectively. The sodium hydroxide concentration range 66.67 g/L to 200.00 g/L. The experiment data was given in Furthermore, the use of the kinetic model allows for the determination of the dependency of the rate of molybdenum dissolution on the concentration of OH Obviously, the reaction order keeps almost unchanged whether the leaching temperature is higher or lower than 65 °C, which implies that the reaction mechanism may be also unchanged and the minor difference maybe experimental error. However, it is inconsistent with the drastically decreasing of activation energy when temperature exceeds 65 °C. Hereby, more experiments on this interesting issue should be carried out in the future. The effects of temperature and sodium hydroxide concentration on the rate of molybdenum leaching were studied, including temperature range 30 °C to 90 °C and sodium hydroxide concentration range 66.67 g/L to 200.00 g/L. The reaction rate of metalliferous black shales oxidation is strongly dependent on temperature and sodium hydroxide concentration. The results of the kinetic analysis of the leaching data for various experimental conditions indicated that the reaction is controlled by diffusion with the activation energy of 15 kJ/ mol as the temperature higher than 65 °C, and controlled by chemical reaction with the activation energy of 57 kJ/ mol as the temperature lower than 65 °C. The total leaching time of molybdenum is still short for about 180 min with recovery of 90% at 40 °C and 30 min with recovery of 90% at 80 °C. In addition, increasing concentration of sodium hydroxide has a positive effect on the dissolution of black shales. The reaction order with respect to sodium hydroxide concentration was approximately 1.8 higher than 65 °C, and 1.9 lower than 65 °C, respectively. As above, the results show that molybdenum can be leached rapidly by air oxidation in alkali solution at high temperature. However, the reaction is controlled by diffusion at high temperature, so the diffusion process should be intensified by taking adequate measures in order to accelerate reaction. This work was financially supported by The Program of National High-Tech Research and Development of China (No. 2006AA06Z122), and The Program of the Rational Development & Utilization of Mineral Resources of Land and Resources Office of Hunan Province, China (No. 2006 K06).