The heating characteristics of flue gas desulfurization (FGD) gypsum and their mixtures have been investigated with a microwave reactor. The influences of three factors(water in FGD gypsum and the additives, anthracite and magnetite), on the microwave heating are the focuses of this work. The heating curves revealed that the temperature of FGD gypsum only reached to 299°C after microwave heating for 90min. With increasing proportions of magnetite and/or anthracite, the final temperature of sample rose significantly. The peaks of the heating rates between magnetite and anthracite are partially overlapped. Adding both of them to FGD gypsum, continuous increase of temperature was achieved. When adding 10wt% magnetite and 8wt% anthracite to FGD gypsum, a relatively high heating rate was obtained. The heating rate is intensified, in sequence, by water, magnetite, burning of anthracite and hot spots caused by agglomerates of anthracite and magnetite. Within 82min of microwave radiation, temperature of the mixture rose to 1040°C which met the decomposition temperature of FGD gypsum.Decomposition of FGD gypsum, CaSO Microwave heating, highlighted by virtue of volumetric heating and selective heating in contrast with the conventional heating Report FGD gypsum was prepared from Taiyuan Iron and Steel Corporation in China. Its chemical compositions are listed in In order to obtain a homogeneous sample, FGD gypsum, anthracite and magnetite powders were thoroughly mixed of about 1 The components of the partially reacted residues were analyzed with the Cu Kα line on a Rigaku D/max 2500 X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with patterns recorded in a range of 20–80°. The desulfurization rates of the samples were measured by a microcomputer rapid sulfur tester (WDL-100C) and calculated indirectly by the test date of SO The absorption of microwaves is related to permittivity ( In this study, magnetite and anthracite are used as microwave receptors to indirectly heat FGD gypsum. Due to the complex components of the mixtures, the dielectric properties of overall can be expressed by law of mixed logarithmic The average power density  Carbon materials, with delocalized π-electrons, show good microwave absorbance properties From Rapid heating stage. Possessed with high relative permittivity( Temperature nearly unchanged, the thermal equilibrium stage. With the existence of water in the mixtures, the resistivity of anthracite was reduced, resulting in lowering the absorbing efficiency of anthracite in microwaves Second temperature-rising stage. As the temperature rose up, the water vapor gradually removed out of the mixtures while the heating rate came to rise continually ( Ma et al. The microwave heating characteristics of pure magnetite and FGD gypsum-magnetite mixtures are showed in As an excellent microwave absorber, magnetite can be heated up rapidly in both According to the heating rate curve of magnetite in The comparison of the heating rate curves between anthracite and magnetite in  In order to investigate the effect of magnetite and anthracite in FGD gypsum mixtures, a series of tests were conducted. For further study the effect of water in the mixtures, a comparative test of anhydrous gypsum-(10 The desulfurization rates of FGD gypsum with 10 The nature of the products that form after the microwave treatment of FGD gypsum-(8 Thus, the optimal weight ratio to convert microwave energy to heat was found to be 8 The heating characteristics of FGD gypsum mixtures were carried out with a microwave reactor. It is found that within 90