Cu/Al2O3 composites with Al2O3 fractions between 0.3 and 0.6 were sintered at 100MPa under vacuum by pulse electric current sintering (PECS). The effect of the temperature and the ceramic content on the microstructure and densification of the composites was studied. The sintering behavior of mixtures prepared by the conventional blending of alumina and copper powders was compared with that of mixtures of copper with Cu-coated Al2O3 particles (18vol.% Cu). The composites prepared by the coated filler method were slightly more densified than those made through the admixture method, a variation that became more pronounced with an increase in the ceramic content. The composites prepared by the admixture method showed a large number of Al2O3–Al2O3 contacts that prevented densification, forming interparticle pores. The coated filler materials enhanced the connectivity of the matrix and distribution of alumina, yielding Cu/Al2O3 composites with 98.5 to 96.7% densification when varying the ceramic content from 30 to 60vol.%, respectively.Because of its high thermal conductivity and outstanding ductility, copper and aluminum are desirable electronic packaging materials. However copper metal suffers from a high coefficient of thermal expansion that must be modified to match the coefficients of semiconductor materials such as silicon and/or gallium arsenide that are commonly used in electronics. One way to accomplish this is to combine the metal with low-thermal-expansion materials, such as Al Among the most popular techniques for fabricating MMCs are liquid metal infiltration and powder metallurgy Pulsed electric current sintering (PECS), also known as spark plasma sintering (SPS), constitutes a novel technique for the super-fast densification of metals, ceramics and composites To the authors' best knowledge, the only evidence of applying the PECS sintering technique in the copper–alumina system is that reported by Liu et al. Beyond the hot-consolidation techniques, non-conventional mixing methods have been applied to improve the microstructure of pressureless sintered copper–alumina composites. Hussain and Kit In the present work, the effect of metal coating and ceramic content on the microstructure of sintered Cu/Al Cu/Al The sintering of the composites was carried out in a SPS apparatus (Dr. Sinter 1050, Sumitomo Coal Mining Co. Ltd., Japan). The mixtures were poured into a graphite die with an inner diameter of 20 The microstructure of the sintered Cu/Al Materials consolidated by pulsed electric current sintering usually show temperature gradients, i.e., there is a gradual positive or negative change of temperature from the surface to the center, depending on the metallic or ceramic nature of the heated specimen The graphs in From the temperatures registered, it is clear that the composites with 30 The sinterability of metal matrix composites is not only affected by the sintering temperature and packing density but also by the filler fraction. High ceramic fractions lead to the agglomeration of particles; the voids formed between particles are difficult to fill with the matrix material during compaction and frequently remain after sintering. When temperature and pressure are simultaneously applied, the matrix is softened by the heat input, making it easier to flow through voids. Irrespective of the processing temperature, The SEM micrographs in Considering the densification results shown in  At low filler contents, no differences between microstructures were observed, irrespective of the method used. The composites with alumina contents ranging from 30 to 50 Nevertheless, a composition of 60 It is expected that the improved microstructure of the composites prepared with the copper coated precursors leads to enhanced physical and thermal properties. Yih and Chung The absence of interfacial products also enhances the composites' material properties. Cu/Al This work was supported by the