Polyethylene glycol (PEG) was used as a catalyst to enhance chalcopyrite bioleaching with Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans in shake flasks. The effects of PEG on the sulfur oxidation of A. ferrooxidans and on the process of chalcopyrite bioleaching were investigated. The morphology, main components and sulfur speciation of bioleached chalcopyrite surfaces were evaluated combining with XRD, SEM and XPS. It was demonstrated that addition of PEG could significantly improve the bioleaching of chalcopyrite. Furthermore, the results indicated that elemental sulfur and jarosite were the main components of the passivation layer during the bioleaching of chalcopyrite. PEG could promote the sulfur oxidation by A. ferrooxidans due to an increase in bacterial attachment, and therefore accelerate the biooxidation of elemental sulfur generated in leaching process. It was found that PEG eliminated inhibitory elemental sulfur from the chalcopyrite surface which could be the main reason for enhanced the leaching efficiency.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS In addition, several studies have shown that the addition of surface-active compounds, especially non-ionic surfactants such as polysorbate (Tween) and polyoxyethylene alkylphenol ether (OP-10), could result in an enhanced bioleaching performance of minerals such as chromite overburden, cobalt ore, and sulphide gold ores ( This work aims to investigate chalcopyrite leaching by Chalcopyrite was obtained from Yunnan province, China, for use in this study. The chalcopyrite lumps were crushed manually and hand selected. Next, the isolated high-purity samples were ground in an agate mortar until all particles passed through a 45-μm filter. The primary chemical composition was determined to be 32.84% Cu, 33.10% S and 29.62% Fe.   Bacterial attachment on sulfur was studied according to a published procedure ( The effects of PEG on the sulfur oxidation by Bioleaching experiments were conducted in 250-mL flasks, containing 100 The pH values were determined using a pH meter (Sartorius PB-10). The ferrous iron concentration was determined by titration with potassium dichromate using sodium diphenylamine sulphonate as the indicator. The concentrations of total iron and copper ions were measured by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES). The ferric iron concentration was calculated as the difference between total and ferrous iron. The cell density was monitored using blood cell counting chambers and a Motic BA210 microscope. The components of the leached residues were analyzed by X-ray diffractometer (XRD, PAN-alytical X’Pert Pro). The morphology of leached chalcopyrite surfaces was examined by scanning electron microscope (SEM, ZEISS Ultra Plus). The sulfur speciation of leached chalcopyrite surfaces was determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscope (XPS, ESCALAB 250). Since the attachment of Along with elemental sulfur being oxidized to sulfuric acid by  During the second stage, the pH value of leaching solution decreased both in the absence and presence of PEG. Although ferrous iron oxidation contributed to proton consumption (Eq. SEM images of the leached residues in the presence and absence of PEG are shown in In order to analyze the components of chalcopyrite surface, the leached residues in the presence and absence of PEG were investigated by XRD. It indicated that Jarosite and elemental sulfur were formed during the chalcopyrite bioleaching with  Based on these successive investigations of surface layers of the bioleached chalcopyrite in the presence and absence of PEG, it could be confirmed that the jarosite and elemental sulfur were the main passivation products during the chalcopyrite leaching by Therefore, it can be proposed that the addition of PEG diminishes the passivation layer on the chalcopyrite surface in two ways: PEG eliminates the elemental sulfur generated in bioleaching, and reduces the amount of jarosite present. As a result, the dissolution process of chalcopyrite was accelerated, and the copper leaching efficiency was significantly increased by the addition of PEG. Effects of PEG 2000 on the sulfur oxidation by This work was supported by