This special issue asks, “Do classics exist in megaproject management?” We identify three types of classics: conventional, Kuhnian, and citation classics. We find that the answer to our question depends on the definition of “classic” employed. First, “citation classics” do exist in megaproject management, and they perform remarkably well when compared to the rest of the management literature. A preliminary Top Ten of citation classics is presented. Second, there is no indication that “conventional classics” exist in megaproject management, i.e., texts recognized as definitive by a majority of experts. Third, there is also no consensus as to whether “Kuhnian classics" exist, i.e., texts with paradigmatic clout. The importance of classics seems to be accepted, however, just as work to develop, discuss, and consolidate classics is seen as essential by megaproject scholars. A set of guidelines is presented for developing classics in megaproject management research.In conventional language a classic is a written work that is generally recognized as definitive in its field by a majority of experts in that field. Kuhn argues that classic texts are necessary for an academic field to make progress and consolidate itself. Classic texts are important because they serve as exemplars and reference points around which paradigmatic research, or what he calls “normal science,” may evolve. Paradigmatic research is used to effectively teach young scholars, or others who are new to a field, “how we do things around here” in terms of which problems to focus on; what theories, methods, and data are relevant; and what the consensus is regarding what constitutes good work in that field, according to Kuhn. However, from time to time the consensus may break down, argues Kuhn. When that happens, paradigmatic research serves as a counterpoint against which “revolutionary” research may pit itself in developing new ideas, aimed at toppling old paradigms and arriving at new ones. Classics and their ideas may here serve as key reference points in a process that leads from an established to a toppled to a new established paradigm, through “scientific revolution,” in Kuhn's words. Indeed, each scientific revolution, big or small, is likely to lead to new classic texts and the abandonment of old ones. We find Kuhn's model useful for understanding important aspects of scientific development and we agree with his view on the role of classics. However, Kuhn developed his thinking for natural science, with most of his examples taken from physics and chemistry, and he was explicit that the situation for social science, to which research on megaproject management belongs, might be different, in that “it remains an open question what parts of social science have yet acquired such paradigms at all” ( Consequently, when we called this special issue, we wondered whether, as an emerging academic field in the social sciences, megaproject management is best described as “pre-paradigmatic” or “non-paradigmatic” ( The If we include the many other fields where megaprojects are a main delivery model – oil and gas, mining, mineral processing plants, aerospace, defense, IT, supply chains, mega events, etc. – then a conservative estimate for the global megaproject market is USD 6–9 trillion per year, or approximately 8% of total global gross domestic product ( Moreover, megaprojects have proved remarkably recession proof. In fact, the downturn from 2008 helped the megaprojects business grow further by showering stimulus spending on everything from transportation infrastructure to IT. From being a fringe activity – albeit a spectacular one – mainly reserved for rich, developed nations, megaprojects have developed into a global multi-trillion-dollar business that affects all aspects of our lives, from our electricity bill to how we shop to what we do on the Internet and how we commute. Given this state of affairs, and given the substantial economic, social, and environmental impacts of big projects ( Our initial doubts regarding the existence of classics in megaproject management were based not only on theoretical arguments about the existence or not of paradigmatic research in megaproject management. It was also based on a recent experience Flyvbjerg had, when he accepted the invitation from a publisher to edit a volume provisionally called (by the publisher) In addition to his own identification of potential articles for the planned Those asked were mainly scholars who themselves publish in the field of megaproject planning and management. By using Google Scholar, a systematic effort was made to include in the survey anyone who may be argued to be a published and cited scholar in the field, that is, the full population of relevant scholars. A few academics working in other fields pertinent to megaproject planning and management were also asked, as was a small number of other researchers and consultants. The response rate of the survey was 44%. Of these 66% returned a valid Top Ten (or top whichever number of publications the respondent chose to submit, ranging from one to several dozen, with only a few respondents submitting more than ten publications). This resulted in 172 different proposed classics, suggested by respondents for inclusion in the book. Characteristics of the study are shown in The overall Top Ten of classics proposed by the respondents is listed in Even more interestingly, agreement was scant among respondents regarding what should be considered classics in megaproject planning and management. In fact, the results from the survey indicate that if one defines a “classic” in the conventional sense, mentioned above, as a written work that is generally recognized as definitive in its field by a majority of experts in that field, then there are no classics in megaproject planning and management. For example, we would have expected works by Albert Hirschman, Peter Hall, and Peter Morris to be identified as unequivocal classics by a majority of respondents, because to us they are classics. Not so. Only one respondent voted for a work by To make matters worse, it may be argued that in order to avoid sampling bias one should exclude from the ranking (a) respondents who proposed their own publications and (b) publications authored or co-authored by Flyvbjerg, because responses may be biased in his favor due to availability bias and anchoring ( If one corrects the outcomes accordingly, then the publication proposed by the most respondents was put forward by only five respondents, several times less the required majority for a classic. Remarkably, the vast majority of publications proposed as a classic – 78% – was put forward by one and only one respondent, indicating a very large spread in views among the respondents regarding what the classics are in megaproject planning and management. The low number of votes on any one publication means that the Top Ten in In sum, these results show there is little agreement among respondents as to what the classics are in megaproject planning and management. Indeed, the results call into question the very notion of classics for this field. Consequently, Flyvbjerg and his publisher decided to change the title of the planned book from Based on the survey described above, we made our call for papers for the special issue, providing the following list of potential topics and questions to stimulate ideas for manuscripts ( If one defines a classic as a written work that is generally recognized as definitive in its field by a majority of experts, do classics exist in the study of megaproject management? If classics exist in megaproject management, what are they, how did they become classics, and what are their impacts? If classics do not exist in megaproject management, why not and are we likely to ever see classics in this field? Do classics matter to megaproject management? Why or why not? Can megaproject management thrive as an academic field without classics? If classics are important, how do we go about developing them in megaproject management? What can we learn on this point from other academic fields? Is the In-depth case studies of one or more classics in megaproject management were welcomed, including reasons why they must be considered classics and illustrations of their impact.  We received a good batch of submissions that went through When discussing This study benchmarks megaproject management against five established fields in the management literature, namely institutional theory, organizational effectiveness theory, stakeholder theory, top management theory, and resource dependence theory. Compared with these fields, which started to build their classics and citations 30 and more years ago, megaproject management research is young, with classic texts beginning to emerge only 12 to 13 Nevertheless, megaproject management is doing well compared with the benchmark in the sense that total citations for the most cited texts in megaproject management is higher than total citations for the five fields in the benchmark, except one, when compared for the first 10  In “The Making and Impacts of a Classic Text in Megaproject Management: The Case of Cost Overrun Research,” Siemiatycki teases out five “key takeaway lessons” (pp. 8–9), which he uses both to explain his conclusions regarding Novelty is not required to be revolutionary in Kuhn's sense. Effective communication to its audience – academic or public – is a key feature of classic texts. Paradigm-shifting research depends on widespread awareness of the work among relevant scholars in the field. Dissemination of research in the mass media is an effective technique to increase the impact of megaproject management research on practice. Authors of classic texts should be prepared for pushback from the standard bearers of the established paradigm, in academia, policy, and practice. In “Classics in Megaproject Management: A Structured Analysis of Three Major Works,”  In sum, Pollack et al. find that megaproject management has good candidates for classic texts, but they are not quite there yet. In particular, they need more use of actor-network theory, which happens to be the forte of the authors: “[A] future classic must include those ideas to address some of the field's most prominent questions,” conclude Finally, in “The Fate of Ideals in the Real World: A Long View on Philip Selznick's Classic on the Tennessee Valley Authority,” In explaining this paradox, Ansar identifies a basic ignorance in project management scholarship, including megaproject management. Scholars in project management ignore Selznick because they operate within a paradigm based in engineering and economics and are not sufficiently socialized into the broader field of management studies and social science, where sociological, political, organizational, and behavioral approaches, like those used by Selznick, are mainstream. Instead, project management scholars tend to see Selznick as an outsider producing “uncomfortable knowledge” that not only does not fit their worldview but problematizes it, and is therefore best ignored, they think, according to Ansar.  We conclude that the answer to the question of whether classics exist in megaproject management research depends in part on the definition employed of what a “classic” is. In terms of Furthermore, if we employ Garfield's standard threshold of 400 citations for a text to be considered a classic, then no less than ten of the publications on the two Top Ten lists in In sum, the results from the first bibliometric study of megaproject management research bode well for the continued development of megaproject management as an emerging academic field and for the development of classics, in the bibliometric sense, within this field. However, before we get too excited about these results the bibliometric studies on which they are based must be replicated with more and better data, as acknowledged by  The three potential classics chosen by Pollack et al. may be argued to be particularly likely cases of classics in megaproject management research. Consequently, an implication of Pollack et al.’s conclusion is that if none of these three works can be argued to be classics, then we should expect that perhaps no, or only few, works in megaproject management research can be. This conclusion fits well with our own initial assumptions, based on the survey results presented above, when we first made the call for papers for this special issue. The conclusion does not fit, however, with We conclude, regarding the question of classics in megaproject management research: Whether classics exist in this field depends on the definition of “classic” employed. There is no general consensus among scholars in the field regarding what the classics are, or of the definition of what a classic is. Classics do exist in the field in the sense of “citation classics,” and these perform remarkably well when compared to other classics in the management literature, for both older and newer classics. There is no agreement as to whether “Kuhnian classics” exist in this field. Some scholars argue they do, others they don't. Furthermore, some argue that works identified as citation classics do not qualify as Kuhnian classics, indicating that the bar may be higher for a work to count as a Kuhnian classic than as a citation classic. There is no indication that “conventional classics” exist in the field, in the sense of works that are recognized as definitive by a majority of experts. No majority and no consensus have been documented on this point, but quite the opposite. Works exist for which it may be argued convincingly that they ought to be considered classics in the field, but they are not, because scholars in the field ignore them, to the detriment of the development of the field. Going forward, we see the following main tasks to stimulate and improve scholarship in megaproject management, in terms of classics:     “History suggests that the road to a firm research consensus is extraordinarily arduous,” said The authors declare no conflicts of interest.