Soil excavation associated with energy production or mineral extraction results in heavily disturbed landscapes that must be reclaimed to avoid long-term economic and environmental losses. A common practice in reclamation of these sites is topsoil replacement across the disturbed area. In some instances, this process requires importing topsoil from another location, known as topsoil transfer, which can be expensive and introduce a new seedbank, insect community, or plant pathogens. This research describes a soil-mixing process for disturbed soils that may be used to reduce costs associated with topsoil transfer and accelerate the recovery of soil function following a large excavation. This process was applied to two disturbed soils: i) crude-oil contaminated subsoil material; and ii) crude-oil contaminated subsoil material that was remediated using ex-situ thermal desorption. These soils were separately mixed with native, non-contaminated agricultural topsoil at 1:1 ratio (by volume). The native, disturbed, and mixed soils were characterized for soil physical, chemical, and biological properties, and statistics indicated that the mixtures were homogenous both spatially and with depth. However, the mixtures were significantly different from both the disturbed materials and native topsoil, primarily driven by changes in soil organic carbon, plant available nutrients, and biological activity. These results suggest that this mixing process can be used for soil reclamation at large-scale excavation sites to both reduce project costs and enhance recovery of soil parameters.Extraction of natural resources, including fossil fuels and other minerals, provides energy resources and raw materials crucial to modern society, as well as providing economic benefits. However, the processes of attaining these fuels can lead to heavily disturbed landscapes. Coal mining and quarrying, for example, often entail excavation of massive pits and stockpiling of soils for many years. This excavation destroys existing soil structure ( Several strategies are available to manage these disturbed sites. First, managers may choose not to take any restorative action and leave the mine spoils, deteriorated topsoil, or subsoil in place ( This research describes an approach that integrates these ideas, in which native topsoil is mixed into both contaminated and remediated disturbed soil materials. The disturbed material in this research was taken from a remediation site of a crude-oil pipeline leak that contaminated subsurface material down to 15 Several researchers have identified some benefits of mixing topsoil with disturbed material. By adding SOM-rich material, SOM of the overall mixture is increased, which is associated with improved biomass production and hydrologic function ( The aim of this research was to assess the homogeneity of research plots constructed using a large-scale mixing technique applied near an active soil remediation project. This determination was made by analyzing soil characteristics of the soil mixtures and comparing them to unmixed samples at four different depths. Multivariate analyses were employed to compare both homogeneity within each treatment and differences between the treatments. Identifying homogeneity within the plots indicates that the added topsoil was spread evenly throughout, which maximizes the benefits of mixing. Additionally, this work provides a framework for separating treatment effects of soil mixing from the natural variability of soil properties. This study provides vital information on understanding the effects of excavation and reclamation on soil parameters, as well as identifies soil-mixing as a viable alternative to current practices. This research took place adjacent to an active remediation site in Mountrail County, ND, USA (48°31′35.4″N, 102°51′25.72″W). The site is currently using thermal desorption to treat a pipeline spill that released Bakken crude oil into an agricultural field and underlying subsoil. Research plots were constructed near the site using three different soils to create five treatments. Non-contaminated, native topsoil acted as a control (A; Treatment 1). The A is mapped as Williams-Zahl loams (Williams: fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, frigid Typic Argiustolls; Zahl: fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, frigid Typic Calciustolls) ( The soil mixtures, SPA and TDA, were created by the following process. Piles of each soil type (A, SP, and TD) were staged adjacent to the plot area for construction. Two material types were added into a screener in alternating 0.6 Thirty plots were constructed, with each treatment repeated twice in each of three replications. Each plot holds approximately 230 Plot construction was completed in November 2015 ( Additionally, separate soil samples were taken for analysis of soil biological parameters. These samples were taken with a hand probe (4 Multivariate analyses were employed to evaluate the effectiveness of soil mixing; thus, no statistical analyses were performed on any variable individually. A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) of the physical and chemical parameters observed in the soil or mixture samples was conducted to identify if core, depth, or treatment interactions existed. Upon finding no significant difference between core for soil characteristics listed in Principal components analysis (PCA) was performed on the correlation matrix of the complete dataset of 360 observations using 20 physical and chemical variables. A second PCA was performed on the correlation matrix following the addition of 6 biological parameters. Both PCAs were performed on the correlation matrices, which are scale invariant, due to the variety of scales, variances, and units among the measured parameters ( For this analysis, no variables were excluded because of high correlations. Since PCA identifies latent structures in the data to describe variability, highly correlated variables are often excluded to avoid weighting the analysis with several variables describing the same latent structure. However, the correlations in this data do not describe the same underlying processes for each PC. For example, although plant available NO Mean values and ranges for all of the measured soil parameters used in the first PCA are shown in  Mean values and ranges for all of the additional soil parameters used in the second PCA are shown in  This research was conducted to determine the homogeneity of research plots constructed using a large-scale mixing technique with native topsoil, remediated soil, and crude oil-contaminated soil. Spatial homogeneity was determined because no differences in soil characteristics were identified based on spatial position within each plots (i.e., core factor in the MANOVA). Similarly, homogeneity by depth was determined since no differences in soil characteristics were identified based on depth of measurement within the samples (i.e., depth factor in the MANOVA). This homogeneity across space and with depth is reinforced by the fact that no interactions (either two-way or three-way) were significant among the samples. Thus, the only statistically significant measure of group separation identified in these samples was by treatment. While the MANOVA identified homogeneity in these research plots, the PCA biplots allow for further description of variability in soil characteristics of soil samples, both within-treatment and between-treatments. Within-treatment variability is a valuable assessment for the soil mixing process because it evaluates homogeneity for a given soil treatment, and it can be described by considering the spatial relationships of samples of the same treatment on the biplots. Despite originating from a wide range of depths, both TD and SP are very tightly grouped ( The between-treatment variability is also evident in both The first PCA offers a framework with which to evaluate the effectiveness of the mixing process, but it did not include any biological parameters or contaminant concentration that can be vital indicators of reclamation success. Due to the cost and time investment associated with the analyses, biological parameters, as well as TPH, were only analyzed for two depths (0–15 This study included soil mixing using contaminated material for two reasons. First, the contaminated material offered another example of how the soil-mixing process may uniformly distribute the A and SP in a research plot, in addition to the thermal desorption-treated material. Second, the research plots will be used in future research to determine if mixing topsoil together with contaminated material increases the rate of degradation of TPHs. Notably, while some specific petroleum hydrocarbons are regulated individually, neither the USEPA nor the state of North Dakota have existing guidelines for acceptable levels of TPHs in soils ( These biplots can also be useful as a tool for visualizing reclamation success over time, with the assumption that success is creating a soil system most similar to the native, non-contaminated topsoil. In theory, the samples from the different treatments will grow closer together as time progresses, indicating that different soil treatments are becoming more similar. In this case, the mixtures are already moving towards the A samples, suggesting that soil mixing may accelerate recovery of the parameters included in this study. However, even with comprehensive management, reaching a reference state can take decades ( For appropriate management decisions, both the within- and between-treatment variability must be considered on the full range of soil samples. The within-treatment variability of the A is so large that some of the samples are more similar to the soil mixtures than to other A samples. This finding could lead to the false conclusion that reclamation was successful (i.e., TDA and SPA matched A after only one season) when the whole data set clearly shows between-treatment separation of these groups. Thus, this example typifies the need for comprehensive soil sampling and holistic analysis of data to assess the effectiveness of reclamation practices. The findings of this research suggest that this mixing process may be applicable across a range of situations, especially in those situations in which the disturbed material is lacking in SOM or biological activity. The homogeneity of the mixtures in this project are likely due to the general similarities in the original materials used. Notably, the greatest difference between A and the TD/SP was SOC, with only minor differences in pH, EC, and available heavy metals. However, the incorporation of topsoil into disturbed or subsurface soil material with drastically different characteristics, especially texture or pH, may produce different results. Nonetheless, mixing with topsoil can jumpstart the soil reclamation process by both moving the starting point much closer to the final goal and increasing the rate at which the goal may be achieved. This study examined the ability of a large-scale soil mixing process to produce homogeneous research plots by analyzing spatial and depth-dependent variation of 26 soil characteristics. The MANOVAs and PCAs showed that treatments were homogenous both spatially and with depth, although the treatments differed from one another. Notably, the properties of the soil mixtures, TDA and SPA, were proportional to the A and TD/SP at the 1:1 ratio in most soil properties, and their spatial orientations were intermediate in the PCA. Inclusion of biological parameters reinforced these trends. Analyzing physical, chemical, and biological parameters is a useful way to gain understanding of how the process can be beneficial in soil reclamation. Using these soil parameters as a proxy for restoring soil function, this research indicates that soil mixing may be a promising approach to improving TD-treated or lightly contaminated material, as well as excavated subsoil material. These findings show that function likely would not be initially restored to the level of A, but the mixing process can improve disturbed/subsurface soil material enough to return to a variety of land uses. Mixing at a 1:1 ratio can double the quantity of suitable material available for reclamation, although the quality of the mixed material may not be as high as native topsoil. Thus, the application of this practice should be determined on a case-by-case basis, as the goals of the project must be considered. Nonetheless, the process may provide a less costly way to reclaim disturbed areas and promote the recovery of soil function. The authors are grateful for the contributions of NDSU research technicians, Nate Derby, Kevin Horsager, Joel Bell, and Rodney Utter, who were integral in data collection and analysis.