Valvular heart calcification is common in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD), especially in those receiving hemodialysis therapy, and it is associated with poor prognosis. Furthermore, progression of valvular heart disease (VHD) and structural valve deterioration of bioprosthetic valves are faster in these patients. Mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of VHD are similar between patients with and without impaired kidney function, but CKD is associated with a bone metabolism dysregulation, which might lead to a procalcifying phenotype within vessels and heart valves. CKD is also associated with left ventricular remodelling and dysfunction, which might contribute to increase the risk of heart failure and death in patients with VHD. Even if promising pharmacotherapeutic avenues are in development, no medical treatment can prevent or reduce the valvular calcific process. Patients with advanced CKD should undergo transthoracic echocardiography for detection of VHD, and if present, follow-up should be more frequent than what is recommended in the guidelines. Transcatheter valve replacement might be preferred over surgical replacement in patients with CKD and severe aortic valve stenosis.Endothelial shear stress Barrier dysfunction with lipid and inflammatory cell infiltration Valvular interstitial cells transdifferentiation and proliferation into smooth muscle-like cells Shear stress increase by fluid overload Oxidized LDL Small circulating LDL particles LP(a) LDL receptor-related protein-5 Local inflammation RAAS activation Valvular interstitial cells transdifferentiation and proliferation into osteoblastic like-cells Increase LP(a) Increase in ROS production (superoxide and hydrogen peroxide) Decrease in antioxidant defenses (NO, superoxide dismutase) Myofibroblast activation Valvular interstitial cells transdifferentiation and proliferation into osteoblastic like-cells NOS uncoupling NO reduction Increased ROS production T lymphocytes, mast cells, and macrophages infiltration Proinflammatory cytokines release (TGF-β1, IL-6, TNF-α, and NF-κB) Extracellular matrix remodelling with fibrosis Inactivation of ROS production Valvular interstitial cells transdifferentiation and proliferation into osteoblastic like-cells Increase in systemic inflammation related to production of uremic toxins (indoxyl sulfate) and malnutrition Calcium/phosphate imbalance Increase in osteoblastic factors: osteopontin, osteocalcin, BMP-2, and Cbfa1/ Runt-related transcription factor 2 RANKL/RANK/osteoprotegerin, and FGF-23/Klotho imbalance Decrease in anticalcifying factors: fetuin-A and activated MGP (cMGP) Hyperphosphatemia Apoptotic pathways activation Osteoblastic cell differentiation Soft tissue calcification PTH level increase with hyperphosphatemia Decrease in fetuin-A Decrease in osteoprotegerin and increase in RANKL Decrease in Klotho and increase in FGF-23 Increase in inactivated MGP (ucMGP) related to vitamin K deficiency Degenerative valvular heart disease (VHD) and left ventricular (LV) remodelling and dysfunction are common findings in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) who are hemodialysis (HD)-dependent. Valvular and annular thickening and calcification are observed in any of the heart valves but more frequently in the aortic and mitral valves, and especially in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients (ie, glomerular filtration rate < 15 mL/min/1.73 m AS has long been considered a passive and age-related disease. Albeit, aortic valve disease is not seen universally among the elderly population. According to recent pathophysiological studies, AS is not a single pathologic process but a combination of different processes that ultimately lead to severe valvular calcification and many pathways involved could be amplified in CKD patients. CKD is common in the general population and is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular complications, such as coronary artery disease, stroke, heart failure, and valvular calcification, A limited number of studies reported risk factors for valvular calcification in patients with CKD. In a recent small Chinese study, the association of advanced age, higher blood cholesterol level, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels, and increased interventricular septum thickness with the presence of valvular calcification in patients with reduced renal function was reported. In AS, early lesions are characterized by endothelial dysfunction associated with a subendothelial thickening and disruption of the overlying basement membrane in regions with low shear stress of the leaflets ( The shear stress-related endothelial damage induced by the repeated turbulent blood flow crossing the valve is further exacerbated in HD-dependent ESRD patients. Indeed, fluid overload, anemia, and shunts across arteriovenous fistulae induce a state of high cardiac output, which leads to increased flow velocity and turbulence across the aortic valve and thereby predispose to valvular calcific process. In addition, CKD patients are more often exposed to cardiovascular comorbidities, especially hypertension, and to arteriosclerosis, which is responsible for vascular thickening, stiffening, and calcification. These 2 conditions increase the LV afterload, which further increases valvular endothelium damage and LV remodelling. To a lesser extent, LV dilatation and dysfunction related to afterload excess can result in the occurrence of mitral regurgitation. Lipid metabolism abnormalities are a central mechanism in the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis and AVC. Early lesions of calcific AS are characterized by the presence of intravalvular lipoproteins, especially oxidized dense LDL, which is not present in normal aged valves ( Increased oxidative stress in calcified and pericalcific lesions of the aortic valve has been documented in humans. Local inflammation related to lipid deposit, oxidative stress, and endothelial dysfunction is responsible for the release of proinflammatory cytokines, which enhance the recruitment and the infiltration of circulating inflammatory cells such as T lymphocytes, mast cells, and macrophages, including lipid-laden foam cells ( Systemic uremic inflammation is a common condition in ESRD patients, a fortiori in case of HD, Bone metabolism is a distinct contributor to AS ( MGP is an extracellular protein expressed in several organs, which inhibits soft tissue calcification. Fetuin-A is a circulating calcium-binding glycoprotein involved in the inhibition of tissue calcification. The liaison of RANKL with RANK induces the osteoclast differentiation and maturation, and therefore bone resorption. Osteoprotegerin is a decoy receptor for RANKL, able to block its interaction with RANK, thereby inhibiting osteoclast differentiation. Alteration in calcium/phosphate homeostasis is a major complication of CKD. Kidney dysfunction and the associated vitamin D deficiency result in hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Hypocalcemia induces an increase in parathyroid hormone (PTH) plasma levels that stimulate bone resorption by osteoclasts and transform vitamin D in its active metabolite. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-23 is a bone-derived hormone that contributes to maintain the mineral homeostasis by inducing urine elimination and lowering intestinal absorption of phosphate, and by reducing active vitamin D level. According to current guidelines on VHD management, valve replacement or repair is the recommended therapy in symptomatic patients with severe VHD. Because “degenerative” VHDs are associated with calcific deposition, especially in CKD patients, the best treatment remains the replacement rather than the repair of the native valve. Modification in LV geometry is an adaptive mechanism in response to physiological or pathological homeostasis change. Several conditions might induce LV structural changes and remodelling such as CKD and VHD ( There is no specific recommendation regarding the medical management of AS. However, several interesting pathways involved in the pathophysiology of VHD might be targeted by therapies. Among them, the lipid infiltration and the calcium/phosphate metabolism are the main mechanisms targeted by therapeutic trials aimed at limiting or even reversing the process of calcification. Three randomized clinical trials have tested the benefit of statin treatment in AS progression, but all were negative despite a significant decrease in LDL plasma levels. Calcium/phosphate metabolism dysregulation is common in older and/or CKD patients. Bisphosphonates have an anti-inflammatory effect and are a major regulator of bone turnover by limiting the osteoclastic resorption and calcium phosphate particles release. Thus, it was postulated that bisphosphonates could influence the course of AVC progression. This hypothesis was tested in elderly women with moderate AS without CKD but considered at higher risk of AVC progression because of osteoporosis. Management of VHD in patients with nonsevere CKD (stage ≤ 3b: glomerular filtration rate ≥ 30 mL/min/1.73 m The pathophysiology of VHD is an active process, which involves several pathways such as lipid deposition, inflammation, and especially bone metabolism. The coexistence of these mechanisms highlight the presence of a temporal continuum from early aortic valve lesions to final calcified valve. CKD and HD therapy aggravate the progression of valvular calcification and promote SVD of bioprostheses, mainly by inducing hyperphosphatemia-derived lesions and by unbalancing the ratio of pro- and anticalcifying factors. Although several options are being investigated, no medical therapy has yet shown efficacy in slowing or preventing the progression of “degenerative” valvular disease. Patients with advanced CKD should undergo TTE examination for detection of VHD, and if present, follow-up should be more frequent than what is recommended in the guidelines. Transcatheter valve replacement might be preferred over surgical replacement in patients with CKD and severe aortic valve stenosis. Dr Ternacle has received a fellowship grant from AREMCAR. Dr Pibarot holds the Canada Research Chair in Dr Pibarot has Core Lab contracts with Edwards Lifesciences, for which he receives no direct compensation; and is a speaker for St Jude Medical. Dr Clavel has Core Lab contracts with Edwards Lifesciences, for which she receives no direct compensation; and a research grant with Medtronic. The remaining authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.