There are essentially two main types of filters from a layout design point of view. There are those that are essentially ancillary fittings, such as line strainers, and those which are unit operations in their own right. Nowadays, filtration tends toward continuous operation, though batch and semibatch operation is still very important in the pharmaceutical, food, and water sectors. The most important technological advance in filtration in recent years has been the increased availability of consistent and economical membrane filters. As these tend to come in standardized packages of a fixed size, membrane plant layouts tend to be highly modularized. There are essentially two main types of filters from a layout design point of view. There are those that are essentially ancillary fittings, such as line strainers, and those which are unit operations in their own right. Nowadays, filtration tends toward continuous operation, though batch and semibatch operation is still very important in the pharmaceutical, food, and water sectors. The most important technological advance in filtration in recent years has been the increased availability of consistent and economical membrane filters. As these tend to come in standardized packages of a maximum fixed size, membrane plant layouts tend to be highly modularized. Depending on the amount of solids which are retained and the form in which they are retained, the ancillary systems which are used to clean filters and handle the products of cleaning may take up more plan space than the filters themselves. Line filters and strainers should not be used where there are significant quantities of solids to be collected, especially where other equipment would be damaged by increased head loss through the strainer caused by retained solids. Consequently, these types of filter are usually only cleaned manually and on an intermittent basis, though some types such as “Y-strainers” can be fitted with automatic discharge valves. Intermittently backwashed batch depth filters will need a store of backwashing water (which may be integrated with product buffer storage) and, frequently, gravity settling tanks to recover most of the water used in backwashing. Continuously operated and continuously backwashed depth filters may need a far smaller storage and settling volume to meet the same aims, as instantaneous flows of backwash water are far lower. Vacuum filters are commonly supplied with a range of ancillaries used for preparing filter aid and so on. Membrane filters may need hot chemical cleaning solutions as well as simple backwashing, and makeup; and dosing facilities for this may take up considerable space. The layout designer should therefore make sure that all ancillaries have been allowed for in the layout, especially at the earlier stages when such issues can be forgotten. Some filter types (notably gravity-driven depth filters) can also be quite tall (around 5 These are filters designed to remove small amounts of solids, often only used during commissioning activity. Access must be provided in order to remove the element for cleaning. Line filters and strainers are best avoided in pump suction lines, as it is common to forget to remove the filter element after commissioning, resulting in pump cavitation. Batch or semicontinuous filters are usually pressure driven. The pressure may be supplied by a pump or gravity for liquids, but gases always require a compressor somewhere in the circuit. Membrane, plate and frame, leaf and depth filters are usually operated in batch mode. Depth filters have a bed of loose filtration media, such as sand or activated carbon (see These filters run continuously for a number of hours or days until the accumulation of dirt within the bed requires cleaning by backwashing with an upward flow of fluid, which may be just liquid, or a mixture of liquid and gas. Depth filters can only handle relatively low levels of solids in the feed (up to around 15 Membrane filters (see Solids will build up in the modules and are removed intermittently by backwashing, either in batch or semibatch “dead end” liquid filtration. There are also disposable filters of various types where the filter element is replaced when solids have built up. This is the mode of operation of the high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters used to purify cleanroom air, as well as the single-use liquid filters which are gaining popularity in the pharmaceutical industry. Membrane filters for liquids require medium-pressure feed pumps, backwash pumps, and a clean-in-place system including dosing pumps and cleaning chemical storage, etc. They are often controlled by pneumatic valves requiring a compressed air supply. Small systems are usually purchased as modular packages, though larger systems may be partially stick built around membrane modules. Plate and frame filters (see Producing a solid cake means that they have less ancillary needs than backwashed filters. They do however need a far higher feed pressure than depth or membrane filters used for solids removal. Another type of batch filter is the candle or tubular filter, in which solids are accumulated on an array of vertical elements (candles) contained in a vertical cylindrical pressure vessel (see It is claimed by manufacturers that the plan layout of candle filters is in general more compact than that of plate and frame filters, as cake can be discharged directly into a container, avoiding solids transfer systems such as screws (see All valves and controls can be placed in the upper part of the filter for an easy access and maintenance. Filters such as these are used for both liquid and gas filtration duties. Typical of this class is the rotary vacuum drum filter shown in Continuous sand filters (see The principle of operation makes for a tall thin structure, and the location of the sand washer and instrumentation require maintenance access to the top of the structure. There is consequently a platform with a handrail covering most of the top of the vessel, accessed by a hooped ladder. The airlift pumps and sand washer use significant quantities of compressed air, so there will be a requirement for ancillary compressors if there is no sufficiently sized compressed air utility. Membrane filters can be run continuously for extended periods of time in cross-flow mode, where the flow through the membrane is far smaller than the flow past the membrane. Cross-flow membrane plants require the same ancillaries as batch ones, though their feed pumps will be larger. In the case of rotary vacuum filters (see Rotary vacuum filters require several ancillaries, whose layout relative to the machine is important, as illustrated in It is desirable that rotary vacuum filters should be located above the feed vessel, to allow the filter drains and overflow to be returned to the feed tank by gravity. The overflow should be vertical and of large diameter, with facilities for rodding out and cleaning of any tees and bends which may be used. Isolating valves should be fitted directly to the trough at the drain connections so as to give the least volume where solids can settle out. The valves should ideally be readily accessible for operation but, if necessary, they may be fitted with extended spindles or chain wheels. An elevated vacuum filter simplifies the discharge of solids. If the filter is elevated above the floor, concrete, or wood foundation supports can be placed under the entire area of the tank base, and access arranged to the drain connections on the tank. The receivers, blowers, vacuum pumps, and filtrate pumps should be located near the filter so that the piping is short, direct, and as free of joints as possible, whilst allowing sufficient space for maintenance and routine adjustments. In locating pumps or auxiliary equipment such as receivers, provision should be made for mounting on a concrete or steel base and grouting or bolting into place. Receivers may be mounted on support legs and should be located as close to the filter as possible at an elevation that will permit drainage by gravity from the line connecting the filters to the side connection on the receiver. In some systems, a single receiver is used for both wash-liquid and filtrate. Filtrate pumps may be mounted on a pedestal integral with the vacuum receiver or on a separate pedestal, according to supplier recommendations. If separately mounted, the filtrate pump should be mounted on a solid foundation with at least 1.5 A valve should not be placed in the suction line to the pump, but there should be a check valve fitted directly on the pump discharge in order to prevent air being drawn into the system. Seal water may need to be provided to the gland packing of the pump. A balance line from the filtrate pump can be connected to the upper part of the filtrate receiver to prevent the filtrate pump losing prime due to surges in the volumetric flow of filtrate. If there is at least 10.5 Moisture traps in vacuum systems must be installed if the vacuum pump is of the dry piston type to avoid pulling filtrate or fine solids into the pump. To ensure this (see The lower side connection on the moisture trap is connected directly to the vacuum receiver. The bottom drain connection on the moisture trap is connected to the tail pipe which should extend as a barometric leg downward approximately 10.5 When a rotary-type wet vacuum pump is used, the trap is only necessary when the solutions are corrosive or when some constituents have a tendency to precipitate and form deposits in the pump. A silencer should be placed in the discharge line of the vacuum pump to reduce noise when the pump is indoors or close to populated areas. Water-sealed pumps also require separators in the discharge line. In the filtering of heated volatile solvents, where a lot of vapors are produced, a condenser may be required. It may be installed instead of the moisture trap (wet vacuum pump only), or between the receiver and moisture trap, provided that the minimum vertical clearances of 10.5 If the cake and/or filtrate are not adversely affected by the weather, all types of filters may be placed in the open, with or without a shelter. Membrane, plate and frame, candle, leaf and depth filters are, however, often installed in a building, as they are commonly used for hygienic service. In the case of plate and frame filters used for slurry, a space of at least one filter’s width should be left around the filter. If trolleys are used for bringing up new cloths, removal of the cake or transporting the filter plates, the free space should be at least 1.75 Depth filters may share a common wall if they are gravity filters contained in rectangular concrete tanks. For those in steel pressure vessels, clearances between shells can be as low as 500 All controls, valves, and switches connected with the operation of a manual filter should be located conveniently so that they can be reached by the operator without leaving the filter station. Wherever possible, it is recommended that a control panel be provided local to the filter. However, when pumps, blowers, and other accessories are located on a floor below or away from the filter, auxiliary switches must be placed nearby to allow for local adjustments and maintenance and to prevent accidental starting. For slurry filters such as vacuum or plate and frame, it is usually easier to transport and store slurries than filter cake and so such liquid–solid separation equipment should normally be located near the point to which solids are finally discharged, such as the dryer or packaging line. It is better with such filters to have one pump delivering to a feed buffer tank, feeding a separate filter feed pump rather than utilizing a single pump both for transporting slurry over a long distance and for feeding the filter. Slurry feed lines should be designed to prevent settlement (superficial velocities over 1 Plate and frame and other batch filters may be piped in parallel. This allows some to be filtering, some washing, and some being decaked in rotation. In filters that have to be opened for cake removal, layout is extremely important for ease of operation, but less so where cake is removed by air-blowing or other mechanical method, when maintenance considerations may predominate. In the case of leaf filters, cranes or hoists should be arranged to allow discharge of the cake on to a conveyor or into a vessel or chute. Filters are sometimes staggered thus saving space and effort in handling trolleys by avoiding a need for right-angled turns. To aid discharge, a filter which produces a cake may be elevated above floor level on steelwork, but generally it is placed on a higher floor discharging to the one below through a chute. Chutes must be of generous dimensions and as near vertical as possible. Special ventilation arrangements such as spray nozzles, vapor hoods, and extractor fans may be needed if the filtered liquids are toxic or flammable, but clear access should always be maintained for removing filter cake. The floor underneath plate and frame filters, and that traversed by leaf filters should be channeled, drained, and graded to control liquid overflow. There should be provision for washing down the floor. For larger filters having heavy internals such as plates, overhead lifting beams may be needed. A room may also be needed for storing cloths or filter media and for cutting filter cloths. Provision may also be needed for the vessels and piping used to handle filter aid, though this is used far less often than in the past. It is more common nowadays to condition solids for filtration using organic polymers. These polymers however also require makeup vessels, piping, and dosing pumps. There should be ample clearance around and above the filter to perform routine inspections, operating adjustments and maintenance. Access is required to the speed control unit of a vacuum filter drum drive, to weir and submergence controls, to the control valves and to the rotary valve, and for maintenance and lubrication. The filter should have good access (>1 Membrane filter layouts tend to be comprised of modules each containing racks of standard membrane modules. They are commonly provided as skid-mounted modular systems. A platform accessed by hooped ladder is required on top of a continuous depth filter to access the sand washer. Plate and frame filters require local access to the changeover valves, pressure gauges, sight glasses, and sample points, especially if these operations are manually controlled. They are therefore commonly installed in an elevated position on a platform. All three of the safety case studies at the end of this chapter involved maintenance operations. Layout designers should pay great attention to ensuring safe access for maintenance. Line filters which have to be serviced more frequently than once a week must be accessible from the operating level (see Depth filters all have some kind of water (and sometimes air) distribution pipework or plenum chamber. If the pipework or the nozzles which allow fluid into and out of it break, access will be required for repair or replacement. This is not however a frequent occurrence in a well-designed filter, so there is a balance to be struck between capital and maintenance costs. Rotary vacuum drum filter valves, piping, expansion loops, and other equipment should be installed in such a way as to prevent the formation of vapor pockets. Piping should be supported so that strains are not placed on the filter or its auxiliary equipment, and flexible connections should always be used where the piping is connected to the filter valve. In vacuum piping, a riser should not be used to pass over or under obstructions and diversions, and right angle bends—especially vertical—should be avoided if possible. The piping of depth pressure filters has to allow access to valves and pressure instrumentation, which is consequently arranged in front of the pressure vessel as shown in Depth pressure filters commonly have a single high-level nozzle for downflow inlet and backwash outlet, and a single low-level nozzle for downflow outlet and backwash inlet, as illustrated in Ideally, they would have both top and side manways, although top-only can be a low-capital cost option, albeit with maintenance drawbacks. Most filters are equipped with differential pressure sensors to allow for the monitoring of any buildup of back pressure as the filter becomes clogged. Differential pressure cells are normally connected by small-bore piping to threaded connectors installed close to the inlet and outlet nozzles. The organic polymers which are used for sludge conditioning are extremely slippery when made up as solutions. Areas likely to be contaminated with spillage of polymer will require nonslip flooring and washdown facilities. The requirement to replace filtration media can expose operators to process fluids, as shown by two of the following case studies. Filtering solids from a flammable fluid can create an explosion hazard, as illustrated by the first. These scenarios should be uppermost in the layout designer’s mind. This fatal explosion was associated with the start-up of an item of equipment after a period of standing, illustrating the fact that designers should consider this situation as well as steady state. As in other cases, operators were not following the written procedures. Again, designers should understand that operators may have a tendency to develop shortcut procedures. Plants should therefore always be designed so that the right thing to do is also the easiest thing to do. In this incident, an explosion and fire occurred during the restart of a production line which had been stopped for 9 The commissioning of a vacuum belt filter by the team leader caused the explosion and fires at several points along the line. An employee was seriously injured, and later died from his injuries. The fire lasted 38 The procedure governing the restart of the filter stated that the filter had to be purged with nitrogen for 2 On the day of the accident, the enclosure was not directly opened, but fresh air entered it via the opening of a trap door in the transport screw that conveyed the carboxymethyl cellulose to the mill and dryer unit. The temperature in the confined space of the belt filter vacuum was between 24°C and 35°C, leading to a volume percentage of ethanol vapors between 5% and 15%. The stoichiometric ratio of reaction of ethanol with oxygen is 5.6% by volume and an explosive atmosphere was thus created. The amount of ethanol vapor in the filter was estimated at 100 The explosion scenarios in the filter had been studied, and in theory, they were contained by the enclosure. This accident shows that the power of solvent vapor explosion is often undervalued and possible sources of ignition of explosive atmospheres (ATEX) poorly studied. It stresses the importance of identifying and managing out of the ordinary situations, as well as the need for ATEX prevention measures, including inerting.  Maintenance operations are dangerous, unless well considered by the designer. This case study shows how quickly a small problem can become a big one, and the need to ensure rapid escape routes from escalating problems. At the fluid catalytic cracking unit, a 30–60 The event took a long time to bring under control because the liquid was hot (about 370°C) and at 80 One person was not able to vacate the area fast enough, and was sent to San Pablo Medical Center with third-degree burns on his head and arm. No off-site injuries were reported, and there was no fire, though some flaring occurred (estimated 28 Approximately 150 Approximately 3000 insurance claims from community members had been filed as of the 30-day report.  This case study is a further example of filter maintenance operation causing serious injury to an operator. Filter equipment should be laid out so that the filter media can be replaced safely. In this case, the operator was approaching the end of a second shift and was changing a distilling machine filter. The filter had burned inside the machine and the operator was having difficulty removing the filter housing. They were wearing a cotton shirt and no other personal protective equipment. While the operator was removing the filter housing, a liquid came in contact with their right wrist, forearm, and shirt (at the chest area). They promptly washed the substance off from their wrist and arm and took a shower at the end of the shift. Two days later, the operator awoke with blisters over their right arm and chest and was diagnosed with second- and third-degree chemical burns. 