In the present study, SBA-15 silica materials synthesized from different silica sources (S15T and S15S) and functionalized by post-grafting method with trimethylmethoxysilane (F-S15T and F-S15S) were compared as drug carriers for flurbiprofen (FBP). The physical state of the drug in the samples was characterized by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray diffractometry (XRD). The results showed that the FBP molecules were not arranged in a crystalline form after incorporation of FBP into the pores of the SBA-15 samples. Surface functionalization resulted in decreased surface area, pore size, and pore volume of S15T and S15S, which decreased the drug-loading capacity from 27.09% to 13.59% and from 16.96% to 9.19%, respectively. The in vitro drug release testing demonstrated that functionalized SBA-15 samples showed slower release rates compared to the non-functionalized samples. The results indicate that F-S15T (which had the smallest pore size) showed controlled drug release profiles without burst-release while the other silica samples showed faster release profiles than F-S15T, indicating that pore size and hydrophobicity influenced the rate of the drug release process. The drug release mechanism of all the samples was found to be Fickian diffusion.Over the past few decades, mesoporous silica materials have been recognized as very promising candidates for drug delivery systems due to high biocompatibility Chemical nature of the surface Despite the active research into drug delivery by means of SBA-15 mesoporous silica, there is still a lack of studies comparing the drug release capabilities of SBA-15 materials synthesized from different silica sources. This paper describes the applications of functionalized and non-functionalized SBA-15 samples synthesized from two different silica sources for the delivery of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug FBP, which was chosen as a model drug for investigation of the influence of the structural characteristics and the organic functionalization. The reagents used for the synthesis and functionalization of samples were tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS, 99% Merck), sodium metasilicate pentahydrate (SMP, 99% Aldrich), Pluronic P123 triblock copolymer (Aldrich), hydrochloric acid (37%, Merck), trimethylmethoxysilane (TMMS, 98% Merck), toluene (˃99%, Merck), and ethanol (96%, Merck). FBP was kindly supplied from Sanovel Pharmaceuticals Inc., Turkey. All other chemicals used in HPLC analysis were higher grade. The mesostructures of samples were determined by Philips Panalytical X'Pert-Pro diffractometer small angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu(Kα) radiation. The patterns were obtained with a step size of 0.005° between 0.6 and 3°. Wide angle XRD and differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) were utilized to examine the state of the loaded drug. DSC analysis was carried out with a Perkin Elmer Diamond DSC using a heating rate of 10 The BET surface areas and pore size distributions of all samples were determined by nitrogen adsorption–desorption on a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 instrument, the pore size distributions and pore volumes were calculated by the advanced Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method using the desorption branches of the isotherms. The micropore volume was estimated from the t-plot analysis Prior to these analyses, the functionalized and drug-loaded samples were degassed at 50 FBP concentration in the drug loaded samples was measured by isocratic reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Perkin Elmer Flexar) using a Brownlee HRes Analytical C18 column (50 To determine the effect of structural characteristics on drug release rate, SBA-15 was synthesized from TEOS or SMP according to our previous study To prepare functionalized SBA-15 by grafting, samples were initially dried at 80 Samples of S15  The representative small angle XRD patterns of S15  In order to investigate the state of the FBP in silica samples, wide angle XRD and DSC analyses were carried out. In addition, to validate the XRD and DSC analysis results, the control experiments were performed. For this reason, the physical mixture of silica and crystalline drug was prepared according to proportion of drug and silica amount in F-S15  DSC is a useful tool that was used to assist in determining the physical state of FBP in the drug-loaded samples.  The porosity characteristics of non-functionalized and functionalized SBA-15 samples before and after the FBP loading are detailed in The virtual image of FBP with relative dimensions was given in The amount of FBP in the drug-loaded samples was quantified by HPLC. The FBP uptake values of S15  Comparing the dissolution profiles of FBP from non-functionalized and functionalized SBA-15 samples, it was observed that dissolution of FBP from non-functionalized SBA-15 samples was faster than that from functionalized SBA-15 samples. This result can be mainly due to the hydrophobicity of the TMMS groups. These organic functional groups lead to slow diffusion of fluid into the mesoporous channels under The In this study, the Authors would like to thank Ali TURKYILMAZ R&D Director at Sanovel Pharmaceuticals for providing the Flurbiprofen.