Spent hen (98 weeks) and broiler (12 weeks) breast and thigh muscles were minced (1 mm orifice diameter) and washed with 0.1% NaCl. A portion of both unwashed and washed mince was mixed with cryoprotectants (CP) at the rate of 4% sucrose, 4% sorbitol, and 0.2% Na-tripolyphosphate to produce surimi and kept frozen at −20°C. The mince and surimi were ground with 3% NaCl and a small amount of water to adjust the final moisture content of 80%. The pastes were stuffed into the sausage casing and heated at 90°C for 15 min to produce gel. The effects of washing, heating and CP on colour composition and thermal gelation properties of hen and broiler minces and surimi were compared. Broiler mince was lighter and less red in colour, higher in protein and lower in moisture, lipid and collagen. Gel strength and breaking strength were higher in spent hen surimi compared to broiler surimi under similar gelation conditions. Gel elasticity, springiness and water retention properties were almost identical in two surimi. Gel quality was markedly deteriorated in spent hen surimi but not so in broiler surimi after 8 weeks frozen-storage. Although CP increased the gel strength of fresh surimi (non-frozen, 0 week storage) from both hen and broiler, they were more effective in broiler surimi than hen surimi in protecting the functional quality of gel.The processing of surimi from mechanically deboned chicken meat (MDCM) has generated potential interest among the processors ( Surimi is a typical intermediate fish product, made by freshwater leaching of mechanically deboned flesh and incorporating with various cryoprotectants for longer frozen-shelf life ( The objective of this study was to compare the thermal gelation characteristics of breast and thigh muscles of spent hen and broiler chicken and their surimi. Although commercial surimi is mainly produced from MDCM of broiler, we prepared surimi from the breast and thigh muscles to maintain an identical experimental condition between the two birds. Since frozen-storage is an essential part of surimi manufacture, the effects of common cryoprotectants (sucrose, sorbitol and Na-tripolyphosphate) on short-term frozen-storage ability of both surimi were examined. Twenty spent hen (ISA Brown, 98 weeks, 2.2±0.3 kg live wt) and 15 broiler (White Leghorn, 12 weeks, 1.5±0.2 kg live wt), obtained from Yamagishi Co. Ltd. Japan, were killed by slashing the throat and exsanguination and immediately dressed in the laboratory attached experimental factory (temperature: 4°C). The breast and thigh muscles were excised manually trimming external fat, epimysial tissue and heavy connective tissue, chilled in crushed-ice and minced by a pre-chilled (4°C) mechanical mincer (WMG 12, Watanabe Co. Japan, 2-mm orifice diameter). Mincing was performed within 20 min of killing of the birds. The minces were passed twice more through a fine sieve (1-mm orifice diameter) to remove excess connective tissues and then mixed uniformly. A portion of the mince was washed twice with 0.1% NaCl. Batches of mince (100 g/batch) were mixed with pre-chilled (4°C) washing solution (400 ml) by stirring in a warring blender at a low speed for 2 min and allowed to settle for 8 min. Floated fat was skimmed off. Washed meat was collected by centrifugation (6000× Washed mince was mixed well to ascertain the uniformity of moisture level. A portion of both unwashed and washed mince was mixed with cryoprotectants (CP) at the rate of 4% sucrose, 4% sorbitol and 0.2% Na-tripolyphosphate (anhydrite) to make surimi. Thus, four product groups (treatments) were obtained from each of the chicken mince: unwashed mince (UM); washed mince (WM); unwashed mince with CP added (UM+CP) and washed mince with CP added (WM+CP). The products were immediately frozen at −40°C for 36 h and stored at −20°C until analysis. All these procedures from muscle collection to surimi preparation were done at 4°C. Three samples from each treatment were analysed for moisture, protein (Kjeldahl), fat and ash by the standard procedures of Colour of the mince was evaluated using a Color and Color Difference Meter (Nippon Denshoku Kogyo Co. Ltd., Model 1001 DP). Colour parameters ( Mince was ground with 3% (wt/wt) NaCl and required amount of water (final moisture content 80%) in a grinder for 10 min at 4°C. For the study of frozen-storage ability, frozen products were thawed at 4°C overnight and chopped for 1 min before grinding. The paste was extruded with a hand sausage stuffer into a sausage casing (Krehalon casing, Kureha Chem. Co., 18 cm diameter, 35 cm long) and heated in the water bath at 90°C for 15 min to produce gel. After the heat processing, the gels were immediately cooled in iced-water for 20 min and kept at room temperature for 2 h before textural quality analysis. Puncture test was carried out on the test sample (2.5 cm height) at a table speed of 6 cm/min using a food rheometer (Fudoh Kogyo Co. Ltd., Tokyo, NRM-2010J-CW) equipped with a spherical plunger (5 min diameter). Gel strength was expressed as the product of breaking strength (g) and deformation (cm). Folding test (FT) was carried out by folding a 2-mm thick sample disc into halves and quarters. The scales were: a=no crack when folded into quarter, b=no crack when folded into half but crack when folded into quarter; c=crack when folded into half, d=broke and split into halves. Expressible moisture (EM) of the gel was determined by compressing a spherical gel slice (about 1.0 g) between two double layers of filter paper (Advantec, No. 3) at a pressure of 20 kg/cm Sensory softness/firmness (S/F) test was done by a nine-person trained panel of students and staffs as reported previously ( Cooking yield was determined by the procedure of The data of gel quality parameters were mean values from three replications. Replications refer to the experimental work for gel quality tests of different treatment groups (UM, WM, UM+CP, WM+CP). In each replication duplicate or triplicate samples were prepared and tested. One-way analysis of variance ( Proximate composition and pH of spent hen and broiler minces are presented in Most of the heavy connective tissues like tendons, epimysial connective tissues, etc., were trimmed off from the muscles before mincing. However, total collagen content was still higher in spent hen muscles compared to broiler muscles ( Unwashed broiler mince was lighter (higher In preliminary experiments with spent hen surimi ( Washing improved the gel quality in both types of meat. It was very much expected, since washing removes the gel inhibitory substances, while concentrates myofibrillar proteins. Washing significantly increased the collagen content in all minces. The result agrees with other findings ( No marked difference ( Addition of CP increased the BS and De in all unwashed and washed fresh surimi (non-frozen, 0 week storage) of hen and broiler ( Protein solubility (PS) was slightly higher ( Unwashed hen and broiler minces almost had identical EM values. The value was less in washed mince and significantly less ( From the results of this short-term frozen-storage, it may be concluded that: (i) gel quality was markedly deteriorated in spent hen but not so in broiler after 8 weeks; (ii) CP increased the textural and functional qualities of non-frozen hen and broiler minces; and (iii) cryoprotective effect of sugar, sorbitol and Na-tripolyphosphate during frozen-storage was more intense in broiler surimi compared to hen surimi.