Statement of problem
                  Masticatory performance is an important and complex multifactorial process in clinical practice. An exploration of the relationships and effects of the associated factors is lacking.
               
                  Purpose
                  This clinical survey compared masticatory efficiency (mixing index) with perceived masticatory ability (masticatory index) among complete denture wearers and sought to clarify the relationship between these indices and other factors.
               
                  Material and methods
                  The study consisted of 58 complete denture wearers (37 men, 21 women) ranging between 37 and 80 years of age. Participants were interviewed and examined clinically. The perceived masticatory ability of participants regarding 15 types of Sudanese food was evaluated. The degree of mixing of a 2-colored chewing gum was used to measure masticatory efficiency. Multiple regression and structural equation modeling analyses were used to assess the association between both indices and other related factors.
               
                  Results
                  Most of the complete denture wearers could eat soft foods easily but found it difficult to eat hard foods and avoided them. No significant differences in masticatory efficiency could be observed regarding sex or age. Values of the mixing index ranged from 13 (well-mixed colors) to 34 (poorly mixed). Perceived masticatory ability was significantly associated with previous denture experience and the duration of denture wearing (P=.01). Masticatory efficiency was significantly associated with denture quality (P=.001) and with perceived masticatory ability (P=.004).
               
                  Conclusions
                  A significant association was noted between denture quality and masticatory performance. A significant association was also observed between perceived masticatory ability and masticatory efficiency, and both can be used to evaluate masticatory performance among complete denture wearers. Improving the quality of dentures will significantly improve masticatory efficiency and masticatory ability. Improvement of masticatory performance in patients with complete dentures will reflect positively in their general health and thus enhance their quality of life. Both subjective and objective methods can be used effectively in measuring masticatory performance. For many years, edentulism was treated with complete conventional dentures to provide esthetics and function. However, even satisfactory dentures are considered poor substitutes for natural teeth. In clinical prosthodontics, masticatory performance can be measured either subjectively, as individual perception, or objectively. An individual’s perception of their masticatory performance is assessed using a questionnaire with food lists or indices to evaluate different types of food. Different scales have been suggested for this purpose. Liedberg et al Evaluating masticatory performance is important for diagnosing the effectiveness of a prosthesis. Compromised masticatory function can directly influence dietary selection, Therefore, the purpose of this study was to compare masticatory ability (assessed subjectively) with masticatory efficiency (quantified objectively), with respect to measuring masticatory performance among participants provided with complete denture prostheses. Moreover, we hypothesized that factors including experience with previous dentures, denture age, duration of wearing dentures (wearing habit), and quality of the dentures can influence both indices. These relationships were tested using structural equation modelling analysis. The study population consisted of 58 completely edentulous patients who attended the dental clinics of the Department of Oral Rehabilitation, Faculty of Dentistry at University of Khartoum, between January and May 2015. Approval from the Ethical Committee of the University of Khartoum was obtained. The purpose of the study was explained to the participants, and a written consent form was obtained. Patients with extraoral and/or intraoral pathology, dry mouth, temporomandibular joint disorders, and intellectual disability and those who presented with major medical problems or chronic diseases were excluded (for example, heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, eating disorders). The criteria selected for professionally assessing the quality of the dentures were those developed by Corrigan et al Two-color chewing gum was used as the test food for masticatory efficiency (objective method) ( For statistical analysis, the means or frequencies were determined according to the variable type (numerical or categorical). The Mann-Whitney Sex, age, and general health were not included in the model because the preliminary bivariate and Student The sample consisted of 37 men and 21 women (mean 61.59 ±7.97 years of age; minimum 37 years of age). Most participants (93.2%) perceived their general health as good or very good, whereas only 6.8% perceived their general health as poor or very poor. Most participants had worn 1 or more prostheses previously; 36% had worn their present dentures for less than 1 year, 40% for 1 to 2 years, and 24% for more than 2 years, with a mean age of 22.60 ±28.86 months for the present denture. Most participants reported that they removed their dentures only at night ( The perceived masticatory index for each participant was obtained by collecting the perceived masticatory ability score (from 0 to 5) of each food, and the mean for all participants was 39.26 ±24.02 points (range, 5 to 75). Regarding masticatory efficiency (mixing index), 11 participants did not masticate the gum. The mixing index values ranged from 13 (well-mixed colors) to 34 (poorly mixed; mean of 27.28 ±5.57 points). The inferential statistics of the masticatory index were run among all participants in relation to the study variables, except for the mixing index, and were rerun for the mixing index after excluding those who could not masticate the gum in relation to all study variables. No significant differences were found between men and women regarding either index. However, a significant difference was observed between previously wearing a denture and masticatory index, although this was not significant in relation to the mixing index ( Multiple regression analysis revealed “wearing habit” and “experience of previous denture” as significant determinants of masticatory index, explaining 26% of the variability with This study investigated the association between perceived masticatory ability, using a masticatory index as a subjective method of measuring masticatory ability, and mixing index, as an objective measurement. This study consisted of more men than women, consistent with other studies of complete denture wearers. Edentulism is strongly related with general health, although evidence of a causal relationship is limited. However, in this study, most participants perceived their general health as good, due perhaps to the positive effect of denture use on daily oral function and general well-being. In the current study, most individuals had worn their dentures for less than 2 years. This differs from 2 studies, where denture use ranged from 19.2 to 29.5 years Most respondents (81%) had an adequate interocclusal distance ranging from 3 to 7 mm, similar to observations by Hamed A high percentage of the participants in the current study could eat soft foods very easily with their dentures, as noted by other authors. The masticatory efficiency (mixing index) between men and women was not significantly different ( There was no significant correlation between denture quality and perceived masticatory ability. This could be explained by the fact that some patients with clinically inadequate dentures become adapted to their dentures and perceive their masticatory ability as good. A similar observation was reported by Shanki et al There was a significant correlation between denture quality and mixing index. People with good quality dentures had better masticatory efficiency than those with poor quality dentures. These findings are in agreement with some studies The small number of participants recruited for this study is a limitation. Another limitation is the absence of comparison groups wearing other types of prostheses (complete overdenture, removable partial denture, implant-supported prosthesis). Future studies are recommended with larger sample size and different types of prostheses. Within the limitations of this clinical study, the following conclusions were drawn: Among the different factors explored in this study, denture quality seemed to have a considerable effect on masticatory performance. Improvement of masticatory performance in complete dentures patients will improve their general health and thus enhance their quality of life. There was a correlation between the subjectively evaluated perceived masticatory ability and the objectively assessed masticatory efficiency. We, thus, suggest that both measures can be used to evaluate masticatory performance among denture wearers.