The innovative 3D printing technique has been successfully applied to build-up, layer by layer, construction-scale structures through the extrusion of various cementitious materials. Favorable buildability of fresh cement mixture and the hardened properties of the printed structures are essential requirements for 3D concrete printing. This chapter firstly proposes a 3D-printable cement mixture containing 40% mining tailings. The influence of paste age on the buildability of a 40-layer structure is evaluated, as well as the bending resistance of a prism specimen sawed from the printed structure. The bonding between layers is a critical factor that influences the structural capacity of the product. In particular, a weak bonding interface formed in the layered extrusion process was identified through high-resolution X-ray CT scanning. It is necessary and desirable for the cement paste to perform buildability and mechanical performances well. Thereafter, a proper amount of viscosity modifying agent (VMA) was used to improve structural integrity by increasing the bonding force between the adjacent extruded layers. Meanwhile, the impact of the curing method on the hardened properties of 3D-printed structures was accessed. Results indicated that the prepared tailing mortar achieved sufficient buildability to be used in an extrusion-typed 3D printer at the paste age of 45minutes. The mold-cast specimens possess flexural strength of 7.87MPa. In contrast, with an addition of 1.5% VMA and 90°C steam curing the flexural strength of printed specimens achieved values of 5.22 and 12.93MPa, respectively. The printable property of fresh cementitious materials and the mechanical behavior of the hardened structures are of great concern for current 3D printing technologies However, this approach would minimize the fluidity and adhesive behavior of the fresh paste, which may result in poor hardened structural capability and integrity. In the printing process, the concrete components are created by bonding the extruded filaments together to form each layer without using extra formworks Proper treatment can be applied to improve the bonding between the layers and to decrease the voids formed by the filaments. Viscosity modifying agents (VMA) are water-soluble polymers that control the flow characteristics and rheological performance of concrete mortars The objective of this study is to optimize the structural integrity and mechanical performance of the components printed at a favorable buildability situation. To this end, this chapter firstly proposes a 3D-printable cementitious material that is suitable for the extrusion-based printing process. The influence of paste age on the buildability of fresh motors was evaluated to reach a desirable buildability. Meanwhile, the bending resistance of printed prism specimens fabricated at different paste ages was tested. Thereafter, various amounts of VMA and different curing methods were applied to improve the structural capacity by increasing the bonding force between the adjacent extruded layers. In particular, X-ray CT scanning was implemented to characterize the weak bonding interfaces formed in the layered extrusion processes. Rapid hardening Portland cement P. O 42.5 In the preparation process, polypropylene fibers and the dry powders (i.e., cement, fly ash, silica fume, natural sand, and tailings) are firstly blended for three minutes to obtain a uniform mixture. Then, one half of the total amount of water along with the superplasticizer was added and stirred for two minutes. Subsequently, the second half of the total amount of water together with superplasticizer is poured in and stirred for another 2 After blending, the fresh paste is delivered to the material storage tank equipped in our self-designed printing system to manufacture a 40-layer structure Thereafter, prism specimens with sizes of 30  Paste age refers to the duration from when the raw materials have been blended to starting printing. The liquid and viscous property of fresh pastes are crucial for the bonding performance between layers, which greatly depends on the paste age. It is expected that the shorter the paste age, the higher the bonding strength between layers. Three paste ages ranging from 15 to 45 By the testing procedures given in Nondestructive X-ray computed tomography (CT) has been widely adopted to provide accurate identification of the meso/microscopic structure of engineering materials To evaluate the influence of paste age on the buildability of fresh mortar paste, 20-layer structures were built up by the proposed tailing mortar at paste ages of 15, 30, and 45 A longer paste age of the cement-based materials promotes the hydration degree of the binding materials and facilitates the fresh paste to turn from a fluidity state into a plastic state At the paste age of 45 minutes, the measured average thickness of layers under the pressure of self-weight is 7.5 Increasing the buildability through prolonging the paste age may minimize the bonding force between adjacent layers. The bending behavior of prism specimens printed at different paste ages were evaluated. Rough fracture surfaces will form once the specimen fails in the bending loads. The two separated parts are assembled together, as shown in The 3D concrete printing process differs significantly from traditional fabrication processes. The failure modes, or the path of the fracture surface, is It is expected that the bonding properties of the extruded layers will be improved by using a certain amount of VMA. To verify this expectation, the bending behavior of prism specimens fabricated with different VMA contents were investigated. The paste age for printing is designed at 45 To further probe the influence of VMA on the bonding property between filaments, CT scanning technique was implemented to characterize the microscale interfaces between adjacent filaments and the fractured zones of tested samples. The detection method is similar to that illustrated in Due to its layered build-up character, 3D printing of cementitious material is appropriate for prefabricated structural components. Proper curing can promote the strength development of the concrete structures. From the test results, steam curing significantly contributes to the improvement of the microstructures of the cement matrix as well as the This chapter investigated the structural capacity of components printed at favorable buildability situations. The paste age, VMA content, and curing method are considered to optimize the buildability of fresh paste and the mechanical strength of the hardened material to meet the structural capacity requirements and demands of the printed stricture. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: The buildability of a proposed tailing material can be controlled by adjusting the paste age. The longer the paste age, the better the buildability. At a paste age of 45 The flexural strength of specimens printed at a paste age of 45 Incorporating 1.5% viscous modifying agent can increase the flexural strength and fracture energy by 25% and 54.5%, respectively. The addition of VMA eliminates the influence of the interlayer delamination on the fracture path to a large extent. The flexural strength of material with 1.5% VMA measures 67% of the mold-casted ones. The flowability of fresh paste must be taken into account to meet the basic requirements of a desirable printability when a certain amount of VMA is adopted. The steam-curing method introduced in this study increased the strengths approximately four times from the original strength. Flexural strengths of 12.93 This chapter investigated the structural integrity and bending resistance of 3D printed structures. It is applicable and beneficial to enhance the 3D-printed structures using the proposed methods. However, there are still certain mechanical mismatches between the printed and mold-cast specimens. The next step for research is to investigate how to reduce the weakening impact of layer delamination on the structural performance of components. Additionally, the mechanical anisotropy of the printed laminar structure needs further study as, currently, 3D-printed objects are either unreinforced, or reinforcement is applied manually; fiber-reinforced cement mixtures or fiber-reinforced polymers that show great potential to increase the ductility of the printed mortar should be developed. Further research will also be devoted to explore the frontiers of 3D printing and promote its effective application in real-life construction scenarios. The authors are grateful to the financial support by the National Major Research Instrument Development Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51627812) and the opening project of State Key Laboratory of Explosion Science and Technology (Beijing Institute of Technology, Grant No. KFJJ13-11M).