The zeta potential and viscosity values of kaolinite suspensions in cationic poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDACl), anionic poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) (PSSS) and nonionic poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) solutions have been determined. The zeta potential value of kaolinite increases with the first addition of PDDACl and PVA solutions, on the contrary of PSSS. Kaolinite–water suspensions exhibit a thixotropic or rheopectic behavior depending on clay concentration. However, kaolinite–polymer suspensions display a thixotropic behavior. The flow type of kaolinite–water and kaolinite–polymer suspensions is Bingham, except kaolinite–PVA suspensions including 7.5×10−5 and 1.0×10−4
                     M PVA. It has been found from the relative plastic viscosity measurements that PDDACl and PVA are of a significant effect on the plastic viscosity values of kaolinite suspensions, unlike the PSSS. The interactions between kaolinite and polymer molecules have been investigated by FTIR spectroscopy. This study shows that the zeta potential and viscosity values of kaolinite suspensions can be adjusted using different polymers.Kaolinite is an aluminum silicate with the general formula Al Clay suspensions are the first step to obtain commercial products that have diverse size, shape, material composition and cost Electrokinetic and rheological properties of particles in an aqueous solution play a significant role in understanding the adsorption mechanism of ionic or nonionic molecules at the solid–solution interface. These properties govern the flotation, coagulation and dispersion properties in suspension systems and also identify the optimal conditions of a well dispersed system There are a lot of research studies on the electrokinetic or rheological properties of kaolinite suspensions in the presence of electrolyte and polymer solutions. Alkan et al. The stability and viscosity values of clay suspensions can be adjusted using the different polymer solutions. Poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDACl), poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) (PSSS) and poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) are among the most widely used polymers in the industry. PDDACl is widely used in water treatment, paper manufacturing, mining industry, cosmetics and biological applications The aim of the present study is to investigate the effects of cationic PDDACl, anionic PSSS and nonionic PVA polymers on the electrokinetic and rheological properties of kaolinite and also to examine the interactions between kaolinite particles and polymers by IR spectroscopy. Kaolinite was obtained from Zafer Mining Co. (Balıkesir, Turkey). Poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride), poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) and poly(vinyl alcohol) were purchased from Aldrich. It is noted that the concentrations of poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) and poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) are 20 Kaolinite sample was purified before using in the experiments. To prepare the purified kaolinite, a suspension was prepared by adding of 100 The cation exchange capacity and the density values of kaolinite were determined as 12.39 Zeta potential measurements were carried out by Nano-ZS model (Malvern) zetasizer instrument which works with the technique of laser doppler electrophoresis (4 The zeta potential measurements were performed to determine the isoelectric point of kaolinite and the effect of polymer concentrations on the electrokinetic properties of kaolinite. To determine the isoelectric point of kaolinite, the clay samples of 0.5 To investigate the effect of polymer concentrations on the zeta potential values of kaolinite particles, a series of clay–polymer suspension was prepared by adding of polymer solutions at different polymer concentrations into the erlenmeyers containing 0.5 Kaolinite–water suspensions containing 5.0 To investigate the flow type and the viscosity values of kaolinite–polymer suspensions, 10.0 All clay–water and clay–polymer suspensions were mixed at 600 The rheological measurements of kaolinite suspensions were carried out by a Brookfield DV-III Ultra programmable rheometer. An ultra low adapter (ULA) with sample volume of 16 The FTIR spectra of pure kaolinite, pure PVA and kaolinite interacted with polymers were recorded by KBr pellet technique. Bruker-tensor 27 model FTIR spectrometer was used to obtain the FTIR spectra of samples in the range of 500–4000 The determination of the pH values of the clay suspensions is very important, since the stability and flow behaviors of the suspensions depend on the pH value of the suspension. When a certain amount of clay is added into the acid or base solution, the pH value of the prepared suspension may change with time. For this reason, pH profile of kaolinite–water suspensions at acidic, basic and natural pH values was obtained to follow the change of pH value of clay suspensions with time. The pH profile of 0.5 The pH value of deionized water is 5.84. The pH value of clay suspension prepared with the addition of kaolinite exhibits a rapid increase in the first 5 Excess clay concentration in the suspension can cause some errors in the zeta potential measurements. Besides, the number of solid particles facilitates the surface charge generation by producing the ionic species at the solid/liquid interface and this can affect the zeta potential value of the suspension The isoelectric point is a pH value at which the total amount of positive charge on the surface of solid is equal to the total amount of negative charge on it. The amount of net surface charge of solid or zeta potential value is zero at the isoelectric point. The isoelectric point is a characteristic property of solid particles. Therefore, it is important to know the isoelectric point of clay and surface charge of the clay particles for the adsorption or flotation processes The effect of pH value on the zeta potential value of kaolinite is shown in The zeta potential values of kaolinite–PDDACl, kaolinite–PSSS and kaolinite–PVA suspensions measured as a function of polymer concentration are illustrated in In the case of kaolinite–PSSS suspension system ( The variation of the zeta potential value of kaolinite suspension as a function of PVA concentration is presented in  Shear stress versus shear rate graphs of sepiolite–water suspensions are presented in The graph of shear stress versus shear rate is called a consistency curve and four different types of curve representing different types of flow behavior of suspensions may be distinguished as Newtonian, pseudoplastic, Bingham plastic and dilatant. The obtained shear stress ( The  A typical shear stress versus shear rate graph of kaolinite–PDDACl suspensions containing 10.0  The  The initial pH values of PDDACl, PSSS and PVA polymer solutions used in the rheological measurements of clay–polymer suspension systems are in the range of 5.52–5.59, 4.07–4.95 and 5.50–5.71, respectively. An increase in the pH values of the suspensions has been observed after the addition of clay particles. The pH values of kaolinite–PDDACl, kaolinite–PSSS and kaolinite–PVA suspensions at the end of 18 Firstly, the FTIR spectra of polymer solutions and pure kaolinite were recorded to explain the interactions between the kaolinite particles and the polymer molecules.  PSSS displays characteristic peaks at 2929 and 1549 As seen from The FTIR spectrum of pure kaolinite is presented in  The results of FTIR measurements indicate that the adsorptions of PDDACl, PSSS and PVA molecules onto the kaolinite particles occur through the formation of hydrogen bonding between the silanol groups of clay particles and the polymer molecules. Besides, the water molecules on the surface of kaolinite are very important in the binding of polymer molecules by kaolinite particles. The pH values of kaolinite suspensions may increase or decrease with time depending on the initial pH values of suspensions. The pH value of the suspension has changed significantly the zeta potential value of kaolinite. The isoelectric point of kaolinite has been found to be pH 1.85. The zeta potential value of 0.5 The authors would like to thank to the Scientific Research Projects Coordination Unit of Akdeniz University for the support of this work. The authors are grateful to Prof. Dr. Ertuğrul ARPAÇ for his permission in the usage of zetasizer and FTIR spectrometer instruments.