This study examines the suitability of Talcher coal fly ash for stowing in the nearby underground coal mines based on their physico-chemical and mineralogical analysis. The physical properties such as bulk density, specific gravity, particle size distribution, porosity, permeability and water holding capacity etc. have been determined. From the chemical characterization it is found that the ash samples are enriched predominantly in silica (SiO2), alumina (Al2O3) and iron oxides (Fe2O3), along with a little amount of CaO, and fall under the Class F fly ash category. In addition, the mineral phases identified in the ash samples are quartz, mullite, magnetite, and hematite. The particle morphological analysis revealed that the ash particles are almost spherical in shape and the bulk ash porous in nature. From the particle size and permeability point of view, pond ash may be considered a better stowing material than fly ash.Hydraulic sand stowing is widely used in underground coal mines for minimizing surface subsidence. These days, the Indian mining industry is facing an acute shortage of river sand due to its increasing application in civil engineering. As a result, a large numbers of underground coal mines are left unstowed after excavation of coal, which leads to surface subsidence. Thus the mining industry is searching for an alternative stowing material which is available in sufficient quantity and at minimal cost. At the same time, fly ash which is generated from the thermal power plants as a coal combustion by-product (CCB), occupies a substantial area of land in the form of ash ponds and is responsible for environmental pollutions. The effective bulk utilization of this unused fly ash locked in the ash ponds has emerged as a challenge for the power plant authorities. Fly ash has multifarious applications in various fields Many researchers have conducted characterization studies in order to assess the suitability of fly ash for stowing in underground mines, backfilling, making highway embankments and other geotechnical applications In the design of hydraulic stowing and selection of the stowing material, permeability plays an important role. Ideally, in hydraulic stowing, the hydraulic fill should be free draining, that is, water should readily drain out from the stowed mass after stowing The chemical composition of coal ash is influenced to a great extent by the geological and geographical characteristics of the coal deposit, the combustion conditions, and the removal efficiencies of the control devices Based on the chemical composition, fly ash has been classified into two classes, i.e. Class F (produced from anthracite and bituminous coals) and Class C (normally produced from lignite and sub-bituminous coals) as per ASTM C-618. The chief difference between Class F and Class C fly ash is in the amount of calcium, silica, alumina, and iron oxide content in the ash. When the combined amount of the oxides of silicon, aluminium, and iron in fly ash is 70% or above (by mass), it is described as a Class F fly ash. When this amount is between 50 and 70%, the ash is called a Class C fly ash. Usually Class C fly ash contains significant amount of calcium oxide (CaO) or free lime and possesses both cementitious (self-hardening when reacted with water) and pozzolanic properties The materials used in the present study are three fly ashes (designated as F Some of the physical properties that are of particular interest when fly ash is used for stowing in underground coal mines are particle size distribution, specific gravity, and bulk density etc. The bulk density ( The particle size analysis is conducted by using a Malvern 3601 particle size analyzer with the wet dispersion method in water. Malvern 3601 is a laser diffraction particle sizer which works on the principle of laser diffraction and utilizes photo-sedimentation method. The particle morphology of the fly ash and pond ash samples are analyzed from the micrographs obtained with a JEOL JSM-5800 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The particle shape is quantified by using image analysis and documented with micrographs. The coefficient of permeability is determined by a constant-head permeameter as per standard ASTM D-2434. The water holding capacity (WHC) of the fly ash samples are determined by Keen's box method The chemical and mineralogical characterization of fly ash is not only beneficial for knowing its composition, but also helps in its classification for its possible utilization as a stowing material. A SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) (Model: JEOL JSM-5800) with Energy Dispersive X-ray microanalyzer (OXFORD ISIS-300) and auto sputter coater is used to determine the chemical composition (major elements and their oxides) of the fly ash and pond ash samples of TTPS. Since the ash samples are non-conducting in nature, they were coated with gold with a BIO-RAD E-5200 coating unit. The presence of carbon in the stowing material plays a very important role in spontaneous heating due to its involvement in auto-oxidation. The unburned carbon content of the ash samples which could not be determined by SEM is determined by the loss on ignition (LOI) test. The LOI is considered as a standard index for carbon content of fly ash and natural pozzolans. The LOI of the ash samples is determined as per ASTM C-311 by subjecting the oven-dried ash samples to 750 The mineral phases present in the collected fly ash and pond ash samples of TTPS are identified by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) technique. The various phases and minerals associated with the ash samples are determined from their diffractograms obtained from the diffractometer. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the ash samples are collected by a Philips X'Pert diffractometer (Model: PW 1710), operated at 40 The results of the physico-chemical and mineralogical characterization of fly ash and pond ash samples of TTPS are given as follows: The physical properties of the TTPS fly ash and pond ash samples are given in The specific gravity of the fly ash and pond ash samples varies from 2.14–2.17 and 2.00–2.15 respectively. The bulk density of the fly ash samples ranges between 1.00 and 1.06 The results of particle size analysis of the fly ash and pond ash samples are summarized in In the case of the fly ash samples, since, C The results of the permeability test of TTPS ash samples show that the coefficient of permeability values of both the fly ash and pond ash samples is on the order of 10 The elemental and chemical compositions (element oxides) of TTPS ash samples are presented in The results of the chemical composition (element oxides) show that the ash samples are enriched predominantly with silica (SiO The XRD patterns of the fly ash and pond ash samples of TTPS are shown in The fly ash and pond ash samples of TTPS possess more or less similar physico-chemical and mineralogical properties. Comparatively, the pond ash samples are coarser in size, more permeable in nature and possess higher WHC than the fly ash samples. The SEM images revealed spherical particle morphology of the ash samples. This creates a lubricating action due to “ball-bearing” effect which results in a frictionless flow in the stowing range causing less wear and tear on the pipelines. In addition, due to improved rheology, it also helps in reducing the energy cost in pipeline transportation during hydraulic stowing operations. The ash samples are mainly constituted of silica (SiO The present study is based on the R&D project sponsored by