With increasing mylonitization of aplite veins and their adjacent granite in the Hatagawa Shear Zone of NE Japan, the modal content and grain size of feldspar porphyroclasts decrease, while the modal content of fine-grained (≤50μm) polymineralic aggregate of plagioclase, K-feldspar, quartz and biotite increases up to 60–80% in the granite and aplite ultramylonites. Deformation-induced myrmekite lobes are ubiquitously developed around K-feldspar porphyroclasts. The occurrence and chemical composition of plagioclase and K-feldspar in fine-grained polymineralic aggregates indicate that the plagioclase is mostly derived from myrmekite, while the interstitial K-feldspar originates from isolated porphyroclast rims between growing myrmekite lobes and/or precipitations from solution. Modal and bulk chemical compositions of granite and aplite indicate that the mylonites are preferentially developed in aplite veins richer in K-feldspar than the surrounding granite. Deformation-induced K-feldspar replacement by myrmekite is then more favored during deformation to produce more abundant fine-grained polymineralic aggregates. Subsequent reaction softening leads to more enhanced deformation, which promotes further myrmekite-forming reaction. Such a positive feedback of deformation and myrmekite-forming reaction in aplite veins and their adjacent granite may be responsible for strain localization in the granite and aplite mylonites along the Hatagawa Shear Zone.Ductile shear zones are regarded as localized zones of ductile shear strain in which strain softening has occurred ( We describe in this paper a strain localization process in a granite along the Hatagawa Shear Zone of NE Japan. Changes with progressive mylonitization in microstructure, modal composition, grain size, quartz aggregate shape, quartz The Hatagawa Shear Zone is one of a series of major NNW-trending sinistral shear zones in NE Japan ( Progressive mylonitization of granite and aplite is well observed in the Hatagawa Shear Zone along the Ukedo River ( In addition to the above six samples, we also collected a weakly deformed granite (WDG) from the eastern margin of the Hatagawa Shear Zone, and an undeformed granite (UDG) and an undeformed aplite (UDA) outside the Shear Zone ( Optical and back-scattered electron (BSE) microstructures of the collected samples were observed viewing downward in subhorizontal Sample UDG has an isotropic fabric ( Sample GM1 exhibits a porphyroclast-in-matrix microstructure ( Myrmekite lobes are well developed around K-feldspar porphyroclasts along their boundaries subparallel to the mylonitic foliation (black arrowheads in In sample GM2, feldspar porphyroclasts form a smaller volume fraction, and are smaller in size than those in GM1 ( Monomineralic K-feldspar aggregates are commonly elongate parallel to the mylonitic foliation, forming K-feldspar ribbons ( Sample GUM contains a few feldspar porphyroclasts ( K-feldspar porphyroclasts show that, relative to core regions, Na concentration decreases while K concentration increases in porphyroclast rims adjacent to myrmekite lobes (e.g. black arrowheads in Microstructures of aplite samples are essentially the same as in their granite counterparts. All aplite samples contain small amounts of garnet ( Modal compositions were determined by point counting with a traverse spacing of 300 The granite and aplite samples contain 24–41 A major difference in modal composition between the non-mylonites and mylonites is an almost absence in the non-mylonites of fine-grained polymineralic aggregate and monomineralic K-feldspar aggregate occurring in ribbons, fracture fillings and pressure shadows ( In each sample, grain boundaries of 38–1354 (mostly 100–400) grains of every major constituent mineral in different microstructural units were traced from a number of optical micrographs. Grain diameters of individual grains were then obtained by image analysis as diameters of circles having equal areas with those of grain areas, and their averages and standard deviations were calculated. Corrections taking account of sectioning effects have not been made. Grain-size reduction of major constituent minerals in porphyroclast and monomineralic aggregate is clearly observed with increasing deformation and mylonitization, although the changes in grain size other than porphyroclast K-feldspar are minor in the mylonites ( Constituent minerals in fine-grained polymineralic aggregates are mostly smaller than 50 Aspect ratios and long-axis orientations of individual quartz aggregates in four granite samples, UDG, WDG, SDG and GM1, were measured in order to obtain information on finite strain. Because individual grains in quartz aggregates are dynamically recrystallized, it is highly unlikely that they preserve information on finite strain. However, individual quartz aggregates may give at least a crude measure of finite strain. Outlines of 35–108 quartz aggregates were traced from polished Quartz aggregates in UDG have small aspect ratios (  The quartz Bulk chemical compositions of the samples except for UDG were determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy using a Philips PW1480 at the Department of Geology, University of Tokyo, following the sample preparation and analytical procedures described by With increasing deformation and mylonitization of the granite, an overall increase in K Although no systematic change in bulk chemical composition is apparent with increasing mylonitization of the aplite ( Chemical compositions of plagioclase and K-feldspar in three granite samples, SDG, GM1 and GUM, and those of zoned garnet in AUM were determined by electron microprobe analysis (EPMA) using a JEOL JXA8900 at the Chemical Analysis Center, Chiba University, and a JEOL JXA8900L at the Department of Geology, University of Tokyo. Porphyroclast-core plagioclase is mostly An The chemical composition of porphyroclast-core K-feldspar varies from Or As described above, optically zoned garnet grains with pinkish cores and colorless rims are common in samples GUM, AML and AUM. Compositional profiles across such zoned garnet grains in AUM reveal an increase in Ca concentration and a decrease in Fe and Mg concentrations at their rims (e.g. Assuming homogeneous deformation of initial randomly oriented individual quartz aggregates, we can estimate two-dimensional finite strains recorded by the quartz aggregates from their averaged ellipse shape tensors ( Deformation of the non-mylonitic granites is represented by elongation of quartz aggregates ( Mylonitization of the granite and aplite involves a decrease in modal content and grain size of plagioclase and K-feldspar porphyroclasts, a decrease in modal content of aggregate quartz and biotite, an appearance of K-feldspar aggregate in ribbons, fracture fillings and pressure shadows, and an increase in modal content of fine-grained polymineralic aggregate ( Fine-grained (≤10 Most plagioclase grains in fine-grained polymineralic aggregate are thought to be derived from the myrmekite plagioclase, because they contain vermicular or globular quartz inclusions (e.g. A smaller sharp peak at <10 Thus the fine-grained polymineralic aggregate is likely formed by mixing of myrmekite lobes and their interstitial K-feldspar isolated from porphyroclast rims and/or precipitated from solution, with minor amounts of quartz, biotite and K-feldspar grains incorporated from their monomineralic aggregate. Increasing amounts of fine-grained polymineralic aggregate with increasing mylonitization therefore implies that the myrmekite-forming reaction proceeded with mylonitization of the granite and aplite along the Hatagawa Shear Zone. The myrmekite-forming reaction plays a key role in the development of the granite and aplite mylonites along the Hatagawa Shear Zone, as discussed above. The occurrence of myrmekite lobes along K-feldspar porphyroclast boundaries subparallel to mylonitic foliation (  A decrease in Fe In any case, the myrmekite-forming reaction is a hydrated reaction, the water required for which may have been introduced by fracturing during aplite intrusion. We applied the two-feldspar thermometry of Quartz Ductile shearing along the Hatagawa Shear Zone at 106–86 Within the Hatagawa Shear Zone, aplite veins are preferentially mylonitized ( Fracturing during aplite intrusion may also have introduced water required for the myrmekite-forming reaction in aplite veins and their adjacent granite. Aplite veins are richer in K-feldspar than the surrounding granite ( In contrast to a systematic change in bulk chemical composition with increasing mylonitization in the granites, the change in bulk chemical composition in the aplites is apparently minor ( In contrast, relative changes in element concentration in the aplite samples ( Initial compositional heterogeneity cannot explain a subtle but systematic change in element concentration with increasing mylonitization in the aplite mylonites, whereas mass transfer between the granite and aplite mylonites has difficulty in explaining the absence of MgO in the aplite mylonites. Without additional data, neither of the above two possibilities can be excluded at present. Microstructural evidence for crystal plastic deformation and dynamic recrystallization of quartz (e.g. From the changes with progressive mylonitization in microstructure, modal composition, grain size, quartz aggregate shape, quartz Strain is localized into narrow (10 With increasing mylonitization of both granite and aplite, the modal content of feldspar porphyroclasts as well as their grain size decrease, while the modal content of fine-grained (≤50 Deformation-induced myrmekite lobes ( Both two-feldspar thermometry and quartz Modal and bulk chemical compositions of the granites and aplites indicate that mylonites are preferentially developed in aplite veins richer in K-feldspar than the surrounding granite. Deformation-induced K-feldspar replacement by myrmekite is then more favored during deformation to produce more abundant fine-grained polymineralic aggregates. Subsequent reaction softening leads to more enhanced deformation, which promotes further myrmekite-forming reaction. Such a positive feedback of deformation and myrmekite-forming reaction in aplite veins is responsible for strain localization in aplite veins and adjacent granite along the Hatagawa Shear Zone, and may be a common process in ductile shear zones of the granitic middle crust. A systematic change in modal and bulk chemical compositions in granite with increasing mylonitization may be due to either initial compositional heterogeneity or mass transfer during mylonitization. In the former case, strain has been localized into aplite veins and their adjacent leucocratic granite domains in the Hatagawa Shear Zone. But in the latter case, granite mylonites in the Hatagawa Shear Zone have become leucocratic by mass transfer during mylonitization. We thank M. Enami, Y. Hiroi, T. Ito and T. Nishiyama for discussions and suggestions, N. Shigematsu for providing his geologic map in press, T. Okudaira for advice on temperature calculations, R. Heilbronner for providing her LGB macro for NIH Image used in grain-size analysis, M. Furusho, S. Miyoshi and H. Yoshida for assisting with EPMA analyses, and H. Yoshida for assisting with XRF analysis. We also thank R. Law, K. O'Hara and R. Wintsch for helpful reviews, and D. Fisher for editorial handling. This study was supported by Grant 07454120 from the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture of Japan to K. Kanagawa.