The Accha deposit in Southern Peru is the first case in which an integrated study between mineralogy, petrography and metallurgical characteristics of a nonsulfide Zn orebody has been carried out. The Accha–Yanque Zinc Belt is located in a major zinc-rich metallogenic province hosting a number of economic mineral deposits, which extends in a zone peripheral to the edge of the Oligocene–Miocene Yauri–Apurímac granite batholith. This belt is comprised of a number of weathering-derived nonsulfides occurrences, showings and mineral deposits. A thorough mineralogical and petrographic study has been carried out on the MET 1, MET 2, MET 3 and MET 4 cores, drilled between 2006 and 2007 for metallurgical purposes. The nonsulfides mineral association in the deposit consists mainly of smithsonite and hemimorphite replacing both primary ore minerals and carbonate host rocks. Smithsonite occurs in zoned concretions with goethite, Mn(hydr)oxides and Zn-clays. One of the most peculiar nonsulfide Zn mineral at Accha is a sauconite-like Zn-smectite, which can be locally very abundant (up to 30%).
                  Differences in mineralogy of the ore and gangue minerals, as well as the composition of the host rock can have a profound impact on zinc recovery and reagent consumption in any extraction process. The Accha nonsulfide ore minerals are intimately intergrown with the limestone host and therefore difficult to separate with traditional methods, this rendering the economic recovery of the metal through the acid leaching process difficult. This is further complicated by the abundance of sauconite in the deposit. It was therefore necessary to envisage a flowsheet development, derived from a thorough metallurgical test work program on various ore types, which could result in an economically viable treatment route in the light of both the carbonate host rock and the peculiar mineralogical association. Several careful processing steps comprised of comminution, dense media separation and flotation before acid leaching, and including precise acid leaching conditions to prevent the formation of deleterious ‘gels’ that would interfere with subsequent solid–liquid separation processes, have been tested for Accha as part of the development of an economic processing flowsheet.It has been six years since Anglo-American began producing zinc from the Skorpion deposit in Namibia ( “Zinc nonsulfides” is a very general term, which comprises a whole series of minerals ( Host rock composition significantly influences the mineralogy (and therefore metallurgy) of nonsulfide zinc deposits. Those in limestone and dolomite tend to be dominated by smithsonite and hydrozincite, due to the interaction of low-pH Zn-rich fluids with host carbonates, whereas deposits in siliciclastic rocks tend to contain hemimorphite- and sauconite-bearing assemblages. However, even in the same category of host rocks, the mineralogy can vary substantially: it tends to be relatively simple (smithsonite, hemimorphite, hydrozincite) in the oxidation products derived from low-temperature sulfide deposits. On the contrary, the resulting mineralogical association can be far more complex in those deposits derived from the weathering of high-temperature, pyrite-bearing ores, owing to the wide range of metals associated with primary mineralization ( Zinc minerals from sulfide deposits are generally easy to enrich, using the time proven flotation method of physical separation, into a high-grade concentrate that can be shipped and treated at conventional smelters worldwide for the recovery of zinc metal. On the contrary, the concentration process is more difficult, if not impossible, for nonsulfide zinc minerals, due to their characteristics being more similar to those of gangue minerals as compared to sulfide ores, which exhibit metallic-like physical properties that can be utilized in the flotation process of selective separation. Even if nonsulfide zinc minerals can be enriched sufficiently using non-flotation, chemical methods, to allow shipping, it is more difficult to find existing refineries suitable to treat each specific nonsulfide concentrate, where “suitable” means economically viable due to a content of easy to process ore minerals with high liberation grades, paired by the “right” gangue. The solution would then be to design and construct a refinery at the mine site that is specifically designed to treat the ore or concentrate produced. These factors make it much more difficult to find an economically viable zinc nonsulfide deposit compared to a sulfide deposit. Therefore, to justify the large capital required for setting up a refinery an economically viable nonsulfide deposit would need to be large, have a potential for long-life production of perhaps 15 A wide series of papers exist on the traditional treatment of nonsulfides (including flotation processes), spanning the first seventy years of the last century ( Because even small differences in dissolution rates and in H This process is currently in the experimentation stage for some Peruvian nonsulfide deposits, including Accha (N. Welham pers.comm.). The economic value of nonsulfide zinc ores is therefore strictly dependent not only on the geological knowledge of each deposit, but mainly on the specific characteristics of the mineralogical association and on the interaction of zinc and gangue minerals during chemical and physical processing ( Accha is a nonsulfide Zn(Pb) deposit (indicated mineral resources of 5.1 The nonsulfide Zn-ores of Accha are amenable to be processed by leaching and EW, using the special process conditions developed over the last decade, successfully practiced by Anglo-American zinc refinery at Skorpion in Namibia ( Mineralogical, petrographical and geochemical research ( The bulk of the analytical work reported in The samples have been divided in half: from the first half thin/polished sections have been prepared for petrography, on the second half we have carried out X-ray diffraction. For routine mineralogical characterization of each sample we have used a GE-SEIFERT MZVI automated diffractometer (XRD), with CuKα radiation, 40 Polished thin sections (~ Secondary electron imagining by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out by a Jeol JSM 5310 instrument. Element mapping and qualitative energy-dispersive (EDS) spectra were obtained by INCA microanalysis system (Oxford). To get the mineralogical composition of selected phases, we have used a wavelength dispersion spectrometry (full WDS) on a Cameca SX50 electron microprobe operating at 15 Chemical analysis for major and minor elements has been carried out at Mintek (Johannesburg, South Africa) from a limited number of samples, to which the QPA has been then applied. The different steps of the processing test work have been also performed at Mintek (SA) under the supervision of Green Team International (South Africa). The data derived from X-ray analyses (partly complemented by EDS) are shown in The richer interval of the MET 1 drill core (the best-mineralized core, with 20 to 50% ZnO) occurs between 80 and 100 The richer zones of this core (about 30 to 40% Zn) have been encountered between 54 to 60 The highest Zn values (about 37% Zn) have been detected in this core between 102 and 112 The richer zones of this core (10 to 44% Zn) are localized between 102 The Accha nonsulfide ore minerals are strictly intergrown with the limestone host ( A first lithological group of samples of lesser economic importance could be observed in MET 2 and MET 3. These samples have a yellowish powdery appearance and occur randomly from 65.5 to 74.6 Smithsonite and hemimorphite are the most common nonsulfide zinc minerals in the Accha cores. Several different lithological sub-groups, each one hosting a distinct association of minerals, could be detected. ( ( ( Abundant quartz and K-feldspars fragments have been also observed in this lithology. Several Zn-smectite types in form of crystals and concretions growing in cavity occur typically in several cores. Zn-smectite occurs also in the groundmass of very compact, yellowish sediments, bearing alternated bands of lead-rich Mn(hydr)oxides. In MET 1 an interesting lithology, consisting primarily of Zn-smectite, associated with at least two hemimorphite generations, could be observed locally. The first generation (Hm1) occurs as small concretions (“stars”) with a dusty appearance, growing in fine-grained siliciclastic sediments ( ( The results of the WDS (Wavelength Dispersion Spectrometry) analyses of the most recurring economic minerals at Accha are reported in As mentioned above, smithsonite is commonly finely intergrown with Fe(hydr)oxides and clay. Nevertheless, most analyses show a metal content ranging between 60 and 62% ZnO (stoichiometric value for smithsonite is 64.9% ZnO). FeO is also commonly present in the lattice of the Accha smithsonite. This mineral at Accha shows the usual composition recorded in many other nonsulfide deposits. ZnO ranges between 65 and 70% (stoichiometric value for hemimorphite is 67.58% ZnO), while SiO Sauconite is one of the most characteristic nonsulfide minerals detected at Accha ( Hydrozincite (59.55% Zn) is far less abundant at Accha than other nonsulfide minerals ( In The main ore mineral sampled in the MET cores at Accha is smithsonite (ZnCO Hemimorphite [Zn Sauconite (Zn-smectite) occurs in very small amounts (< Besides sauconite, which is the most abundant clay mineral at Accha, illite and halloysite have been detected in few samples, as well as kaolinite. Neither of these clays is important volumetrically or economically. Minor Zn is associated with goethite as well as with Fe- and Mn(hydr)oxides ( Cerussite (PbCO The three main Zn nonsulfide minerals (smithsonite, hemimorphite, sauconite) are irregularly distributed throughout the MET cores. Nevertheless, they are commonly associated in recognizable lithologies in each of the defined Following the above quoted assumptions, it is relatively easy to identify (at least roughly) both on outcrop and in drill cores of the Accha deposit the mineralogical composition of the different mineralized lithotypes. This issue can be extremely useful when performing a metallurgical mapping, in order to conceive an economically viable flowsheet for the nonsulfide ore. The whole ore-processing concept applied at the Skorpion Zinc plant in Namibia relies on the economic leaching of zinc minerals with sulfuric acid solutions under atmospheric conditions. This is not the case of Accha, which contains much more calcium carbonate associated with the ore. At Skorpion the economic viability is premised on the selective mining of nonsulfide zinc ore from a limestone pit shell ( Therefore, it was necessary to consider for the Accha deposit a flow sheet development, derived from an accurate metallurgical test work, which could conceive an economically viable treatment route in the light of both the carbonate host rock and the peculiar mineralogical association. If we consider the ore minerals as defined by the mineralogical analyses, both smithsonite and hemimorphite present at Accha are the prevailing and most easily leachable phases that could be recovered with moderate crushing (− Contrary to the Skorpion deposit, the abundance of acid-consuming gangue minerals (limestone host rocks and diagenetic calcite) in the mineralized samples indicates that pure atmospheric leaching of the ore will not be economically viable at Accha, as it would consume too much acid (as much as 50% of the tonnage of ore treated!). Therefore, it will not be possible to selectively mine nonsulfide zinc ore in this deposit with low acid consumption. However, the boundaries between the barren limestone and the red mineralized zones are very sharp throughout the deposit. Therefore, because a visual distinction between limestone “blocks” and ore lithotypes is generally possible, a first concentration could be carried out at least locally through selective mining, followed by a treatment with DMS as discussed below. Metallurgical test work ( separation of the acid-consuming gangue minerals from the ROM (= run of the mine), to produce leach feed ore material (which could be processed economically in a on-site refinery); extraction and recovery of different zinc minerals from several intergrown phases, in order to produce a high Zn grade concentrate (which may be transported economically to an even remote refinery). Flexibility in refinery location can introduce potential advantages in respect of fiscal regime, infrastructure and power cost. Regarding point (a), the difference in specific gravity between the various zinc and acid-consuming gangue minerals makes gravity separation an attractive option, due to the relatively low capital- and operating costs of most gravity separation techniques. Dense media separation (DMS) was evaluated through heavy liquid separation (HLS) test work. The samples were comprised of whole drill core sections, prepared as composites (consisting of 130 In the figure are also shown the specific gravity (SG) values of the various mineral species identified at Accha. The most efficient density cut point for efficient separation of zinc from calcium is 2.7 The HLS test results seem to indicate a relatively high efficiency of calcium elimination (reduction of gangue acid consumption) for the Accha ore and therefore suggest that a single DMS step should be included in the treatment. However, a major limitation in the application of DMS is the treatment of fine material (− It was clear that various alternatives were needed to investigate how to treat the − In order to achieve zinc concentration and selectively separate zinc minerals from iron minerals, flotation with primary amines was evaluated. This technology is well known and has been commercially applied at a number of industrial scale plants ( Accha displays significant mineralogical variability, with ROM zinc grade ranging from 0 to 40%. In order to adequately address the impact of variability on the mine plan and the metallurgical design, it was decided to carry out a metallurgical mapping ( DMS testwork on the metallurgical composite sample (considered representative of the mineralisation in the MET holes) from MET 1, MET 2, MET 3 and MET 4 drill cores resulted at Accha in a zinc recovery of 75% Zn, for a zinc feed grade of 8.0%. In The nonsulfide Zn minerals association in the Accha deposit consists mainly of smithsonite and hemimorphite, locally associated with Zn-smectite. Smithsonite occurs locally in zoned concretions with goethite, Mn(hydr)oxides and Zn-clays, as well as spottily in the limestone intervals. Minor hydrozincite has been also detected. One of the peculiarities of the nonsulfide paragenesis is the presence of sauconite (up to 30% of the ore!), a zincian smectite. Even though clay minerals are generally considered a problem for the ore treatment of nonsulfide deposits (requiring additional desliming), the sauconite detected at Accha is a large part of the metallic resource that could be hardly neglected, as in the case of the Skorpion nonsulfide deposit (Namibia). However, a clear understanding of the whole mineralogical association, particularly in the presence of clay minerals, was required to quantify the overall zinc recovery at Accha, as in most nonsulfide Zn deposits. Even minor differences in mineralogy of the ore and gangue minerals, as well as their spatial distribution and the composition of the host rock may have a profound impact on both metal recovery and reagent consumption. Due to the abundance of calcite in the limestone host at Accha, direct leaching of the ROM ore with sulfuric acid will not be economical. Therefore, DMS in a combination with a double flotation step (coarse and slimes) will be necessary before the acid treatment. Moreover, the notable amounts of sauconite in the fine ore fraction would require a multistep, dedicated concentration process. Due to the prevailing carbonate host rock and the complex mineralogy of the deposit, for the treatment of the Accha nonsulfide ores one should conceive additional capital costs, associated with DMS process and flotation. However, these costs will be counterbalanced by major savings resulting from: lower acid consumption, higher feed Zn concentration, possibility to replace the solvent extraction (SX) circuit (in use at Skorpion) with a lower capital cost conventional Zn dust purification circuit ( Of course, should an ammonia-based chemical process instead of acid leaching be used to selectively extract metals from ores, the entire Accha flowsheet would be substantially modified. This is the first case where an integrated study between mineralogy, petrography and potential metallurgical characteristics of a nonsulfide Zn orebody has been carried out. We hope that it may lead the way to further improve the technology for this type of metallic ores. We wish to thank Zincore Metals for supporting basic research and for the permission to publish. The careful reviews of two anonymous referees have improved the quality of the manuscript.