The Ti The starting materials were pieces cut out from a cast pancake of a Ti-24Al-11Nb. Hot rolled strips of the Ti-24Al-11Nb alloy, with a reasonably good basal rolling texture, a weak basal texture, a non basal texture and a basal transformation texture were taken. Each of these samples was soaked for 30 minutes at 1173 K before being subjected to further rolling at the same temperature up to a maximum of 65% reduction in multiple passes with intermediate heating for 2–3 minutes for re-attaining the rolling temperature after each pass. The rolling was kept strictly unidirectional. The as-rolled materials were subjected to microstructural characterisation using a Scanning Electron Microscope (JEOL JSM 840A). A few samples were also examined in a Transmission Electron Microscope (JEOL 2000FX) operated at 160 kV. The X-ray pole figures were measured at half thickness level of the as-rolled materials using Cu     From the above results it is quite clear that all the four starting materials have a recovered and/or partially recrystallised microstructure, whereas a second rolling at 1173 K produces a typical deformation substructure consisting of cells [ The weak basal texture does not sharpen during subsequent deformation. The stability of a basal rolling texture during further high temperature rolling has been examined for Ti-6Al-4V alloy by Frederick and Lenning Moderate rolling deformation (65%) at 1173 K of a prior thermomechanically processed Ti-24Al-11Nb alloy with a weak basal texture or a non basal texture does not either improve the basal texture or lead to the formation of basal texture. The main texture components, in all the cases are ( The authors are grateful to Prof. G. Gottstein, Director of the Institut fur Metallkunde, RWTH Aachen, Germany for kindly providing the laboratory facility for texture measurement. We extend our gratitude to Dr. D. Banerjee, Director, DMRL Hyderabad, India for his constant encouragement throughout the present research programme and valuable suggestions in the present work.