Gas diffusion, a critical process during underground gas drainage and coalbed methane recovery, is viewed as the bridge connecting the coal matrix and fractures. Study on gas diffusion is of great significance to the understanding of gas migration in coal seams and the prediction of gas production. Gas diffusivity is one of the most important parameters characterizing the diffusion process. In previous studies, diffusivity was generally viewed as a constant, but the experimental results show that it is strongly dependent on diffusion time. In order to fill the gap between the existing theories and experimental results, this paper proposes a physical model for gas diffusion in coal matrix, based on which a time-dependent diffusivity model is developed from the perspective of fluid dynamics. In this model, the diffusivity of coal particles is divided into two parts, namely time-dependent diffusivity and residual diffusivity. With the continuation of the diffusion process, the diffusivity exponentially decreases with the time. Based on the time-dependent diffusivity and the classical unipore diffusion model, a time-dependent diffusion model is established. To indicate the rationality and superiority of the newly developed model, both the unipore diffusion model and time-dependent diffusion model are used to fit the experimental data, and the results show that the fitting effect of time-dependent diffusion model is obviously better than that of the unipore diffusion model. Finally, the physical nature of the time dependence of the diffusivity is discussed, and it is believed that the change of the pore pressure and its resultant alteration of the pore structure are the main reasons for the variation of diffusivity with time.total amount of gas diffused at time total amount of gas adsorbed on coal at equilibrium pressure, (mL/g) diffusivity (m radius of coal particles (m) the dynamic force exerted on the free gas column (N) the ratio of thickness of adsorbed gas to the pore radius the pore radius (m) the internal gas pressure (Pa) the external gas pressure (Pa) time (s) the length of the pore (m) the dynamic viscosity of gas (Pa s) the migration velocity of free gas (m/s) distance between any point in the pore and the middle line of the pore (m) the coordinate along the gas migration direction (m) the density of free gas (kg/m the migration velocity of adsorbed gas (m/s) the gas mass flow (kg/s) the gas diffusivity (m the gas concentration difference (kg/m the diffusivity of free gas (m the diffusivity of adsorbed gas (m initial diffusivity of free gas (m initial diffusivity of adsorbed gas (m attenuation coefficients attenuation coefficients the residual diffusivity (m the porosity of coal matrix the initial porosity of coal matrix the increment of confining pressure (Pa) the increment of pore pressure (Pa) the bulk modulus of coal matrix (Pa) diffusivity-porosity factor the density of adsorbed gas As a companion of the coal seams, coal mine methane (CMM) is a greenhouse gas of which the greenhouse effect is 21 times greater than that of CO Currently, gas drainage is one of the most effective methods to realize gas disaster prevention and resource utilization Up to now, many researches concerning the gas diffusion in coal have been conducted, and a series of achievements have been obtained, which to some extent promotes the understanding of this problem. Based on the understanding of the pore structure of coal particles, the existing diffusion model can be divided into three categories: unipore diffusion models (UDM), bidisphere diffusion models (BDM) and mutiporous diffusion models (MDM). In 1951, Richard M. Barrer established a classical UDM, one of the most commonly used models of gas diffusion, when investigating the diffusion process of natural gas in zeolite The established models need to be verified with experimental results. Therefore, a lot of laboratory tests have been conducted so far, based on which influencing factors of diffusivity have been discussed. The results showed that the diffusivity increased with the rise of the pore pressure and temperature, exponentially decreased with the confining pressure and showed a U-shape trend with an increase of the metamorphic degree of coal Based on the analyses above, it can be found that current researches generally believed that the coal diffusivity remained constant during the diffusion process. However, the laboratory test results show that the diffusivity is strongly dependent on the diffusion time, yet this phenomenon has been rarely considered in the diffusion models. The few models which consider the time dependence of diffusivity are empirical and lack of theoretical basis. Besides, the physical nature of the time dependence of coal diffusivity has not been discussed. To address the aforementioned issues, in this work, the relationship between the diffusivity and time is established first from the perspective of fluid mechanics. Then, based on the classical unipore diffusion model, a time-dependent diffusion model is proposed. Finally, the physical nature of the time dependence of coal diffusivity is discussed and the relationship between the diffusivity and pore pressure is built. In general, it is thought that the gas migration in coal matrix follows Fick’s law. Based on this, Richard M. Barrer derived the classical unipore diffusion model To date, a lot of researches have been conducted on diffusivity which is generally viewed as a constant during the diffusion process Obviously, the linear fitting results in In order to clarify the intrinsic mechanism of the phenomenon that the diffusivity of the coal matrix decreases with the time, this study develops a physical model of gas diffusion in coal pores first (see In this model, coal is viewed as a dual porous medium consisting of coal matrix and fractures [see The analyses above qualitatively interpret the intrinsic nature of the decrease of diffusivity with time. In order to quantitatively characterize the relationship between the diffusivity and time, it is assumed that the pore in the coal matrix is a cylinder whose radius is The process of gas migration in coal pores equals to the process of gas column movement under the action of forces. In this section, based on the physical model built in Two forces are revealed by the analyses of the force condition in The viscous resistance exerted on the free gas column can be obtained according to Newton’s law of friction. Assuming that the gas in coal is a viscous and incompressible fluid, its migration process can be expressed by Hagen-Poiseuille equation By solving Eq. By solving Eq. From The viscous resistance exerted on adsorbed gas by the pore surface can be given as By solving Eq. According to the Fick’s law, for a cylindrical pore with the radius of For free gas, we have Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. As a porous medium, coal has a complex pore structure, which leads to a multi-scale gas storage and migration. In general, it is thought that free gas mainly exists in macro-pores and fractures, while adsorbed gas is predominantly stored in micro-pores. Therefore, gas diffusion in coal normally contains two parts, namely bulk diffusion in macro-pores and fractures and surface diffusion in micro-pores, and the contribution of each part to the total diffusion is mainly determined by the pore diameter. Generally, in a coal pore with smaller diameter, the proportion of the bulk diffusion is relatively low, while that of the surface diffusion is relatively high, but the surface diffusion process may be very time-consuming due to the extremely small pore diameter In order to verify the rationality and reliability of the time-dependent diffusivity, the TDD and STDD models are used to fit the laboratory test data, and the results are shown in The analyses above imply that in macro-pores, the surface diffusion can be neglected, and the STDD model can be used to describe the diffusion process accurately. In contrast, in micro-pores, the gas mainly exists as adsorbed gas that has a significant impact on the diffusion process. For this case, both the bulk diffusion of free gas and the surface diffusion of adsorbed gas should be considered, and the TDD model should be adopted to characterize the diffusion process. In order to get the time-dependent diffusion model, we make the following definition It should be noted that the development of the TDD model is based on the classical UPD model, therefore, it is only applicable to coal particles with standard spherical shape. Therefore, when applied in the field, errors may occur since coal particles in the field are not the standard spheres. Besides, during the application of this model, it is critical that the concentration on the surface of the particles should be kept constant. What’s more, during the development of the TDD model, the Hagen-Poiseuille equation was used to describe the gas migration in the matrix pores, therefore, no fractures, which may lead to non-laminar migration of the gas, should be included in the coal particles. Diffusivity is a critical parameter for characterizing the gas diffusion ability in coal pores, and its value reflects the resistance of the pore structure: The greater the diffusivity, the smaller the resistance, and vice versa. Under a constant temperature and pressure, the diffusion resistance is mainly controlled by the pore structure The above research show that both the theoretical analyses and laboratory test results prove that the diffusivity of coal particles decreases with the diffusion time. In order to clarify the physical nature of this phenomenon, a physical model for gas migration in coal matrix is proposed. In this model, it is supposed that the coal matrix is a cube; the gas diffuses from the center to the surface along the direction perpendicular to the matrix surface; during the diffusion process, the gas pressure at the sphere center decreases gradually, while that on the matrix surface remains constant. The previous research show that gas adsorption in coal will lead to matrix swelling and thus changes the pore structure The change of the pore structure during gas diffusion can be characterized by the relationship between the porosity and pore pressure. Up to now, many models which can be used to describe the quantitative relationship between the porosity and pore pressure have been developed When investigating the tracer migration in rock matrix, Zhu et al. In general, the gas diffusion experiment is conducted under zero confining pressure condition; then we can obtain the pressure-dependent diffusivity (PDD) model. This paper proposes a physical model for gas diffusion in coal seams, in which the matrix pore is a tandem structure consisting of multiple pores with different sizes. At the initial time, gas diffusion occurs in macro-pores on the surface of coal particles, and it transfers to the interior later. With the increase of migration pathways, the pore resistance rises, leading to a decrease of the diffusivity. In addition, with the continuation of the diffusion process, the pore pressure reduction changes the pore structure and thus alters the diffusivity. Based on the physical model, a time-dependent diffusivity (TDD) model is developed from the perspective of fluid dynamics. In the TDD model, both the bulk diffusion of free gas and surface diffusion of adsorbed gas are considered. The coal diffusivity which can be divided into a time-dependent term and a residual term exponentially declines with the time. Combining the TDD model with classical unipore diffusion model (UDM), a time-dependent diffusion model (TDDM) is developed. The fitting results show that the TDDM fits the experimental data well. The physical nature for the time dependence of diffusivity is that with the continuation of the diffusion, the decrease of the pore pressure leads to a shrinkage of the matrix pores, as well as an increase of the pore resistance. Based on this understanding, the relationship between the diffusivity and pore pressure is built, which can be used to improve the simulation of the multi-field coupling processes during gas drainage and CBM recovery. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. This work was supported by the