Fractures of iliac wing are rare. One of the first descriptions of isolated iliac wing fracture was reported by Duverney in 1751. Actually, iliac wing fractures are classified by AO/OTA system as type A1 and A2. A1 fractures definite avulsions fractures. A2 fractures definite lesions extending through the iliac wing. These fractures do not compromise the stability of the pelvic ring. They remain stable to vertical forces because sacro-spinous and sacro-tuberous ligaments remain intact. The patient may be at risk for hemorrhage from the internal iliac arterial system. These fractures are usually considered as not amenable to ORIF. A2 fractures are typically caused by lateral compression forces or high energy trauma. During the 3-year study period, from January 1 2003 to December 2006, 10 consecutive iliac wing fractures were identified among a consecutive series of 450 patients treated in our institution. All patients were previously healthy, and their mean age 38.6 years old (range, 24-51). The fractures were diagnosed on the initial radiographic screening performed on patient’s arrival in the emergency department completed by CT scan. The examination was carried out in all patients with a delay of 18 months average (3 month to 3 years). All the patients were managed in the emergency department according to A.T.L.S. guidelines. The incidence of iliac wing fractures was 0.02% during the entire study period. All patients were implied in high energy trauma: traffic (5 motor-cycles, 2 car trauma, 1 truck trauma) or falls (3). The mean Injury Severity Score of all these patients was 42.2 (from 8 to 75). The mean TRISS (Trauma Injury Severity Score) was 26.3%. The mean R.T.S. (Revised Trauma Score) was 7.16. Revised Trauma Score inferior to 8 turned out to be an indicator of severe injury with high mortality and morbidity. Our small review shows surprisingly frequent association with moderate to severe potentially life-threatening “soft-parts” lesions, requiring immediate surgical care. Associated soft parts injuries ranged widely from thoracic, visceral, to vascular, urologic or gynecologic. In our series, we didn’t find any correlation between the degree of comminution of the fracture and the severity of organ lesion. The incidence of iliac wing fracture is rare involving 0.02 5 patients during our entire study period.We found that the open reduction and internal fixation is indicated in 30% but always with delay. We believe that the discovery of an iliac wing fracture on the initial workup of a trauma patient should enhance the level of attention towards the potential coexistence of associated severe internal lesions.