Hollow fiber renewal liquid membrane (HFRLM), a new liquid membrane technique inspired from surface renewal theory, is used to simultaneously remove and recover copper from acidic wastewater. The commercial extractant, LIX984N, is used as a carrier in liquid membrane phase, kerosene used as a diluent. CuSO4 solutions is used to simulate acidic industrial wastewater, in which the pH is adjusted by dilute H2SO4. The mass transfer mechanisms of the process are investigated. As a carrier-facilitated transport process, the addition of LIX984N in the liquid membrane phase can greatly improve the transport performance; the organic/aqueous stripping volume ratio from 1:10 to 1:7 on lumen side mixture is better in terms of the renewal effect and diffusion resistance. The higher pH in the feed phase (>3) and H2SO4 concentration in the stripping phase around 2.0molL−1 are favorable for the transport process due to the increase of mass transfer driving forces. The mass transfer fluxes increase with increasing flow rates on two sides. The countercurrent cascade experiments show that the HFRLM process could carry out the simultaneous removal and recovery of copper from wastewater successfully. The modeled results based on the surface renewal theory demonstrate a good agreement with experimental data.The discharge of industrial acidic effluents containing copper may cause serious environmental problems due to its highly toxicity and non-biodegradability, and expensive heavy metal is also being wasted too Liquid membrane techniques have become an attractive alternative for the removal and recovery of copper from wastewater, due to the specific characteristics of simultaneous extraction and stripping processes in the same stage, non-equilibrium mass transfer, “up-hill” effect, high selectivity, low solvent inventory, etc. In a HFRLM process, hydrophobic hollow fibers are used, whose pores are filled with the organic phase previously. The stirred mixture of organic phase and stripping phase at a low organic/aqueous volume ratio is pumped through the lumen side of the hollow fiber module. The organic phase droplets are uniformly dispersed in the mixture by stirring. The feed phase flows countercurrently through the shell side. During the fluid flowing through the lumen side, a thin organic film, i.e. liquid membrane layer, is developed in the internal side of fibers The mass transfer mechanism and model studies on the simultaneous removal and recovery of copper from acidic wastewater by hollow fiber renewal liquid membrane have been carried out in order to provide more theoretical bases and help for the intensification of mass transfer, design, scale-up and industry application of the HFRLM technique. CuSO The extractant of LIX984N, a mixture of LIX860N and LIX84I with volume ratio of 1:1, is supplied by Cognis, Ireland. Kerosene, from Tianjin Damao chemical reagent plant of technical grade reagent, is washed twice with 20 All the experiments were conducted using the self-designed systems. The experimental set-up was the same as described in our previously work To determine the distribution coefficient, equal volume (25 For the HFRLM experiments, hydrophobic fibers used in the hollow fiber module were pre-wetted with organic phase more than 0.5 The removal efficiency of copper based on the feed phase is: In order to indicate the tendency of mass transfer characteristic of the HFRLM process, in some case, the normalized concentration, The copper(II) concentration in the aqueous solution was analyzed with sodium diethyldithiocabamate spectrophotometric method (GB7474-87, P.R. China). And a digital precision ionometer model PXS-450 (Shanghai Dapu Co. Ltd.) with a combined glass electrode was used for pH measurements (±0.01 pH). The meter was standardized against 4.01, 6.85, and 9.14 standard buffer solutions. The solvent extraction of copper with LIX984N dissolved in kerosene from aqueous solutions can be written as follows: The initial copper concentration in the feed aqueous solution is 70.22 As listed in In order to explore the stability of HFRLM process, a series of experiments were conducted in single-pass mode. The stirred mixture of organic phase (10 As described above, the pH in the feed phase has significant influence on the extraction equilibrium of copper between 10% LIX984N In order to study the influence of stripping phase on the mass transfer of HFRLM process, a series of HFRLM experiments in one-through mode are conducted at H The mass transfer mechanism of the HFRLM process is a carrier-facilitated transport. The carrier concentration in the organic phase can effect these factors of facilitated transport capacity, chemical reaction rate, mass transfer driving force caused by distribution equilibria, diffusion of complex in liquid membrane phase and membrane phase, renewal capacity of liquid membrane, etc. These factors are corresponding to the mass transfer resistance within the lumen side and membrane phase. The mass transfer rate usually increases with the increasing of carrier concentration in the organic phase. Prior to the experiment to study the effects of LIX984N concentration in the liquid membrane phase on the mass transfer performance of the HFRLM process, hollow fibers used in the module were pre-wetted with organic phase at different LIX984N concentrations more than 0.5 At higher LIX984N concentration in the organic phase, as shown in In a HFRLM process, the renewal effect between the organic droplets dispersed in the lumen side fluid and the surface of developed liquid membrane layer can greatly accelerate the mass transfer rate. The organic/stripping volume ratio (O/A) is one of important operation parameters. The amount of the organic phase dispersed in the lumen side fluid will influence the thickness of the developed liquid film, which is corresponding to the mass transfer resistance within the lumen side. Then in this paper, the organic/stripping aqueous volume ratio of 0, 1:50, 1:20, 1:10, 1:7, 1:5 are studied. The results are shown in The flow rates both on the lumen side and shell side are the important hydrodynamic parameters, which relate to the contact time (residence time), the thickness of liquid membrane layer, and renewal rate of the liquid membrane in the HFRLM process. As shown in The ability of copper transport from the feed phase to the receiver phase through HFRLM is studied with countercurrent cascade experiments. The feed phase, 2500  As the rate of complex reaction at interfaces is faster, the mass transfer resistance resulted from complex reaction can be ignored compared to the mass transfer resistance of diffusion mobility across the aqueous phase or organic phase. The transport of copper across HFRLM can be considered as four sequential steps Based on the surface renewal theory, resistance-in-series model and mass balance law, the differential mass transfer flux of copper at time interval Δ The overall mass transfer coefficient, In general, the value of For the countercurrent cascade experiments, it is an unsteady process. The copper concentration in the tank of the stripping phase is: For the whole process of HFRLM, the mass balance equation is: The individual mass transfer coefficient on the shell side, The individual mass transfer coefficient in the membrane phase, The individual mass transfer coefficient of renewal process on the lumen side, By solving Eqs. In this paper, a new liquid membrane technique, namely hollow fiber renewal liquid membrane (HFRLM), is used for simultaneous removal and recovery of copper from acidic wastewater. CuSO The results show that LIX984N has good performance for the extraction of copper from the acidic and dilute aqueous solutions. The HFRLM process is more stable because of the automatically and continuously replenishment of membrane liquid by the dispersed organic droplets on the lumen side fluid. As a carrier-facilitated transport process, the addition of LIX984N in the organic phase can greatly improve the transport performance of the HFRLM process. The removal efficiency and the mass transfer flux increase with the increasing of LIX984N concentration in the organic phase. There is a favorable organic/aqueous volume ratio range from 1:10 to 1:7 on the lumen side mixture for the HFRLM process under the range studied. The higher pH value (>3) in the feed phase facilitate the transport results of copper through HFRLM; the removal efficiency and the mass transfer flux increase with the increasing of H The transport results in countercurrent cascade experiments show that the HFRLM process can carry out the simultaneous removal and recovery of copper from wastewater successfully. The mass transfer model based on the surface renewal theory is presented by considering the renewal process of liquid membrane layer, diffusion across membrane phase and aqueous boundary layer on the shell side. The modeled results demonstrate a good agreement with experimental data. The results also show that HFRLM is a promising method for the treatment of acidic wastewater containing copper. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20706003) and the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-05-0122). We thank Prof. Xiaolong Lv of Tianjin Polytechnic University for PVDF hollow fibers and Cognis Inc. (Ireland) for LIX984N reagents.