In the present wok, a series of Ti-filled and Te-doped skutterudite compounds TixCo4Sb11.5Te0.5 (x = 0.2, 0.3, 0.5) were successful fabricated by combination of microwave synthesis and spark plasma sintering technique. The microstructure and thermoelectric properties of TixCo4Sb11.5Te0.5 bulks have been investigated systematically. The experimental results show that nearly single phase skutterudite were obtained by 5 min microwave synthesis. The Ti0.3Co4Sb11.5Te0.5 bulk has smallest and uniform grain size of about 2 μm. The influences of Ti concentration on thermoelectric properties were discussed. A highest ZT of 0.60 for Ti0.3Co4Sb11.5Te0.5 was achieved at 773 K along with a total thermal conductivity of 3.72 W m−1 K−1, one might obtain higher values at a higher temperature.In the past two decades, skutterudite compounds have attracted extensive attention for their potential application in power generation in the intermediate temperature ranges There are two major strategies can be used to improve the thermal transport property of CoSb In the present wok, a series of Ti-filled and Te-doped skutterudite compounds Ti The starting metal powders are Ti (99.99%, Aladdin), Co (99.99%, Aladdin), Sb (99.9%, Aladdin) and Te (99.99%, Aladdin). The four powders were weighed and mixed at nominal compositions of Ti The phase composition was detected on Bruker/D8-ADVANCE diffractometer. The microstructure was observed on FEI/Nano-SEM430. The Seebeck coefficient and electrical resistivity were tested on JouleYacht/Namicro-3 test system. The hall coefficient, carrier concentration and mobility were tested on JouleYacht/HET measurement system. The thermal diffusivity was measured on Netzsch/LFA-427 laser flash thermal analyzer. The electronic thermal conductivity was calculated as The XRD patterns of Ti The lattice parameters of Ti The FE-SEM morphologies of cross section of Ti  The electrical resistivity, Seebeck coefficient and power factor of Ti The temperature dependences of electronic thermal conductivity, lattice thermal conductivity and total thermal conductivity of Ti The thermoelectric figures of merit of Ti In summary, a series of Ti-filled and Te-doped skutterudite compounds Ti This work was supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:          