Acute elbow instability ranges from simple dislocation with soft tissue lesions alone to complex dislocations involving fractures of the coronoid and radial head (‘terrible triad’). Simple dislocations for the most part are stable after reduction, managed with early mobilization and have good outcomes with relatively low complication rates. In contrast, complex fracture-dislocations render the elbow very unstable and therefore surgical intervention is usually necessary to restore bony and ligamentous stability to allow early range of movement. The risk of complications, including stiffness, chronic instability, heterotopic ossification and arthrosis, are high and clinical outcomes have traditionally been suboptimal. Detailed knowledge of the relevant anatomy is crucial in the understanding of injury patterns and in the application of successful systematic treatment algorithms that will minimize complications and improve outcomes. Chronic instability is most commonly posterolateral, due to incompetence of the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) leading to recurrent episodes of subluxation or dislocation. Most symptomatic patients require surgical reconstruction of the LUCL (using tendon autografts or allografts) which produces favourable clinical results.Elbow dislocation is common in adults and the elbow is the most commonly dislocated joint in children. The adult incidence is 5.5 The aim of this article is to review the anatomy of the elbow and pathoanatomy of acute simple and complex elbow instability. Additionally, the aetiology and management of chronic instability will be considered. The resistance to dislocation of the elbow joint is governed by bony and capsulo-ligamentous static stabilizers along with muscular dynamic stabilizers. The ulnohumeral joint, medial and lateral collateral ligaments (MCL, LCL) are the primary stabilizers and the radiocapitellar joint, anterior capsule and the common flexor and extensor origins are secondary. The highly congruent ulnohumeral joint is a hinge joint that allows a range of movement (ROM) in most people from −15° to +160° of flexion. More than 80% of the spool-shaped trochlea is articular in nature and the whole articular portion is flexed 30° in relation to the sagittal axis of the humerus. Support of this spool by two strong columns medially and laterally creates two fossae: the posterior olecranon fossa and the anterior coronoid fossa. These are engaged by the olecranon and coronoid respectively at the extremes of motion, offering further constraint to the joint in these positions. The medial trochlea is larger than the lateral, giving a slight valgus angulation to the joint. The articular surface of the proximal ulna is extended anteriorly by the coronoid process, and together they form the greater sigmoid notch that articulates with the trochlea, although there is often an area bare of articular cartilage centrally ( Lateral to the ulnohumeral joint, the radiocapitellar joint offers varus-valgus constraint and resistance to axial loading. It also offers an important anterior buttress to displacement. Radial head resection results in a 30% reduction in varus-valgus restraint. The radial head periphery is 70% covered in articular cartilage and articulates with the lesser sigmoid notch of the ulna, which is part of the coronoid process. The coronoid process additionally comprises the supinator crest laterally, where the LCL inserts, and the sublime tubercle medially where the anterior band of the MCL inserts. There are key ligamentous structures laterally and medially, whilst the capsule itself provides significant restraint to displacement ( The MCL together with the radiocapitellar joint is the main restraint to valgus stress. It has three components: Anterior oblique ligament (AOL), which runs from the anterior inferior surface of the medial epicondyle and has a broad insertion onto the coronoid process, centred on the sublime tubercle. The AOL comprises an anterior and posterior band. The anterior band of the AOL is the single most important structure resisting valgus stress, and is near isometric during the elbow ROM. The posterior band acts as a cam due to being posterior to the ulnohumeral hinge joint, and its tension increases with increasing flexion. Posterior oblique ligament (POL) is a fan-shaped thickening of the medial capsule and forms the floor of the cubital tunnel. It becomes tighter in flexion. It originates at the posterior aspect of the medial epicondyle and inserts into the medial olecranon process. Transverse ligament runs from the proximal medial olecranon to the just distal to the coronoid, The LCL has four components and is the main restraint to both varus stress and posterolateral rotational instability: Lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) originates at the lateral epicondyle and loops over the annular ligament to insert onto the tubercle of the supinator crest. It is the primary restraint to varus stress. It also resists posterolateral rotation. Lateral radial collateral ligament (LRCL) is indistinguishable from the LUCL at their origin but progresses anteriorly to insert into the annular ligament (AL). Annular ligament (AL) this loops over the radial head from its origin and insertion on the ulna at the sigmoid notch. Anteriorly it is contiguous with the anterior elbow capsule. Accessory lateral collateral ligament (aLCL) originates from the supinator crest of the ulna and inserts into the annular ligament and anterior capsule ( There are both medial and lateral dynamic stabilizers that augment and assist the osseos and capsuloligamentous structures. They act in part by increasing compression across the joint, as follows. The muscles arising from the common flexor origin and pronator teres act as dynamic resistors of valgus stress at the elbow. Muscles arising from the common extensor origin act as dynamic stabilizers of the lateral elbow. They are assisted in this by the anconeus, which arises from the posterior aspect of the lateral epicondyle and inserts into the olecranon and the posterior capsule. Prior to considering individual injury patterns, it is helpful to consider the sequence of failure of elbow structures. Acute posteromedial injury, results from a fall onto an extended arm with an axial varus force with the forearm in pronation. Tensile stresses lead to avulsion of the humeral origin of the lateral collateral ligament complex and disruption of the posterior band of the medial collateral ligament. The medial trochlea fractures the anteromedial coronoid with distal displacement and various degrees of impaction and comminution. Most of the time, the radial head is intact. Elbow injuries may be classified according to chronicity, whether a simple dislocation, or complex in the presence of fractures, or the direction of the forearm with respect to the humerus. They may also be classified in terms of their acute instability.  Appropriate history relating to the elbow injury, in particular the mechanism (if known) and any previous elbow injuries Clinical examination, in particular: Direction of deformity, if any Neurovascular assessment, both prior to and after any intervention Assessment of whether it is an open injury Imaging of the affected limb Plain film imaging in two planes, ideally orthogonal CT imaging with three-dimensional reconstruction if a complex injury.  Reduction of simple dislocations is most commonly performed in the emergency department under conscious sedation, but can also be performed under general anaesthesia where appropriate. In-line traction and counter-traction with the arm in slight flexion and supination should result in a clunk as the joint reduces. The absence of the clunk may indicate a degree of instability. An examination of stability, ideally under fluoroscopic control, should then be performed. The elbow will often be most stable in flexion with forearm pronation, and varus/valgus stress tests should be performed. Inevitably, given the disruption to ligamentous structures, there will be some laxity at least initially. The aim of treatment is to provide a stable, concentric elbow. In most cases this is achieved with a short period of immobilization, and then active unloaded ROM exercises. Should the elbow be unstable in extension, a hinged brace with extension block would be appropriate. Should the elbow be unstable in >45° flexion and require pronation to maintain reduction, then a hinged external fixator and a consideration of ligamentous reconstruction would be appropriate. Prolonged immobilization is associated with poorer outcomes, although there may be confounders in terms of injury severity. Nevertheless there is no evidence for early ligamentous reconstruction  In general, these fracture dislocations fall into one of several patterns: Posterolateral rotatory instability. Posterior dislocation with fractures of the radial head and coronoid (terrible triad) ( Posteromedial rotatory instability (PMRI) ( Trans-olecranon fracture-dislocations in either anterior or posterior directions ( Acute PMRI occurs following a valgus extension mechanism. This commonly results in a significant Type 2 or 3 coronoid fracture, but usually with an intact radial head. One study has found a 100% rupture rate of the LCL and 63% of the MCL. Computed tomographic imaging is extremely helpful to characterize the exact pattern and to plan the necessary operative interventions. The restoration of bony and ligamentous structures is necessary to restore stability and allow early movement of the elbow. Dependent on the severity of the injury, the following equipment may be required: Olecranon/proximal ulna: small fragment; contoured plates; locking plates Radial head: small fragment; headless compression screws; radial head plates; radial head arthroplasty Ligamentous structures: anchors; auto or allograft (not usually in the acute setting) The patient is positioned supine with an arm board; a tourniquet is optional. If the fracture is closed then a lateral Kocher approach utilising the interval between anconeus (true radial nerve) and the extensor carpi ulnaris (posterior interosseous nerve) is commonly used. This allows access to all of the lateral structures and the coronoid. If the medial structures are also involved, a longitudinal midline posterior incision may be utilised with full thickness flaps to allow access to both sides. Surgical reconstruction should follow the order below.  Reconstruction of Regan and Morrey Type 1 fractures is controversial, but can be achieved with sutures passed through the ulna and incorporating the anterior capsule at the level of the coronoid tip. It has been suggested that fixation of fractures <30% of the coronoid height is not required, unless instability persists. If the fracture pattern is trans-olecranon or a Monteggia variant, then it is frequently possible to reduce the displaced coronoid fragment down to the ulna using screws through the dorsal proximal ulna plate that is employed to fix the ulna. In these cases a posterior approach is appropriate. Once the bony anatomy is restored, there is often no significant ligamentous injury to reconstruct in these injuries.  Fixation should be attempted in the presence of the following factors: young age, good bone and less comminution. In this case headless compression screws are usually the implants of choice, though in some cases a plate may be appropriate, particularly if there is extension to the radial neck. The metalwork must be placed in the 90° arc that does not articulate with the sigmoid notch. This is the lateral part of the radial head when the arm is in neutral prono-supination. If there is a small fragment then partial excision without reconstruction or replacement may be appropriate, especially if it is the non-articular portion of the radial head.    Anterior trans-olecranon fracture-dislocations are usually associated with high-energy trauma to the dorsal aspect of the forearm with the elbow in mid-flexion. The proximal ulna fracture is usually complex, includes a large coronoid fragment, extension into the ulnar diaphysis, comminution of the trochlear notch and fragmentation of the olecranon. Both the radius and ulna are dislocated anteriorly but remain associated differentiating these injuries from an anterior Monteggia lesion. Posterior olecranon fracture-dislocations, unlike the anterior types, often involve lateral ligament injuries, radial head fractures and coronoid fragments. The aim of surgery is to anatomically restore the proximal ulna with restoration of the trochlear notch and coronoid by repair or replacement of the radial head to stabilize the lateral column and possible repair of the lateral ligament complex. Chronic elbow instability can either be one of the sequelae of an acute injury as described above, or related to overuse, often in the throwing athlete. In the case of acute dislocation, the residual laxity is predominantly lateral and results in posterolateral rotatory instability. In the throwing athlete, the stress is almost always valgus and results in attenuation or acute rupture of the AOL of the MCL. This allows an increase in valgus, but also in internal rotation of the forearm in relation to the humerus, i.e. posteromedial rotatory instability. The anterior band is the strongest and stiffest part of the MCL complex, Although not common following a simple elbow dislocation, it is the most common instability The classical demonstration is of pain and clicking when pushing-up out of a chair. Testing varus-valgus instability in varying degrees of flexion may also demonstrate a significant lateral opening. The pivot-shift test is performed with the patient supine, and with the forearm in a hypersupination position, a valgus stress and axial load are applied. The elbow is then moved from extension to flexion. In the conscious patient apprehension is a positive test, but under general anaesthesia and subluxation or dislocation may be evident. This usually occurs at between 30° and 45° of flexion. Finally, the posterolateral drawer test is positive when the radial head can be palpated to translate posteriorly in relation to the humerus with external pressure on the radial head. Plain film may show evidence of enthesopathy or calcified ligament that has been trying to heal, or indeed, old fractures. CT imaging is not often helpful, but MRI may demonstrate a ruptured LCL or a common extensor avulsion injury. Surgical reconstruction of the LUCL has been performed since the early 1990s with good results. The current recommended technique is the ‘docking technique’, A docking point is then created at the humeral isometric point by testing the tension of the suture passed through the bone tunnel formed and cycling the elbow. A 3.2 mm × 15 mm hole is created from this point, aiming towards the posterior cortex. This is replicated aiming towards the anterior cortex. 2 × 2 mm holes are drilled anterior and posterior to the supracondylar ridge and are connected to allow suture passage. Although allograft or autograft can be used, in the UK palmaris longus or split hamstring autograft is most commonly used. This is harvested and passed through the ulna tunnel. The whip-stitches at each end are then pulled into the docking ports on the humerus, and the stitches passed through the 2 mm tunnels and tied. Overall, satisfactory results are seen in 80% of patients with PLRI who have an LUCL reconstruction. A similar technique is used to reconstruct the MCL, however the coronoid must be appropriately reconstructed if necessary. The ulnar nerve must be identified and protected throughout. Nerve injury occurs in approximately 20% of acute dislocations and usually involves the ulnar nerve, although it may involve the median nerve especially after reduction of the elbow dislocation. The injury most commonly results in transient paraesthesiae but may occasionally be a permanent palsy. Intramuscular bleeding and oedema formation within the flexor compartment of the forearm may result in a compartment syndrome. A high index of suspicion is required to make this diagnosis and prompt surgical treatment to avoid muscle and nerve ischaemia with potentially irreversible disability. Loss of elbow motion is the most common complication of both simple and complex elbow dislocations. This is thought to occur due to thickening and fibrosis of the anterior joint capsule. A simple dislocation often results in the loss of 10–15° of terminal extension this is greatly increased if the period of immobilization exceeds 2–3 weeks. Heterotopic bone formation occurs in up to 75% of cases and commonly involves the LCL and MCL with minimal functional limitation. Motion-limiting ossification occurs in fewer than 5% of cases. HO is typically seen on radiographs and forms 4–6 weeks after injury. Risk factors for HO include injury to the central nervous system and burns. Motion-limiting HO can be resected once it has been established that the ossification process has matured (3–4 months after injury) with the presence of a well-defined trabecular pattern on standard radiographs. This is more prevalent with increasing complexity of the injury and energy due to chondral damage at the time of the initial injury and also delayed damage in association with residual instability which may be subtle. Elbow dislocations are relatively common, and frequently seem to be simple injuries, yet may progress to complex problems with stability. A detailed understanding of the functional anatomy is necessary to facilitate diagnosis and appropriately manage the patient. Acute simple dislocations can usually be treated non-operatively, but some will develop chronic instability that needs surgical intervention. Usually this is related to the lateral collateral ligament. Complex acute instability requires surgical reconstruction, and an understanding of the sequence of failure enables a logical approach to reconstruction. Bony structures should be reconstructed first, and ligamentous structures following this. Wherever possible prolonged immobilization of the elbow (for more than 3 weeks) should be avoided. A hinged external fixator can be a useful adjunct in facilitating early mobilization in the most complex fracture dislocations. Open fractures need to be treated in accordance with local guidelines. If instability persists following initial reconstruction, surgical reconstruction of the medial and lateral elbow ligamentous complexes is reliable and results in 85% of patients having a good outcome. Complications of simple and complex elbow dislocations may be significant and include heterotopic ossification, neurovascular injuries, arthrosis and stiffness with loss of range.