 The criticism of other mill power formulae in the introduction contains false statements. For example, the Allis-Chalmers formulae ( Eq. Reported mill “no load power” (motor input power) measurements taken as described are erroneous. Checking the references all the way back through the original thesis, no field motor information or example calculations to take into account the precipitous fall in motor efficiency (and power factor, depending on what instruments were used) at such extremely low motor loads are presented. Please see Attachment 1. Furthermore, any imbalance of the empty mill and lining center of gravity around its center of rotation will require (and record) power from the motor during its lift, which is not returned to the motor during its fall, even though the net effect of such imbalance on power during a full rotation of the mill, loaded or not, is zero. The steel charge in a ground out, rotating mill expands as the feed is introduced, moving its center of gravity and thus changing its independent effect on power demand. With coarser feed, the steel charge expands further, whether moving or stationary. Please see Attachment 2. This well-known phenomenon is not addressed. After detailed development of the value ‘h’ in Eq. (13), a factor in the order of 2 is said to be required to match operating data. This correction is attributed to ‘inviscid’ slurry behaviour with no supporting scientific evidence. See page 589, Fig. 10. Performance of Centrifugal Pumps on Slurry, I must suggest that previous peer reviews of the mill power draw characterization method presented here have failed to identify some of the key issues noted above. Peer acceptance does not constitute validation, however, which should be based alone on observed facts and science. Respectfully submitted, Robert E. McIvor    1. Contrary to McIvor’s claim, the statements made in the introduction of this paper are both precise and true in relation to the mill power draw models of the other researchers that were referenced ( Bond’s basic power draw formula for ball mills as published in 1961 in British Chemical Engineering is as follows:  Kwb D Cs Vp Note that Bond in his Allis Chalmers publication revisions in 1961 changed 2.8D Hogg and Fuerstenau’s published equation is as follows:  K ϕ L D α θ ρ As with Bond’s equation there is no explicit inclusion of the slurry phase, the charge bulk density term being defined in terms of “ Arbiter and Harris’ equation is as follows and although they used a different approach to Hogg and Fuerstenau they ended up with essentially the same equation. Yet again there is no explicit inclusion of the slurry phase. However, they do discuss the importance of including the weight of the slurry and claim that the presence of slurry results in  N L D α θ ρ Austin combined Bond’s and Hogg and Fuerstenau’s equations as follows: As with the other models the slurry phase is not explicitly described. However, Austin does define the mean charge density term as described in Eq.  E w ρ ρ J J That MacIvor goes on to claim that Bond’s power formulae “… 2&3. The purpose of my paper was to present a power draw model that explicitly described the slurry phase and its impact on power draw. To this end it adapted and expanded an existing model structure (Eq. 4. McIvor states that “ 5. McIvor claims that in my paper it says that for “… Yours faithfully, 