This paper deals with an analysis method for the response and motion of soil-like rigid-plastic bodies under seismic loading conditions. A continuity condition to determine the acceleration distribution within the rigid-plastic body when the failure occurs during seismic motions is proposed. Combining this continuity condition of acceleration and the ‘Generalized Limit Equilibrium Method (GLEM)’, the responses of the earth structure during seismic motions as well as the permanent displacements can be obtained, where GLEM is one of the limit equilibrium methods proposed by the authors for static problems and providing the approximate solution for Kötter's equation. The theoretical formulation of the method, the illustrative examples, and some comparisons between the analytical and experimental results are demonstrated.In traditional analyses for earthquake-resistant design, the pseudo-static method is the most common method and is currently used to analyze earth structures. In this analysis, the same acceleration is applied to every part of the body and is treated as inertia forces acting permanently on the structure. The stability of the earth structure is evaluated in terms of safety factors. However, in reality, the effects of an earthquake exist only for a short period. During this time, the movement of failed soil mass may occur several times, which means the safety factor may drop below 1.0, but the structure may not collapse. Thus, evaluation of the stability of the earth structure in terms of safety factors under dynamic loading is inadequate, and attention should be paid to the earthquake-induced displacements. Newmark Based on Newmark's concept, the authors have been developing a method to analyze the motion of earth structures. In this method, when the earthquake-induced acceleration reaches a certain critical value, sliding failure starts to occur and many slip planes appear within the body. This critical acceleration can be obtained by the ordinary pseudo-static analysis in which the acceleration of every part of the structure is the same as the input acceleration. When the seismic acceleration exceeds the critical value, the failed soil mass is then considered as a rigid-plastic block system, in which the surrounding surfaces of the block are the slip planes. The rigid blocks will move relative to each other and to the base ground along the slip planes. The GLEM is developed with the introduction of continuity condition of acceleration to analyze the motion of the earth structures. The permanent displacements of every block in both vertical and horizontal directions can be calculated by integrating twice the relative acceleration. The following assumptions have been adopted: (a) the soil behaves as a rigid-plastic material; (b) only translation movement is treated; (c) the volumetric compression of soil and the distribution of shear are not captured in the present work; and (d) the absence of a ground water table is assumed. In static cases, the solutions of plastic problems can be obtained by solving the equations governing the stress distribution within regions undergoing plastic failure. In dynamic cases, the theory of plasticity can be easily extended by introducing the accelerations as inertia forces, and the equilibrium equations become motion equations. For two-dimensional stress problems, the following fundamental equations can be written as The Mohr–Coulomb failure criterion is expressed as: From Eqs. Up until now, no researcher has given the results of research on the distribution of acceleration in the plastic failure body. In this research, the authors have discovered a continuity condition of acceleration, permitting the determination of the acceleration distribution in the rigid-plastic body. The authors discovered the continuity condition of acceleration when analyzing the motion of the surface soil layer of infinite slope The component of acceleration parallel to the slip plane is discontinuous but the shear stress on the slip plane corresponding to the shear strength is transmitted. GLEM is a development of the generalized slice method proposed by the authors The major difference between the conventional slice methods and the GLEM is that the former consider the interslice planes to be vertical and fix the relation between the normal force and tangential force acting on the interslice plane, whereas the later does not fix the inclination angle of inter-block planes and relates the normal force and tangential force on the inter-block plane by using the failure condition. This means that the constraint condition for the conventional slice methods is stronger than that for the GLEM.  Before the sliding occurs and even when the structure reaches critical state, every part of the structure has the same movement. This means the acceleration of every part of the structure is the same as the seismically induced acceleration. The following equations can be established. 〈Equilibrium equations〉 In the direction normal to the bottom plane: In the direction tangential to the bottom plane: 〈Failure condition〉 On the bottom plane: On the Where For the entire block system, assuming the mass of the footing block is given, the number of unknowns is 5 When the safety factors on the bottom planes and inter-block planes are assumed to be 1.0, the structure is in a certain critical state (potential or actual critical state). Firstly, considering The three following cases may happen: (a) when the given acceleration is small so that the resultant external force acting on footing is still less than During sliding process, the safety factors on inter-block planes and bottom planes are 1.0 and the accelerations of blocks are different from each other. Considering the equilibrium of the 〈Equilibrium equations〉 In the direction normal to the bottom plane: In the direction tangential to the bottom plane: 〈Failure condition〉 On the bottom plane: On the 〈Continuity condition of acceleration〉 On the bottom plane: On the ( According to Corresponding to each pair of the given accelerations ( The main sliding surface is defined by the straight-line segments connecting the bottom points of the inter-block planes. So, to optimize the bearing capacity for the geometry of sliding surface is to optimize it for the coordinates of the bottom points of the inter-block planes. For every inter-block plane, polar coordinates are used, in which the top points of the inter-block planes are considered as the origins. The optimization will give the inclination of the inter-block plane, the distance from the bottom point to the top point, and coordinates of the origin point. Although many methods of optimization are available, the classical Newton method is used herein to optimize the function value. The following modification will be required to apply the optimization program to GLEM. The decrements or increments of variables in one interaction cycle of the optimization should be small. The initial values of the variables should not be far from the ones in the result. To increase the number of variables more than necessity would probably not give good results due to the error generated in the numerical calculation. In this approach, the term ‘critical state’ means the state at which the sliding starts to occur. The acceleration and sliding surface corresponding to this state are the critical acceleration and actual sliding surface of the structure. To define the critical acceleration, from the beginning of the time-history of seismically induced acceleration, the potential sliding acceleration ( In the case, if we assume the strength parameters of the soil is not affected by the seismic loading, and the given acceleration is a periodic function of time, then the bearing capacity as well as the critical acceleration will not change from cycle to cycle of the acceleration. However, for almost seismically induced acceleration records, the interrelation of the magnitudes of the vertical and horizontal accelerations changes form cycle to cycle. Consequently, the bearing capacity as well as the critical acceleration become different from cycle to cycle even when the strength parameters of the soil are unchanged. In the present proposed method, the structure can be analyzed at every moment of the ground motion process. Therefore, any assumption concerning the change of the actual sliding surface during sliding can be dealt with. However, in this paper, the actual sliding surface is assumed to be unchanged throughout the process of sliding.  The relative displacement will be induced during further cycles of the ground motion if the critical acceleration for sliding is again exceeded and the relative displacement is accumulated through the process of ground motion. For all time-history of ground acceleration, the relative acceleration, Δ In this manner, the displacement of each block of the block system can be determined in both horizontal and vertical directions. It is important to note that, the failing soil mass is a deformable body rather than a rigid body. Therefore, the number of blocks of the block system representing the soil mass will have a significant effect on the distribution of acceleration within the body and on the result of the methodology as well. It is a matter of course that, the larger number of blocks will give the more appropriate solution. However, increasing the number of blocks brings about the increase of variables for the optimization program used in GLEM. The present work in this section aims to investigate this effect and to give the information of appropriate number of blocks. A foundation structure in which the parameters were given as In this section, the application of the dynamic GLEM for analyzing the motion of finite slopes is demonstrated. According to However, the optimization for the sliding surface of the slope is the most difficult among the optimizations for sliding surfaces of earth structures because we cannot get information on the slip line field, and cannot determine a specific point through which the main sliding surface passes. Attention should be paid to the characteristics of the foundation motion problem, in which the sliding surface almost always goes through the bottom-corner point of the foundation. Thus, with a certain width The Mononobe–Okabe method (M–O method) Herein a new approach for analyzing the earth pressure and motion of the retaining wall is introduced. When the seismic acceleration is not large enough to cause sliding failure, every part of the structure will take the same movement, and the computing model for active earth pressure is shown in When the sliding has not yet occurred, taking the equilibrium equations for the sliding soil mass and the failure conditions on slip planes In the case of passive earth pressure, the directions of the tangential forces on the slip planes will be reversed. Similarly, the dynamic passive earth pressure can also be derived as: For the model of retaining structure during the sliding process shown in The formula of the passive earth pressure in this case can be written as: The ultimate values of The M–O equations for dynamic active and passive earth pressures for cohesionless soil are written as:  In the case the cohesion To investigate the difference between the proposed method and M–O method, an example of calculating the dynamic active earth pressure on a retaining wall using sinusoidal wave as the input motion was carried out. A gravity wall with a height The results of the analysis are represented in In order to investigate the validity of the proposed theory, a number of the following types of experiments have been carried out: (1) experiments on the model of the foundation; (2) experiments on the model of the slope; and (3) experiments on the model of the retaining structure. The experimental results were analyzed and compared to the analytical results, in which the input acceleration was the acceleration record measured from the experiments. A shaking table was used to cause dynamic motion. According to the operating principle of the shaking table, only motion in the horizontal direction can be made. Measurement devices such as accelerometers, load cells, and laser displacement meters were used. The noise is eliminated from the acceleration records by 60 About the shaking table experiments, other researches can be referred to such as inclined plane studies of the Newmark sliding block procedure The model of the foundation on shaking table is shown in To measure the accelerations of every part of the structure, a number of accelerometers were installed inside the sub-base, failed soil mass and on both right and left sides of the foundation.  (1) Although the soil is assumed to behave as a rigid-plastic material, the elastic deformation of the body still affects the plastic deformation. This is supported by the fact that the acceleration of the footing differs from the acceleration of the sub-base even when the sliding does not exist. (2) Observing the deformation process of the base ground in the experiment, an embedded effect due to the weight of the footing block and seismic loading usually causes some deformation to the base ground before the sliding occurs. This phenomenon will affect not only the strength parameters of the soil but also the permanent displacement of the structure. The difference between the permanent displacement obtained by analysis and that measured by experiment can be seen in A slope with a height of 15  According to the experimental results, the sliding begins to occur from the second cycle of the input acceleration at a critical acceleration of about 8 Although there are still some differences, it can be said that the experimental results have a comparative agreement with the analyzed results. The model of the retaining structure on the shaking table is shown in  It can be said that in the case of active earth pressure the experimental result agrees well with the result obtained by the proposed theory. In the case of passive earth pressure, although the result is not presented here, it shows that the elastic deformation has a remarkable influence on the plastic deformation of the soil.  Calculating motion of shallow foundation with the use of sinusoidal wave as input motion. A foundation with a high roughness surface at the bottom and a mass of 70 It can be seen from these figures that after the input acceleration exceeds a critical value of about 3.94  Calculating motion of shallow foundation with the use of Western Tottori Earthquake acceleration record as input motion. An earthquake with a magnitude of 7.3 known as the Western Tottori Earthquake hit the western area of Tottori Prefecture in Japan on 6 October 2000. The maximum recorded accelerations were 9.27 In the present paper, an analysis method for the dynamic responses of earth structures under dynamic loading is proposed. The soil is considered as a rigid-plastic body. The formulation of the Generalized Limit Equilibrium Method (GLEM) for dynamic cases is established. All types of dynamic plasticity problems such as bearing capacity and motion of foundation, failure and motion of slope, earth pressure and motion of retaining wall can be analyzed by the proposed theory. In this proposed approach, for the first time, the continuity condition of acceleration, which governs the distribution of acceleration within the rigid-plastic body when the failure occurs, was discovered and applied in the calculation procedure. Combining this condition with GLEM, the motion of every part of the body is analyzed. A significant difference between this proposed approach and the Mononobe–Okabe method is that the relative movements of the retaining wall and sliding soil mass to the base ground were taken into account when establishing the formulae of dynamic earth pressures. In particular, the active earth pressure obtained by the proposed method tends to be significantly smaller than that obtained by the M–O method after the critical state is reached or sliding failure occurs. The analyzed results agree with the experimental ones in active earth pressure problems and slope failure problems. In other problems, the elastic deformation seems to suppress the plastic deformation. The proposed method provides not only the responses of earth structures during earthquake motions such as bearing capacity, slope stability, and earth pressure, but also the permanent displacements of the structures. This is extremely significant for the earthquake-resistant design of earth structures. The authors wish to thank Mr S. Fumimura, Mr T. Hanafusa, Mr T. Ishikawa, Mr H. Kasuya, Mr M. Katayama, Mr M. G. Lee, Mr Y. Morimoto, Mr J. Okada, Mr K. Ueda, Mr T. Yoshikawa, and Mr T. Yoshimura, the graduate and undergraduate students of Tottori University, for their assistance in this research. The seismographic data used in this research were obtained from the home page of the National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention (NIED) [