The XPS peaks of Fe 3p for Fe2+ and Fe3+ in FeO and Fe2O3, respectively, have been measured and the effects of curve fitting parameters on interpretation of the data have been analysed. Firstly, the peak fit parameters, i.e. (1) the number of peaks to be deconvoluted, (2) the range of the peak for back ground subtraction, (3) straight line (Li) or the Shirley (Sh) background subtraction method, (4) GL ratio (the ratio of Gaussian and Lorentzian contribution to the peak shape) and (5) asymmetry factor (AS), are manually selected. Secondly, the standard peak fit parameters were systematically investigated. The peak shape was fitted to a Voigt function by changing the peak position, the peak height and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) to minimize the χ
                     2. The recommended peak positions and peak parameters for Fe2+ and Fe3+ in iron oxides have been determined.XPS is routinely used for quantitative surface composition analysis. The relative elemental concentrations are determined by comparing the intensities of the characteristic signals Although computer programs are used to determine the best fit (minimum In the present study, those parameters for curve fitting were systematically altered and the effect of the parameters on the peak characteristics were studied. The standard peak fit parameters are selected manually as much as possible to avoid the influence of the computer software algorithm. Therefore, the results obtained here may be extended to the general discussion to a certain extent. Standard samples, “Fe Fe Wüstite is a non-stoichiometric compound at atmospheric pressure and should be expressed as Fe For XPS analysis a KRATOS Axis Ultra (2002 Kratos Analytical, Manchester, United Kingdom) facility was utilized. The samples were cleaved under vacuum in the sample preparation chamber prior to delivery, without breaking vacuum, to the XPS analysis chamber. The vacuum in the sample preparation chamber is approximately 10 The resulting XPS Fe 3p peak was curve-fitted as shown in The number of peaks to be deconvoluted. The range of the peak for back ground subtraction. Straight line (Li) or the Shirley (Sh) background subtraction method. GL ratio (the ratio of Gaussian and Lorentzian contribution to the peak shape, e.g. GL40 means 40% Lorentzian and 60% Gaussian). Asymmetry factor (AS). XPS spectra are rarely symmetrical and the Voigt-type approximations are often augmented by introducing tail functions The computer program supplied with the Kratos Axis Ultra facilities then fits the curve to the Voigt function given in Eq. In the present study for Fe 3p three ranges, i.e. 50–62, 52–62 and 52–60 Curve fitting procedures were carried out in the following sequence: Select the binding energy range for background subtraction. Select the method of background subtraction (Shirley-type or linear). Select GL ratio (initial number is 0). Select asymmetry factor (initial number is 1.0). Select the best-fitted curve for experimentally obtained Fe 3p, that gives the minimum Go to step (4) and decrease the asymmetry factor by 0.2. When it reaches 0.2, then go to the next step. Go to step (3) and increase the GL ratio by 20. When it reaches 100, then go to the next step. Go to step (2) and change the method of background subtraction. When curve fitting is completed using both Shirley-type and linear background subtraction methods then go to the next step. Go to step (1) and change the range for background subtraction. Firstly, curve fitting was carried out for Fe 3p peak of Fe In In  Thus the best curve fit for the Fe 3p peak for Fe asymmetry factor of 0.4, linear background subtraction between 62 and 50 peak position of 55.6 FWHM of 3.2 GL ratio does not affect the above parameters significantly. The basic shape of XPS peak is Lorentzian Using equilibrium data obtained by previous workers In FWHM for Fe The Fe The best curve fit for the Fe asymmetry factor of 0.6, Shirley type background subtraction between 62 and 50 peak position of 53.9 FWHM of 3.7 XPS surface analysis measurements have been undertaken on standard samples containing known concentrations of Fe It has been shown that for both Fe The Gaussian–Lorentzian ratio does not significantly affect the curve fit calculation unless values approaching 100% Lorentzian are used. The best descriptions at the XPS peak shapes are obtained with the asymmetry factors in the range of 0.4 and 0.6. The methods of the background subtraction affect the values of FWHM around 0.5 The asymmetry factors does not significantly affect FWHM. The peak signal positions increase monotonically with increasing the asymmetry factor. The recommended peak parameters for Fe The authors wish to thank Barry Wood, Brisbane Surface Analysis Centre, University of Queensland and Dr. Bill Bin Gong, School of Chemical Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney for their advice and assistance with this project. This project was undertaken with funding from the Australian Research Council, Discovery program, Commonwealth Government of Australia.