A rotating-drum reactor with a gas-sparger of microfiltration ceramic membrane was used for arsenopyrite bioleaching by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. The gas mass transport performance could be improved by adjusting the aeration rate and drum rotation speed, and high bioactivity of bacterial strains could be maintained at high pulp densities. Arsenopyrite bioleaching showed that higher pulp density could be allowed in the rotating-drum reactor, which was favorable to the reactor used in the bioleaching of sulfide minerals.The reactor is one of the important factors to affect bioleaching process, but fewer efforts were devoted to develop the reactors used in sulfide bioleaching. The conventional reactors such as stirred-tank reactors have some common drawbacks such as severe collision and friction between solid particles, high shear force and no more than 20% of pulp density in bioleaching systems ( Compared with stirred-tank reactors, rotating-drum reactors have the different mechanism of slurry mixing. In this work arsenopyrite bioleaching was performed in a rotating-drum reactor with a gas-sparger of microfiltration ceramic membrane. The gas mass transfer coefficients of the reactor were measured under different conditions. The process parameters including pH, Eh, Fe and As concentrations were monitored at different pulp densities during the bioleaching process to explore the application potential of rotating-drum reactor. Arsenopyrite was obtained from Jinfeng of Liaoning province, China, and its chemical compositions were shown in  During the bioleaching processes of arsenopyrite, the dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration of the system was monitored by a DO electrode plugged into the rotating-drum reactor. The pH and redox potentials (Eh) of the bioleaching system were measured by a pH/ORP electrode, and the bacterial densities in the suspension were determined by direct counting on microscope. The liquid samples were withdrawn at the predetermined intervals with a syringe. The As concentration of leaching solutions was analyzed by ICP-AES, and the concentration of Fe A rotating-drum reactor with a work volume of 13 The gas mass transport coefficients ( The By adding Al Keeping the same content of arsenopyrite in batch experiments, pulp density was adjusted by adding different amount of Al  The laboratory scale rotating-drum reactor with a gas-sparge was used in arsenopyrite bioleaching. The gas mass transport coefficients under different conditions show that the gas mass transport performance in the reactor can be improved by adjusting aeration rate, rotational speed and pulp density. The concentrations of Fe and As in the leaching solution are approximate at different pulp densities and the higher bioactivity of bacterial strains can be maintained at high pulp densities. The results showed that higher pulp densities could be allowed in the rotating-drum reactor, which was favorable to the reactor used in the bioleaching of sulfide minerals. This work was supported by the