Magnesite ore powder is the primary raw material used to prepare refractory magnesia. With the depletion of high-grade magnesite, methods to reduce the impurities and improve the quality of magnesite ore powder are urgently required. In this study, an ethanolamine-based surfactant, bis (2-hydroxyethyl) dodecylamine (BHDA), was first introduced into the flotation of magnesite ore as a novel collector, and the possibility of improving the purity of the ore was investigated by experiment and theory. Flotation tests, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Fourier-transform-IR spectroscopy, and zeta potential measurements were carried out to study the behaviors and mechanisms by which the collector enhances the purity of magnesite ore powder. The flotation results revealed the noticeable difference in the floatability of quartz, magnesite, and dolomite when combined with the collector over a wide range of pulp pH values (4.18–9.17). The analytical results obtained from FTIR spectra, XPS, and zeta potential measurements indicate that BHDA was readily adsorbed on the surface of quartz, mainly by electrostatic and hydrogen bonding interactions, whereas it was adsorbed on the surfaces of magnesite and dolomite by weak electrostatic interactions. By introducing a hydroxyethyl group to the tertiary amine collector, more hydrogen bonds can form with the surface of quartz, strengthening the adsorption stability. Thus, compared to the traditional collector, dodecylamine, BHDA showed better desilication and purification performance for magnesite ore powder. Meanwhile, our results show that the simpler reagent system and process flow makes BHDA promising for the industrial purification of magnesite ore powder.Magnesia (MgO) is one of the most important raw materials in the refractory industry. Magnesia refractory is usually used as the main material of lining materials for industrial kilns in high-temperature manufacturing industries, such as iron and steel making, nonferrous metals treatment, and the preparation of building materials and glass, as well as the petrochemical industries [ Froth flotation is the most widely utilized technique for the separation and enrichment of valuable minerals. As early as the 1930s, flotation had been used for the separation of silicate minerals from magnesite ore [ In this study, an ethanolamine-based surfactant, bis(2-hydroxyethyl)dodecylamine (BHDA), was used as a novel collector for the reverse flotation of magnesite ore powder. To investigate the mechanism of the purity improvement of the ore, experimental and theoretical investigations were carried out. BHDA, which has two hydrophilic groups, is an amino alcohol. Compared with dodecyl dimethyl amine, the addition of an alcoholic hydroxyl group to the molecule enhances its solubility and alters the flotation performance [ Hand-picked natural specimens of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz were obtained from Haicheng, Liaoning Province. The samples were crushed, ground in a porcelain laboratory ball mill and wet-sieved to obtain the −74 + 15 μm fractions. High purity silica for flotation studies was prepared by leaching with hydrochloric acid. Magnesite and dolomite samples were further purified using a magnetic separator and shaking table. Chemical compositions of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz are shown in The collector (BHDA, C The flotation of single minerals and the separation of artificially mixed samples were carried out in a XFG XPS spectra were measured with America Thermo VG ESCALAB250 spectrometer using Al FTIR spectra of the samples were recorded by Nicolet 740 FT-IR spectrometer at 25 °C between 400 and 4000 cm The zeta potentials of the untreated minerals and those treated with the collector were measured using a Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd. Britain) at 25 °C. Prior to the test, the purified mineral samples (20 mg, below −5 μm) were added to a 50 mL aqueous solution containing 1 × 10 The flotation performances of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz were investigated using BHDA as a collector, and the results are shown in The effects of the collector concentration on the flotation recoveries of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz at the natural pH of the slurries (7.04, 8.16, and 9.17, respectively) are shown in The slurry pH strongly influenced the flotation performance, and the results are shown in To investigate the separation efficiency and potential for the industrial application of BHDA in magnesite ore flotation, two typical artificially mixed minerals were prepared. These correspond to the feedstocks of high-silicon magnesite ore and high-calcium magnesite ore in dressing plants, respectively. The flotation separation of these mineral mixtures was conducted, and the results are shown in   As shown in To evaluate the potential industrial application of BHDA for magnesite ore, the respective flotation results using BHDA and DDA as collectors are shown in The XPS spectra of the untreated magnesite, dolomite, and quartz samples and those treated with BHDA were analyzed to systematically expound the adsorption phenomena and mechanisms of action of the BHDA mineral collector. The XPS results are summarized in To verify the selective adsorption mechanism and to determine the mechanism of the purity enhancement of magnesite ore powder by BHDA, the FTIR spectra of the untreated magnesite, dolomite, and quartz samples and those treated with BHDA were measured, and these are shown in To investigate the selective adsorption behavior and mechanism of interaction of BHDA with the minerals, the zeta potentials of the untreated magnesite, dolomite, and quartz samples and those treated with BHDA were measured as a function of pH (pH range of 1–12), and the results are shown in To investigate the effect of the speciation of BHDA on the adsorption mechanism, the distribution diagram of BHDA in solution as a function of pH was plotted, as shown in Based on the above analysis, we propose an adsorption model for the collector on the surface of magnesite ore powder ( The use of the tertiary amine BHDA as a collector has been shown to be effective for enhancing the purity of magnesite ore powder. Flotation experiments of single minerals indicated that the BHDA collector exhibited excellent collecting ability, as well as selectivity, for quartz in a wide range of pulp pH values (4.18–9.17). The separation flotation tests of artificially mixed ores showed that BHDA shows better excellent desilication and purification for magnesite ore powder than DDA. Meanwhile, the use of BHDA as the collector could simplify the reagent system and process flow, making it a valuable collector for the industrial purification of magnesite ore powder. The adsorption behavior and mechanism of BHDA on the surface of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz were further investigated using XPS, FTIR, and zeta potential measurements, and an adsorption model has been proposed. The results indicate that BHDA is readily adsorbed on the surface of quartz, mainly by electrostatic and hydrogen bonding interactions, whereas the adsorption of BHDA on magnesite or dolomite, which occurred mainly via weak electrostatic interactions, was very limited. Combining with the distribution diagram of BHDA in solution and the obtained results, it we determined that the speciation of BHDA and the electronegativity of the mineral surface in the slurry are the critical factors in the flotation separation of magnesite ore powder. These results indicate that BHDA This work was supported by the