An experimental investigation was made to study the effects of chemical coupling of flocculation and adsorption with photocatalysis in treating persistent organic pollutants in wastewater. The photocatalysis alone showed initial reverse reaction when titanium oxide (TiO2) was used in catalysis. The effect of the pretreatment of adsorption with powdered activated carbon (PAC) on photocatalysis was studied. The results showed that PAC adsorption followed by photocatalysis was not effective in alleviating reverse reaction. On the other hand, when PAC and TiO2 were added simultaneously, the reverse reaction was eliminated. Further, the organic removal was also improved by simultaneous PAC and TiO2 additions. When flocculation with ferric chloride (FeCl3) was used as pretreatment, the organic removal efficiency was superior. The initial reverse reaction was also eliminated/minimized. However, inadequate doses of FeCl3 (less than 30mgl−1) resulted in initial reverse reaction and inferior DOC removal.The water requirement is increasing with population growth and also with industrialization. Reuse of wastewater after treatment will help to maintain environmental quality and to relieve the unrelenting pressure on conventional natural freshwater sources. Although the effluent from the secondary and tertiary wastewater treatment can be discharged into waterways, it cannot be used for reuse purposes without further treatment ( Photocatalysis is one of the attractive processes to degrade POPs from biologically treated sewage effluent. Photocatalytic reactions allow in many cases, a complete degradation of organic pollutants into very small and harmless species without use of any chemicals. This avoids sludge production and its disposal ( Many studies have found that photo-Fenton's systems are useful in treating a variety of contaminants including aromatic and aliphatic organic compounds ( Photocatalysis efficiency can also be improved by collecting pollutant in the solution to the surface of TiO None of the previous studies dealt with the synergistic phenomena of the effect of FeCl The composition of the synthetic wastewater used in this study is presented in Ferric chloride (FeCl PAC from 0.1 to 5 Photocatalysis experiments were conducted with powdered P25 Degussa TiO DOC was measured by using the UV-persulfate TOC analyzer. All samples were filtered through 0.45 The synthetic wastewater after each treatment was subjected to MW distribution measurement. High pressure size exclusion chromatography (HPSEC, Shimadzu, Corp., Japan) with a SEC column (Protein-pak 125, Waters, Milford, USA) was used to determine the MW distributions of organic matter (OM). Standards of MW of various polystyrene sulfonates (PSS: 210, 1800, 4600, 8000 and 18000 The effect of the UV lamp surface on DOC removal from OM was studied with a TiO The overall rate is presented in  The effect of PAC adsorption as a pretreatment to TiO Experiments with simultaneous PAC and TiO The effect of flocculation with FeCl To understand the phenomenon of the reverse reaction and the advantages of adding flocculants and adsorbents, a detailed MW distribution analysis on the effluent was made. The MW of the OM of wastewater ranged from 248 to about 36,000 On the other hand, flocculation as pretreatment removed the large MW OM (in the range of 854–36258 The MW distribution of OM after PAC adsorption followed by photocatalysis is presented in Following the pretreatment of FeCl This study was conducted to investigate the synergetic effect of chemical coupling of FeCl The overall rate constant ( Photocatalytic reaction showed both forward and reverse reaction with TiO The photocatalysis system with a pretreatment of adsorption was not effective in alleviating reverse reaction. The PAC adsorption followed by photocatalysis caused reverse reaction because the large MW OM remained in the solution after the PAC adsorption was adsorbed on the TiO When flocculation was used as pretreatment to photocatalysis, the organic removal efficiency was superior. Further, it also reduced/eliminated the initial reverse reaction. However, inadequate FeCl This research was funded by Australian Research Council (ARC) discovery grant. The supports of Photo and Environmental Technology Co. Ltd., Chonnam National University, the Kwanjeong Educational foundation and Dai Miyazaki in Nagaoka University of Technology are greatly appreciated.