During the comminution of metals, intensive deformation of the material takes place resulting in wide fragment size distributions and a large range of fragment shapes and states of compactness. Thus, the characterisation of the products is a very demanding task. In this paper, the most common methods for the determination of characteristics describing the results of the comminution as well as of the deformation are explained.The comminution of materials with nonbrittle behaviour, especially of metals, plays an important role in recycling processes. The scientific investigation of these processes is—in comparison to the comminution of brittle materials—still at the beginning. The fact that the characterisation of the fragments produced during comminution is very difficult may be one of the reasons for that. The Chair of Mineral Processing and Recycling (ATRec) at the Freiberg University of Mining and Technology has attended to the basic research in the field of the comminution of metals and scrap in shredders of the swing hammer mill type for a longer period of time. Platy test bodies of metal sheets are usually utilised as model materials. One essential result of the present research is the finding that very intensive bending and other deformation processes, which cause the formation of initial flaws and crack initiation, take place before a real fragmentation can occur inside this kind of equipment. Only as a second step, the cracks formed propagate until breakage. Due to this kind of stressing, the fragments produced are of very wide fragment size distributions, a large range of fragment shapes and—depending on the material properties and the conditions inside the zone of comminution—of a varying state of compactness. Therefore, the determination of the properties of these fragments is a very demanding task. Besides the characteristics usually utilized in order to describe the results of the comminution, such as fragment size and fragment mass distributions, fragment shape and crack and fracture surface area, respectively, characteristics describing the compaction have to be determined too. These are the bending radii distribution, the bending length, the degree of bending and the degree of compaction, which is equal to a relative fragment density. The scope of this paper is to introduce the determination methods of the characteristics listed in The fragment shape is an important granulometric property which affects most technological processes. Therefore, a great number of investigations have been done in order to describe this characteristic in a suitable manner. Frequently, the determination of shape factors is based on: the evaluation of the triaxial dimension relationships, the comparison between the properties (such as area of projection, volume, etc.) of the irregularly shaped fragment and those of a geometric body (such as the sphere with equal mass) or the evaluation of the change in behaviour (e.g. settling velocity) as a result of the irregular shape. Other concepts deliver characteristics describing the so-called roundness by measuring the radius of curvature of the projection of the fragments All the shape factors mentioned above are inadequate if applied to fragments formed by comminution of metals. This is due to the fact that the different fragment shapes are results of the varying states of compaction, too. Schubert Starting from that, for the following investigations, a fragment shape classification was used in order to describe the products of the comminution, which is not only suitable for shape characterisation but also helps to distinguish the state of compaction Every fragment can be described by its three dimensions The objective of the investigations was to find a method for the determination of dimension The determination of the fragment size distributions The laboratory trommel screen operates discontinuously and is equipped with two octahedral trommels (widest diameter Therewith, cataracting and, consequently, the separation according to dimension During the last years, devices using image analysis have become an alternative to be taken into account as compared with sieving. The initial objective was to employ a commercially available image analyser for the characterisation of fragments formed by comminution of sheet metals. Because of its wide measuring range, the CPA-4 In this device, the material is dropped past a linear source of light (3) after being transported from the feed bin (1) by means of a vibrating conveyor (2). The line camera (4) installed opposite to the source of light is connected to the computer (5), which is needed for evaluating the data and for controlling purposes Since problems appeared during determination of the fragment size using the equipment mentioned above, an apparatus using image analysis was assembled in order to meet the specific requirements of the characterisation of the fragments formed by comminution of metals Exemplary for the results obtained in the determination of the fragment size distributions using the aforesaid equipment, the mean fragment size Due to the low height of the sieves, the suspended sieving machine could not be employed for the comparably coarse fragments obtained after a stressing time of only 3 s. The deviations of the results from those obtained by direct measurement are relatively high for longer-stressed products, too. The values of Δ( Problems also arose if the trommel screen was employed to products obtained after short stressing times (3 and 8 s). The fragments were subject to deformation and in some cases, breakage occurred. Therefore, the values of Δ( The results of the determination of the fragment size distributions using the Haver & Boecker CPA-4, which is designed for on-line applications, are in good agreement with the values obtained by direct measurement for products obtained at stressing times of In order to examine this effect, monodisperse bodies of known dimensions were analysed. For steel and glass spheres, the results are in good agreement with the diameters Investigations conducted with cylinders of equal diameter ( For further investigations, fragments which are of approximately equal size but can be assigned to different fragment shape classes were singled out and analysed separately. From the results shown in The sphericities The device utilised for the determination of the fragment size at the Chair of Mineral Processing and Recycling (ATRec) shows relatively low deviations from the values obtained by direct measurement for all analysed products The change of the medium dimension The calculation of the fragment mass distributions from the fragment size distributions is impossible since there has to be found a correlation for every single fragment shape class In this context, the device utilised for the determination of the fragment size at ATRec has proven to be well suited, since the mass of every single fragment is measured too. Consequently, the fragment mass distributions and the fragment size distributions are available simultaneously. The increase in surface area The characteristic obtained is well suited to measure the progress of comminution. Looking at The evaluation of the crack lengths Finally it has to be stressed that the named methods are too time-consuming to be routinely employed; but their purposeful utilisation can provide valuable information for the research of the microprocesses and principles of comminution of metals. The deformation processes mentioned above are mainly caused by bending, buckling and torsion. As a result, linear kinks are formed in the platy material, which also can branch or cross each other. The sum of the lengths of these kinks is called bending length When comparing products obtained after subjecting them to a varying amount of specific energy, it becomes obvious that with increasing specific energy, the bending radii become smaller For each fragment of the mass If, for example, the degree of bending of single fragment mass fractions are regarded dependent on the specific energy consumption As mentioned above, the degree of bending is suited to describe the deformation, but it cannot be utilised in order to determine the resulting compaction. For this purpose, the degree of compaction As the fragment density is the quotient of the fragment mass It is obvious that the degree of compaction is dependent on the method used for determining the envelope volume. For that, two methods have proven to be practicable: the embedding of fragments into bulks of monodisperse spheres and the calculation of the ellipsoid of rotation having the dimensions The former method is based on the fact that the embedding of fragments into a bulk of monodisperse spheres results in a change in its bulk volume. This change in bulk volume can be assumed to be a good estimate of the envelope volume of the fragments embedded. Hence, the degree of compaction This method is sufficiently accurate only if employed for sets of fragments, which have to be a representative sample of the product under examination. Moreover, the size of the spheres and of the vessel has to be adapted to the fragment size. As a result, an integral value of the envelope volume of the embedded set of fragments is obtained. In comparison to that, the method of calculating the envelope volume is based on the assumption that the volume of the ellipsoid having the dimensions It must be stressed that for strongly compacted and very small fragments, values of During the comminution of metals, deformation and breakage occurs simultaneously. Therefore, characteristics both for describing the results of comminution and of the deformation processes makes the characterisation of the products obtained a highly sophisticated task. In correspondence to the characterisation of minerals, the former task is solved by the determination of the fragment size and fragment mass distributions, the fragment shape and as well as the increase in surface area. However, the methods utilised are different. For the determination of the fragment size distributions, sieving has shown to be of limited applicability. In contradiction to that, the utilisation of image analysis has proven to be successful. However, the known commercial devices cannot be used. It rather has to be taken care that the largest and medium dimensions The evaluation of the deformation processes can be conducted by means of the bending radii distribution and the bending length, the degree of bending as well as the degree of compaction. The latter two characteristics can easily be calculated from those obtained in determining the fragment size and mass.