Here, an overview on the advances in solar photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF) is initially presented to show that it is the more potent electrochemical advanced oxidation process based on Fenton's reaction chemistry to remove organic pollutants from waters, due to the synergistic action of generated hydroxyl radicals and solar irradiation. As a novel advance for SPEF, an autonomous solar pre-pilot plant is proposed to make an energetically inexpensive process that can be viable at industrial level. The plant of 10dm3 capacity contained a Pt/air-diffusion cell with 90.2cm2 electrode area, coupled to a solar compound parabolic collectors (CPCs) photoreactor of 1.57dm3 irradiation volume and to a solar photovoltaic panel that provides a maximum average current of 5.0 A. The oxidation ability of this plant was assessed by studying the degradation of Direct Yellow 4 (DY4) diazo dye, which involved the predominant destruction of organics by OH formed from Fenton's reaction between H2O2 generated at the cathode and added Fe2+, along with the photolysis of Fe(III)-carboxylate complexes with sunlight in the CPCs photoreactor. The effect of Fe2+ and dye contents as well as current on decolorization rate, substrate decay and mineralization rate was examined. About 96-97% mineralization was rapidly attained using 0.50mmoldm−3 Fe2+ and up to 0.32mmoldm−3 DY4 at 5.0 A. The DY4 decay always obeyed a pseudo-first-order kinetics. Eleven aromatic products, twenty two hydroxylated derivatives and nine short-linear carboxylic acids were identified as intermediates. The Fe(III) complexes of most acids were rapidly removed, pre-eminently photolyzed by sunlight, except those of acetic and oxamic acids that were slowly destroyed. The initial N of the dye was mainly released as NH4
                     + ion and its initial S was lost as SO4
                     2− ion. A plausible reaction sequence for DY4 mineralization involving all the detected products was finally proposed.Over the past fifteen years, electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) have received increasing attention for the removal of toxic and non-biodegradable organic contaminants from waters Boron-doped diamond (BDD) electrodes are the best anodes for AO because they interact very weakly with physisorbed BDD( Other EAOPs based on Fenton's reaction chemistry are electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF), in which H In Fenton based EAOPs, Fe Reaction (3) is catalytic and can be mainly propagated from Fe An important drawback of PEF is the high electrical cost of the UV lamps used. To solve this problem, we have proposed the alternative use of the SPEF method in which the solution is directly irradiated with sunlight as an inexpensive and renewable energy source with λ Despite the more cost-effective treatment by SPEF, the electrolytic systems used spend energy from a power supply that provides the electric current to the electrolytic cell and this still represents an economical problem for its possible application to water remediation at industrial level. For this reason, we have designed a novel autonomous solar pre-pilot plant in which the electrical energy needed for the electrolytic cell is supplied by a solar photovoltaic panel, making thereby an energetically inexpensive SPEF process. The ability of such autonomous plant for organic removal has been assessed by studying the decolorization and mineralization of a typical diazo dye such as Direct Yellow 4 (DY4), whose chemical structure and characteristics are collected in This paper presents, in the first place, a brief overview over the advances in SPEF to show more clearly the interest of using the designed autonomous solar pre-pilot plant of 10 The degradation of the drugs salicylic acid The SPEF treatment of organics has been scaled-up to a recirculation pre-pilot plant of 2.5 In order to reduce the energy consumption for the SPEF process, a larger solar pre-pilot plant of 10 In view of the excellent expectative of using the above 10 Pure DY4 diazo dye was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Maleic, malic, tartronic, malonic, glycolic, acetic, formic, oxalic and oxamic acids were of analytical grade supplied by Panreac and Avocado. Anhydrous sodium sulfate, used as background electrolyte, and heptahydrated Fe(II) sulfate, used as catalyst, were of analytical grade purchased from Fluka and Sigma-Aldrich, respectively. Organic solvents and other chemicals employed were of LC-MS, HPLC or analytical grade purchased from Teknokroma, Merck and Sigma-Aldrich. All solutions were prepared with deionized water and their initial pH was adjusted to 3.0 with analytical grade sulfuric acid purchased from Merck. A scheme of the pre-pilot plant designed for the SPEF process is depicted in All the SPEF experiments were run for 4 The solution pH was determined with a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter. Prior to analysis, the samples withdrawn from electrolyzed solutions were neutralized at pH 7-8 to stop the degradation process and filtered with 0.45 The DY4 decay was followed by reversed-phase HPLC using a Waters 600 LC fitted with a Spherisorb ODS2 5 Aromatic intermediates formed after 5-30 A first series of experiments was made by electrolyzing 10  To better clarify this behavior, the decay of DY4 concentration was followed by reversed-phase HPLC and the results obtained are presented in  The aforementioned findings indicate that the optimum Fe The applied current is a key parameter in the EAOPs because it controls the amount of  An almost complete mineralization of 96% as maximal was found for both currents, but a longer time of 240 The above results are indicative of a good effectiveness of the SPEF process for DY4 mineralization using the autonomous solar pre-pilot plant. The treatment becomes more efficient at smaller currents, but longer time is required for achieving the maximum mineralization of 96%. For this reason, the maximum average current of 5.0 A provided by the solar photovoltaic panel can be taken as the best current for SPEF under the present experimental conditions. The substrate concentration is another important experimental variable since it can inform about the ability of EAOPs to produce reactive oxidizing species and to treat high pollutant concentrations. To clarify this effect for the autonomous solar pre-pilot plant, 10  The good oxidation ability of the SPEF process to mineralize the different DY4 solutions is shown in The above study evidences that the autonomous solar pre-pilot plant is able to rapidly mineralize solutions up to 0.32  Ion-exclusion chromatograms of electrolyzed solutions exhibited the generation of nine short-linear carboxylic acids like maleic (  The mineralization of the initial N (0.64 On the other hand, the release of the initial organic S as SO Based on the above detected products, The process starts with the cleavage of one azo bond of The SPEF process is the more potent technology for the treatment of organic pollutants by EAOPs based on Fenton's reaction chemistry using a gas-diffusion cathode to generate H The authors are grateful to the financial support from MICINN (Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Spain) under the project CTQ2010-16164/BQU, co-financed with FEDER funds. S. Garcia-Segura thanks the grant awarded from MEC (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, Spain).