Non-thermal plasma as well as photocatalysis is intensively investigated for volatile organic compounds (VOCs) oxidation. Their association exhibits high performances for air pollutant removal and mineralization. Nevertheless, numerous experimental investigations are performed under dry conditions, or on very short range of water vapour amounts. This article aims at determining the influence of water vapour on the oxidation efficiency of (i) photocatalysis, (ii) non-thermal plasma, and (iii) their association. The amount of water vapour investigated in dry conditions ranges from 0ppm to 23,000ppm. Acetylene has been selected as a model pollutant. The presence of water vapour in the gas stream induces a strong decrease in the photocatalytic oxidation of acetylene. The mineralization process is modified. The efficiency of acetylene removal by non-thermal plasma decreases regularly with the water vapour amount. Nevertheless, the presence of water vapour improves significantly the selectivity of carbon dioxide. The same tendency is reported for plasma/photocatalysis association. Those results are interpreted in terms of oxidative species modification due to the presence of water. Moreover, the investigation of water vapour contribution into oxidative processes improves the understanding of plasma/photocatalytic association mechanisms.Air treatment is mainly devoted to the removal of toxic, odorous or irritating volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Various techniques have been developed during the last 20 years to adsorb and/or to decompose molecules. First developed for water depollution Studies are mainly focused on the fundamental understanding of the interaction phenomena between non-thermal plasma and photocatalysis. Consequently, reactions are performed under simplified conditions like synthetic dry air. Few works investigate water vapour as a chemical parameter. If experiments are performed in the presence of water vapour, H The influence of water vapour on gas phase photocatalytic oxidation is extremely different according to: (i) the compound to be oxidized, (ii) the morphology of the photocatalyst, and (iii) the amount of water vapour. Zhao and Yang The presence of water molecules in the gas stream flowing between dielectric barrier discharge electrodes leads to the formation of HO* and H* radicals because of the high electronic dissociative attachment coefficient of H The same reactor has been used for photocatalytic, non-thermal plasma and coupling experiments in order to enable comparisons. It consists in a Pyrex planar double dielectric barrier discharge (gap: 8 The coupling material consists in glass fibres coated with 20 Experiments have been performed in a recirculation mode, meaning that the same gas batch is treated during the experiment. Recirculation is ensured by a pump placed on the gas circuit. Gases used for experiments were all provided by Air Liquide. First, the reactor and the gas circuit are purged with 200 C Adsorbed acids on porous Si20Ti20 solid placed inside the discharge during photocatalytic experiments were analyzed by high precision liquid chromatography (HPLC). It consists in a Varian ProStar device equipped with Sarsep-car-H packed column to perform acids separation. Detection was ensured by UV absorption at 210 In order to enable the understanding of water vapour influence on acetylene removal by non-thermal plasma and photocatalysis, each oxidative configuration has been investigated separately: (i) influence of water vapour on acetylene photocatalytic oxidation; (ii) influence of water vapour on acetylene non-thermal plasma oxidation; finally, regarding to those results (iii) the influence of water vapour on the “non-thermal plasma/TiO The removal of acetylene on irradiated photocatalytic material Si20Ti20 has been performed in the presence of various water vapour amounts. After each experiment the removal rate of acetylene has been calculated, values are reported in Under dry air, the removal rate of acetylene is 27 Initial formation rate of carbon dioxide, like acetylene initial removal rate, decreases regularly as water vapour amount increases till 10,000 The presence of water vapour into the reactor obviously slows down the oxidation reaction kinetics. Under our conditions, the inhibiting effect of water vapour is already noticed at the lowest amounts. We suggest that a competitive adsorption between water and acetylene occurs, and this phenomenon would not be balanced by the reaction of hydroxyl radicals on acetylene. HO* radicals are produced by the reaction of photogenerated holes with water. The activity decrease reveals that acetylene mainly reacts with photogenerated holes. Reaction constants available on NIST kinetics database confirm that acetylene mainly reacts with O* ( The decrease of CO Si20Ti20 photocatalyst has been collected from the reactor after 10 Acetylene removal and CO The introduction of water vapour in the gas stream induces a regular decrease of acetylene removal rate on the whole studied range: from 190 As reported by Guaitella et al. The decrease of CO formation rate and the increase of that of CO Even if the presence of water vapour inhibits the removal of acetylene by non-thermal plasma, this inhibition is weak. Moreover, the formation of carbon monoxide is clearly reduced and the selectivity of carbon dioxide is highly improved. Acetylene oxidation has been performed under two coupling conditions: (i) Si20Ti20 photocatalyst is placed inside the discharge and the reactor remains in the dark (no irradiation by external UV lamps); (ii) Si20Ti20 photocatalyst is placed inside the discharge and is irradiated by external UV lamps during the experiments. Each plasma experiment has been performed with an injected power adjusted to 0.2 In the absence of UV irradiation and under dry air, the presence of the porous photocatalyst inside the discharge improves acetylene removal rate by 12–14%. This improvement is noticed on the whole investigated range of water vapour amount. As stated in Section In the presence of UV irradiation, acetylene removal rate is clearly enhanced in dry air. This effect decreases as water vapour amount increases in the reactor. Beyond 15,000 Ohtani et al. Carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide formation rates are reported as a function of water vapour amount in the reactor for both coupling respectively in In dry air, the presence of non-irradiated porous photocatalyst reduces by 23% the formation of carbon monoxide. This phenomenon is noticed on the whole studied range of water vapour. The illumination of the photocatalytic material with UV does not influence the formation rates of CO. The behaviour of carbon dioxide formation rates is completely different. The presence of the porous material inside the discharge does not influence CO The presence of water vapour in the gas stream induces strong modifications on the oxidative processes: (i) the removal of acetylene is considerably slowed down in the presence of water vapour; (ii) the mineralization of the removed compound is delayed. The influence of water vapour is already noticeable at the lowest water vapour amount. This phenomenon is related (i) to competitive reactivity between water and acetylene; (ii) to the modification of the main oxidative species. Even if the presence of water vapour inhibits the removal of acetylene by non-thermal plasma, this inhibition is weak; it does not exceed 10.5% of inhibition in the presence of 23,000 The presence of water vapour inhibits dramatically the contribution of the photocatalytic oxidative process, even into the coupling experiments. The behaviour of the plasma/photocatalysis association mainly corresponds to that of plasma: the removal rate of acetylene is reduced whereas the selectivity of carbon dioxide is markedly improved over 12,000 Water vapour has to be considered as a significant source of oxidizing species which can lead to a major modification of oxidation processes in comparison to dry air condition.