Ca mineral flotation was performed to characterise the separation conditions of calcite, francolite, fluorite and gypsum at neutral pH. These minerals constitute the gangue of metallic or sedimentary ores. The separation of Ca minerals is difficult because of their similar surface properties. Thus, the effect of using different electrolytes on francolite zeta potential measurements was studied. Batch experiments were performed to generate scientific knowledge of Ca mineral flotation behaviour at neutral pH. This paper discusses the effect of mixing anionic collectors (sodium oleate, hydroxamic acid, D2EHPA) with nonionic reagents on the selective separation of Ca minerals. The most interesting observation is the separation of gypsum from other Ca minerals using a mixture of sodium oleate and nonionic reagents. Additionally, this paper discusses the enhancement of separation contrast between calcite and francolite by adding nonionic and anionic reagents.Due to the similarities in their formation properties, calcite, francolite, fluorite and gypsum are commonly found together as gangue minerals or the main minerals in ores ( Separation of Ca minerals from themselves is difficult because of their same mineral surface properties, their high surface reactivity with anionic reagents ( The synergetic effects of nonionic reagents for non-sulphide ore flotation with anionic collectors for Ca minerals were reported by In this study, attempts were made to enhance the selective separation of Ca minerals (calcite, francolite, fluorite and gypsum) from each other. Several flotation tests were performed using different types of anionic collectors (sodium oleate, alkyl hydroxamate, D2EHPA, sulphosuccinamate) without any Ca mineral depressants. The synergetic effects of mixing nonionic reagents with some of these anionic reagents were studied. The combination of anionic collectors with low-polarity nonionic reagents was considered in this work to enhance the separation efficiency of Ca minerals. Calcite, francolite, fluorite and gypsum flotation behaviours are presented in this paper. Moreover, in order to understand the effect of electrolytes on global surface charge of francolite, zeta potential measurements were performed using 10 Pure minerals were used to characterise the flotation conditions of calcium-bearing minerals. The pure minerals sources were as follows: calcite from France, Provence; francolite from Madagascar, Fort Dauphin, Tuléar province, gypsum from Morocco, Idharen, Central Atlas and fluorite from France, Le Burc. To determine impurities in mineral samples, chemical analysis was carried out using inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrophotometry (ICP-MS) for trace elements and inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) to analyse major elements. Although calcite and gypsum had a high degree purity, Sr can substitute for Ca in these four Ca minerals. Pure minerals were crushed in a laboratory ceramic ring mill and dry and wet sieved to obtain 20–100 The mineral size fraction was determined by wet sieving in spite of the dissolution rate in water of these types of minerals. A laser sizer (HELOS BF) with 1 XRD analyses were carried out on a D8 Advance Bruker. The diffractometer functions in optimal condition of 35 The BET-specific surface area of pure minerals (size range between 20 and 100 The electrophoretic mobility measurements were carried out with a Zetaphoremeter IV. The Smoluchowski equation, modified by Henry ( To perform these experiments, 30 The studied collectors were 98% sodium oleate and 95% di-2-(ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) purchased from Acros Organics (France), alkyl hydroxamate (AERO 6493) and 35–38% pure sulphosuccinamate (AERO 845) supplied by Cytec (France). To study the synergetic effect between anionic and nonionic reagents, nonionic reagents such as iso-tridecanol ( For pure mineral flotation tests, sodium oleate and AERO 845 were prepared as an aqueous solution. AERO 6493, D2EHPA and the nonionic reagents were used as ethyl alcohol solutions. Flotation tests using pure minerals were performed in a self-aspirated MINIMET apparatus with a 180 All obtained products were decanted and dried in an oven at 30 Several adsorption studies revealed that the ion involved in anionic reagent adsorption is Ca The Ca mineral IEPs varied widely between 1 and 10.35. In order to determine the pH value at which separation of Ca minerals is feasible, these IEP values were compared. Gypsum, fluorite and calcite may have the same IEP values depending on the zeta potential measurement conditions. During the zeta potential measurement of these semi-soluble salt systems (calcite and fluorite), the carbon dioxide partial pressure must be considered. Without controlling this parameter, the IEP of these two minerals were different due to surface carbonation ( However, apatite can contain many substitutions (cations and anions) in its crystalline system that may be responsible for the variation of its IEP values.  The IEP values of francolite in KCl were pH 2–3. Although the results we obtained for zeta potential measurements were in agreement with the results obtained by Regarding the IEP values of Ca minerals in All tests were performed at pH 8, where francolite global surface charges were theoretically negative and positive or zero for calcite, gypsum and fluorite. Therefore, selective separation of apatite from other Ca minerals may be feasible at neutral pH or pH 8 using anionic reagents such as fatty acids. However, some experimental results revealed that this is not true ( To create separation between these minerals, reagents with different complex stabilities for anionic chelating reagents such as alkyl hydroxamate and the cationic sites of pure minerals ( The synergetic effects of mixed collectors (anionic and nonionic reagents) were studied, and the flotation results are reported in this paper. Several authors have reported the selective flotation of Ca-bearing minerals from silicates using fatty acids as collectors.   The results showed that 80% of calcite, 92% of francolite and 80% of gypsum were directly floated using 10 Using an ionic/nonionic reagent mixture improved the froth stability during the flotation process (  In the presence of nonionic reagents mixed with sodium oleate, the recovery of calcite and francolite was enhanced at pH 8 using 2 Using Calcite and francolite separation is enhanced when using a mixture of sodium oleate and TX-15 at a ratio of 1:1 (2  As shown in The decreased sodium oleate adsorption on the calcite surface does not result in decreased flotation recovery because of the co-adsorption of alcohol molecules. Scheelite surface and sodium oleate adsorption in the presence of a nonionic reagent was enhanced. A more closely packed layer of collectors was formed. The displacement of the stretching band of carboxylate (ν(C The main mechanisms of the enhancement of the ionic reagent adsorption onto mineral surface when a mixture of ionic and nonionic reagents was used can be described as follows ( Other types of collectors, such as alkyl hydroxamate (AERO 6493), di-2-ethylphosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and sulphosuccinamate, have been tested in order to determine the best conditions to separate francolite, calcite and fluorite from gypsum. The synergetic effects of a mixture of these anionic reagents with nonionic reagents were studied to enhance the separation contrast between calcite and francolite. Two of these reagents are chelating reagents. The adsorption selectivity for Ca minerals allows their separation.   It is evident that the calcium complex is the least stable complex, and in this regard, it is unexpected that the hydroxamate is so efficient for flotation of Ca minerals such as calcite, fluorite and francolite. However, the selectivity of this reagent is achieved by making use of differences in stability constants, chelate formation under various solutions conditions and, the most important factor here, mineral solubility ( The calcite and gypsum solubility products were, respectively 4.0 The adsorption of chelating reagents depends also on the arrangement of cationic sites on Ca minerals surfaces. The more highly organised the cationic site of Ca minerals is, the more the anionic reagents are adsorbed and the more Ca minerals are recovered by flotation ( Fluorite has a cubic lattice in which Ca The gypsum flotation response can be explained by the fact that the density of Ca   Several types of separation can be seen in Two of them yielded complete separation of fluorite and the other Ca minerals through 10 The most important conclusion of this study concerns the possibility of francolite and calcite separation using a mixture of AERO 6493 and a nonionic reagent ( Using a mixture of nonionic reagents and hydroxamic acid (e.g., The addition of 5 The consumption of AERO 6493 was decreased 2-fold using Some adsorption studies must be performed to understand the role of the nonionic reagent on AERO 6493 adsorption and enhancement or reduction of the flotation recoveries of Ca minerals. D2EHPA (di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid) is usually used to extract transition metal ions such as rare earth elements ( Eq. There is no literature concerning Ca mineral flotation with D2EHPA. Few authors have described the possibility of iron oxide flotation with this type of reagent at pH 4.5 with 200 According to As described for alkyl hydroxamate, the stability of such complexes with transition metals may be stronger than with alkaline earth elements such as Ca depending on the pH ( The adsorption mechanism of D2EHPA onto Ca minerals surfaces is not known. Some adsorptions tests must be performed in the future. Two types of separation are shown in The synergetic effect of a D2EHPA and  The combination of The separation of calcite and francolite was not complete in a mixture of 15 The lack of effect of a nonionic reagent such as These results indicate that the main mechanism of non-ionic reagent adsorption at the mineral surface in the presence of ionic reagents is related to lateral interactions between hydrocarbon chains. However, an enhancement of hydrophobic effect is only observed if low polarity nonionic reagents adsorb via hydrogen bonding of the hydroxyl group with Ca species on the mineral surface to yield the same orientation of carbon chains as the main collector. In fact, it is possible from However, using a mixture of D2EHPA and TX-15 as nonionic reagents, calcite, francolite and gypsum were not floated. Thus, using a mixture of anionic and nonionic reagents has different effects on Ca mineral flotation behaviour, which may be dependent on the type of nonionic reagent. Further adsorption studies with these mixtures must be performed to elucidate the adsorption mechanism of D2EHPA on Ca minerals and to understand the effects of different types of nonionic reagents on D2EHPA adsorption onto Ca mineral surfaces. Sulphosuccinamate is often used to beneficiate iron-bearing minerals or transition metal element with minerals such as cassiterite, hematite, galena, cerusite, anglesite, sphalerite, and chalcocite ( Given the properties of the Ca  An interesting separation of calcite and other minerals at pH values near 4 has been demonstrated. Despite the fact calcite begins to dissolve itself at pH values below 4, the p In these conditions, separation of calcite and francolite was demonstrated at pH near 5 for a collector concentration of 100  The results corroborate those obtained by In terms of flotation kinetics, The following three types of Ca mineral separation were discussed in this paper: separation of gypsum from other Ca minerals, separation of fluorite from other Ca minerals and enhanced separation of Ca minerals from each other, such as calcite from francolite, by mixing anionic and nonionic reagents. Selective separation of gypsum from calcite, francolite and fluorite was established using different types of anionic reagents individually at pH 8 (100 The synergetic effect of a mixed collector system (sodium oleate and nonionic reagent) on selectivity was elucidated by flotation data on gypsum. The main effect of the combination of a nonionic reagent such as Fluorite can be easily separated from the other Ca minerals without a depressant using a low concentration of sulphosuccinamate, hydroxamate or di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid. A synergetic effect has been shown in these conditions. Adding 5 Separating francolite from calcite or the reverse is difficult without any depressants. At pH between 4 and 5, sulphosuccinamate allowed the separation of francolite from calcite without any depressant or nonionic reagent. The most important conclusion of this study concerns the possibility of francolite and calcite separation using 50 A synergetic effect of mixing different types of anionic reagents such as AERO 6493 and D2EHPA and a nonionic reagent has been shown in the flotation data on francolite and calcite. In the presence of a mixture of reagents, the separation contrast between these two Ca minerals was significantly enhanced at pH 8. The adsorption mechanisms of mixed reagent with chelating reagents are not well understood or studied. Some adsorption tests must be performed to understand these mechanisms. The main mechanisms of adsorption when a mixture of sodium oleate and nonionic reagents was used can be described as follows: Adsorption of ionic surfactants is enhanced by the presence of nonionic surfactants due to hydrophobic chain interactions and the reduction of electrostatic repulsion between ionic head groups that are shielded from each other by the nonionic surfactant molecules, Interaction of low-polarity nonionic reagents by hydrogen bonding of the hydroxyl group with Ca species on the mineral surface, modifying the structure of the adsorbed layer.