Leaching of celestite (SrSO4) in hydrochloric acid solution with BaCl2 was investigated to produce SrCl2 in solution, which is the main source for SrCO3. The effects of variables such as stirring speed, BaCl2 and HCl concentrations, and temperature and particle size, and also the presence of NaCl in the leaching solution were studied. The leaching was modeled according to the shrinking core model. The activation energy for the leaching process in 8.25×10−3 M BaCl2 solution equilibrated with 0.5 M HCl was found as 68.8 kJ mol−1. This value reveals that the dissolution of celestite is a chemical reaction controlled process. In agreement with the model, the reaction rate is inversely proportional to the particle size and increases as 0.73, 0.70 and 0.19 powers of the H+, Cl− and Ba2+ concentrations, respectively.Majority of the artificially produced strontium carbonate (SrCO There are two different SrCO Because of the problems either originated from the content and grade of celestite concentrate or the problems occurred during the conversion of celestite to SrS in the black ash process or to SrCO In this present study, an attempt was made to convert the celestite directly to soluble SrCl In this study, samples of the celestite concentrate purchased from Barit Maden Türk A.Ş. Concentrator (Sivas, Turkey) were used. The samples were wet sieved to obtain 106 A Pyrex beaker of 1 L was used as a leaching reactor with a rubber cover. Temperature of the leach solution in the reactor was provided by a thermostatically controlled water bath with ± Distilled water and reagent grade chemicals were used to make up all required solutions. Each experiment was repeated at least three times and the arithmetic mean of the results was used in the discussion of experimental results. When celestite is introduced into an aqueous solution, dissolution occurs with the formation of Sr Preliminary experiments showed that during the leaching of celestite in barium chloride solution at high acidic conditions (pH These experiments also confirmed that the pH of the solution kept constant at pH 0.7 throughout the leach as expected. From this point of view, H The effect of stirring speed on the dissolution of celestite was investigated at different stirring rates from 100 to 600 min  The effect of HCl concentration on the celestite dissolution was investigated by varying the HCl concentration in the 0.05–0.75 M range in 8.25 Experiments were conducted to determine the effect of temperature on the dissolution of celestite in the temperature range of 40–80 °C, using 0.5 M HCl and 8.25 The rapid decrease in the dissolution rates observed during leaching at 70 and 80 °C after 60 min is not surprising as only 75% of the required amount of Ba Effect of particle size was investigated by using the particle size ranges of 106 There are many reports on the solubility of sulfate minerals like gypsum, barite and celestite in NaCl solutions. Nearly all of these studies have investigated the thermodynamics of those scale forming minerals in oil and gas production. The effects of temperature, pressure and, ideal and non-ideal solutions have been analyzed ( The dissolution of celestite can be explained by a shrinking core model. Hence, diffusion and surface reaction control models were investigated. If reaction is controlled by diffusion the following equation can be used ( Where Eq. Eqs. The activation energy was calculated as 68.8 kJ mol In order to decide the specific effect of H Leaching of celestite in hydrochloric acid solution in the presence of BaCl This study was supported by The Research Foundation of Selçuk University under Project No. BAP-2004/098.