The speciation in solution of a number of metallurgically important iron-bearing systems are calculated from critically reviewed data. In acidic solution, Fe2+ and Fe3+ are the predominant iron species, although ferric ion hydrolyses to Fe(OH)2
                     + above pH 2. For sulphate and arsenate, HSO4
                     − and H3AsO4 predominate up to pH ∼2 where deprotonation occurs and sulphate and dihydrogen arsenate ions become predominant. For arsenite, the major species is H3AsO3 for all acidic pH. In ferric systems where complexing anions are present, the situation is somewhat different, although all systems are substantially dependent upon the concentration of the anions. In the presence of arsenate and sulphate, ferric ion readily complexes to form charged anions, arsenate complexes being more favourable than sulphate in mixed solutions. Chloride plays only a minor role with complexation only occurring at concentrations close to unity. The importance of the solution speciation is discussed with reference to both leaching of iron minerals and in oxidative leaching using ferric ions.The quantity of metal sulphide ores being processed is increasing rapidly as more amenable ores become less abundant. In Australia, many large open-pit gold mines are now starting to reach the gold-bearing sulphides below the oxidised zone. The newer methods of processing sulphide ores including pressure oxidation and bacterial oxidation have been increasing in importance over the past few years. The older method of roasting is environmentally sensitive as the roasting step produces SO The two main sulphides present in gold-bearing ores are pyrite (FeS This paper examines the solution speciation in aqueous solutions containing Fe In this paper, no distinction between concentration and activity is made and a direct conversion between the two is made in some places to give a feel for the approximate solution concentration. Thermodynamic calculations are made using activities and although this distinction is not important at low concentrations (<1 mM) it becomes important as the concentration increases and ionic interactions occur. Under these circumstances, the fraction of ions, which are available for interaction with other species, is less than unity and this fraction is called the activity coefficient. For example 0.5 M NaCl has an activity coefficient of 0.681 The technique used to determine the speciation-pH diagrams will be illustrated using the ferric–water system as an example. There are five aqueous ferric species which can be present within the system: Fe In the system, the total soluble ferric species concentration is given by: Identical equations can be formulated for both arsenate and sulphate systems using the most protonated form (i.e., H Reversible potentials can be derived for the redox couples present within the various systems by considering half cell reactions. For an electrochemical process, the Nernst equation The thermodynamic data used here for iron are primarily derived from the NBS compilation Although there has been considerable thermodynamic data produced for individual compounds and species, it is often difficult to determine which basic data set was used in the calculations and normalisation cannot be made with confidence. It is unlikely that there has been a substantial change in the free energy for any of the compounds considered here. It should be noted that only species for which data were available can be considered and the absence of data does not necessarily mean that a solution species does not exist. This problem is greatest for the arsenical system where little work has been undertaken in comparison with sulphate or chloride systems and further work is needed to confirm the findings. Therefore, the calculations and consequent interpretation should be made bearing this in mind. The speciation diagram for ferrous is shown in The speciation diagram for ferric as derived from The major sulphate species under acid leaching conditions is HSO There is some disagreement over the speciation of arsenite in solution. The most often cited species are HAsO The near-unity values of For arsenious acid, the calculated value of p The arsenate system is the subject of some disagreement. The speciation of the arsenate system, shown in Ferric ions are very commonly used as an oxidant in metallurgical systems and ferric speciation is of major importance. In uncomplexed systems, the standard potential of the ferric/ferrous couple is +0.770 V, complexation of the iron can be expected to change the standard potential making the iron either less or more oxidising. Two different diagrams can be obtained in these calculations, which have two variables — pH and ligand concentration of which either can be fixed to determine the importance of the other. Since most metallurgical leaching systems are run at low pH it makes more sense to vary the ligand concentration at a fixed pH. Equally, for subsequent precipitation processes varying the pH at a fixed ligand concentration is more appropriate, this has been addressed elsewhere Ferrous forms a neutral complex with chloride ions, FeCl Only a single ferrous sulphate complex has been described: neutral FeSO Although naturally occurring solid compounds with ferrous and both arsenite and arsenate have been reported The addition of chloride to the iron system can be made by considering the following species FeCl The speciation with increasing chloride concentration at pH 1 is shown in Similar calculations incorporating the ferric–sulphate complexes FeSO As for the ferrous–arsenite system, there is no evidence in the literature of complexation between ferric and arsenite, although there are reports Ferric will, theoretically, oxidise arsenite to arsenate and this may explain the absence of a solution complex, however an analogous situation occurs for ferric and thiocyanate and a complex has been reported as forming prior to reaction Ferric reacts with arsenate at 298 K to form a series of complex ions   There are surprisingly few instances where iron-bearing minerals are leached to recover metal. Numerous examples are available where leaching occurs but, in general, these are to remove impurity iron from a more valuable product (e.g., silica sand In general: The starting pH for acid leaching of iron is typically <2 to prevent precipitation of iron. The decreasing pH is predicted to have some effect on the speciation of iron in sulphate and arsenate containing solutions. The change in the arsenate system is relatively minor with an increase in the protonation of the complex ions predicted with decreasing pH. However, this leads to a decrease in the oxidising power of the ferric in solution. For the sulphate system a more important change occurs with a reduction in the number of sulphate ions complexed with ferric from two to one, For all metal sulphides, it is accepted that there are two major sulphur products, elemental sulphur and sulphate, with the fraction of sulphur reporting as sulphate increasing with the oxidation potential Arsenic also reports in one of two oxidation states (III) or (V): of these, the trivalent state is the more toxic and more soluble form. The relative abundance of arsenite and arsenate formed during leaching seems to be a function of both the oxidising potential The lower oxidising potential generated by ferric, compared with dissolved oxygen, leads to a larger fraction of elemental sulphur forming Ferric can also act as an oxidant for metal sulphides For batch processes, sufficient ferric is added to complete the oxidation process, hence the complexation of the ferric is important for the rate of reaction and the nature of the products. In sulphate solution, the sulphate concentration is always greater than ferric as Fe In continuous processing, it is important to maintain a high ratio of ferric to ferrous. This can be achieved by increasing the partial pressure of oxygen above the solution, agitation and aeration of the solution, by the presence of bacteria, which derive energy from oxidising ferrous to ferric or by electrolytic oxidation. Biooxidation is becoming an increasingly important sulphide processing option having been proven to be economical as a gold recovery pretreatment step Electrolytic oxidation is a less common approach with both ferric Speciation calculations have been made for a series of systems of metallurgical importance, including ferrous, ferric, arsenite, arsenate and sulphate. All of these systems showed changes in speciation with the metals becoming increasingly hydroxylated and the anions deprotonated as pH increased. Where reliable complexation data was available, calculations were made for mixtures of these systems and for chloride systems to account for saline conditions. There was predicted to be little effect of either chloride or sulphate on the speciation of ferrous until the ligand concentration was greater than unity. For ferric systems there is a much greater extent of complexation with >10% of total ferric complexed at a concentration of 0.4×10 This paper has been the product of research and calculations performed at several different institutions over a number of years by the authors. These institutions were the Royal School of Mines, Imperial College, London, UK; Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy, Perth, Australia; Murdoch University, Perth, Australia; Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia and Anaconda Nickel, Perth, Australia. All of these institutions and companies must be thanked for providing the facilities during the periods spent there by one, or more, of the authors.