Porous carbon was prepared by carbonization from agro-waste such as rice husk and barley straw to evaluate the adsorption of precious and base metals from metal solutions. The effects of hydrochloric acid concentration, metal ion concentration, and contact time on adsorption were examined. Rice husk carbon was found to be highly selective for Au(III) and inert to Pt(IV), Pd(II) and other base metals. Barley straw carbon adsorbed these three precious metal ions, but was inert to base metal ions such as Cu(II), Fe(III) and Ni(II). The maximum adsorption capacity of rice husk carbon for Au(III) was 0.76mol/kg and the maximum adsorption capacity of barley straw carbon for Au(III), Pt(IV) and Pd(II) was 1.47, 0.39 and 0.64mol/kg, respectively. The effectiveness of recovery of precious metals from industrial solution was also tested and barley straw carbon was found to be highly efficient and selective for the targeted metal ions in the presence of excess of other metal ions. Rice husk and barley straw carbon are thus potential alternatives to commercially available activated carbon as they have high selectivity and are efficient with low production costs.Precious metals are used extensively in jewelry, electronics, electroplating and medicine ( The recovery of precious metals from secondary sources usually requires their separation from other metals. Classical lixiviation processes with aqua regia produce solutions containing chloro-complexes of precious metals and base metals ( Modern lixiviation processes use hydrochloric acid containing chlorine gas instead of aqua regia. The chlorine gas oxidizes gold according to Eq. Activated carbon has been the preferred adsorbent for many years in the gold recovery process due to its high adsorption capacity, high adsorption rate and good resistance to abrasion ( Rice husk and barley straw are currently not fully utilized and are discharged as waste, but can possibly be used as an alternative precursor for porous carbon. The aim of this study is to prepare low cost carbon from these wastes to replace expensive, commercially available adsorbents for the recovery of precious metals. Rice husk and barley straw harvested in Saga prefecture, Japan, were used as feed materials for preparing porous carbon. A single-step carbonization method was used to obtain porous carbon. Rice husk, and barley straw were separately ground in an alumina vibration mill. The resulting samples were then put in an alumina crucible with an alumina cover. This crucible was put in a larger alumina crucible and covered with graphite powder and capped with an alumina cover in order to prevent oxidation. The crucible set was put into a furnace with a heating rate of 5 Batchwise adsorption behavior tests of porous carbon for metal ions at different concentrations of hydrochloric acid were done. Individual metal solutions (0.2 The adsorption isotherm experiment was conducted by mixing 15 The effect of adsorbent dose on adsorption of precious metal ion from industrial solution was studied by adding 15 The concentrations of metal ions before and after adsorption were measured by a Shimadzu model ICPS-8100 ICP/AES spectrometer. The % adsorption and metal uptake capacity, Thermogravimetric analysis was performed on the carbon materials before and after adsorption of gold using a Seiko Instruments model TG/DTA 6300 thermogravimeter. About 5   The high selectivity of barley straw and rice husk carbon to precious metal ions over other base metal ions in acidic solution is due to its positively charged surface as it adsorbs negatively charged species by electrostatic attraction. Since other base metal ions coexist in solution, partly in the form of cationic species, they can not adsorb onto the carbon surface because of their similar electronic charges. Adsorption tests were also carried out on commercially available activated carbon for comparison. Adsorption isotherm tests were carried out on rice husk carbon for Au(III) with 1 Consequently, the adsorption isotherm data was fitted with the following Langmuir equation  These results show that rice husk carbon is highly selective for Au(III) ion with an adsorption capacity of 0.76 The adsorption kinetics of Au(III) on porous carbon was studied using a 1  As mentioned earlier, adsorbed precious metals can be easily recovered by simply burning the metal-loaded carbon materials. This study shows that rice husk carbon is highly selective for Au(III), and that barley straw carbon is highly selective for Au(III) and other precious metals over various base metals. The adsorption of Au(III) on both adsorbents is nearly independent of hydrochloric acid concentration, which is advantageous in practical applications. The very fast metal ion adsorption rate of barley straw carbon is an additional advantage. The enhanced adsorption capacity as a result of Au(III) to Au(0) reduction, high selectivity and very fast adsorption rate for carbons generated from discarded agro-waste can make rice husk carbon and barley straw carbon a promising alternative adsorbent for precious metals and Au(III) recovery from industrial waste using chloride solution.