This work proposes a new procedure for on-line electro-oxidative leaching and spectrophotometric determination of uranium in ore samples. By associating a conventional flow injection system, used for uranium determination with Arsenazo III, with an on-line system for electro-oxidative leaching, a fully integrated system was assembled. The systems were integrated after achieving optimum conditions for uranium determination and leaching. According to the results obtained in the present work, a current density of 280mAcm−2 generated enough hypochlorite ions in the electrolyte solution (3.6molL−1 HCl+2% (w/v) NaCl) to promote quantitative oxidation of U(IV) to U(VI) thus improving the extraction efficiency. The slurry density did not significantly affect the performance of the system and the increasing temperature resulted in a decrease in extraction efficiency. This methodology was applied in the determination of U3O8 in four ore samples and the results obtained agreed with those obtained by ICP-MS after conventional wet acid digestion of the samples.The Brazilian energetic matrix is mainly focused on the exploration of the hydrological potential of the country. However, due to the increasing demand for energy, research has been increased, particularly, in the nuclear energy field. In this context, the research of uranium deposits in geological materials can be assumed as equal importance to that of the environmental issues following energy generation via nuclear reactors. Several analytical techniques like alpha spectrometry The determination of metallic components in rocks, sediments, soils or minerals is usually carried out after conventional dissolution/digestion of samples. In general, this procedure is very inefficient and slow and requires much attention from the analyst. According to Oliveira Hydrometallurgy is a method widely used for treating industrial effluents from mining and to recover chemical species from the liquid phase The employment of electro-dissolution technique for sample treatment in analytical procedures shows some advantages over conventional dissolution/digestion procedures such as the use of diluted reagents and low requirements in terms of energy and time. All these characteristics make the electro-dissolution technique a cheap, quick and safe process. On the other hand, a stringent control of operational conditions is required in order to avoid errors during analysis. Conclusively, the electro-oxidative technique can replace flow injection analysis due to the benefits: simplicity, low operational cost, versatility, high sampling frequency and inherent repeatability. Ultimately, little research is found today to help support this conclusion Differently of metallic samples, minerals and ores are characterized by their low conductivity and high heterogeneity. Therefore, different sample pretreatment as milling and homogenization are necessary before analysis in order to ensure that representative laboratory sub-samples are obtained Electro-dissolution via direct application of electrical current over sample, which is an approach commonly employed in the analysis of metallic samples, is not possible for minerals and ores. In this case, the analyte removal from sample should be carried out by an indirect way. Electro-oxidative technique consists in the electrochemical generation of new species in the medium (typically an electrolytic solution) that will act directly on analyte leaching or will create proper conditions for the sample decomposition. During this process, electrolyte current modifications can also act on the sample, improving galvanic interactions The main goal of this work was to build up an integrated flow injection system for the on-line leaching and determination of uranium in geological samples like uranium ores. Secondly, the research was focused on the designing and construction of a cell for the on-line electro-oxidative leaching of uranium from geological materials. In order to achieve these objectives, several physical and chemical parameters that could affect sample electro-oxidative leaching and uranium determination were evaluated. The FIA system for analyte determination, which explored the well known reaction between U(IV) and Arsenazo III, was optimized in relation to chemical and hydrodynamic variables and the electro-oxidative cell performance was critically investigated through evaluation of the influence of some parameters such as applied current density, leaching time, temperature and electrolyte concentration and nature. Finally, both systems were integrated and successfully applied in the determination of uranium in four reference materials of pitchblende, torbenite and uraninite. ICP-MS measurements were performed with a spectrometer Elan A Rigaku (Osaka, Japan), model B3, wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (WDXRF) was used to analyze the remaining residues of pitchblende sample after electro-oxidative leaching process. The spectrometer was equipped with a silver anode, an X-ray tube operated at 40 FIA system for uranium determination ( The on-line electro-oxidative leaching system ( The FIA system for uranium electro-oxidative leaching and determination ( All solutions were prepared using tri-distilled water and analytical grade reagents that were used without further purification. When necessary, solutions were filtered with cellulose acetate units with 0.22 The uranium stock solution (500 A 3.6 A 1.0 A 3.6 Concentrated HCl, HNO A mini-column (2 All four reference samples analyzed in this work were obtained from IAEA (International Agency for Atomic Energy). The samples were pitchblendes (OIAE-S13 and OIAE-8), torbenite (S4) and uraninite (S1) with reference values of U The development of the integrated flow injection system for uranium leaching and determination was divided in three steps: (i) optimization of the flow injection system for uranium quantitative determination; (ii) evaluation of the on-line electro-oxidative leaching process with a system for this purpose and (iii) the construction and application of an integrated flow analysis system for electro-oxidative leaching and uranium determination in ore (pitchblende, uraninite and torbenite) samples. The flow injection analysis system for uranium determination was assembled to explore the well known colorimetric reaction between U(IV) and Arsenazo III in acidic medium After designing and mounting the flow system shown in Employing the conditions expressed in In the interference study, Th(IV), Ti(III) and Zr(IV) were the most important interferents. The presence of Th(IV) at 0.1 After establishing uranium quantification strategy using the FIA system, the subsequent step of the work was to optimize operational conditions for analyte electro-oxidative leaching from samples. An electrochemical cell was built up in the laboratory for this purpose ( The scheme of the electro-oxidative leaching is depicted in Electro-oxidative leaching process explored in this work was based on the electrochemical generation of a suitable specie inside the cell that was able to convert poor water soluble U(IV) (as UO Taking into account these processes, two parameters were evaluated in the first experiment: (i) density of the applied current, which is directly responsible for Cl After finishing the electrochemical assisted leaching process, the slurries obtained in each experiment were filtered and the solid residues were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence. A strong decrease of the peaks related to uranium oxides (together with peaks of Fe and As) was noted, evidencing that uranium was leached from solid to liquid phase. Following the optimization sequence, the influence of temperature on electro-oxidative leaching was investigated. For this task, the leaching process was carried out at different temperatures (20–40 In general, the increase of the ratio mass of sample/volume of electrolyte solution can cause some difficulties in the electro-oxidative process such as the creation of worst stirring conditions and the necessity of the use of more concentrated reagents. Moreover, at high ratios a smaller reactive area is observed in the solid phase, which reduces the contact time between sample particles and the oxidizing species generated inside the cell The influence of the nature of the electrolyte solution was also studied. This study was carried out taking into consideration two aspects: (1) the HCl concentration in the electrolyte solution and (2) the possible addition of NaCl to the medium in order to accelerate Cl As mentioned before, one of the objectives of this work was to develop a fully integrated system for the on-line electro-oxidative leaching and determination of uranium in geological samples. In view of this objective and of the results obtained previously, the subsequent step of the work was to integrate the FIA system optimized for spectrophotometric uranium determination and the on-line system for electro-oxidative leaching. This task was performed by adjusting the manifold to allow direct filling of the loop of the injection unit with leachate. The system was modified by replacing valve 1 (V1) by a home-made proportional commutator (PrC) injector with two sections In this mode of operation, treated samples (leachate) and U(VI) standard solutions were simultaneously injected into two carrier lines as shown in In the integrated system, determinations were carried out by weighing 6–15 Evaluation of the accuracy of the integrated flow system was carried out by employing it in the determination of U Combination of flow injection analysis with electro-oxidative leaching technique provided a new methodology for the chemical extraction of uranium from geological samples, which allowed the construction of an integrated flow system for leaching and spectrophotometric determination of uranium in ores. This integrated flow system provided a quick, safe and reproducible determination of uranium in ore samples. It also eliminated the necessity of a previous digestion of samples by conventional wet acid dissolution, which is a time-consuming and laborious procedure. Analysis of the solid residues from electro-oxidative leaching, by X-ray fluorescence, demonstrated that this approach can be useful for the determination of other analytes than uranium in this kind of sample. Therefore, the coupling of electro-oxidative leaching unit to multi-elemental analytical techniques like ICP OES or ICP-MS can further provide good results in the simultaneous determination of several analytes in geological samples like ores. Results obtained by proposed methodology for uranium determination in four ore samples agreed well with those obtained by ICP-MS after total digestion of samples, indicating that the proposed system can be considered a cheaper alternative for the determination of uranium in ores. The authors are grateful to CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico) and CNEN (Comissão Nacional de Energia Nuclear) for providing grants and fellowships and for financial support.