Structural applications of monolithic icosahedral phase (I-phase) materials have been limited by the brittleness of I-phases. Composite material design, including a ductile phase, can be a solution for the structural applications of the I-phase materials. Two phase microstructures, including thermodynamically stable I-phase, are studied in the Mg-rich corner of the alloy system Mg–Zn–Y. An (I-phase+α-Mg) eutectic microstructure is reported for the first time in the as-cast samples. By controlling thermal processing procedures, a very different (I-phase+α-Mg) microstructure from the eutectic microstructure can be developed, expanding the microstructural options available for the structural composite materials, comprising the I-phase and α-Mg solid solution.Icosahedral phases (I-phases) that have quasiperiodic atomic structure have been reported in many alloy systems In the Mg–Zn–Y system, thermodynamically stable I-phase exist, having the stoichiometry of about Mg In this study, we investigate the phases equilibrating with the I-phase in the Mg-rich corner of the Mg–Zn–Y system. The microstructures, including the I-phase, a ductile phase and α-Mg solid solution, are explored for the development of in-situ composites. The existence of the (I-phase+α-Mg) two-phase field in the alloy system Mg–Zn–Y provides an opportunity to develop structural composite materials. A master alloy, Mg Constituent phases were identified by X-ray diffraction (Rigaku CN2301) using monochromatic CuK The nominal compositions of the alloys are shown in the partial Mg–Zn–Y ternary phase diagram ( The addition of a small amount of Y into the binary alloy Mg The existence of the eutectic microstructure including α-Mg and I-phase implies that the (I-phase+α-Mg) two phase field should exist in the Mg–Zn–Y ternary alloy system. In a ternary eutectic microstructure, three phases exist unless the eutectic microstructure is developed by a pseudobinary eutectic reaction. In the eutectic microstructure shown in However, in the alloy Mg A very different (I-phase+α-Mg) microstructure from the eutectic microstructure can be obtained by rapid quenching from liquid state and subsequent heat treatment. In the rapidly quenched ribbon of the alloy Mg Since the properties of multiphase materials can be effectively optimized by microstructural control of the materials, the definition of multiphase microstructure of an alloy that can be controlled by thermal processing is technologically important. The development of two distinctive (I-phase+α-Mg) microstructures, a eutectic and an equiaxed microstructure, expands the microstructural options available for (I-phase+α-Mg) two-phase materials. In the Mg-rich corner of the alloy system Mg–Zn–Y, the addition of a small amount of Y to the binary alloy Mg A eutectic microstructure involving the α-Mg solid solution and the I-phase is developed between the α-Mg or the I-phase primary dendrites, implying the existence of the (I-phase+α-Mg) two-phase field in the Mg–Zn–Y ternary system. Through rapid quenching from liquid and subsequent heat treatment, an (I-phase+α-Mg) two-phase structure that has equiaxed α-Mg grains enveloped in fine I-phase grains can be produced. Development of these two distinctive (I-phase+α-Mg) microstructures expands the microstructural options available for structural composite materials. This work is supported by Creative Research Initiatives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.