Polysaccharide reagents are frequently used in the mineral processing industry to improve the grade of the concentrate by depressing the naturally floatable gangue. A microflotation study showed that at an ionic strength of 10−3 M KNO3, the dosage, molecular weight, and chemical composition of polysaccharide depressants affect their depressing action on talc. Viscosity readings for four carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) reagents and three modified guar gum reagents are reported, and estimates of the molecular weight of the CMCs are calculated. The natural floatability of talc was diminished when guar-based polymers were added to the system. Moreover, the depression of talc was increased as the guar molecular weight was increased. Strong depression of talc was achieved at a relatively low guar dosage; higher dosages did not further increase this depression. At 10−3 M KNO3, the CMCs were ineffective depressants of talc. No systematic change in talc depression for differing molecular weight CMCs was observed. A small increase in depression was observed when the concentration of CMC was increased. A mechanism is proposed for the polymer–talc interactions based on these preliminary studies and information from similar studies in literature.Talc is a significant constituent of the gangue in the platinum-bearing ore bodies of South Africa. Flotation is the predominant process used to beneficiate valuable minerals from gangue. However, talc, a layer silicate with a unit structure of Mg In many flotation plants, the cost of depressants can exceed the cost of any other reagent. However, relatively little is known about the effects of chemical composition, molecular weight and polymer dosage on their depressing action on talc. The depressants used to reduce the floatability of talc vary considerably with regard to charge, molecular weight, chemical composition and molecular structure. In this investigation, two different types of polysaccharide depressants — CMC and modified guar gum — with a range of molecular weights have been compared with respect to their depressing behaviour on the natural floatability of talc. Natural talc from Scotia Mine (Barberton, South Africa) was wet-screened into the size fractions +38–45 μm, +45–53 μm, +53–75 μm, +75–106 μm and +106–150 μm. Repeated ultrasounding and decantation was used to eliminate ultrafines. An XRD analysis on the talc showed that the only major impurity in the sample was magnesite. XRF analyses of the size fractions +38–45 μm, +45–53 μm, +53–75 μm, +75–106 μm and +106–150 μm showed no variation in the silicon–magnesium peak ratios with talc size. This implies that the magnesite is firmly embedded in the talc structure and is not liberated by grinding. The talc size fraction +75–106 μm was split into 20 g portions and used for microflotation tests. The B.E.T. nitrogen-specific surface area of the talc in the size fraction +75–106 μm was found to be 1.51 m The CMC depressants used were FF10, FF30, FF150 and FF300, provided by Trohall. The abbreviation FF indicates that they belong to the Finnfix reagent series. The numbers indicate the relative viscosity of the reagents, which increase in the order FF10<FF30<FF150<FF300. For the CMCs used, the average number of glucose hydroxyl groups substituted by CH The guar depressants used in this study were SM4060, IMP4 and SM4560. These were also provided by Trohall and belong to the Acrol reagent series. The viscosity of the reagents increases in order SM4060<IMP4<SM4560. For the guars used, the average number of glucose hydroxyl groups anionically substituted is 0.1 (degree of substitution). This indicates that these guars have a very low charge. The solid polymer samples were dried overnight in the oven at a temperature between 60°C and 80°C and cooled in a vacuum dessicator in order to remove excess moisture. The polymer solutions were prepared by weighing out a 4 g portion of polymer and adding this slowly to an agitated vessel containing deionised water. The solutions were stirred for 30 min. The solution was made up to the required volume by adding deionised water and left to equilibrate overnight. Fresh solutions were prepared every 4 days. When required, analytical grade potassium nitrate (KNO Analytical grade sodium hydroxide (NaOH) was used to adjust the pH to 9. Deionised water was used in all tests. A Brookfield digital viscometer (model LVTDV-II) was used to measure the viscosity of the polymer solutions. The viscosity of each polymer was measured at various concentrations ranging from 0.2% to 5.0% by mass at two different ionic strengths (10 Microflotation experiments were carried out using the U.C.T. flow-through microflotation cell ( The following conditioning procedure was used for all microflotation tests. Two grams of talc, suspended in 50 ml deionised water was treated with ultrasound for 5 min. The sample was then placed in a conditioning beaker and the level was raised to 250 ml with a polymer solution at the required concentration at pH 9. This suspension was conditioned for 20 min. After conditioning, the pulp was then transferred to the microflotation cell and the cell was filled to the top with the polymer solution at the given concentration at pH 9. During flotation, when the solution was drained from the launder of the cell to remove the concentrate, fresh polymer solution of the same concentration as that specified for the talc–depressant system, was used to refill this section of the cell. Concentrates, taken between 30 s and 10 min, were dried overnight and weighed. The results are expressed as the cumulative mass percent of talc floated. It was found that in cases when the polymer concentration in solution was diluted during the microflotation test by adding deionised water to the launder instead of polymer solution, the flotation results of the talc were significantly different with respect to the guar, and fairly similar with respect to the CMC. The viscosity of a polymer is indicative of the hydrodynamic volume that the polymer occupies in solution. The relation between viscosity and polymer solution concentration used in viscosity analysis is given by the Einstein equation ( The term on the left-hand side of the above equation is known as the reduced viscosity ( This intrinsic viscosity can be related to the average molecular weight of a polydisperse polymer by the Mark–Houwink–Sakurada equation ( When a mass average molecular weight ( Therefore, for a given series of polymers in a given solvent, one can deduce that a polymer with a high intrinsic viscosity has a larger molecular weight than one with a low intrinsic viscosity.  The reduced viscosity curves of the guars are not significantly affected by salt concentration. Apparently, an increase in the salt concentration from 10 The manner in which the plot of   Similar to the guars, the intermolecular interactions of the CMCs increase with increasing molecular weight. Moreover, the slopes of the curves at high KNO The constants The flotation results are plotted in The guars achieved a strong depressing action at low dosages (<20 mg/l); however, at higher dosages, no further increase in depression was observed. This indicates that a maximum surface area coverage of the guar on the talc was achieved at 20 mg/l. This result is consistent with findings by CMCs, on the other hand, showed poor depressing ability under the same solution conditions (solid symbols in Adsorption results reported by   The increased depression with molecular weight exhibited by the guars could be due to the fact that, in general, a longer chain length leads to more adsorption and a thicker adsorbed layer at the same polymer concentration due to the extension of the tails with increasing concentration. The low depressing action of the CMCs could be indicative of low adsorption onto the talc and a flat conformation when adsorbed onto the planes. From the results of this investigation the following conclusions can be drawn: The average molecular weights of the modified guar depressants increases in the order SM4060<IMP4<SM4560. The average molecular weights of the CMC polymers increases in the order FF10<FF30<FF150<FF300. The ionic strength of the system has a large effect on the viscosity characteristics of the CMC polymers, but it has no effect on the viscosity characteristics of the guars. Under the conditions of the system, guars were much more effective depressants of talc than the CMC samples tested when a salt concentration of 10 As the molecular weight of the guars increased, their depressing ability on talc increased. Increasing the molecular weight of the CMC did not have a decisive effect on the depression of the talc.