Microbial cultures were evaluated for organic acid production and their potential utility for leaching of rare earth elements (REE) from retorted phosphor powder (RPP) and spent fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) catalyst. Two bacterial and one fungal strain were isolated from environmental and industrial materials known to contain REE and compared to the industrially important bacterium Gluconobacter oxydans. Gluconic acid was the predominant organic acid product identified in all of the cultures. Maximum REE leaching (49% of the total REE) from the FCC material was observed using cell-free culture supernatants of G. oxydans, with preferential recovery of lanthanum over cerium. The phosphor powder was more difficult to leach; only about 2% of the total REE was leached with G. oxydans. Leaching experiments with the RPP material indicated that the extent of REE solubilization was similar whether whole cell cultures or cell-free supernatants were used. Abiotic control experiments showed that increasing gluconic acid concentrations increased leaching efficiency; for example, total REE leaching from FCC catalyst increased from 24% to 45% when gluconic acid was increased from 10mM to 90mM. However, G. oxydans cell-free culture supernatants containing 10–15mM gluconic acid were more effective than abiotically prepared leaching solutions with higher gluconic acid concentrations, suggesting that other exudate components were important too. Our results indicate that microorganisms producing gluconic and other organic acids can induce effective leaching of REE from waste materials, and that increasing organic acid production will improve recovery.The recovery of rare earth elements (REE) from recyclable materials is an important component of the United States strategy for addressing anticipated future shortages of metals critical for our modern technological society ( Waste streams that represent targets for REE recycling include permanent magnets, nickel metal-hydride batteries, and lamp phosphors ( To recover REE from solid materials (ores or wastes), physicochemical or biological processes may be employed. Conventional physicochemical methods for REE extraction and separation include dissolution, electrochemical technologies, fractional crystallization, ion exchange, and solvent extraction ( Most REE-containing recycling feedstocks do not contain sulfidic material, and bioleaching by heterotrophic organisms producing organic acids presents an alternative approach. These organisms require organic carbon substrates to support growth and these substrates could be derived from municipal or agricultural wastes for an economical process ( In this study microbial processes were evaluated for leaching REE from end-of-life waste products, specifically fluorescent lamp wastes and spent petrochemical FCC catalyst. The FCC materials, like the RPP, are considered “low-value” feedstocks, i.e., materials from which REE might not be economically harvested with conventional chemical, electrical, or mechanical methods because of low REE concentrations ( REE ore materials were obtained from the Rare Earth Resources (RER) Bull Hill Mine, located in the Bear Lodge District, north of Sundance, WY. Samples were collected from the main carbonatite dyke zone borehole, 82.9  Genomic DNA (gDNA) was extracted from the selected isolates using an UltraClean Microbial DNA Isolation kit (Mo Bio, Carlsbad, CA). Bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using < Microbial isolates were grown overnight in Pkm medium at 30 Most leaching studies were conducted using four day cultures, either with microbes present or with culture supernatants. Culture supernatants were obtained after centrifugation (10,000 The possibility of REE biosorption occurring during leaching was evaluated. Solutions were prepared by chemically leaching RPP and FCC material with 35 Organic acid analysis was performed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with a BioRad Aminex HPX-87H column (300 REE concentrations were measured using ICP-MS. The instrument (iCAP Q, Thermo Scientific) was operated in accordance with manufacturer instructions. The filtered (0.22 As we have described elsewhere, microbial strains were isolated from the ores and other REE-containing materials for this study ( The BH1 16S rRNA gene sequence showed highest homology to the genus Growth was monitored for the bacteria by optical density measurements at 600 During the four day incubation period, cultures were monitored for organic acid production. At day four, B58 produced the highest total concentration (approximately 20 In PkmT, as noted above, the cultures grew to greater densities, even at a lower temperature (20 Because the organic acid analyses indicated that gluconic acid was the predominant acid produced by the microorganisms, abiotic tests of REE leaching were conducted with gluconic acid at three different concentrations (10, 30 and 90 Abiotic leaching of REE from FCC catalyst was far more effective than from RPP, and as in the RPP experiments, increasing the gluconic acid concentration enhanced leaching. Total REE leaching increased from 24 to 36 to 45% for the 10 The results for the different feedstocks are likely related to the fact that the REE are present within very different matrices in the two materials. The limited extraction of REE from the RPP may be related to the high abundance of calcium phosphate in the RPP that would have titrated much of the acidity; the Material Safety Data Sheet for the RPP stated that it was 40–60% Ca Published studies of organic acid based leaching from end-of-life materials are limited. However, Because the cultures were producing organic acid concentrations of 30  As observed in the abiotic leaching tests, REE recovery from the FCC material was far greater than from RPP. The results of the leaching tests with FCC catalyst ( Relative yields of the individual REE in the leachates were not necessarily consistent with the measured compositions of the RPP. Because we noted a slight difference between PkmT supernatants and cultures for BH1 and BH24 with respect to RPP leaching efficiency, and because many researchers have reported on the sorption of rare earths to microbial cells ( Gluconic acid was the predominant acid produced by all four of the microbial cultures included in our study, and the abiotic experiments demonstrated that this organic acid was effective for releasing REE from the RPP and FCC materials. Microbial production of gluconic acid has been acknowledged in the literature by others as a likely contributor to biologically mediated phosphate mineral dissolution ( It is important to note however that our data indicate that the gluconic acid concentration is not necessarily the prime determinant of leaching efficacy. This research shows that utilizing microorganisms that produce gluconic and other organic acids can result in effective leaching of REE from end-of-life waste materials. Such organisms can be readily isolated from REE-containing materials themselves, indicating that the microbes are tolerant of metals (REE and heavy metals) in the samples. In this study however, we found a previously described strain of We express our appreciation to M. McIlwain, D. Bruhn, and J. Reiss (INL) and F. Roberto (Newmont Mining Corporation) for helpful discussions. We thank A. Van Rythoven (RER) for providing ore samples, B. Swavely (AERC Recycling Solutions) for retorted phosphors, and J. Hude (Valero) for the spent FCC catalyst. We thank D. Combs (INL) for assistance in preparing the Graphic Abstract. We are grateful for the sequencing services provided at the Molecular Research Core Facility, Idaho State University and ICP-MS analysis provided by D. Lacroix at University of Idaho and B. White (INL). This research was supported by the Critical Materials Institute, an Energy Innovation Hub funded by the