Vitamin D was discovered as an anti-rachitic agent, but even at present, there is no direct evidence to support the concept that vitamin D directly stimulates osteoblastic bone formation and mineralization. It appears to be paradoxical, but vitamin D functions in the process of osteoclastic bone resorption. In 1952, Carlsson reported that administration of vitamin D3 to rats fed a vitamin D-deficient, low calcium diet raised serum calcium levels. Since the diet did not contain appreciable amounts of calcium, the rise in serum calcium was considered to be derived from bone. Since then, this assay has been used as a standard bioassay for vitamin D compounds. Osteoclasts, the cells responsible for bone resorption, develop from hematopoietic cells of the monocyte-macrophage lineage. Several lines of evidence have shown that the active form of vitamin D3, 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1α,25(OH)2D3] is one of the most potent inducers of receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL), a key molecule for osteoclastogenesis, in vitro. In fact, 1α,25(OH)2D3 strongly induced osteoclast formation and bone resorption in vitro. Nevertheless, 1α,25(OH)2D3 and its prodrug, Alfacalcidol (1α-hydroxyvitamin D3) have been used as therapeutic agents for osteoporosis since 1983, because they increase bone mineral density and reduce the incidence of bone fracture in vivo. Furthermore, a new vitamin D analog, Eldecalcitol [2β-(3-hydroxypropoxy)-1α,25(OH)2D3], has been approved as a new drug for osteoporosis in Japan in January 2011. Interestingly, these beneficial effects of in vivo administration of vitamin D compounds are caused by the suppression of osteoclastic bone resorption. The present review article describes the mechanism of the discrepancy of vitamin D compounds in osteoclastic bone resorption between in vivo and in vitro.Bone remodeling is a dynamic process orchestrated by bone-forming osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts. In normal bone remodeling, osteoclastic bone resorption is followed by osteoblastic bone formation through a coupling mechanism It is well recognized that, in higher vertebrates including humans, serum calcium levels are tightly regulated and maintained at 9–10 Vitamin D was originally discovered as an anti-rachitic agent capable of preventing a failure of bone mineralization Vitamin D Yoshizawa et al. Although it appears paradoxical, vitamin D induces bone resorption. Carlsson The metabolite of vitamin D In 1981, Rodan and Martin In 1992, we proposed a working hypothesis for the mechanism of osteoclastogenesis based on the extensive studies using the co-culture system In 1998, we finally identified the structure of ODF in collaboration with Yasuda and Higashio of the Snow Brand Milk Products in Japan The molecular mechanism of osteoclast formation and activation proposed by There is no doubt that 1α,25(OH) Maxacalcitol [22-oxa-1α,25(OH) In contrast, the higher affinity of Eldecalcitol for DBP extends its half life in plasma As described above, 1α,25(OH) There are three possible explanations for the discrepancies between Although osteoclasts originate from the monocyte-macrophage lineage, osteoclast precursors We then examined effects of Eldecalcitol on bone metabolism including analysis of QOPs in mice The second possibility is whether the daily administration of Eldecalcitol suppresses RANKL expression in osteoblasts. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis showed that RANKL mRNA expression in mouse tibiae was significantly lower in the Eldecalcitol-treated mice than in the vehicle-treated mice. RANKL-positive cell surface (RANKLS) along the trabecular bone was significantly decreased in the Eldecalcitol-treated mice How does the daily administration of Eldecalcitol decrease RANKL-expressing cells Another important question is what types of osteoblast lineage cells express RANKL. There is no conclusive evidence to identify the RANKL-producing cells in osteoblast lineage cells. It has been postulated that the RANKL-producing osteoblast lineage cells are immature rather than mature osteoblasts The third possibility is the differences of the dose levels of vitamin D compounds used in Daily