This work sets out to verify whether the application of municipal solid waste compost (MSWC) or treated urban sewage sludge (USS) organic amendments efficiently promote organic matter (OM) increases in a Haplic Podzol (PZha) and in a Calcic Vertisol (VRcc). For that purpose, carbon (C) mineralization and C kinetic parameters were studied, using a laboratory experimental incubation setup. The results showed that the addition of the amendments to the soils increased their mineralization capacities, and that the highest C mineralization rate was reached at the end of the first 2d of incubation. The different characteristics of the soils seem to have influenced the C mineralization rates during the 28-d incubation. The USS induced higher C mineralization than the MSWC, and the PZha soil gave rise to higher C mineralization than VRcc. For all treatments, C mineralization adjusted well to an exponential plus linear kinetic model, suggesting that the organic C of the amendments was made up of two organic pools of differing degrees of stability. With the exception of the application of USS 60tha−1, all the treatments increased the OM content on both soils, or at least the OM remained constant throughout the incubation.Soil organic matter (SOM) plays a major role in maintaining soil quality. In addition to supplying plant nutrients, the type and amount of SOM influences several soil properties, particularly those related to physical conditions ( The decrease of SOM by erosion and leaching is considered one of the most important threats to soil ( Although the C/N ratio is one of the quality criteria of amendments that is considered most, it is sometimes inadequate for predicting decomposition kinetics (  This method assumes that microbes first mineralize the most labile C, with later mineralization of the resistant ones. The technique involves measuring CO Rates of OM decomposition depend upon several factors, ranging from the type of organic amendments to the soil type and properties, the climatic conditions and land management practices. Although OM decomposition studies are numerous, few researchers have addressed the relative importance of direct and indirect mechanisms of soil texture control on OM stabilization. In general, the quantity and nature of the soil clay affects the amount of C stabilized in soil, since fine textured soils (clays) often contain higher amounts of OM than sandy soils ( The fitting of kinetic equations to mineralization curves allows the calculation of the potentially mineralizable C fraction, and its mineralization rate. Several kinetic models have been used to describe the effects of amendment composition ( Our aim was to verify whether the application of two different organic amendments efficiently promotes OM increases in two distinct soils from Portugal. For this purpose, the C mineralization and the C kinetic parameters were studied using a laboratory experimental incubation setup. Two types of soil were used in the incubation test. Composite soil samples were collected at the 0–20 Two amendments were used for the experiment: urban sewage sludge (USS) and municipal solid waste compost (MSWC). The USS was sampled after the anaerobic digestion treatment at Frielas Wastewater Treatment Plant, near Lisbon, Portugal. The compost was produced in the Amarsul MSW Composting Plant (Setúbal, Portugal), where the OM bio-oxidation was carried out during an approximately 8 weeks period. This process was conducted in an enclosure kept under controlled aerobic conditions. During the process, periodic moisture measurements were made (using compost moisture meters) and the compost piles were turned at 5 Ten experimental treatments with three replicates were carried out using the two amendments on the two topsoil samples, PZha (A) and VRcc soils (B), at the following rates (dry weight): T0A and T0B—Control (unamended soil); T1A and T1B—Application of 30 The experiment was conducted in an incubator under laboratory-controlled conditions ( The fraction of added C mineralized from experimental treatments at each sampling time was estimated utilising the following equations: The quantities and rates of labile and resistant C mineralized during the course of the incubation were calculated by parameterizing two-pool models ( Statgraphics Plus 5.1 software package was used to calculate the analysis of variance (ANOVA) and least significant difference (Duncan) at According to The amendment applications increased the amount of soil biomass in relation to the control in all experimental treatments ( The C mineralization rate became constant earlier in the PZha soil than in the VRcc soil. In the PZha soil the rate at the end of the incubation period was highest in T3A and T4A (0.649 and 0.861 The application of the amendments to both soils induced a remarkable effect on the cumulative mineralized C ( The total amount of CO For both soils, the average of the mineralized C increased with increasing rates of applied OM, and the T4 was higher than the T2. However, the T3 and T1 were not significantly different ( The complementary mineralized C shows the “real” mineralization capacity that the amendment addition provides to the soils, as compared with the endogenous mineralization of the control treatment. For both soils, the amount of mineralized C increased with the amount of OM applied. Consequently, significant differences were verified with time in the complementary mineralization rate and among the treatments ( Our kinetic model offers an acceptable description of the C mineralization kinetics in all treatments and on both soils ( The rapid mineralization values obtained pointed out the existence of a large easily degradable C fraction in the treatments with the amendments used. In fact, the application of the amendments to the soil produced a higher C labile pool than the control ( As expected, the potentially mineralizable C (C In the VRcc and PZha soils, the The amendment applications increased the soil biomass in relation to the control (  The cumulative C results are lower when compared with data from the literature (e.g., The cumulative CO The different soil texture and total organic C content of both soils may explain the differences between endogenous mineralization on VRcc and PZha soils. There is no consensus from the literature with regard to the effect of soil texture, especially clay content, on SOM. However, some authors obtained significant increases in soil microbial biomass C, as the clay percentage increased ( It has also been shown that, at a soil pH of 5 and below, biological activity becomes inhibited, thereby promoting a decrease in the rate of SOM decomposition ( The C mineralization decreases with increasing clay content (  It has also been suggested ( The usual agricultural practice consists of the addition of organic wastes to the soil some weeks before sowing in order to allow the soil microorganisms to degrade the labile OM, reduce phytotoxicity, release plant nutrients and reach a new equilibrium in the soil microbial activity ( Simple incubation experiments have proved valuable in understanding the mineralization kinetics of C for organic materials amended to the soil ( All experimental treatments, on both soils, except for USS 60 The use of the kinetic model to describe the C mineralization process allows us to estimate the potential C fraction and the mineralization rate, as well as estimating C The However, there is a need for standardization of the methods in order to measure the CO These results were consistent with the study of  This study verified that the addition of two amendments, urban sewage sludge (USS) and municipal solid waste compost (MSWC) to the PZha and VRcc soils provided an increase in their mineralization capacities; the highest C mineralization rate was reached during the first 2 The USS amendment produced higher C mineralization than MSWC, and the PZha soil induced higher organic C mineralization than the VRcc soil. The higher C mineralization of the USS amendment may be related to its higher organic N content, promoting a more elevated microbiological activity due to the existence of easily bio-degradable N compounds. The different behaviour between the two soils may be related to their different physical and chemistry characteristics. These results emphasize the importance of continuing these studies for a better understanding of the mechanisms that take place, in order to develop OM management options for soils with different characteristics. Except in the case of USS at 60 We would like to thank Silvio Fonte for his collaboration with the analytical work. We also wish to thank the PhD student Diaz-Marcote for allowing us to mention his experimental findings.