A large amount of severely weathered copper oxide ore is on the surface of Zambian copperbelt, in which the main cupriferous mineral is biotite. To treat this kind of copper oxide ore, thermal treatment and acid leaching is commonly utilized by many local plants, but the copper leaching efficiency is not high, resulting in the loss of copper resource. To solve the problem, enhanced acid leaching by organic intercalation was proposed and studied. The effects of sulfuric acid concentration, temperature, intercalant type and dosage on copper extraction were investigated systematically. The highest Cu extraction rate of 90.5% could be achieved by using CTAB at a dosage of 1.5 × 10−4 mol/L, which increased nearly twenty one percentage points comparing to leaching test without organic intercalant. Leaching tests of weathered copper oxide ore also proved that CTAB was in favor of improving copper recovery. XRD analysis of leaching residue suggested that intercalation with CTAB contributed to the expansion of cupriferous biotite in leaching process, which was in favor of lixiviant entering the interlayer of biotite particles, hence copper leaching efficiency was improved. This method is effective and promising to recover copper as much as possible from this kind of copper oxide ore, and also provides a good reference to recycling valuable metals from phyllosilicate minerals.Copper is one of the most important base metals and widely used in power transmission, electronics and many other fields due to its good electrical and thermal conductivity ( Many research attempts aiming to improve copper extraction from refractory copper oxide ore have been made in the past few decades, such as microwave ( In this research, aiming to improve copper recovery, enhanced acid leaching of copper from cupriferous biotite by organic intercalation was conducted. Factors that affect copper leaching efficiency such as temperature, acid concentration, intercalant type and dosage were studied systematically. The mechanism of enhanced acid leaching by organic intercalation was analyzed as well. The weathered copper oxide ore used in this research was obtained from Luanshya copper hydrometallurgy plant. The ore from Luanshya copper mine and several nearby copper mines, which are relatively larger and typical deposits in Zambia copper belt, is blended and treated in this plant. Considering that biotite is the chief refractory cupriferous mineral, it is necessary to get relatively pure biotite for following experiments. In this research, cupriferous biotite was separated from raw material by grinding and wet sieving due to its good abrasion resistance. The leaching device used in this study is shown in Particle size distribution of prepared cupriferous biotite was firstly measured by laser particle size analyzer LS-POP (9). As shown in The effect of initial sulfuric acid concentration at different levels (0.2–0.6 mol/L) on the extraction rate of copper was investigated at a temperature of 65 °C. The results shown in To investigate the influence of temperature on copper extraction rate, leaching experiments at 25 °C, 45 °C, 65 °C, 85 °C were conducted at sulfuric acid concentration of 0.4 mol/L. The results ( Considering that copper extractant usually has good selectivity, and organic cations in the solution almost have no effect on solvent extraction and electrowinning, three kinds of intercalants including DTAB, TTAB and CTAB were used in leaching tests. Much larger organic intercalant was not selected due to its poor solubility. The tests were carried out at temperature of 65 °C, sulfuric acid concentration of 0.4 mol/L and leaching time of 120 min. Test results are shown in In order to justify that organic intercalation was also in favor of improving copper recovery from weathered copper oxide ore, different dosages of CTAB were used in leaching tests at temperature of 65 °C, sulfuric acid concentration of 0.4 mol/L and leaching time of 120 min. The mass of weathered copper oxide ore used in each test was 50 g, and the fineness P In order to further illustrate the effect of CTAB on the leaching of cupriferous biotite, leaching residues were measured with XRD. In this study, the method of organic intercalation to improve copper extraction from cupriferous biotite was investigated. Characterization of prepared cupriferous biotite indicates that it contains 2.54% of copper, and copper is indeed present in biotite. Leaching tests results demonstrate that the highest Cu extraction rate of 90.5% could be achieved by using CTAB at the dosage of 1.5 × 10 None. This work was financially supported by the