Objectives
                  Locking plate fixation of humeral head fractures bares the risk of glenohumeral screw penetration. In order to circumvent this problem it is recommended to insert shorter locking screws having at least a 6mm distance to the humeral head cortex. This in turn may reduce fixation stability and may lead to early varus displacement. One second frequent failure mechanism is cranial displacement of the greater tubercle. The study evaluates the biomechanical properties of a locking plate employing an additional telescoping screw that may enhance resistance to varus displacement. Screw in screw fixation of the greater tubercle may reduce the rate of cranial displacement.
               
                  Methods
                  In four paired fresh-frozen human cadaver humeri (age>70 years) a Neer IV/3 fracture was created with a 5mm osteotomy gap simulating metaphyseal comminution. Limbs were randomly assigned to receive plate fixation with an additional telescoping screw (Humerus Tele Screw: HTS) and on the contralateral limb Philos plate fixation before biomechanical evaluation (MTS-Bionix 858.2). Standard locking screws were placed in both groups 6mm below the radiological head circumference; the telescoping screw was placed in the subchondral layer. The greater tubercle was fixed with an additional screw in both techniques, in the HTS group the screw was anchored in the sleeve of the telescrew (screw in screw fixation).
               
                  Findings
                  Fixation stability with a mean stiffness of 300.9±28.8N/mm in the HTS plate group proved to be significantly higher than in the Philos plate group (184.2±23.4N/mm; p
                     =0.006). The HTS plate also resisted higher loads in terms of fixation failure with loss of reduction at 290±58.6N in comparison to 205±8.6N for the Philos plate (p
                     =0.2). Displacement of the greater tubercle occurred in no case of the HTS plate group and in two out of four cases in the Philos plate group.
               
                  Interpretation
                  The HTS plate provides high fixation stability in an in vitro humeral head fracture model and securely prevents displacement of the greater tubercle.Fractures of the proximal humerus are a common injury particularly in the elderly and account for 5% of all fractures and 45% of all humeral fractures. Common mechanisms of failure after open reduction and internal fixation of the proximal humerus in which screw and plate constructs have been used are varus displacement, glenohumeral screw penetration and avascular necrosis. Screw related complications account for more than 40% of the over all complication rate and up to 50% of the reoperation rate and it is known that minimal screw overlength can cause severe damage to the glenoid and may enhance retractive capsulitis. It is therefore recommended not to drill through the humerus head cortex and to choose a shorter length of screws. As a consequence, screws may not be securely anchored in the firm subchondral bone and thus primary stability of the whole construct may be reduced. This unsolved dilemma between prevention of screw perforation and loss of primary stability with the risk of early varus displacement prepared the ground for the development of a DHS-like implant for proximal humerus fractures. In contrast to the DHS screw for the treatment of trochanteric fractures the implant was designed to allow for only minimal subsidence and thus was supplied with additional non-telescoping screws. Furthermore a specially designed screw seating for the fixation of the major tubercle was introduced ( The objective of the study was to evaluate the biomechanical properties of this new implant in comparison to a locking plate (Philos), especially the fixation stability of a dynamic sliding mechanism (Tele Screw) in the treatment of humeral head fractures. Four paired fresh-frozen human cadaver humeri (age Special care was taken to not drill through the contralateral cortex and to use screw lengths that anchor not closer than 6 The distal humeral condyles were removed and the humeral shafts potted with polymethylmethacrylate in steel tubes. During testing at room temperature, all specimens were wrapped in saline-soaked gauze to avoid exsiccation. Specimens were tested with use of a servohydraulic materials testing machine (MTS-Bionix 858.2) and were placed on a XY-table (range ±3 Each specimen was subjected to sinusoidal axial loading at a loading frequency of one hertz. Loading was started with 50 cycles at a magnitude of Min: 25 Furthermore a load of 30 Data were statistically analysed using the non parametric Mann–Whitney-test for paired samples. Normal distribution of the received data was ruled out by means of the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Values are given as mean  Angular stable implants have gained a lot of importance in fracture care. There are numerous reports on a higher stability in the fixation of humeral head fractures. A study reported by Kettler et al. Initially correct screw placement in the very subchondral area will cause a slow penetration of screws through the cartilage into the glenohumeral joint. In biomechanical testing the HTS plate proved to be significantly stiffer (300.9 Hessmann et al. In another study Hessmann et al. The 3 The addition of a strong telescoping central screw in a humerus plate increases fracture fixation stability in terms of varus displacement. Furthermore, the sleeve component of the implant allows an effective fixation of the greater tubercle by an additional screw. The telescoping principle of the central screw may contribute to reduction of glenohumeral screw penetration. The promising results and the conclusions drawn from the reported in vitro testing have to be substantiated by further different test setups and clinical trials. The senior author Georg Gradl has a patent registration on the technique of a humeral plate in combination with a central lag screw and is affiliated to the company M.O.R.E. Medical Solutions, Rostock. All other authors disclose any financial and personal relationship with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence this work.