Gangue and tailings are both solid wastes produced by mining processing. In this study, permeable bricks were prepared by partial sintering of aggregates method, using gangue and tailings as aggregates and binder, respectively. The effects of aggregates content, aggregates size, sintering temperature and adding new aggregate on the permeability, apparent porosity, water absorption and mechanical properties of the prepared permeable bricks were systematically investigated. The optimum parameters to prepare the permeable bricks were obtained at 1180–1200°C for 45min with 20wt% tailings, 60–70wt% gangue and 10–20wt% waste ceramic. The prepared permeable bricks, with the optimized parameters, have a high permeability (about 0.03cm/s), exhibiting considerable compressive strength (exceeding 30MPa). Combined with the macroscopic properties and microstructure analysis of the permeable bricks, the variation of the performance of permeable brick under different factors is studied. The preparation of permeable bricks using gangue and tailings may provide a promising way to reuse mine solid wastes, considering the advantages in both economic and environmental aspects.The notion of “sponge city” With open pores and channels in the compacted block, permeable brick allows rainwater to penetrate through to the soil. The filtered stormwater is then either harvested for later reuse or released slowly into the underlying soil or drainage system. Therefore, the application of permeable bricks can reduce surface stormwater runoff and increase groundwater recharge. With so many advantages, permeable bricks have been widely used in residential sidewalks, pavements, parking lots and pedestrian areas. Many literatures Currently, there are mainly two kinds of permeable bricks: cementitious bricks and sintered bricks With the increasingly widespread use of permeable bricks, many scholars began to carry out related researches, several kinds of solid waste have been used to produce permeable bricks, such as molten slag Based on the above reasons, this paper proposed a method of using gangue and tailings as substitute materials. Gangue is one of the commercially worthless materials that surrounds, or is closely mixed with, a wanted mineral in an ore deposit. Usually, gangue can be separated as waste rocks before mineral processing, which are suitable as aggregates. Tailings are the materials left over after mineral processing process and often finely ground for extracting the valuable fraction from the ore, which are chemically similar to natural clay and can be used as high temperature binders. In current practice, gangue and tailings are disposed of in tailing pond or backfilled in the mines without effective utilization. Those disposal ways waste the associated resources, occupy vast land and lead to potential environmental and safety problems, including but not limited to contamination of surface water, groundwater and soils, and failure of tailings dams Our research adopted sintering method to produce permeable bricks and simplified the method without using natural clay and artificial aggregates. This not only saves the energy consumption of the production of artificial aggregates, but also reduces the use of natural clay. In our experiments, the gangue acted as aggregates for permeable bricks, and the tailings served as a high temperature binding agents. The effects of aggregates content, aggregates size, sintering temperature and adding new aggregate on the permeability, apparent porosity, water absorption and mechanical properties of the prepared permeable bricks were systematically investigated. Gangue and tailings used in our investigation were presented as gravels and powder, respectively. These two raw materials were both received from a feldspar mine in Anhui Province, China. First, they were dried at 105 The crystalline phases were identified by using X-ray diffraction (XRD), and the XRD patterns of gangue and tailings are shown in In this study, the gangue and tailings were mixed in different proportions and added about 10 Moreover, the samples for permeability test were cut into cylinders of Ф75 The morphology of sintered permeable bricks was examined by Scanning electron microscope (SEM, S-4800, Hitachi). The crystalline phases in the raw materials and prepared bricks were investigated by X-ray diffraction using Rigaku D/max 2550PC X-ray (Cu-K α, scanning rate: 8°/min, scanning range: 10–80°).  What’s more, a good positive correlation between permeability and apparent porosity can be observed obviously. Apparent porosity is an important factor in making high water-permeable bricks. Generally, permeable bricks with a higher apparent porosity typically have a higher water permeability, which is attributed to that there are more connected pores and cavities in a compacted block for the flow of water. Basically, the compressive strength decreases with the increasing gangue content. The compressive strength reaches a peak of nearly 40 In the sintering process of permeable bricks, gangue plays a role of coarse aggregate to create pores and channels for water to infiltrate through and tailings serve as binding agents due to its lower melting temperature. On one hand, insufficient tailings may not bond the gangue particles firmly. On the other hand, superfluous tailings result in excessive liquid phase, which will fill in the pores and decrease the permeability. As can be seen from In In order to study the microstructure morphology, sintered bricks prepared in this work were also subject to SEM and the results are shown in In order to investigated the effect of the sintering temperature on the performance of the permeable bricks, the samples with 70  The compressive strength and water absorption of permeable bricks sintered at various sintering temperatures were also investigated, and the results are demonstrated in The water absorption is approximately a half of apparent porosity (  The aforementioned study shows that the preparation of permeable brick has certain feasibility of using solid waste as aggregates. It is thought that the aggregate of permeable bricks may have a greater effect on its performances, especially mechanical strength. To test this idea, we conducted a series of experiments to explore the effect of adding new aggregates on the performance of permeable bricks.  The occurrence of this phenomenon is inseparable from the nature characteristics of waste ceramic. Due to the technique of production, waste ceramic has a high strength in itself. Therefore, the addition of waste ceramic can significantly improve the strength of permeable bricks. However, the strength of the permeable bricks decreases with further waste ceramic addition, which is due to the higher melting point of the waste ceramic than the gangue, and at the sintering temperature of 1180 In this work, permeable bricks with high permeability and mechanical strength were fabricated by partial sintering of aggregates method. Aggregate properties (content, particle size, types) and sintering temperature have significant effects on the permeability and mechanical strength of permeable bricks. In conclusion, the optimum technological parameters for the preparation of permeable bricks are as follows: sintering temperature 1180–1200 According to the influences of the particle size and content of the aggregates on the permeable bricks, we can draw an important conclusion that the compressive strength and permeability showed the opposite trend, i.e., more or bigger pores were often accompanied by worse mechanical strength. When the aggregate size and content were fixed, the permeability initially increased with increasing temperature, reaching a maximum value of 0.034 It is also found that the strength of the aggregate itself has a great impact on the permeable bricks. The mechanical strength of permeable brick can be significantly improved by adding higher strength aggregates, such as waste ceramic. Whether from the perspective of economic or environmental aspect, the production of permeable bricks is an effective way of turning waste into treasure. This paper was supported by the ministry of land and resources public welfare industry research project (201511062-02).