The crystallization kinetics of glasses obtained from coal fly ash was investigated by both isothermal and non-isothermal methods using differential thermal analysis (DTA) data. In DTA experiments, glass samples having coarse (800–1000μm) and fine (<180μm) particle sizes were used and the results were compared. The Avrami exponent (n) was calculated by means of Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) and Ozawa equations. Calculated kinetic parameters indicated that the appropriate crystallization mechanisms were bulk and surface crystallization for coarse and fine particles, respectively. Isothermal and non-isothermal DTA experiments showed that the crystallization activation energies of coarse glasses are changed in the range of 444–578kJ/mol, while the crystallization activation energies of fine glasses are changed in the range of 610–662kJ/mol. It was found that crystallization activation energies of fine glasses are higher than those of the coarse glasses. Results showed that isothermal and non-isothermal crystallization kinetics of glasses produced from coal fly ash is in agreement within the experimental error.Knowledge of nucleation and crystallization kinetic parameters such as, activation energy for crystal growth and crystal growth mechanism is important in the preparation of glass–ceramics with desired microstructure and properties. DTA is widely used in investigating the crystallization kinetics of glasses Coal fly ash sample was obtained from Tunçbilek Thermal Power Plant in Turkey and used as a raw material source. The chemical analysis showed that the coal fly ash consists of the following oxides (in wt%): 54.08% SiO DTA scans of glass specimens were carried out using a Perkin Elmer (Model TAC7/DX) thermal analyzer. The glasses were ground to a coarse particle size (800–1000 The variation of the crystallization peaks with different heating rates can be used to estimate the activation energy for crystallization and to determine the crystallization mechanism. The crystallization behavior of glasses was determined by using the both isothermal and non-isothermal methods. DTA was performed on both coarse and fine glass samples in each method to determine the particle size effect on the crystallization mechanism. Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) method has been widely used as an isothermal method for the interpretation of the crystallization experiments and for the determination of the crystallization mechanisms from the results of DTA curves. In the JMA method, the as-quenched glass samples were heated to the maximum nucleation temperature at a heating rate of 20 Kissinger, Matusita–Sakka and Ozawa methods were used to determine the kinetic parameters from the non-isothermal methods. Crystallization mechanisms and activation energies were calculated in each method from the heating rate dependence of the crystallization peak temperature. In order to investigate the crystallization behavior of glass samples by using the Kissinger equation, the glass samples were heated to the maximum nucleation temperature and held at this temperature for the maximum nucleation time for complete nucleation to prevent the increase in the number of nuclei during the DTA scans. The temperature was then raised to the maximum working temperature of DTA. DTA scans of fully nucleated glass samples were obtained at the heating rates of 5, 10, 15 and 20 Isothermal methods are generally based on the Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) transformation kinetic equation given below Several equations have been proposed, attempting to interpret crystallization behavior from the non-isothermal data In the presence of bulk crystallization, From the exothermic peak, the Avrami parameter, The kinetic parameters of the glass-crystallization transformation were determined under non-isothermal conditions applying three different equations, namely, Kissinger Matusita and Sakka Assuming that the nucleation and growth processes had occurred simultaneously in as-quenched samples during the DTA measurements, the data for as-quenched glasses were analyzed by Matusita–Sakka model (Eq. By substituting the appropriate values of The crystallization kinetics of the as-quenched coarse and fine glasses were also examined using isothermal differential thermal analysis. The experimental DTA data were analyzed with the equation derived by Johnson–Mehl–Avrami The isothermal heat treatments of the coarse and fine glasses were carried out in the temperature range of 1033–1073 A comparison of kinetic parameters of all coarse and fine glasses, as determined by isothermal and non-isothermal methods, is shown in The activation energy of the glass sample was determined under both non-isothermal and isothermal methods. The differences in the crystallization activation energies obtained in this study could result from the differences in crystallization mechanism, which is strongly influenced by the particle size of the glasses. As it was observed from the activation energy values obtained in this study, high The value of Only a few researchers studied the crystallization kinetics of coal fly ash based glasses. Crystallization activation energy values of glasses produced from coal fly ashes were found as 283 and 318 The studied glass is in the SiO Crystallization kinetics of glasses obtained from coal fly ash was studied by both isothermal and non-isothermal methods. Avrami exponent values of coarse and fine glasses indicated that the increase in the particle size has changed the crystallization mechanism from surface to bulk crystallization. Crystallization activation energy values of fine glasses are higher than those of coarse glasses. Overall results showed that the calculated parameters for isothermal and non-isothermal crystallization kinetics of glasses produced from coal fly ash are in agreement within experimental error. These results indicate that the data of the crystallization mechanism and crystallization activation energy of glasses obtained in this study are accurate and reliable. The question to be addressed is whether or not these kinetic models that we used in this study can be applied to the fly ash based glasses by using DTA technique. The similarities between non-isothermal and isothermal results give us confidence that variable heating rate DTA measurements can be used to determine crystallization kinetics of glasses produced from coal fly ash.