In this paper, we discretized the ball motion in a horizontal planetary ball mill, the fundamental equation of the relative motion and the detaching trajectory were analyzed, and the impact time was approximately formulated. We performed experiments on impact comminution and observed that an equal impact potential energy causes an equal grinding effect. Based on theoretical analysis, comparing the horizontal planetary ball mill whose planetary factor is z with the traditional ball mill through dynamic similarity principles, the results show that when dynamic similarity exists and when the grinding outputs of each mill are equal to each other, the radius of horizontal planetary ball mill is z
                     −1/4 times as the radius of a traditional ball mill. If the impact potential energies of the balls in these two mills are the same, the impact stress of the balls in a horizontal planetary ball mill is z times as in a dynamic similarity traditional ball mill. To determine the equal grinding effect, the energy consumption of a horizontal planetary ball mill is z
                     −3/8 times as that of traditional ball mill.Two different types of planetary ball mill exist. One is by vertically placing its vials, which is common, and the other is by placing vials horizontally, as showed in The planetary ball mill has a similar grinding principle to a traditional ball mill. However, compared with a traditional ball mill, the vials of a planetary ball mill are capable of both rotation and revolution. As such, the planetary ball mill has been widely used in various areas such as in the preparation of ultrafine powder, mechanochemical process, and mechanical alloying because of its high grinding ability and energy utilization ratio During 1990s, Yan Previous studies have elaborated on the grinding mechanism of the planetary ball mill and the kinetics and dynamics of the balls and ground materials during the grinding process. However, compared with the traditional ball mill, the extent of improvement in energy utilization and the grinding ability when the planetary ball mill is used should be determined. In 2008, Yan et al. The impact and grinding process in a horizontal planetary ball mill could be essentially explained by impact dynamics. The process conforms to dynamic similarity principles, which include geometry, kinematic, and dynamic similarities. According to the previous research The ball motion in a single vial of horizontal planetary ball mill could be characterized as a relative motion in an inertial coordinate system whose convected acceleration is revolution centrifugal acceleration located at the center point of the vial. The forcing system of a typical ball in this coordinate system is shown in When the vial rotates, the balls inside make a relative circular motion, which could be formulated as follows: The planetary factor The obtained Eq. If we assume: Moreover, As such, Eq. Eq. According to Lu et al. Thus, we simplified the process of ball motion between its detachment and subsequent reattachment to the vial wall. Considering that the value of The detaching trajectory can be formulated as: Moreover, Thus, the equations above could be solved: The impact time, i.e., the simplified solutions of The value of To verify the hypothesis of Yan et al. The impact objects, whose weights are separately 976.1, 976.7, and 976.7 The experimental results are shown in For a single vial of a ball mill and that of a planetary ball mill, we can formulate their equal impact potential energy as: Thus, Eq. The impact altitude of the balls is actually the radius of vial. Thus, we could obtain the following equation from Eq. Based on the conclusion proposed above, an equal impact energy results in an equal grinding efficiency. We could explain the scientific meaning of Eqs. We can determine the motion situations of the grinding media in a traditional ball mill from literature The similarity criterion of impact stress is defined as: Based on the Hertz’s theory of impact Based on the dimension, the impact force is: The diameter of the contacting surfaces (the Hertz radius)  The traditional ball mill and the planetary ball mill whose planetary factor is Eq. Finally: The similarity criterion of the power is defined as: The power of the ball mill and the planetary ball mill could be separately expressed in terms of dimensions The traditional ball mill and the planetary ball mill whose planetary factor is This equation yields: The critical speed of a traditional ball mill and a planetary ball mill Hence, Eq. Based on theoretical analysis and experiments carried out in this paper, the following conclusions can be drawn: Neglecting the influence of gravity, the grinding ball in a single vial of a horizontal planetary ball mill has a relative motion in the inertial coordinate system, and the acquired equations were easier to learn and apply. Around the critical speed ratio, the values of impact time between the simplified solutions obtained in this study and the theoretical solutions in an absolute coordinate system were very close to each other. The experiments of impact-comminution proved that an equal impact energy results in an equal grinding efficiency. The traditional ball mill could be seen as a special planetary ball mill whose Based on the premise that an equal impact energy results in an equal grinding efficiency, when the two types of mills are dynamically similar, to obtain the equal grinding output of a single vial, the vial radius of a planetary ball mill is The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the