Dark chocolate is a good source of dietary flavonoids, mainly comprised of (+)-catechin, (−)-epicatechin, and their oligomeric and polymeric procyanidins. Nevertheless, flavonoid content and antioxidant capacity are affected during chocolate manufacturing. In this study, the influence of manufacturing process of dark chocolate, particularly, roasting of cocoa beans (115–135 °C), conching (60–80 °C), and alkalization treatment (pH 7–9) was studied and the process conditions were optimized via Response Surface Methodology (RSM). Validation of the model accomplished applying the conditions generated by RSM. Considering the data obtained from the model; chocolate manufacturing process, particularly increasing alkalization degree and roasting temperature significantly reduced phenolics and related antioxidant capacity (p < 0.05). Nevertheless, increasing conching temperature was insignificant (p > 0.05) since higher temperature leads to a shorter required processing time.Cocoa bean, and its derivative products (dark chocolate and cocoa powder) are rich polyphenol sources which have beneficial effects for health such as anti-ulcer, anti-carcinogenic, anti-thrombotic, anti-microbial effects and they exhibit antioxidant activity ( Fermentation, drying, and roasting are essential for characteristic flavour development in cocoa beans. During fermentation, polyphenols undergo oxidation to condensed high molecular insoluble tannins catalysed by polyphenol oxidase enzyme. Then, cocoa beans are dried to decrease the moisture content below 8% which is the critical moisture content for mould growth ( Chocolate liquor and cocoa butter are the main ingredients of chocolate manufacturing with others such as sugar and emulsifiers. After mixing all ingredients in mixers, obtained chocolate paste is refined by roll refiners. For the final texture and flavour, refined chocolate paste is conched with varied temperature-time conditions. During conching, moisture is reduced, volatile substances are removed and all particles are dispersed in continuous fat phase. Meanwhile, phenolic content is expected to be reduced due to high temperature and oxygen in roasting and conching steps. Moreover, if alkalization treatment (Dutching) which relies on neutralization of acetic acid is present, phenolic content decreases sharply ( In the literature, some researchers studied phenolics and antioxidant capacity of cocoa beans ( On the other hand, there are Epicatechin (EC), epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), epigallocatechin (EGC), epicatechin gallate (ECG), Trolox (6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid), 2,2-azobis(2-amidinopropane) dihydrochloride (AAPH), fluorescein, Folin–Ciocalteu reagent were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH & Co. KG (Steinheim, Germany). Other chemicals and reagents were of analytical or high-performance liquid chromatography grade. To identify and quantify procyanidins, a composite procyanidin oligomer standard containing monomers through decamers was purified from cocoa beans. Ingredients such as roasted cocoa beans and alkalized chocolate liquor were provided from Altinmarka Inc. and dark chocolate samples were kindly produced by Nestle Turkey Inc. Recipe of dark chocolate contained cocoa liquor (43.20%), cocoa butter (5.50%), sugar (47.52%), soy lecithin (0.25%), milk fat (3.50%) and vanilla extract (0.03%). Cocoa liquor, sugar and vanilla extract were mixed in a mixer for 5 min. After pre-refining, the batch was fed to the five roller refiner lasting 3 h. After addition of cocoa butter and milk fat to the chocolate paste, conching was performed at 80 °C for 11 h, at 70 °C for 12 h, and at 60 °C for 13 h, respectively. As the last step of conching, lecithin is added to the mass and mixed for 30 min more. Then, chocolate paste was tempered with a continuous process heat exchanger to be ready for deposition. Finally, dark chocolate samples were cooled and demoulded. Chocolate samples were analysed in a week after manufacturing. Until then, they were stored in plastic bucket at room temperature. The samples were extracted following the method described by All defatted samples were dissolved in acetone: Milli-Q water: acetic acid (70: 29.5: 0.5, v/v/v) at a ratio of 1: 5. After vortexing for 5 min and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm, the supernatant was filtered through 0.45 μm syringe filters ( A composite procyanidin oligomer standard containing monomers through decamers was purified from cocoa beans previously described by Approximately, 2 g of acetone extract was suspended in 10 mL of 70% aqueous methanol and centrifuged at 1500 Approximately 0.7 g of semipurified acetone extract was dissolved in 7 mL of acetone/water/acetic acid in a ratio by volume of 70: 29.5: 0.5, respectively ( Total phenolic content (TPC) was measured using Folin–Ciocalteu assay ( Six major catechins were determined [(+)-catechin, (−)-epicatechin, GC, EGC, ECG and EGCG)] by UFLC-MS/MS system which is equipped with a ultra fast liquid chromatography (Prominence Liquid Chromatography LC-20AD, Shimadzu), a micro vacuum degasser (Prominence Degasser DGU-20A3, Shimadzu), an autosampler (Prominence AutoSampler SIL-20AHT, Shimadzu), a column oven (Prominence Column Oven CTO-10ASVP, Shimadzu), a controller (Prominence Controller CBM-20A Lite, Shimadzu) and an MS detector with electrospray ion source (ESI) and triple quadrupole analyzer (API-2000 Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry System, ABSciex, (USA). In this study, chromatographic separations were performed on an Inertsil C8 column (150 mm × 2.1 mm, 3 μm). A gradient of mobile phase A (7.5 mM formic acid) and mobile phase B (Acetonitrile) was used for the chromatographic separation. The gradient profile was set as follows: 10 min 95% B eluent, 11 min 15% B and 13 min it was stopped. The flow rate was 0.5 mL min API 2000 was operated in the triple quadrupole mass spectrometry mode using an electrospray ionization (ESI) source operating in the negative (−) ion mode with Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) in the experiments presented here. MS interface conditions were set as follows: ion spray voltage of −4500 V, source temperature of 525 °C, gas 1 temperature of 20 °C. Declustering potential (DP), entrance potential (EP), collision energy (CE) and collision cell exit potential (CXP) parameters were optimized for all of the phenolic compounds. Separation of the compounds up to trimers was achieved by reversed phase UFLC with PDA detector previously described by Antioxidant analysis were performed with ORAC and DPPH assays.All samples were analysed in triplicate. Both hydrophilic and lipophilic oxygen radical absorbance capacity (H-ORAC and L-ORAC) assays were carried out on a Synergy™ HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader (BioTek Instruments, Winooski, VT at 37 °C, described by For hydrophilic ORAC, samples (0.3 g) were extracted with 25 mL of 70:29.5:0.5 acetone/water/acetic acid by sonication at 30 °C for 10 min. For lipophilic ORAC assay, 1 g sample was dissolved in 20 ml acetone. An aliquot of sample solution was diluted with 7% randomly methylated beta-cyclodextrin (RMCD) (w/v) solvent in a 50% acetone–water (v/v) mixture and was shaken for 1 h at room temperature on a orbital shaker at 400 rpm ( DPPH radical scavenging activities of the samples were determined according to A three-level central composite rotatable design (CCD) was used for the response surface methodology (RSM) studies, and 17 experimental settings were generated with three factors by using Design Expert 9.0 (Stat-Ease, Inc., MN, USA) software. The three factors chosen were roasting temperature, (115–155 °C); alkalization concentration and conching temperature (60–80 °C). The independent variables and experimental design are presented in In the present study, TPC changed between 2.07 and 8.22 mg kg On the other hand, conching temperature did not decrease TPC and TFC significantly ( The antioxidant capacity of the samples was measured using ORAC and DPPH assays. Since cocoa and cocoa products contain hydrophilic antioxidants more than 90%, usually H-ORAC is employed, and L-ORAC is omitted in the literature. In this study, both lipophilic and hydrophilic antioxidant capacities were measured and total antioxidant capacity (TAC) combining hydrophilic (H-ORAC) and lipophilic (L-ORAC) antioxidant compounds was determined for all samples. TAC (H-ORAC + L-ORAC) values of the samples were found to be between 126.34 and 206.25 μmol TE per g. In previous studies, H-ORAC value was reported to be 131.2 μmol TE per g by Methanolic extracts of epicatechin (EC), C (catechin), EGC (epigallocatechin), ECG (epicatechingallate), EGCG (epigallocatechingallate) were investigated by LC-MS-MS. Concentrations of EC, C, EGC, GC, ECG and EGCG were shown in Procyanidins were extracted byacetone: Milli-Q water: acetic acid (70: 29.5: 0.5, v/v/v/) since this mixture was determined as the most efficient solvent mixture for dark-chocolate procyanidins ( In our study, we found that roasting and alkalization treatment affected catechin, epicatechin, dimer B2 and trimer C1. Conching process was also involved this impact in case of EC and dimer B2 (Models 1–8). The results of TPC, TFC, EC The model equations for the responses can be written as follows: Regarding significant terms obtained from equations, the first order-variables, RT and pH had negative effects on the TPC, TFC, C, EC, Dimer B2 and Trimer C1 values. Meanwhile, the first order-variable of pH only affected the TAC value in a negative way. In contrast, EC The interaction of term of RT and pH (RT*pH) had a positive effect on the TFC and Dimer B2 values, whereas TAC and EC values were negatively affected by (RT*pH). Meanwhile, the Dimer B2 value was correlated negatively by the interaction of term of pH and CT (pH*CT). In addition, there was a negative correlation between the interaction term of CT and pH (CT*pH) and the Dimer B2 value. The second-order variable of RT (RT The impact of RT, pH and CT levels on TPC, TF, EC Design Expert 9.0 software generated optimum formulations for targeted responses. Two optimum formulations were produced. Optimum formulations, predicted scores and experimental results for responses are summarized in Chocolate manufacturing process, particularly pH and roasting temperature significantly changed the procyanidin profile and antioxidant capacity ( We would like to thank the technical staff of Nestle Turkey Inc., Özlem Bahtiyar, Adnan Özkıranartlı, and Şirin Yılmaz for the manufacturing of chocolate samples.