Leaching copper from shredded particles of waste printed circuit boards (PCBs) was carried out in sulfuric acid solution using hydrogen peroxide as an oxidant at room temperature. The influence of system variables on copper recovery by leaching was investigated, such as sulfuric concentration, amount of hydrogen peroxide addition, waste PBCs particle size, presence of cupric ion, temperature and time. The results shown that the optimum addition amount was 100mL 15 (wt%) sulfuric acid solution and 10mL of 30% hydrogen peroxide for leaching 10g waste PCBs powder with a solid/liquid ratio of 1/10 for 3h at room temperature (∼23°C). Moreover leaching temperature and initial copper ion concentration had insignificant effect on the leaching recovery of copper. The effect of different particle size of shredded waste PCBs on leaching of copper was investigated under the optimum leaching condition. The results revealed that shredding pieces of waste PCBs smaller than 1mm was efficient and suitable for copper leaching. Then the leaching solution was concentrated to crystallize CuSO4·5H2O, and crystal liquor was reused for the next cycles.Printed circuit boards (PCBs) are the base of the electronic industry as it is an essential part of almost all the electric and electronic equipment (EEE). Both technological innovation and market expansion accelerate the replacement of EEE, which leads to a significant increase of waste PCBs It can be noted from review of the literatures that, the processes for recovering metals from waste PCBs include mechanical In this regard, a green process for leaching copper from shredded particles of waste PCBs at room temperature was investigated in the present research. The objective of the research is to recover valuable metal copper by leaching process with solutions of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide. The effect of the waste PCBs particle size on the leaching behavior of copper will be discussed as well. Twenty pieces of different kinds of waste computer mainboards (about 10 The schematic of specimen preparation and leaching process is presented in Aqua regia and perchloric acid was used to fully leach the metals from the specimen. The metal concentrations of the digestion solution were tested by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (Hitachi, Z2000). The digestion results are showed in X-ray diffraction pattern was investigated on grounded waste PCBs powders by X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (PANalytical B.V. company, X’ Pert PRO), and the result indicates that the copper in the PCBs exists as metal copper. Specimen sampled from particles shredded by 8 Analytical grade commercial concentrated sulfuric acid, hydrogen peroxide (30%) and chalcanthite were used as received in experiments. Leaching experiments were carried out in a 200 Samples were sieved into different fraction by sieve shaker (Retsch, AS200) using a series standard sieve with a pore size of 8 Oishi et al. As In the leaching system of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide, the overall reaction for copper dissolution can be expressed by reaction follows Eq. 10 Copper recovery from waste PCBs specimen was carried out at room temperature (∼23  Zhu et al.   The results of copper recovery by leaching versus time are presented in It can be summarized from the experiment results above that the optimum condition of leaching copper from 10 Some research works were done to recover metal from waste PCBs. Nevertheless, few studies were carried out on the effect of shredded particle size on copper leaching behavior. Yang et al. In the present research, the influence of shredded particle size on copper leaching behavior was examined. The temperature was recorded by thermometer when leached samples with different particle sizes. The curve of temperature versus time is showed as A reasonable shredding process should be considered since it can extract copper efficiently when the particle size of waste PCBs is smaller than 1 422.8 sample of about 3 It is showed in  The product from crystallization of leaching pregnant was examined with XRD technique. The XRD pattern of the product is showed in  The copper in powder of waste PCBs was recovered by leaching process in sulfuric acid using hydrogen peroxide as an oxidant. The optimum leaching condition for 10 Copper was extracted efficiently by the leaching process when the pieces of waste PCBs were shredded smaller than 1 The leaching solution was concentrated to produce CuSO The authors are grateful for the fund support of