Natural mordenite, replacing the synthetic zeolites, has been employed as the support of TiO2, and its photocatalytic activity has been examined in methyl orange (MO) aqueous under UV light. AFM, TEM, XRD, FTIR and fluorescence spectra have been used to reveal the loading effects of TiO2 on mordenite. The results show that the photocatalytic degradation (PCD) reaction rates are sharply increased by natural zeolite supports. Since mordenite is photo-inert, the PCD-enhancement is mostly caused by the bonding effects of Ti–O–Si and Ti–O–Al. Moreover, another two distinct natural zeolites have been employed as the supports of TiO2, in order to check the universality of PCD-enhancement effect of natural zeolites on TiO2. And the factors of PCD reaction on TiO2–zeolite, such as pH and catalyst dose, have been investigated.Nanoscaled TiO As a typical porous material, zeolites can be divided into natural zeolites and synthetic zeolites. Natural zeolites are cheaper and more abundant, but have smaller channels as compared with synthetic zeolites. As a natural mineral resource, natural zeolites are easy to obtain and cause negligible chemical pollutions during the production process, but meet some difficulties in purification. Previous works have simply emphasized on the synthetic zeolites as supports, and found that the employment of special species of synthetic zeolites benefit the photo-activity of loaded TiO Considering the large-scale utilizations in practical, natural zeolites seems more ascendent than synthetic ones, due to their low cost, abundant and less chemical pollution during production. But, as we have known, comparing with the synthetic zeolites, natural zeolites have smaller channel size, and their species of structure are multiform. In view of these facts, whether the PCD-enhancement effect would be preserved after replacing synthetic zeolites with natural ones remains a question. However, studies on the natural zeolite supports are rare. It would be instructive to investigate the interaction between TiO Based on the above point, in this article, the principal objective was to verify whether the PCD-enhancement effect could recur in the natural zeolite–TiO Ti(OC A transparent TiO The typical conditions of the PCD experiments are as follows: 0.04 The PCD rate of MO was determined in two ways, Considering the slight degradation of MO under UV light, the PCD processes of pure MO and raw zeolites had been measured. During the calculation process of The structures of the samples were examined with an X-ray diffractometer (XRD; Shimadzu, D/max-rA with Cu Ka radiation). The morphology of the samples were obtained by atom force microscope (AFM; Dimension 3100, USA) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). And the bond vibration was analyzed by far Fourier transform infrared ray (far FTIR; Nexus 6700, USA) spectroscopy, which was carried out by polyethylene film and collected 70 scans at the range of 600–50 Natural mordenite, whose structure was much approximate to the characteristics of synthetic zeolites, was employed as the support of TiO The mordenite materials before and after TiO Moreover, TEM image ( Furthermore, XRD studies were undertaken to understand the crystalline structure of the mordenite before and after TiO In this study methyl orange (MO) was chosen as model compound, which was considered to be one kind of recalcitrant azo dye. And the PCD processes of MO in aqueous heterogeneous system were measured under UV light, in order to determine the photocatalytic activities of different photocatalysts. As the effect of pollutant concentration was important in any process of water treatment, PCD processes at various initial concentrations of MO ( That means there are two reaction rates to describe the PCD process. The first is the initial reaction rate ( Taking the results of Mordenite is photo-inert, and do not participate in the PCD process forthrightly. In order to reveal the PCD-enhancement mechanism, further investigations were carried out by FTIR and fluorescence spectra to understand the loading effect between natural mordenite and TiO The combination or interface reaction effects were confirmed by far FTIR analysis. As shown in Furthermore, the fluorescence spectra ( As has been discussed previously Since the decrease in COD reflected the extent of mineralization of organic species, the COD removal percentage was measured to ascertain the complete degradation of MO. And the results are displayed in As the catalyst dose was one of the major kinetic factors of PCD reaction, a series of experiments were carried out by varying the amount of TiO As known, the value of pH makes great impressions on the conditions of medium, the surface charge distribution of TiO In the dark adsorption experiments, the TiO As shown in In order to examine the universality of PCD-enhancement effect on natural zeolites, another two distinct species of natural zeolites were employed as supports of TiO The PCD processes at various The comparative study of TiO The author gratefully thanks the financially supports of National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 40172020 and No. 50574043).