Quality of pellets is influenced by the nature of ore or concentrate, associated gangue, type and amount of fluxes added and their subsequent treatment to produce pellets. These factors in turn result in the variation of physicochemical properties of the coexisting phases and their distribution during pellet induration. In the present study, effect of pellet basicity and MgO content on the melt formation and microstructure during the induration was examined. Fired pellets with varying basicity (0 to 0.8) and MgO (0 and 1.5%) content were tested for cold strength, reduction degradation index, reducibility, swelling and softening–melting characteristics. Optical microscope studies with image analysis software were carried out to estimate the amount of different phases. SEM-EDS analysis was done to record the chemical analysis of oxide and slag phases. X-ray mapping was also carried out to understand the distribution of CaO, MgO, SiO2 and Al2O3 in different phases. From the results, it was observed that with increasing basicity, RDI and softening–melting characteristics of pellets found to be improved. Addition of MgO to both acid and limestone fluxed pellets considerably reduced their swelling tendency. Improved pellet quality could be attributed to the formation of sufficient amount of silicate melt in basic pellets and high melting point slag in MgO pellets. Limestone fluxed pellets at 0.8 basicity, pyroxenite fluxed pellets at 1.5% MgO and dolomite fluxed pellets at 0.4 basicity & 1.5% MgO exhibited optimum metallurgical properties among all the pellets studied.Iron ore agglomerate quality plays a vital role in decreasing the reducing agent consumption and increasing the productivity of blast furnace. In most of the integrated steel works, the burden mix for blast furnace is decided as per the availability of the iron ore agglomerates like sinter and pellets. More attention has been given in recent years to the use of fluxed pellets in blast furnace due to their good strength and improved reducibility, swelling and softening–melting characteristics. Generally, quality of pellets is influenced by the nature of ore or concentrate, associated gangue, type and amount of fluxes added and their subsequent treatment to produce pellets. These factors in turn result in the variation of physicochemical properties of the coexisting phases and their distribution during pellet induration. Hence properties of the pellets are largely governed by the form and degree of bonding achieved between ore particles and the stability of these bonding phases during reduction of iron oxides ( In fluxed pellets, the bonding is achieved through silicate melt formation during induration. The amount of gangue in the concentrate, CaO & MgO in the fluxes and binder influences the amount and chemistry of silicate melt. CaO fluxes silicate melt as well as reacts with iron oxide to form different calcium ferrites. MgO either enters the magnetite lattice to form magnesioferrite or dissolves in the slag phase. These melting phases interact with each other and dissolve a variable amount of iron oxides. As the formation of phases and microstructure during induration depends on the type and amount of fluxes added, there is a need to study the effect of these fluxing agents in terms of CaO/SiO Wynnyckyj et al. presented results of adding CaO in the form of lime on fired pellet quality; they found addition of lime increases the pellet shrinkage and hence increase the pellet strength due to the formation of calcium silicate and calcium ferrites ( Hamilton et al. revealed that CaO fluxed pellets exhibit improved strength when fired between 1200 Panigraphy, S.C et al. presented detailed results of limestone and dolomite fluxed pellets from hematite concentrate; in limestone fluxed pellets silicate melt was the predominant bonding phase up to the basicity of 1.3. With increasing basicity more amount of liquid phase was formed during induration and hence more strength and less porosity. It was noted that the reducibility reaches a maximum at basicity 1.3 and then decreases with increased basicity. In low basicity pellets, during reduction of wüstite, a dense iron layer forms around slowing down the reduction, whereas at 1.3 basicity, relatively small grain size of hematite before reduction provides large surface area for reduction. Reducibility decreased beyond 1.3 basicity due to the formation of large secondary hematite grains. In limestone fluxed pellets, swelling found to be highest at 0.8 basicity and decreased thereafter due to the formation of stronger bonding phase that can absorb hematite to magnetite transformation stress. It was also reported that dolomite fluxed pellets exhibited higher porosity in comparison to limestone pellets, as MgO, being a major constituent of dolomite, raises the liquidus temperature of slag. Strength of dolomite pellets was found to be lower due to the high amount of porosity. Dolomite addition also improved the reducibility, highest at 1.3 basicity ( John J Friel et al. studied effect of dolomite addition on the magnetite pellets; pellets with basicity up to 1.3 exhibited less low temperature disintegration, whereas at basicity more than 0.8 exhibited less swelling. Pellets containing 1.5% MgO showed highest reduction characteristics and improved softening characteristics ( Sugiyama et al. studied the effect of CaO/SiO Earlier work reported by authors itself, revealed the MgO addition in the form of pyroxenite reduced the swelling substantially due to the formation of low FeO slag that can resist reduction stresses ( Frazer et al. reported the effect of pellet basicity on swelling; high swelling observed in the basicity range of 0.2–0.8 was caused by the ‘plastic’ nature of the slag which provides a medium for absorption of the reduction stresses by increased distances between the particles ( Yadav et al. established the influence of MgO on sinter quality. It was reported that addition of MgO reduces the sinter strength by forming glassy dicalcium silicate suppressing calcium ferrite formation. MgO restricts the melt formation during sintering, resulting in increased porosity, thereby increasing its reducibility and reduction degradation. MgO also improves the softening–melting characteristics ( Bentell et al. reported the effect of MgO/SiO Lingtan K., et al. reported that addition of MgO in the form of olivine to pellets caused more low temperature breakdown due to the formation of cracks between the reduced magnetite phase and magnesioferrite spinel. However MgO improved the high temperature reducibility of pellets due to less liquid slag formation ( It is important to note that conditions and parameters of pelletizing are specific to given ore or concentrate; the present study is undertaken for typical Indian hematite ore fines high in alumina. Except authors earlier work on quality of pellets from Indian iron ore ( The following materials were used for preparing the green pellets: iron ore fines (− Green pellets were prepared using a laboratory balling disc with a diameter of 600 Firing of the pellets was carried out using electrically heated rotary hearth furnace (RHF) mentioned elsewhere by the author in their earlier work (  Fired pellets were tested for their cold compression strength (CCS) as per ISO 4700 and swelling index as per ISO4698. While reporting CCS, standard deviation was also measured. Reduction degradation index (RDI) and reducibility index (RI) were tested as per ISO 4696-2 and ISO 7215 respectively. For swelling, reducibility and reduction degradation index, average of two test readings was taken and error bars are added to the graphs with 90% confidence level. For softening–melting test, mixed burden sample of 280 Image analysis is a technique that is used to provide an objective measurement of different phases in microstructure. Pellet samples were cut into half and hot mounted at 175 The signal from the camera was provided to a personal computer through a gain correction amplifier to correct the signal for optimal display. The computer software used for interpreting the camera signal into digital image was ‘Axiovision 4.7 Imaging System’ supplied by Carl Zeiss Vision. Basically, the digital image captured from the black and white camera is represented by pixels having 256 shades of grey values i.e. 0 to 255 (     Cold compression strength (CCS) indicates the ability of pellets to withstand the load during their storage & handling and the load of burden material in the reduction furnace. Blast furnace needs pellets with CCS values in the range of 200–230 Swelling index indicates volume change of pellets during reduction. Higher swelling index reduces the strength of pellets after their reduction thereby causing irregularities in the blast furnace like high resistance to gas flow, burden hanging and slipping. Maximum allowable swelling of pellets for blast furnace ranges from 14 to 16%. Reduction degradation index (RDI) of pellets indicates their tendency to generate fines during reduction. From the results it is evident that acid pellets exhibited highest RDI whereas MgO-free pellets in the basicity range of 0.2–0.8 showed low RDI as shown in Reducibility of the pellets may be defined as the ease with which the oxygen combined with the iron oxide can be removed. A higher reducibility indicates more indirect reduction in the blast furnace resulting in lower coke rate and high productivity. Results indicated that acid pellets reduced more compared to MgO-free pellets whereas MgO pellets exhibited higher reducibility compared to acid and MgO-free pellets irrespective of their basicity as shown in Study of softening–melting characteristics of pellets help in understanding the formation of cohesive zone in the lower portion of blast furnace. If the pellets soften at lower temperature and the temperature range between softening and melting is wider, then the resistance to the gas flow will be more in the cohesive zone. Results indicated that softening temperature of MgO-free pellets increased with increasing basicity and the softening–melting range decreased considerably,  Strength of MgO pellets found to be lower as compared to MgO-free pellets irrespective of basicity. This could be attributed to high amount of silicate melt, Volumetric expansion of iron ore pellets takes place during their reduction from hematite to magnetite and wüstite. It can be mainly attributed to the increased volume requirements for the anisotropic growth of magnetite (111) planes parallel to the hematite (0001) planes ( Addition of MgO to pellets increases the melting point of the slag or silicate melt formed between the oxide particles ( Reduction degradation (measured as RDI) of pellets is an undesired phenomenon that occurs at low temperatures in the upper part of blast furnace or reduction shaft of any direct reduction unit. The primary cause of low temperature disintegration is due to crystalline transformation from hexagonal hematite to cubic magnetite accompanied by volume expansion to an extent of 25% and lattice distortion ( MgO pellets exhibited less degradation compared to MgO-free pellets up to 0.4 basicity. This could be attributed to the comparatively high amount of silicate melt as shown in As shown in Softening–melting properties of the pellets are affected by the liquidus phase with low melting point that is formed between wüstite and slag phase during reduction ( MgO pellets exhibited high softening temperature and low S–M range at 0.4 basicity as shown in After evaluating the pellets for different metallurgical properties, it is often difficult to directly ascertain the optimum pellet chemistry suitable for blast furnace because some quality parameters like reducibility, degree of reduction need to be maximized where as other parameters like swelling and softening–melting range need to be minimized. To calculate the numerically optimum pellet chemistry, a new dimensionless index called ‘composite quality index’ has been formulated. Similar attempts were made earlier by other workers to formulate integral index for green pellets ( Composite quality index (CQI) is composed of different indices related to high temperature metallurgical properties of pellets. Indices that need to be increased viz., reducibility index and degree of reduction are placed in the numerator whereas indices that need to be decreased, viz., reduction degradation index, swelling index and softening–melting range are place in the denominator. Hence higher composite index indicates the improved pellet quality and vice verse. Composite quality index (CQI) The effect of pellet basicity and MgO content on the melt formation and microstructure during the induration of iron ore pellets was examined. Fired pellets with varying basicity (0 to 0.8) and MgO (0 and 1.5%) content were tested for cold strength, reduction degradation index, reducibility, swelling and softening–melting characteristics. Optical microscope studies with image analysis software were carried out to estimate the amount of different phases. SEM-EDS analysis was done to record the chemical analysis of oxide and slag phases. X-ray mapping was also carried out to understand the distribution of CaO, MgO, SiO With increasing basicity the amount of silicate melt, which acts a bonding phase, found to increase in the fired pellets. FeO content of the silicate melt decreased with increasing basicity of pellets. Addition of MgO to both acid and limestone-fluxed pellets resulted in the formation of high melting point slag during their induration. Acid pellets exhibited highest swelling, whereas maximum swelling in MgO-free pellets was observed at 0.6 basicity. Addition of MgO to both acid and limestone-fluxed pellets at all basicity levels considerably reduced the swelling tendency of pellets due to the formation of high melting point slag that gives sufficient bond strength to withstand the reduction stresses. With increasing basicity, MgO-free and MgO pellets exhibited considerably lower reduction degradation compared to acid pellets due to the formation of more amount of silicate melt, which is more stable under the reducing conditions in blast furnace. Reducibility of MgO-free pellets is slightly lower compared to acid pellet due to the formation of silicate melt in the former which softens and impedes the flow of reducing gas within the pellet thereby retarding the reduction. Addition of MgO to both acid and limestone-fluxed pellets at all basicity levels increased their reducibility by forming high melting point slag which does not soften at reduction temperatures and keeps the pores open for reducing gas thereby enhancing reduction. Inferior softening–melting characteristics of acid pellets can be attributed to the formation of FeO rich low melting fayalitic liquidus slag. MgO-free pellets with increasing basicity exhibited increased softening temperatures and low softening–melting range due to the formation of burden slag with high liquidus temperature. To relatively compare pellet quality based on vital quality parameters, a new dimensionless index called ‘composite quality index’ has been formulated. Higher composite index indicates the improved pellet quality and vice verse. Limestone fluxed MgO-free pellets at 0.8 basicity, pyroxenite fluxed pellets at 1.5% MgO and dolomite fluxed pellets at 0.4 basicity & 1.5% MgO exhibited optimum metallurgical quality parameters among all the pellets studied. Authors are thankful Mr. Mark B Denys (Chief, R&D and SS) for his encouragement, support and permission to publish this paper. Thanks are also due to Prof A K Lahiri, Prof. T C Rao, Mr. Ashok Kumar (Chief, RMIMTG) and Mr. Surajit Sinha (Head Pellet plant) for their valuable inputs.