For the first time carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been successfully grown directly on hydroxyapatite (HA) by using microwave plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (MPECVD). Such integration has potential to capitalize on the merits of both HA and CNTs. This type of coating could be useful to improve the interface between bone and the implant. Scanning electron microscope SEM investigations show that; the surface of the CNTs is relatively clean and free of amorphous carbon. The CNTs diameters lie in the range 30–70nm. In addition HA encapsulation by carbon was observed at a growth temperature 750°C. Raman spectroscopy indicates that the CNTs are of high quality and the I
                     G/I
                     D ratio lies between 1.243 and 1.774. The changes in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns give an indication that during the plasma deposition the HA-substrate surface is subjected to a temperature sufficient for partial conversion to the β-tricalcium phosphate via dehydroxylation.A variety of materials with higher mechanical strength than bone have been used for bone and joint replacement. Stainless steel, titanium, and tantalum have been utilized extensively as implant materials. The interface between the bone and the implant is of particular importance and has been shown to be very sensitive to the surface treatment of the metal Carbon nanotubes CNTs are considered to be a super material due to the exceptional physical and chemical properties. For example the Young modulus of CNTs about 1 Microwave plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (MPECVD) method has been regarded as one of the most promising candidates for the synthesis of the CNTs; moreover it is a promising rapidly developing growth technique, due to the lower growth temperature, uniform heat distribution and the ability to control the different growth parameters precisely. In the literature there are many reports about the mechanical mixing of both CNTs and HA at different ratios. Although this method is very simple it has many disadvantages. In this paper we report for the first time the synthesis of CNTs directly on HA by using MPECVD. To the best of our knowledge, until this moment, there is no report in the literature concerning such synthesis. This synthesis could be useful to improve the interface between the bone and the implant. The substrates used were the compacted calcium hydroxy phosphate obtained from Sigma–Aldrich. A thin film, about 5 The specimens were imaged with a JEOL JSM-6490LA scanning electron microscope with a resolution of 3 XRD patterns of carbon deposited on the HA substrate are presented in The decomposition to TCP and TTCP occurs at temperatures greater than 900 According to these equations, both the dehydroxylation and decomposition reactions include water vapor as a product. The rates at which these reactions proceed depend on the partial pressure of H  The morphology of HA crystals are first pre-determined by the parameters of the unit cell ( When CNTs are grown on HA and not annealed in vacuum at 700 The growth temperature was found to be a crucial parameter in the growth of the CNTs on HA. When the growth temperature decreased to 500 In order to explain these results there are two possibilities. First, at high temperature the small catalyst particle can coalesce together to form bigger particles with bigger diameter which will produce CNTs with larger diameter. Second, the catalyst particle itself may be flat at the higher temperature so it can also produce CNTs with higher diameter There are several Raman peaks which are interesting for the analysis of carbon nanotubes: the G-band, or Graphite band, at 1582 The spectrum of HA, contained bands associated with internal vibrational modes and bands due to hydroxyl ion stretching and vibrational modes. It was observed that the Raman spectrum of the  For the first time, CNTs with diameter distribution from 30 to 70 El-Shazly M. Duraia would like to acknowledge the Egyptian Government and Suez Canal University for providing all facilities in order to achieve this work.