Six types of alumina with different particle size distributions have been tested for breakage in a plant-scale transport rig. Acoustic chemometrics is used to monitor the powder breakage during pneumatic transport. This is a non-invasive on-line monitoring technique. The correlation between the acoustic signals and the degree of powder comminution is investigated. By relating the acoustic information to dust fractions from the process, we assess the possibility of predicting powder breakage during transport, based on acoustic sensor technology and multivariate data modeling.Particulate materials (“powders”) are some of the most versatile goods used in industry. They include extremely valuable pharmaceuticals and chemicals, as well as lower value minerals, polymers and foodstuffs. The quality of these materials is important for the correct operation of many industrial processes. We have here investigated the breakage of particles during pneumatic transport, and the applicability of acoustic chemometrics as a tool for discovering quality variations (i.e. varying particle size). It is understandable that particles transported in a pipeline can break due to the collisions with the inner walls, and especially as they are transported around bends. As a result, the dust fraction/particle size distribution of the powder changes, possibly with a corresponding change in the acoustic output from the particle flow. Acoustic signals generated from pneumatic transport lines contain abundant information about the process; earlier investigations have shown that information about flow rate Acoustic chemometrics is an emerging discipline, encompassing diverse fields such as electronics, applied engineering and chemometrics The working of acoustic chemometrics principally consists of four main elements:      Chemometrics originated in analytical chemistry, but it also serves as a generic data analytical technology. The multivariate nature of many sophisticated instruments demands the use of chemometrics to analyze the complex data generated. It is indispensable as an integral part of many new measurement techniques. Acoustic chemometrics combines applied engineering, instrumentation, electronics, signal analysis and chemometrics to form a new interdisciplinary approach for the monitoring and control of industry, laboratory and scientific processes Chemometrics consists of a diversity of data analysis tools, which can be used to extract structural information underlying complicated data and systems. For example, a particular chemometric model can be calibrated and validated so as to be used for, e.g. process monitoring and control. The fundamental idea of this approach is that the emission of “noise” is an inherent characteristic of many production, manufacturing and transportation processes. “Noise” here means acoustic energy output not only in the audible range (5–20 kHz), but also denotes the forms of vibrational energy in contiguous frequencies outside audible range, i.e. 0–5, 20–250 kHz. It should be emphasized that the acoustic sensor used in this study is a “passive” sensor that can only “listen” to the acoustic energy output, in contrast to an ultrasound approach where both the acoustic impulse input and output are controlled. Ultrasound sensors are “active sensors”. The main types of sensors in acoustic chemometrics include generic accelerometers as well as specialized units. In this work, we use a sensor type shown in The Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression method is a widely used method for multivariate calibration and has been used with great success in very many chemometric and other applications. It is the workhorse of the data analysis part of acoustic chemometrics. A brief introduction to the PLS method is given below to make it more accessible to the field of powder technology. PLS is a bilinear modeling method that models the relationship between the There are two phases in the common PLS predictive modeling: calibration phase, and prediction phase. Assume input data from The calibration model is summarized as follows: If a nice structure in After the training/calibration phase shown above, a model for the prediction of The prediction of A good model fit does not necessarily mean that the model will be optimal for the future prediction. We have to validate/test the model on new data and choose the model that gives the minimum prediction error, ibid. “Full cross” validation is used to evaluate the prediction ability of the proposed models when there are only a (very) small number of observations available for modeling. Full cross validation means that one builds up as many sub-models as there are objects, each time leaving out one of the objects and only use this one for the testing successively. This procedure is iterated, gradually building up the prediction evaluations. Details can be found in An important evaluative validation parameter is the Root Mean Square Error of Prediction (RMSEP), given by Both calibration and validation variances are calculated at each step of modeling after each factor called PLS components. The model complexity is directly related to the number of components involved. RMSEP tells about the model prediction ability when the optimal number of PLS components has been included in the model. A plot of the RMSEP as a function of the number of components is a very useful guide to determine how many components to use, see The technical details are given in PLS-based acoustic data modeling can be described by the following schematic overview shown in The steps in data processing and regression analysis can be described. (1) Record raw time series from the process, and if necessary, pad each to the nearest length 2 (2) Choose a proper transformation technique(s), i.e. FFT, WT, AMT. In this work, these three techniques have been tried out as preprocessing for regression modeling. FFT was found best suited for extracting information from the acoustic signals, and for the further PLS regression modeling. (3) If necessary, variable selection can be conducted for the purpose of reducing computation time a.o. In this work, the full FFT spectra are used for maximum information since modeling time is not an issue here. (4) Perform PLS modeling based on the proper After the PLS model is established, one can use new The pneumatic transport test rig used in the experiments is shown in Six types of alumina (aluminum oxide, Al Signal conditioning was carried out by a programmable differential amplifier and a low-pass filter board (Alligator Technologies). The signal-to-noise ratio was enhanced, and suitably amplified, and band-limited analogue signals from this board were then converted to digital representation, using a data acquisition board with a sampling rate of 50 kHz (National Instruments). The software part with GUI is based on Labview 5.0 The time-domain signals acquired from the accelerometer appear quite irregular at first sight. Our assumption is that the information of interest is hidden beneath the cover of “noise”, and can be revealed only by data analysis. The Power Spectral Density (PSD) derived from acoustics by the FFT transform is an advantageous signal representation, which enables easy comparison of the signal frequency components from one record to another. PSD spectra were used in the final modeling. The six types of alumina powders used in the experiments are coded as AL-A, -B, -C, -D, -E and -F. For each type of aluminum, 15×5 replicated time series were obtained at each run. Each time series was divided into 100 parts and FFT was conducted on each part. The 100 PSD spectra derived were then averaged to generate a vector containing 512 FFT frequency components. Consequently, an The reference values for the For many reasons, it is likely that outliers may occur in both the Regression models, through multivariate PLS-calibration, were established to describe the relationship between the acoustics ( Models for AL-E, AL-F have fairly good correlations but the slopes are less than 0.7, which falls below the requirements. These models need to be improved. The different types and quality of the selected pilot study set of alumina powders have clearly managed to span a relevant “breakage” range. By comparison, we found that models based on sampler B were slightly better than those on sampler A as evidenced by the marginally higher correlation coefficients. This is reasonable since sampler B is located on the same loop as the acoustic sensor. Again, this means that precise reference values impact directly on the validity of prediction models. In the following, we shall explain the modeling results in detail using the AL-B powder based on dust fraction −42 μm and sampler B since this model is significantly better than all others. This model has highest correlation coefficient, 0.96, largest slope, 0.88, smallest offset, 1.45, and lowest minimum RMSEP (for −42 μm), 0.81, shown in As can be seen in The results for the other five aluminum powders obtained in the same way are shown in We have also evaluated two other alternative domain transformation techniques: Wavelet Transform (WT) This paper has presented the technique of acoustic chemometrics to monitor powder breakage during pneumatic transportation. This is a relatively inexpensive and non-invasive monitoring method. By transforming the acoustic data series to FFT PSD spectra, we show that good models for predicting the degree of breakage can be established for half of the powders selected. Overall, six tested aluminum powder types exhibited a general correlation coefficient in the range of 0.8–0.96 between the acoustic signals and the particle size, but three out of six powders could not be modeled satisfactorily by the present first attempts. There are many reasons for non-perfect models, such as measurement error in reference values, model inadequacy and operation procedures, etc. Further development of this technique is ongoing. Knowing the particle size distribution is important for the correct operation of many industrial processes. Our results indicate that acoustic chemometrics may successfully be used to monitor the particle size distribution of a transported powder. There are several obvious improvement and options to be explored This article is dedicated to one of the co-authors, Prof. Dr. Sunil de Silva, who unfortunately passed away just after the manuscript was submitted. We deeply regret his early demise with sorrow and sympathy. The authors gratefully acknowledge M. Halstensen, at Telemark University College, Norway, for his help in setting up the acoustic experiment system.