Rubberised concrete has the benefit of utilising waste material, preventing resource extraction and improving concrete ductility, however at the cost of reduced strength and stiffness. This paper explored the option to effectively confine the rubberised concrete with steel tubes to obtain enhanced strength and ductility. The behaviour and performances of thirty rubberised concrete-filled single-skin steel tubes of various rubber content, steel section and load eccentricities was systematically investigated in this study. The results have shown that confined rubberised concrete and the restrained steel tube improved ductility of the composite section. The rubberised concrete was more effective in delaying the premature buckling failure of the steel tube compared to the more brittle normal cement concrete. The 15% rubber replacement ratio showed a good balance of strength and ductility and thus recommended for design of roadside barriers. The behaviour of the rubberised concrete filled steel tubes could be accurately predicted using existing design guidelines and safe designs can be produced. This study demonstrated the possibility of using rubberised concrete as a solution to problems that require high moment and deformation capacity, such as the roadside barriers and columns in buildings located in seismic active zones.Waste tyre is one of the largest sources of waste material on the planet, which is an environmental, health and fire hazard and costs millions to dispose Despite the advantages, RuC showed significant reduction in compressive, tensile and flexural strength, reduced workability, and early cracking by the relative deformation between the rubber particles and concrete matrix at interfacial transition zone A limited number of studies were carried out on plain concrete-filled single-skin tube (CFST) beams and analytical models were proposed to predict the beam behaviour of the CFST. The earliest contribution was made by Tomii and Sakino This paper provides an experimental study of the square normal CFST (NCFST) and RuCFST long columns ( General purpose ordinary Portland cement to AS3972 The control mix has 426 kg cement, 205 kg water, 843 kg fine aggregates (sand) and 880 kg of coarse aggregates in one cubic metre. The coarse aggregates consisted of <4, 7, and 10 mm gravels. The particle size distribution curves for cement, sand, coarse aggregates and rubber particles are shown in Four types of steel tubes were used for this project, namely SHS89 × 3.5 ( To obtain the mechanical properties of the concrete, the rubberised concrete cylinders (100 mm diameter and 200 mm height) were tested at 28 days using a Baldwin compression machine with a 600 kN load cell. The loading rate was fixed at 20 kN/min as per AS 1012.9 The CFST columns specimens were tested using different load eccentricities, i.e. 0 (concentric load), The test setups of the CFST columns and beams are shown in The cross-sections of NC, RuC15 and RuC30 concrete cylinders are compared in    The typical failures at the mid-height section of the columns are shown in   For concrete filled SHS89 × 3.5, SHS100 × 3 and SHS100 × 2 beams, as the steel section slenderness increased, the effect of concrete became increasingly noticeable. This was consistent with the findings from previous studies   seen from the concrete residue in the buckles. One major buckle was found in the specimen and a major fracture was found on the tension face. RuC30 ( The strength results for the 36 hollow and concrete filled steel tubular composite specimens are listed in The strength performances of the three types of concretes are compared in The load carrying capacity of CFST members was generally associated with the confinement factor The specimens after testing are shown in   The moment-rotation curves enabled the calculation of energy absorption (shown in The interaction diagrams for the sections of concrete filled SHS89 × 3.5 and SHS100 × 3 specimens were constructed in accordance to Eurocode 4 At pure bending (Point B) from Eurocode 4 the plastic section modulus of the concrete the plastic section modulus of the steel the plastic section modulus of the concrete from 2 the plastic section modulus of the steel from 2 and the height of the neutral axis The Point B from CIDECT Point C and Point D formed an equilateral triangle on the interaction diagram. The moment at Point C was the same as that at Point B, however its load was defined as the resistance to compression of the concrete alone ( At Point D, the load is half of that at Point C and the moment was the maximum resistance moment The member slenderness was also considered as the members had relatively large The reduction factor The interaction diagrams for member capacities of concrete filled SHS89 × 3.5 and SHS100 × 3 specimens constructed from the experimental results and theoretical calculations by Eurocode 4 In In   Thirty CFST specimens with varying rubber content and steel section slenderness were tested under axial, flexural and combined loading conditions. The following conclusions could be drawn: Higher rubber replacement ratios resulted in significant strength reduction of the concrete. However, the ductility of the concrete was greatly improved. As a result, RuCFST members also showed improved ductility compared to their NCFST counterparts. The strength deficiency of the RuC could be overcome by confinement through a steel tube. The improvement was even greater when the concrete was confined by a more compact section. The behaviour of the RuCFST members under combined loading could be accurately predicted using existing design guidelines for normal concrete. The RuCFST also showed better performances when compared to their CFST counterparts in terms of normalised load and moment capacities. The interface zone of the RuC and the steel section was well bonded, with the ductile RuC deformed to fill the buckles and effectively delayed the collapse. The RuC infill generally delayed the fracture of the steel tubes compared to NC, which resulted in larger energy absorption and ductility. The RuCFST beams were more ductile, with significantly improved moment capacity and deformation capacity compared to the hollow tubes. The RuC had a larger contribution to the load/moment capacity compared to NC at a given confinement factor. CFST specimens with larger slenderness ratios showed larger ductility improvements compared with their hollow counterparts, due to their higher tendency to buckle. It is recommended to confine RuC with steel tubular sections in the future construction as flexible roadside barriers, and beams and columns in buildings in seismic active zones. This research is supported by 