Background context
                  Conventionally, short-segment fusion involves instrumentation of one healthy vertebra above and below the injured vertebra, skipping the injured level. This short-segment construct places less surgical burden on the patient compared with long-segment constructs, but is less stable biomechanically, and thus has resulted in clinical failures. The addition of two screws placed in the fractured vertebral body represents an attempt to improve the construct stiffness without sacrificing the benefits of short-segment fusion.
               
                  Purpose
                  To determine the biomechanical differences between four- and six-screw short-segment constructs for the operative management of an unstable L1 fracture.
               
                  Study design
                  Biomechanical study of instrumentation in vertebral body cadaveric models simulating an L1 axial load injury pattern.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirteen intact spinal segments from T12 to L2 were prepared from fresh-frozen cadaver spines. An axial load fracture of at least 50% vertebral body height was produced at L1 and then instrumented with pedicle screws. Specimens were evaluated in terms of construct stiffness, motion, and rod strain. Two conditions were tested: a four-screw construct with no screws at the L1 fractured body (4S) and a six-screw construct with screws at all levels (6S). The two groups were compared statistically by paired Student t test.
               
                  Results
                  The mean stiffness in flexion-extension was increased 31% (p<.03) with the addition of the two pedicle screws in L1. Relative motion in terms of vertical and axial rotations was not significantly different between the two groups. The L1–L2 rod strain was significantly increased in the six-screw construct compared with the four-screw construct (p<.001).
               
                  Conclusions
                  In a cadaveric L1 axial load fracture model, a six-screw construct with screws in the fractured level is more rigid than a four-screw construct that skips the injured vertebral body.Axial load injuries such as compression and burst fractures involving the thoracolumbar junction without associated neurologic injury are often managed nonoperatively with bracing and early mobilization. Operative intervention may be warranted in certain fractures, especially in those with associated neurologic injury and/or perceived mechanical instability. Patient factors such as multitrauma and inability to tolerate bracing may also lead to surgical treatment in cases that would otherwise be nonoperative. In these situations, operative intervention allows for neural element decompression when needed, restoration of sagittal alignment, and early patient mobilization. The appropriate surgical technique for unstable thoracolumbar compression and burst fractures remains controversial. Surgical options include vertebral column reconstruction and instrumentation via an anterior approach, posterior instrumented fusion, or a combination thereof. Anterior column reconstruction allows for direct restoration of the vertebral body height, but with associated morbidities and potential complications accompanying an anterior approach. The posterior approach may be used to reconstruct the anterior column, but is more often used for decompression and instrumentation rather than anterior column reconstruction. As pedicle screw instrumentation was introduced and popularized, the instrumented levels mimicked the historically used hook-and-rod constructs, incorporating two or three levels above and below the level of injury, which came to be called long-segment posterior instrumentation (LSPI). Although this produced mainly successful outcomes with respect to fracture reduction, maintenance of sagittal alignment, and fracture healing, there arose concern that fusion over five or more levels could significantly decrease spinal range of motion and hasten adjacent-segment degeneration Short-segment instrumentation initially involved placing pedicle screws in the vertebra immediately above and below the level of injury, creating a four-screw construct connected by rods spanning, but not directly incorporating, the injured level. The idea was to reduce the extent of surgery and maintain as much native spine mobility as possible, thereby hopefully reducing morbidity and the risk of late adjacent-segment degeneration. Early clinical reports, however, showed a relatively high rate of instrumentation failure and progressive sagittal plane deformity with short-segment instrumentation Spine surgeons have subsequently modified their techniques and indications for the use of SSPI. Highly unstable injuries such as fracture dislocations and high-energy burst fractures with extensive comminution of the vertebral body are more reliably treated with LSPI. However, it is possible to treat other unstable injuries with SSPI. One of the technical modifications that allows for the successful use of SSPI involves placing pedicle screws in the fractured vertebra, provided the pedicles are not fractured and the screws can be safely inserted. This theoretically provides additional stiffness to the construct, thereby reducing the incidence of instrumentation failure, screw pullout, and progressive deformity. There is inherent concern and skepticism, however, as to whether the addition of screws into the injured vertebra adds any real biomechanical benefit. A few reports in the literature tout the improved stability seen with the inclusion of screws in the fractured vertebral segment of a burst fracture Thirteen grossly and radiographically normal fresh-frozen human cadaveric spines (donor ages 20–60 years at time of death) were thawed and manually stripped of the paraspinal muscles, leaving the facet joints, capsules, and interspinous ligaments intact. The spines were separated at the T11/12 and L2/3 discs, leaving an intact segment from T12 to L2. Multiple holes were drilled in the L1 vertebral body to compromise its integrity and allow for the production of an isolated vertebral body axial load fracture. The vertebral column segment was then placed between metal plates, and an incremental axial displacement was applied via an MTS MiniBionix II Model 858 servohydraulic testing machine (MTS Systems Corporation, Eden Prairie, MN, USA) until a fracture at L1 with a residual vertebral height loss of at least 50% was produced. Fluoroscopy was used to confirm a persistent height loss of at least 50% after the load was removed. The posterior elements were intact to visual inspection. DePuy Expedium polyaxial pedicle screws (DePuy Synthes Spine, Inc., Raynham, MA, USA) of 6 mm diameter and 40 mm length were used to instrument T12, L1, and L2. The pedicle screws were then connected to 5.5-mm-diameter titanium alloy rods. The rods were then secured to the pedicle screws with set screws tightened to 80 inch pounds. The inferior end plate of L2 was fixed with polymethylmethacrylate and wood screws to an ultra–high molecular weight polyethylene block that was machined to create a slope of −23° for the inferior end plate of L2 to rest on to orient the spine to the normal sagittal profile. The superior end plate of T12 was attached by screws to a fixture that provided a connection to the lever arm used to apply the flexion-extension loading and the follower preloads ( To maintain the integrity of the bone and soft tissues, all specimens were cyclically loaded at a frequency of 0.25 Hz to 5 Nm in flexion-extension, well within their elastic range ( Two conditions were tested. First, the four-screw construct without screws at the L1 fractured body (4S) was tested, and then the screws at L1 were added creating a six-screw construct (6S). Statistical analysis was performed with the Student The mean stiffness in flexion-extension was 13.42 N/mm with the four-screw construct and 17.37 N/mm with the six-screw construct, a difference that was statistically significant (p<.025). Relative motion of T12 compared with L2 was evaluated in six degrees of freedom. The greatest motion occurred in vertical translation and sagittal left and right rotations, but no significant difference was found between the four- and six-screw groups. Rod strain changes between constructs during motion from flexion to extension were not significantly different (p>.05) at the T12–L1 segment for the two groups (11.77 in the 4-screw and 10.63 in the 6-screw constructs). At the L1–L2 segment, the rod strains were significantly increased (p<.003) in the six-screw construct (7.63) compared with the four-screw construct (3.09). When comparing rod strains at each level within the constructs, there was over a two-fold increase in strain in the T12–L1 (11.77) segment compared with the L1–L2 segment (3.09) of a four-screw construct (p<.01); however, the distribution of strain was more uniform within the six-screw construct (10.63 at T12–L1 and 7.63 at L1–L2). The overall comparison of the biomechanical changes found between the two constructs in terms of the percent change of six screws compared with four screws, with paired statistics, is shown in When surgery is performed for unstable thoracolumbar axial load–induced injuries, rigid fixation is necessary to maintain reduction and preserve sagittal alignment during the fusion and fracture healing process. Fracture reduction, restoration of sagittal alignment, and rigid fixation may be directly and reliably performed with anterior strut grafting and instrumentation of the vertebral body above and below the fractured level There are understandable concerns with posterior instrumentation in isolation, without vertebral body reconstruction, in the surgical treatment of axial load injuries. Despite this, the appeal of treating these fractures with a relatively straightforward posterior-only approach has produced a gradual movement toward using pedicle screw and rod instrumentation alone Placement of a pair of screws in the fractured vertebral body has the goal of increasing the construct strength and stiffness of the construct while maintaining the same construct length as SSPI. There are only a few limited studies in the orthopedic literature evaluating the addition of fracture-level pedicle screw supplementation to short-segment constructs, and they all consider burst fractures only. Mahar et al. Our study quantifies the biomechanical changes that occur with four- versus six-screw posterior instrumented constructs in an unstable cadaveric thoracolumbar axial load fracture model. The additional screws at the fractured level provide 31% greater construct stiffness and potentially better support the fractured vertebral body during flexion-extension loading. The six-screw construct should be particularly advantageous when the pedicles and pedicle-vertebral body junction are intact at the injured level allowing for improved screw purchase, which does occur in some unstable axial load fractures, although the pedicles at L1 are usually the smallest of the lumbar pedicles and can on occasion be difficult to instrument. Other findings of particular interest are the changes in rod strains within each construct. Buckling was evident within the four-screw construct but not the six-screw construct. This was likely a result of the four-screw construct rod spanning a longer distance without an intervening point of fixation as occurs in the six-screw configuration, resulting in tension strain in one segment and compression strain in the other on the same rod of the four-screw constructs as opposed to all tension strains at every level for the six-screw constructs. Additionally, a significant increase in rod strain was found between L1 and L2 in the six-screw fracture model compared with the four-screw model. This is likely the result of the additional two pedicle screws increasing the stiffness of the construct and changing the transmission of load more uniformly through the rod as evidenced by the more even distribution of strain within the rods. With distribution of load shared over 50% more screws than the traditional SSPI construct, each pedicle screw should experience reduced stress during cantilever bending thereby potentially lowering the chance of instrumentation failure and collapse into kyphosis. The resulting increased construct stiffness of a six-screw configuration should better maintain the vertebral body height and sagittal alignment during healing, which may correlate with increased thoracolumbar spine fusion rates Limitations of this study include the variability in bone density, vertebral size, and degree of joint degeneration of the cadaveric specimens. We sought to minimize these possible confounding effects by testing the four- and six-screw constructs in the same specimen, thus providing internal controls. In addition, to maintain the integrity of the bone and soft tissues, all specimens were cyclically loaded well within their elastic range and for only approximately 10 cycles, or 40 seconds per parameter, to limit the potential change in performance of the constructs after repeated cyclical loading. Specimens were also kept moist by spraying saline between tests. Fracture stability contributed by muscle and soft-tissue components cannot be fully assessed using this cadaveric model. In a cadaveric L1 axial load fracture model, a six-screw construct has improved biomechanical characteristics compared with a four-screw construct. When axial load injuries of the thoracolumbar spine are treated surgically with SSPI, a six-screw construct may reduce the stress on each pedicle screw during cantilever bending. Based on the results of this study, we feel that a six-screw short-segment construct with pedicle screws in the injured vertebral body has biomechanical benefits compared with a four-screw construct and should be considered as an option in the surgical treatment of unstable axial load injuries of the thoracolumbar spine when the additional screws can be safely placed. However, we do not know if the placement of additional screws into the fractured level will translate to improved clinical outcomes, as radiographic success does not always mean clinical success. Further studies are warranted in this regard, but nevertheless, these findings may help guide surgical decision making in the setting of an unstable thoracolumbar fracture.