Lead sulfide is the main raw material employed to produce lead. And it is believed to be a very stable substance. The dissociation pathway of lead sulfide is believed to be 2PbS = 2Pb(l)+S2, and its initial dissociation temperature at 10 Pa is believed about 1273 K, and there is no report that it could directed dissociate into lead and sulfur. In this work, we theoretically calculated the stability of lead sulfide at the pressure of 10 Pa, and experimentally investigated the dissociation product of lead sulfide. The first part of this article investigated the dissociation pathways of lead sulfide based on thermodynamic calculation. The second part studies the dissociation as well as volatilization product using X-ray diffraction, ICP-AES and SED. The result indicated we could obtain lead from the direct dissociation of lead sulfide, and the dissociation pathway is 2PbS (g) = 2Pb(l)+S2. At 1153 K, the decomposition rate is 39.23%, and the purity of lead is 99.9%.Lead is not found in nature as a free element, but rather, is predominantly found in the earth's crust in the form of galena (PbS). And lead sulfide is the main raw material employed to produce lead. Almost all the lead is produced from galena through pyrometallurgical process, including oxidation-reduction smelting process, reaction smelting process and precipitation smelting process. The purity quotient of lead produced from pyrometallurgy range from 96% to 99% [ Our team have studied the thermal dissociation of molybdenum disulfide (MoS In this study, we calculate the possible reactions for the dissociation of lead sulfide. And performed the dissociation of lead sulfide experiments under vacuum, in which provides for a substantial simplification in the production of metallic lead by a direct dissociation of lead sulfide into its component elements, metallic lead and sulfur. The raw material was analytical regent grade and used as received without further purification. Lead sulfide (PbS, 99 wt %) was provided by A La Ding Co., Ltd. And Vacuum dissociate experiment was carried out in a laboratory-scale vertical vacuum furnace, as shown in  For the preparation of lead sulfide, the raw material is powdery. Under vacuum condition, powdery substance tend to spray everywhere. So we use 40 g raw material and briquetting it under the pressure of 3–5 p.m. We get compact cylinder-shaped lead sulfide as ingredient in our experiments. The cylinder-shape materials were removed into crucible and put into the vacuum furnace. We keep the pressure at the range of 5–20Pa, and the material was heated up to the experimental temperature at 20°Cper minute. When the temperature reach the experimental temperature, we keep that temperature for 30 min. After that, the heated power was switched off and the chamber pressure was remained the same. When the temperature in the furnace decreased below 323 K, it is time to turn off the pump system and take out the crucible. Finally, residual and condensate were gathered and weighted, respectively. XRD measurements were performed with Rigaku-Dmax 2200 using Cu-Kαradiation. The morphology of the raw material, products collected from the graphite crucible wall and condensate tower were monitored by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on a JEOL 5510 apparatus. The purity of metallic lead was determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) with Optima 8000. The melting point of PbS is 1392 K, and the melt point of Pb is 600 K, boiling point is 2022K [ Considering experiment conditions, the relationships between Gibbs free energy change and temperature of the reactions (1)–(3) are calculated under 10 Pa, as shown in The temperature at which Gibbs free energy change for reactions (1)–(3) equals to zero are 995 K, 1177 K, 1289 K under 10 Pa, respectively. They are the starting temperature for the reactions under 10 Pa. And the starting temperature for reaction (1) is very close to the starting decomposition provided by Xiujing Zai (16.8Pa, 1273 K) and Zairong Guo (10Pa, 1273 K). Our experimental temperature is controlled at 1103 K, 1153 K, so reaction (3) could not proceed. So PbS evaporates congruently in the form of PbS (g). Gaseous lead sulfide is unstable, the possible reactions of PbS (g) in our experimental condition should be described as follow:  Gaseous Pb  From the result of thermodynamic calculation, two decomposition pathways are present for PbS: (1) gaseous lead sulfide direct decomposition to elements (PbS(g)→Pb(l)+S The existence of Pb The first kind of decomposition experiments were done at three different temperatures (1103 K, 1153 K, and 1273 K) under vacuum atmosphere in graphite crucible (a) with a volume of 720 cm Several authors have determined the saturated vapor pressure of lead sulfide, for example, Kingo Sudo, Kelly and Veselovskii have used kundsen effusion method to measure lead sulfide's vapor pressure (see Refs. [ And the saturated vapor pressure of lead sulfide under our experimental temperature range are shown in So under our experimental condition, lead sulfide evaporated congruently. At 1103 K, there were average 16.8 g residual left in the bottom of the crucible, 17.7 g condensate collected from the crucible wall and 5.2 g condensate collected from the condensate tower. The XRD patterns of product collected in the crucible bottom are shown in As seen in At 1153 K, there were 3.76 g residual left in the crucible bottom. And 22.09 g condensate collected from the crucible (a) wall. And 10.3 g condensate collected from the condensate tower. The SED micrograph and associated XRD patterns of products collected from crucible (a) wall, condensate tower are shown in  At 1273 K, after 30 min, there was nothing left in the bottom of crucible (a), all of 38.9 g lead sulfide was collected from the condensate zone. This indicates the results of Zairong Guo and Xiujing Zai, which based on reaction (1): 2PbS = Pb(l)+S The second kind of experiments were carried out in crucible (b) with 40 g lead sulfide at the temperature about 1153 K, under the pressure of 5–15 Pa and the heating time also controlled 30 min. There are 15.69 g lead collected from the bottom of crucible. Compared the result of the experiment in crucible (a), the decomposition rate has increased from 10.85% to 39.23%.This result verified the dissociation of lead sulfide happed when lead sulfide is in gas phase. Lead sulfide in crucible (b) has a smaller volatilize space, and the small hole on the lid could enable sulfur which result from the dissociation of lead sulfide get through as well as extend the time of gaseous lead sulfide stay in the heating zone. In our experiments, there are two pathways for the lead sulfide. (PbS-PbS(g)-PbS, and PbS-PbS(g)-Pb(l)+S2). In the first kind of experiment, without any block, most of gaseous lead sulfide direct transform into solid lead sulfide. In the second kind of experiment, the small crucible with a lid enable gaseous lead sulfide stay in the heating zone longer, which enhance its dissociation. Based on thermodynamic calculation, the dissociation pathway for lead sulfide is 2PbS(g) = 2Pb(l)+S This research work is supported by the Found of