A two-dimensional coupled lattice Boltzmann immersed boundary discrete element method is introduced for the simulation of polygonal particles moving in incompressible viscous fluids. A collision model of polygonal particles is used in the discrete element method. Instead of a collision model of circular particles, the collision model used in our method can deal with particles of more complex shape and efficiently simulate the effects of shape on particle–particle and particle–wall interactions. For two particles falling under gravity, because of the edges and corners, different collision patterns for circular and polygonal particles are found in our simulations. The complex vortexes generated near the corners of polygonal particles affect the flow field and lead to a difference in particle motions between circular and polygonal particles. For multiple particles falling under gravity, the polygonal particles easily become stuck owing to their corners and edges, while circular particles slip along contact areas. The present method provides an efficient approach for understanding the effects of particle shape on the dynamics of non-circular particles in fluids.Particles moving in fluids are commonly found in nature, such as when plant seeds move in the wind and pebbles move in a river. Many industrial processes, including chemical, pharmaceutical, and mineral processes, also involve the transport of solid particles by fluids. Understanding the mechanism and behavior of particles in fluids is important in terms of being able to control or optimize particulate flows. Particulate flow commonly encountered in nature or industry is often complicated since non-spherical particles often exist. Recently, non-spherical particles have received attention because of their application to granular systems of academic and industrial interest. When particles move in fluids, the particle shapes may affect the flow field in addition to there being particle–particle contact. Collisions between particles are always possible during the movement of multiple particles in fluids. Actual particles may have complex geometrical shapes and the collision and migration of particles may be highly complicated. The behaviors of non-circular or non-spherical particles moving in a flow may be greatly different from those of circular or spherical particles. With the development of computing technology, numerical simulations have come to play an important role in the investigation of particles moving in fluids. Numerical simulation can provide details for exploring the fundamental mechanisms of particles in fluids when experimental measurements are difficult to make ( In recent years, as an alternative computational method of solving N–S equations, the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) has been widely used in the simulation of a flow field owing to its simplicity and intrinsic parallel nature. In addition, the LBM has become popular in the simulation of particulate flows owing to its particle-based numerical scheme, which calculates the dynamics of fictitious particles ( Combining Newtonian dynamics of the solid particles with a discretized Boltzmann equation for the fluid phase, The immersed boundary method (IBM), which was first introduced by Combining most features of the LBM and IBM, a two-dimensional immersed boundary-lattice Boltzmann method (IB-LBM) was presented to solve fluid–particle interaction problems by In the case of multiple particles moving in fluids, collisions between particles need to be considered for the IB-LBM. The discrete element method (DEM), which was introduced by At present, most numerical studies on particles moving in fluids focus on circular or spherical particles and there are few studies on non-circular or non-spherical particles. Recently, The present study provides a two-dimensional lattice Boltzmann immersed boundary discrete element method (LB-IB-DEM) for multiple polygonal particles moving in fluids. This method is simple and easy to implement, and combines the advantages of the LBM, IBM, and DEM. In our coupling scheme, the IB-LBM of Although our method is two-dimensional at present, it can be straightforwardly extended to three-dimensional cases, in spite of this requiring a more complicated detection algorithm to be considered. The validity of the present method is demonstrated in the simulation of a single circular particle and two circular particles falling under gravity in incompressible viscous fluids. Through numerical simulations, we study the dynamics of particles and the characteristics of the flow field and discuss the effect of particle shape during the transport of polygonal particles. For the motion of polygonal particles in incompressible viscous fluids, a discrete lattice Boltzmann equation with a single-relaxation-time approximation is used to simulate the fluid flow: In this study, an incompressible D2Q9 lattice Boltzmann model proposed by A momentum-exchange-based LB-IBM proposed by Considering the hydrodynamic force, gravitational force, and collision force, the governing equation of motion of solid particles can be written as This study adopts the DEM of The contact shape of two interacting polygons is shown in The relative velocity The contact force acting on the force point The magnitude of the elastic force is proportional to the area The normal damping is chosen to be The friction is treated as a modified Cundall–Strack model: The direction of the cohesive force is the direction of the normal In this study, we use Gear’s second-order predictor–corrector algorithm to solve Eq. The computational sequence is illustrated in To validate the code, we consider the motion of a single circular particle falling in an incompressible viscous fluid, as shown in The To demonstrate the effect of the particle shape on particle–particle collision, we consider two particles falling under the effect of gravity in an incompressible viscous fluid, as shown in The simulation results of particle positions and velocities are shown in To investigate the effect of the grid size, we compare the results of the longitudinal velocities for three computational grids, as shown in To compare the dynamics of polygonal particles with the dynamics of circular particles, we simulate two regular polygons falling in the same fluid. To reduce the sensitivity of numerical disturbance, the first particle is initially set at (0.99 The particle shape affects not only the drag but also the collision modes between particles. Triangular particles and hexagonal particles fall more slowly than circular particles, which can be seen from the vertical positions of particles, as shown in It is noteworthy that triangular particles did not come into contact with each other in our simulations. The distance between the two triangular particles was always greater than the diameter of the circumcircle, as seen in The contours of vorticity for polygonal particles falling under gravity in the kissing stage at Our simulation results demonstrate that the shape of particles can make non-circular particles behave differently from circular particles and suggest that we should consider the geometry of the particle shape for particle motion in fluids. The present numerical method provides a way of understanding the mechanics of non-circular particles moving in fluids. To demonstrate that our method is capable of handling the sedimentation of multiple particles, a simulation is carried out for the sedimentation of 16 polygonal particles in an incompressible viscous fluid. The fluid domain is a square box with width of 2 Polygonal particles are initially statically positioned in the fluid domain. The first corner of a particle lies on a ray that starts from the center of mass of the particle and is along the The simulation results for the sedimentation of 16 particles in an incompressible viscous fluid at different time stages are also shown in To further demonstrate that our method can deal with particle shapes that are more general, we simulate the sedimentation of 16 irregular polygons in fluids. The initial centers of the irregular polygons are the same as those of the regular polygons. However, the particle shapes deviate from regular polygons. The number of corners of each particle is generated randomly between four and eight. The corner positions of each particle deviate from those of regular polygons with random variations. The circumcircle diameter of particles is approximately 0.3 To quantitatively describe the dispersion of particles, we use the standard deviation of the particle positions in the x-direction. The standard deviation The time histories of the standard deviation A novel two-dimensional numerical method was presented for the simulation of polygonal particles falling in viscous incompressible fluids. The method combines the advantages of the LBM, IBM, and DEM, and is simple and easy to implement. The effects of the particle shape on particle–particle and particle–wall collisions were considered in our simulations. The presented method can handle the sedimentation of particles with irregular geometry in fluids. The sedimentation of a single particle and two circular particles was investigated by employing our method and the simulation results are in agreement with results reported in the literature. The dynamics of two regular polygonal particles falling in fluids were compared with those of circular particles. Finally, through the simulation of 16 particles moving in a viscous incompressible fluid, we demonstrated that our method can deal with multiple polygonal particles moving in fluids. The simulation results showed that the particle shape affects not only the drag forces but also the modes of collision between particles when particles move in viscous incompressible fluids. Non-circular particles behave differently from circular particles. Polygonal particles can stack up more easily than circular particles in the vertical direction on the surface of the wall below in the fluid domain, while circular particles can more easily slide along their contact line and are finally almost uniformly distributed on the wall below. The present numerical method provides a way of understanding the mechanics of non-circular particles moving in viscous incompressible fluids. Finally, we point out that, even though the present simulations are limited to two-dimensional cases, the equations and method are general and the presented LB-IB-DEM may be easily expanded to three-dimensional cases, despite more efforts being required for the development of the DEM of three-dimensional non-spherical particles. This study was funded by the