Biomass accumulation was studied in a biofilter packed with an organic/inorganic, hybrid packing material made of clay pellets plus clay pellets covered by a thin layer of compost and inoculated with activated sludge from a municipal WWTP. Operating conditions under high loads of toluene were selected to force plant failure by clogging. The biofilter achieved a remarkably maximum elimination capacity of 595gtoluenem−3
                     h−1 (1280gtoluenem−3
                     h−1 based on the first 25cm of the biofilter). The evolution of biofilter performance and biomass growth over the packing material were studied until the reactor collapsed. Several variables related to biomass growth such as reactor weight, oxygen consumption, CO2 production, substrate removal and pressure drop were monitored. Alternated periods of substrate supply and starvation were tested to assess biomass growth and detachment. Moreover, pH and biomass content were periodically measured in the leachate to determine the washing efficiency of intermittent watering. Pressure drop measurements demonstrated that watering was an effective technique to wash the excess of biomass accumulated. Experimental data also permitted to determine important parameters for biofilter modeling as the biomass growth yield and the stoichiometric coefficients of toluene biological oxidation. Variables monitored are sensitive to biomass accumulation and provided enough description of the system towards development of a comprehensive model considering biomass growth to predict and prevent clogging in equivalent processes.Biofiltration of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) employs the metabolic activity of microorganisms immobilized on a packing material to degrade gas phase pollutants which are the carbon and energy source for microbial growth. However, biomass accumulation is one of the most critical processes that need to be controlled along the operation of biofilters and biotrickling filters to achieve a stable performance during long-term operation. The excess of biomass inside the bioreactor significantly increases pressure drop, which ultimately may lead to external wash out of part of the biomass from the system or to force the replacement of the support media. Additionally, the excess of biomass leads to increased pressure drop that implies an increased operating cost. In addition, reduced removal efficiencies due to reduced specific surface areas and porosities are encountered. Channeling because of non-uniform biomass growth might also occur Organic volatile compounds, as toluene, are industrial chemicals produced widely in the world. The high interest of improving the knowledge of abatement techniques for VOCs are closely related to odor emissions as well as to the serious adverse human health effects recently reported. Even at low concentrations, toluene has been found to be carcinogenic, causes damage to the liver and kidney, paralyzes the central nervous system and causes genetic damage Several packing materials, both organic and inorganic, have been tested in biofiltration as support media for biomass immobilization. While organic materials are shown to be low-priced and suitable to potentially release inorganic nutrients and keep the water content at optimal levels for microorganisms, inorganic materials generally offer higher contact surfaces and durability Still, removal of high loads of toluene entails important operational difficulties. Several authors have reported that high inlet concentrations of toluene may reach toxic levels for the active microflora, i.e. the biodegradation rate may be substrate inhibited In the present work, the performance of a lab-scale biofilter treating high loads of toluene was assessed through extensive biofilter monitoring to quantify and understand biomass accumulation towards future modeling of the system. Parameters were monitored along the evolution of the biofilter from the inoculation to a forced clogging episode in five sampling ports along the height of the biofilter to determine the corresponding profiles during several periods of operation. Biomass detachment under starvation conditions and recovering from a long shutdown of the inlet load were also studied. Experiments were carried out in a lab-scale plant consisting of a PVC column with an inner diameter of 14.5 The reactor was packed with a mixture of a hybrid material based on clay pellets with a thin layer of compost and clays pellets without compost in a 1:4 ratio. The particle size of the packing material was 4–5 Gas-phase parameters were monitored through five sampling ports along the height of the biofilter in order to obtain properties profiles during operation. Sampling ports were tagged A, B, C, D and E, from biofilter inlet to outlet separated by a distance of 25 Toluene concentration in air was measured from the sampling ports by an on-line photoionization detector (PID) (Photovac 2020, USA). The detector was connected to a computer via a RS232 port for continuous data collection. However, between day 17 and 55 gas samples were collected in Tedlar® bags due to the PID malfunctioning. In this case, toluene concentrations were measured in triplicate in each port using a gas chromatograph (Perkin Elmer Clarus 400, USA) equipped with a capillary column (N65110C0, Perkin Elmer, USA) and a flame ionization detector. Carbon dioxide and oxygen concentrations were measured on-line with a gas analyzer (Maihak S710, Germany) by infrared (IR) with a NDIR UNOR module for CO A set of solenoid valves allowed for on-line monitoring of toluene concentration, carbon dioxide, oxygen consumption, differential pressure, temperature and humidity at the five sampling points. Analogical inputs and digital outputs were connected to a PCI-1711 data acquisition card (Advantech, Taiwan). A Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system developed in LabWindows/CVI (National Instruments, USA) was used to automate and monitoring the pilot plant. The solenoid valves were programmed by means of the SCADA system to switch periodically the five sampling ports. Each solenoid valve was connected through PU tubing to the photoionization detector, the oxygen and carbon dioxide analyzer, the differential pressure transmitter and the temperature and humidity transmitter. Time programming of solenoid valves ensured that the samples reached each instrument after a cleaning cycle with compressed air. Thus, a value for each parameter monitored was obtained per sampling port at a frequency of, at least, once per day. This SCADA system was also used for regulating the water addition in order to keep suitable moisture content, provide the necessary nutrients for the microorganisms and wash out dead cells and end-products of toluene degradation. Nutrient solution was automatically sprinkled over the biofilter bed at a flowrate of 1400 Biofilter performance was monitored for 120 A quick start-up period was observed in the biofilter. The RE quickly increased to around 96% after 72 Pressure drop measurements ( From day 45, the measured pressure drop reached a value over 100 The overall performance of the biofilter in terms of toluene removal is shown in Biofilter activity during starvation periods depends on several factors such as the type of packing material used, the amount of biomass accumulated and the operating conditions in terms of air, water and nutrients supply Experimental data permitted to evaluate the fraction of pollutant used to produce biomass. Toluene abatement in a biofilter is a biochemical reaction catalyzed by microorganisms. In the case of complete oxidation of toluene to carbon dioxide and water, 3.35  Present results show that 53% of degraded toluene is effectively oxidized to CO The use of packing materials combining the advantages of both organic and inorganic materials has been reported to improve the performance of biofilters, particularly in the case of the hybrid packing material studied herein. Hernández et al. In addition to a fast start up of the bioreactor, a large, stable EC is desired. Only one previous work achieving an EC of the same order of magnitude has been found in the literature Long-term bioreactor stability is demonstrated if stable ECs are maintained in a large period of time without a decrease in bioreactor performance. In this sense, the high load fed to the bioreactor served also to assess its long-term stability in a shorter period of time. The loss of performance encountered on days 20, 26, 38 in modules C, D and E, respectively, indicated that reactor stability was starting to diminish. In addition, short-term stability is defined by the reactor capability to face transient load changes by smoothing inlet concentration fluctuations as those tested on days 20 and 95 as well as after the starvation period. Short-term stability was probably due to the large amount of biomass grown in the reactor, mostly in the lower modules of the biofilter, which served to smooth inlet concentration fluctuations such as that on day 20. Interestingly, toluene and CO In the long run, biomass accumulation is detrimental and leads to an excessive water hold-up and, concomitantly, to a not viable pressure drop across the bed. Independently of clogging prevention, biological treatment of such high loads of pollutant needs of methods for facing clogging problems such as bed stirring, bed washing or nutrients control which permit removal of part of the excess biofilm without affecting the performance Biomass accumulation in a biofilter was enhanced by the high load of toluene treated, the particle size of the material, and its spatial distribution in the bed in order to collect information towards a better understanding of biomass growth by mathematical modeling. Results demonstrate that high loads of toluene can be treated by a non-specific consortium in biofiltration (up to 1280 Antonio David Dorado received a pre-doctoral scholarship of the MEC (Ministerio de Educacion y Ciencia, Spain). Authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the “Comision Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologia” (CICYT) and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF-EC), Projects CTQ 2006-14997-C02-02 and CTQ 2009-14338-C03-03. The Department of Chemical Engineering at UAB is a unit of Biochemical Engineering of the Xarxa de Referencia en Biotecnologia de Catalunya (XRB), Generalitat de Catalunya. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 