Longitudinal high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is the most widely applied in industry by virtue of to its high processing capacity and low magnetic leakage. However, due to introduction of pulsating flow and the limited magnetic forces induced by rod matrices, longitudinal high gradient magnetic separator still showed quite lower recovery compared with horizontal high intensity magnetic separator in recovering ultrafine magnetic minerals. Optimization of longitudinal HGMS system is of great significance for improving particle capture efficiency or reducing energy consumption. In this study, we proposed a new concept of matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied induction for maximum particle capture in longitudinal HGMS. Particle capture performance of matrices with aspect ratio of 1/5–6 in applied induction of 0.2–2T were investigated using extended particle capture models for unsaturated and saturated matrices as well as model selection methodology. The matching relation under the two cases of equal matrix cross-section area and equal horizontal axis were demonstrated. Particle motion trajectories around matrices were depicted and particle capture radius was determined. It was proved that there existed matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied induction for maximum particle capture for both the two cases and the relation was independent of matrix and particle size. The matching relation can be adopted to configure the HGMS system for improving particle capture efficiency or reducing energy consumption. Based on results of this study, it was also inferred that there should exist matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied induction for maximum separation efficiency.vacuum permeability, 4π × 10 magnetic susceptibility of particle volume of particle, m magnetic field, A/m the applied magnetic field strength, A/m the applied magnetic induction, T radius of particle, m particle capture radius, m polar angle coordinate polar coordinate, m angle of applied field with respect to matrix long axis angle of fluid with respect to matrix long axis base of natural logarithm imaginary symbol the saturation magnetic of the matrix, T viscosity of the fluid, Pa·s velocity of particle, m/s velocity of fluid, m/s initial velocity of fluid, m/s half the long axis of elliptic matrix, m half the short axis of elliptic matrix, m half the focal length of elliptic matrix, m radius of circular matrix, m horizontal axis of elliptic matrix, m vertical axis of circular matrix, m ratio of matrix long axis to short axis ratio of axis along magnetization to that perpendicular to magnetization elliptic angle coordinate elliptic coordinate High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) has witnessed widespread application in mineral processing Initially, the greatest obstacle for large scale application of high gradient magnetic separator in mineral processing is the serious blockage of materials in the vicinity of matrices. In longitudinal and transversal HGMS, a pulsating flow is generally applied in the separation space to eliminate matrix blockage Simulation is widely adopted in process study In this paper, extended particle capture models (for unsaturated and saturated matrices) in longitudinal HGMS were derived. Particle capture performance of matrices with various aspect ratio under a variety of applied induction were investigated with the extended models and model selection methodology. The matching relation between optimal aspect ratio and applied induction in longitudinal HGMS is expected to be obtained and then longitudinal high gradient magnetic separators can be configured using the matching relation for improving particle capture or reducing energy consumption. The matrix shape has significant influence on matrix magnetic characteristics and its performance in HGMS  For the HGMS of paramagnetic particle in the size range of several microns to dozens of microns, the Van Der Waals force, the electric force, the Brownian motion and inertial force are negligible compared with magnetic and fluid drag forces. Particle capture can be modeled by balancing magnetic and fluid drag forces Magnetic field and electric field belong to conservative field and have many similarities. Magnetic field around elliptic matrix can be calculated by analogy with the calculation of electric field around an elliptic dielectric. The complex potential functions of electric field around a elliptic dielectric has been presented by Smythe The following boundary conditions can be applied to calculate the coefficients With the magnetic potentials in Eqs. For unsaturated and saturated matrices, For unsaturated and saturated matrices, For the case of The same boundary conditions as Eqs. The magnetic force acting on paramagnetic particle can be calculated: Flow field around matrices can be calculated using the complex potential function of flow where The real part is flow velocity potential: The flow velocity around matrix can be calculated with the potential and the components are shown by Eqs. For the case of The velocity potential: Components of flow velocity are as follow: With the components of flow velocity, the fluid drag force can then be calculate with Eq. Having obtained the magnetic and fluid drag forces, extended particle capture models in longitudinal HGMS can be established (for unsaturated and saturated matrices). For the case of where For the case of For unsaturated and saturated matrices, For the case of For unsaturated and saturated matrices, In this study, applied induction of 0.2T, 0.4T, 0.6T, 0.8T, 1T, 1.5T, 2T and matrix aspect ratio of 1/5, 1/2, 1, 2, 4, 6 were considered. With increasing aspect ratio, matrix magnetization state changes and can reach saturation even under a low induction. Rapid determination of magnetization state of matrix is quite necessary. We have investigated magnetization process of circular and elliptic matrices with increasing applied induction    Another interesting phenomenon which can be observed in  Also, matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied induction for maximum particle capture was investigated under the same horizontal axis (2 mm).  Longitudinal high gradient magnetic separators are the most widely applied in mineral processing. As has been mentioned above, in many practices of HGMS, capture efficiency of magnetic particles is not the only index, the quality of magnetic products is equally important. In mineral processing, many efforts have been made to improve the selectivity in HGMS of weakly magnetic ores In HGMS, particles are attracted by matrices and then accumulate on matrices. Variation of particle aspect ratio will not only affect particle capture by matrices but also particle accumulation on matrices. As mechanical entrainment in longitudinal HGMS is mainly caused by direct impingement of pulp flow on particle deposit, deposit morphology will also affect impingement range of pulp flow and consequently mechanical entrainment of gangue minerals. In this paper, a new concept of matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied induction for maximum particle capture in longitudinal HGMS was proposed. The matching relation exists for both the cases of equal matrix cross-section area and horizontal axis, and is independent of particle and matrix sizes. Particle capture radius of matrices with optimal aspect ratio can be much larger than that of conventional circular matrices within induction range commonly adopted in mineral processing. The matching relation can be used to configure the HGMS system for improving recovery of ultrafine magnetic minerals or reducing energy consumption under the same separation indexes. It is also believed that there should exists matching relation between matrix aspect ratio and applied induction for maximum separation efficiency in three configurations of HGMS, which will be investigated systematically in our follow-up studies.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research work was financially supported by the