For ∼50 years mixtures of cobalt(II) and manganese(II) acetates with sodium bromide or hydrobromic acid in acetic acid have been used as catalysts for the homogeneous aerobic oxidation of alkylaromatic compounds. They are known to be stable mixtures. While characterizing this mixture via EXAFS, it was thus surprising to observe an unexpected change in the color of the reaction mixture from deep blue to yellow or orange. Subsequent characterization of the reaction via UV–vis and EXAFS showed that the color change was due to the oxidation of bromide to dibromine. The reaction was found to require the presence of dioxygen. It was found via MALDI, IR and other methods, that the commercial source of cobalt(II) acetate contained a small amount of nitrate impurity. It is the presence of nitrate that caused the oxidation of bromide since intentional addition of various nitrate compounds causes the reaction to occur. Nitrate is likely initiating a chain reaction. The dibromine formed is an active bromination agent. Thus we show that an inexpensive, in-situ preparatory method for generating dibromine is a Mn(II) acetate/nitrate/bromide/air mixture. We show that the reaction, for T
                     <40°C, is autocatalytic and its initiation and reaction times are dependent on a number of variables such as temperature, nitrate concentration, type of bromide and metal, pH, water concentration in acetic acid, and purity of the solvent. A cautionary note: the accidental addition of nitrate into a catalyst feed tank used for homogeneous oxidation of alkylaromatics in pilot plants or commercial plants could cause the bromide to oxidize to dibromine. This could be potentially dangerous and/or result in decreased yields.Homogeneous aerobic oxidation of alkylaromatics is commercially practiced on a multi-billion lb/yr scale to produce five major products – terephthalic, isophthalic, trimellitic, pyromellitic and 2,6-dicarboxynaphthalene acids. The solvent is acetic acid with the most common metallic catalysts being the acetate salts of Co(II) and Mn(II). Addition of bromide to these metallic catalysts as HBr or NaBr, either to the individual metals or to combinations of the metals, increases their activity and selectivity during oxidation of alkylaromatic compounds. The most common catalyst is a mixture of Co/Mn/Br which gives molar yields from 80% to 95% Oxybromination refers to bromination of an organic substrate in which the dibromine is generated in situ from hydrobromic acid or a bromide salt via an oxidant. It is a safe way of generating dibromine because transfer of the volatile dibromine from a bottle is not necessary. Peroxides, especially hydrogen peroxide, are most often used as the oxidant. Dioxygen is the preferred oxidant because of its greenness, its non-toxicity, and its ready availability in air. Because of the triplet spin state of dioxygen, The reaction that we discovered is The formation of dibromine in reaction The original purpose of this research was to characterize the coordination chemistry of a hydrobromic acid/cobalt(II) acetate mixture using EXAFS at 25 and 95 Another indication of the formation of dibromine is the positive cyclohexene tests described below. The dibromine immediately reacted when cyclohexene was added to the Co/Br solution after the color change occurred. We established that the active catalyst for reaction Significant differences between active and inactive cobalt(II) acetate were also observed with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectroscopy (MALDI-TOF-MS) and infrared spectroscopy (IR). MALDI-TOF gave unique positive and negative ions associated with the cobalt (active) species whose molecular weights were consistent with the presence of nitrate, see Table 1S (Supplementary data). The presence of nitrate was also confirmed using EM Quant Nitrate Test Strips (10020-1) which gave positive results for cobalt (active) and negative results for cobalt (inactive). The IR of cobalt (active), cobalt (inactive) and cobalt(II) nitrate hexahydrate were compared. The IR of cobalt (active) was consistent with cobalt(II) acetate mixed with a small amount of cobalt(II) nitrate. Thus cobalt (active) contains unique absorptions at 830, 1730, and 2480 Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at  The striking color change that occurs during reaction When sodium nitrate is added to the cobalt(II) acetate (inactive)/HBr solution, within 50 UV–vis spectra were also obtained on the final product of the reaction of sodium nitrate with Mn/Br in acetic acid, see A classic organic test for the presence of bromine, is the addition of an olefin which reacts with the dibromine. An instantaneous color change occurred when cyclohexene was added to the above experiments after reaction The autocatalytic nature of these reactions can be illustrated from a kinetics plot that is derived from the measured UV–vis spectra (300–800 As shown in As explained below, the induction and reaction times are very sensitive to the purity of the acetic acid and hence only experiments with the same purity of solvent can be compared. Solvent 1 is Aldrich acetic acid with 99.99+% purity and solvent 2 is Aldrich acetic acid with 99.7+% purity. Slower induction times are observed in solvent 1. With the lower purity solvent longer induction times are observed in the order Mn/Br/NO We further determined that nitrate salts without transition metals were also active in promoting the conversion of bromide salts to dibromine. Mixures of NaNO  We did not further explore why these two solvents gave such different results. Solvent 1 probably has significantly less impurity metal concentrations. It is well known that the presence of small amounts of impurity metals, such as copper and vanadium, affect the activity and selectivity in the autoxidation of hydrocarbons using a Co/Mn/Br catalyst       In acetic acid the dissociation reaction is     Bromination is a very common organic reaction. It is much safer to generate the dibromine in situ than adding it from a bottle of dibromine This discovery of a catalyst solution of Co/Br and Co/Mn/Br, in the presence of a small amount of nitrate, that aerobically oxidizes the bromide to dibromine has practical, and dangerous consequences since dibromine is a volatile, gaseous, suffocating, corrosive and toxic substance. In our studies, we used only ∼5 If an operator happened to extract a sample from the feed tank, he might be exposed to a very large amount of dibromine. Furthermore, the volatile dibromine would enter the vapor space in the catalyst feed tank potentially resulting in a reduced bromine/metals ratio in the oxidation reactor. This would decrease the aromatic acid yield and increase undesirable side-products such as carbon dioxide – a greenhouse gas. The manufacture of terephthalic acid is a continuous process with very stringent quality controls. A sudden lowering of the terephthalic acid yield even by 1 We have the following four types of evidence that nitrate is not a stoichiometric oxidant of bromide and hence is probably initiating the chain reaction. (1) If nitrate is a stoichiometric oxidant supplying five electron equivalents and assuming all five equivalents were used, then Br/nitrate ratios greater than five would result in an incomplete reaction. We find, however, in The autocatalytic nature of the reaction is consistent with a free radical chain mechanism. Nitrate is a strong oxidant and is known to react through free radical mechanisms We have discussed above a variety of variables that affect the reaction and induction times of rxn 1. Initiation. One possibility is the reaction of nitrate with bromide to give the bromine atom radical (Br 2. Propagation The sum of the five propagation steps above is rxn In the presence of Co and Mn, we find experimentally that the induction time is greatly reduced and significantly less nitrate is required for the reaction to occur. This can be rationalized by reactions M It is known that most of the bromide in anhydrous acetic acid is coordinated to the metals Alternatively, rxn The retardation in rate due to the presence of water in acetic acid can be explained by Eqs. The strong catalytic effect of Co and Mn in promoting reaction All experiments were performed in 10 cc vials containing ∼5 All of the reagents stated below were used as received. Cobalt (active) was a specific lot of Aldrich cobalt(II) acetate tetrahydrate with 99.999% purity (metals basis). Cobalt (inactive) was Aldrich reagent grade cobalt(II) acetate tetrahydrate. Two different sources of hydrobromic acid were compared – Alpha (99.9999% metals purity) and Alpha ACS reagent grade. Two differences sources of acetic acid were compared – Aldrich (99.99% metals basis) and Aldrich reagent grade. Aldrich anhydrous cobalt(II) acetate, Aldrich cobalt(II) oxide, Alfa Aesar ACS grade sodium nitrate, Alfa Aesar puritronic cobalt(II) nitrate hexahydrate, Aldrich 70 A Bruker Autoflex II MALDI-TOF-MS was operated in reflectron mode following external calibration with peptide standards in alpha cyano cinnaminic acid with a mass range covering 100–2500 IR spectra were acquired using a Bruker IFS-66V FTIR spectrophotometer with an liquid nitrogen cooled MCT detector. The solid samples were prepared by dissolution in acetic acid and then placing a drop onto a thin-film polyethylene IR transmission card. The acetic acid was allowed to evaporate to dryness using house nitrogen. As a further measure, the samples were run under vacuum in the evacuated sample compartment of the spectrometer to eliminate contributions from volatile components. UV–vis absorption measurements were performed using a Shimadzu spectrometer UV-2401PC. The spectrometer was operated in repeat scan mode wherein the reaction kinetics were measured by a series of consecutive spectra. During kinetics measurements, a spectrum with wavelength range 300–800 The Br K-edge (13474 J.L.F., C.M.S., V.T.P., and Y.C. were supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 