The study of succinic acid as a leaching agent has been undertaken to probe the leaching of naturally occurring magnesite samples. The influence of various reaction conditions (acidic strength, particle size of the magnesite, liquid to solid proportion, reaction temperature and stirring rate) was investigated. The results indicated that the extraction of magnesium depends on acidic strength, reaction temperature, ore particle size, stirring rate and liquid solid ratio. The application of graphical and statistical approaches for the analysis of kinetic data revealed that the rate of extraction of magnesium from natural magnesite is determined by the chemical reaction step. The calculated energy of activation for the dissolution of magnesite is 45.197kJmol−1 in the reaction temperature span of 313K to 343K.Magnesite is considered one of the most suitable ores for obtaining magnesium and its various compounds. After aluminum and iron, magnesium is considered the third most commonly used structural metal. Magnesium and its compounds are widely applied in alloy formation, desulfurization of molten iron, fertilizers, pyrotechnics, aerospace, flares, synthesis of Grignard reagent, refractory materials, food, and many other areas ( Magnesite rocks from different locations show differences in acidulation processes on account of variation in composition of magnesite deposits. Impurities contained in magnesite rocks in general are silica, calcium, iron, etc. and may become the causes of undesirable impacts on the usage of compounds of magnesium. Many studies concerning leaching of rocks with a variety of leaching solutions have been carried out ( Leaching of magnesite rocks can be achieved by organic/inorganic bases or acids or/and their salts. Dissolution of magnesite rock in inorganic acids such as HCl and H Organic acids can act as active leaching reagents in situations where mild acidic conditions are essential. In the leaching of ores where comparatively less acidic solution strengths are preferable, organic acidic solutions may be considered more selective than inorganic acid solutions. Moreover organic acids as leaching agents cause less corrosion and froth amassing. It is also possible to obtain organic acids from renewable biological sources.  Various research studies considering usage of different organic acids such as ascorbic acid, citric acid and gluconic acid for the dissolution of magnesite ores are available ( In Pakistan the natural magnesite ore deposits are widely found in the Khuzdar area of Balochistan. The collection of natural magnesite samples was carried out from Balochistan (Pakistan). The grinding of magnesite samples was achieved by using ball mill and mortar grinder. The ground samples were sieved to obtain particle size fractions (500–707, 250–354, 177–210 and 125–177 An atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Hitachi-1800) was used for the estimation of Mg in rock and leached solutions. In order to image the ore morphology of magnesite samples, a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S-3000H) was utilized. The composition of the magnesite sample was determined using X-ray diffractometer and energy dispersive X-ray. In order to study the leaching of magnesite, samples with altered size fractions (500–707, 250–354, 177–210 and 125–177 The dissolution of the magnesite with succinic acid (HOOC(CH Ionization of succinic acid HOOC(CH Flow of hydrogen ions to the uncovered surface of rock. Attack of H The hydrogen ions in the above reactions may be generated from the carbonic acid and succinic acid. Chemical reaction between Mg The following general equation can be used to represent the overall leaching process: In the above reaction Y stands for the succinate ion. Solubility product constant for MgCO The analytical results obtained from the analysis of calcined magnesite ore using atomic absorption spectrometer are given in Using different experimental conditions (177–210 The impact of succinic acid solution strength and liquid to solid proportion on leaching rate of magnesite was determined. The experimental results are presented in In order to find the impact of liquid/solid proportion on the extraction of magnesium, a series of experiments was done by altering the liquid/solid proportion from 10:1 to 27.5:1 Many experiments were undertaken to investigate the impact of sample particle size and stirring rate on dissolution of magnesite samples. Four particle sizes (500–707, 250–354, 177–210 and 125–177 The influence of stirring rate on leaching kinetics of magnesite ore was inspected by varying rates of stirring from 100 The magnesium contents of four different size fractions (500–707, 250–354, 177–210 and 125–177 The cost of a leaching process also relies on the cost of chemicals used in the process. If the expensive chemicals used in the process are regenerated by any suitable method then the cost of process is reduced and the overall process may become more economical. Succinic acid used in the present research work as a leaching agent may be regenerated by treating magnesium succinate with any inorganic acid thus making the leaching of magnesite with succinic acid economical. The selection of inorganic acid would depend on the nature of the end products and their commercial and/or industrial applications. In this approach selectivity of succinic acid can be favorably used without incurring higher costs. In another approach, the solid magnesium succinate can be recovered by evaporation and then combusted in air in order to obtain pure MgO directly similar to processes developed for making PbO from lead citrate crystals ( The hydrometallurgical processes usually take into account fluid–solid heterogeneous systems. According to Dispersion through ash or product layer. Diffusion through fluid films. Chemical reactions occurring at the surface of unreacted constituents. A chemical reaction occurring in a fluid and solid system may be denoted as: In the absence of ash or product layer, the chemical reaction or fluid film diffusion may be considered during the reaction Let If a reaction is controlled by film diffusion, For a surface chemical controlled step, If the reaction is ash layer diffusion controlled, Fluid/solid reaction models were used for the analysis of data to evaluate the slowest step and the kinetic parameters for the leaching of magnesite. The reliability and validity of the data was examined by statistical as well as by graphical approaches. From the results of the dissolution of magnesite, it was perceived that the rate determining step of the dissolution reaction is surface chemically controlled. The rate expression for leaching reaction of magnesite was found to follow the rate equation given below: Using the Arrhenius equation, Eq. Using the values of The magnitude of energy of activation calculated for magnesite leaching shows that the reaction of magnesite with succinic acid is surface chemically controlled. Moreover this value is in agreement with the value of activation energy found in a similar study ( To test the workability and reproducibility of the suggested model, the experimental data were compared with the calculated ones. The comparison of the two sets of data has been shown in For 35 experimental observations, the relative mean square of errors was determined using the following equation: The relative mean square of errors (0.038) also fairly supports the applicability of the model. The results show that extraction of magnesium from magnesite ore can be achieved using succinic acid as a leaching agent. The findings based on the kinetic data for the leaching of magnesite illustrates that the reaction is chemically controlled having activation energy of 45.197