The increase in rock engineering projects over the last decade, has made an increase in the importance of the determination of the rock mass parameters. Although properties of rock material are usually determined at laboratory, it can also be determined by special in situ tests. These in situ tests are both expensive and time consuming. Therefore, empirical equations are developed to estimate rock mass properties by several researchers. In numerical modelling, rock mass properties are important. Furthermore controlling the results of models, making back analysis and taking the feedback are very important. Comparison of different empirical equations of deformation modulus of rock mass suggested by different researchers by using field displacement measurements and numerical modelling results is aimed in this study.Descriptive form: input to the system is mainly based on descriptions; Numerical form: input parameters are given numerical ratings according to their character; Behaviouristic form: input is based on rock mass behaviour in a tunnel; General type: system is worked out to serve as a general characterization; Functional type: system is structured for a special application (for example, for rock support). In a rock engineering project, final design processes are very time consuming, expensive and need great experience. In the beginning of the design process, definition and characterization of rock mass had to be done. For this purpose, some researchers have developed rock mass classification systems ( These systems are frequently used at the preliminary design phase. The rock mass properties (e.g. deformation modulus) needed at the design process are determined by empirical equations based on those systems. The static modulus of deformation is among the parameters that best represent the mechanical behaviour of a rock and of a rock mass, in particular when it comes to underground excavations. All in situ deformation tests are expensive and difficult to conduct. They are mostly conducted in special test adits or drifts excavated by conventional drill and blast, having a span of 2 Applications and comparison of those empirical equations with each other are performed recently ( In this research, numerical modelling studies of tunnels having different rock mass properties are investigated. Rock mass deformation modulus, as one of the important input parameters at numerical models, was determined by empirical equations and then displacement occurring around opening was compared with field measurements. In this study, hydroelectric power plants at Ordu, Tokat, Amasya, Bartın and Izmir metro tunnels are used as the cases. Supports and rock masses of tunnels in Tokat, Amasya, Bartın and Ordu are different but their cross-sections are almost the same (23 The most important parameters that affect rock engineering design are rock mass properties. Preliminary designs request the determination of these parameters. Rock mass classification systems are easy and very useful methods to determine rock mass properties. Uniaxial compressive strength and deformation modules of intact rock are obtained from the laboratory tests in accordance with the methods suggested by ISRM, ASTM or other international standards. However, uniaxial compressive strength of rock material is determined indirectly by BPI because preparing a standard sample for uniaxial compressive strength was not possible at the Izmir metro tunnel in Bornova. Geomechanical properties of rock units are given in At the study areas, different rock mass classification systems such as RMR, Q, GSI and RMi were used and the results were given in Excavation-support stages in the field are integrated exactly in modelling studies. The methodology used at a numerical modelling is the same as the methodology used at this type of works. In a numerical modelling study, firstly excavation stage is completed and then support is carried out. Those processes are defined into models in various stages, depending on the construction of tunnel. All the parameters in modelling process (meshing, boundary condition etc.) are chosen the same for all cases. The cross-section of 22.6 Measurement stations were set up at certain points in the tunnels to determine the convergence occurrence while and after the tunnel excavations and time-dependent changes. Places of measurement stations are given in 12 hydroelectric plant tunnels and 3 metro tunnels were examined in the scope of this research. The descriptions of the rock mass in tunnels were made with the most-used rock mass classifications (RMR, Q, GSI and RMI). Deformation module of the rock masses was estimated by the help of different empirical equations based on those classifications. The main purpose of this study is to compare the numerical modelling results and convergence measurements at tunnels having different rock mass properties. Results obtained from these comparisons were used for questioning the rock mass deformation modulus performances obtained through empirical equations. Although the classification systems used to characterize the rock masses containing discontinuities is inadequate in some cases, today, they are one of the most-used methods. Significant problems may happen especially in the representation of very weak, extremely weak and very blocky systems with some classification systems. Some troubles also come up with laboratory tests to determine the deformation modules. For example Elasticity Module/UCS ratios can be variable. This situation is partially a result of test conditions and this may slightly affect the results of the study. Even though there are limitations and inadequacies, these methods have been used constantly by rock engineers. In order to evaluate the method's performance, comparing the field measurements and numerical modelling results was considered as a suitable way. Rock deformation modules obtained through empirical equations suggested by different researchers were used as input data to the numerical models of 15 tunnels mentioned above. Keeping all the initial parameters and boundary conditions constant, except rock deformation modulus, results were examined. Vertical deformation values obtained from both measurement points at tunnels and from numerical models were evaluated for examination of results ( In The results from the studies show that, in case of hard rock mass condition and big size of block, numerical modelling results obtained through deformation modules suggested by This case proves the above mentioned fact that there is trouble in representation of rock mass having discontinuity and weak, very weak and blocky conditions. The accuracy of the result can be observed in The main parameter for rock mass deformation modules, obtained from the empirical equation suggested by It stands out that rock mass deformation modules determined by In light of this information, it can be said that, rock deformation modulus suggested by Rock mass deformation modulus is a very important parameter in rock engineering studies. One of the methods to determine this parameter is performing in situ tests and the other one is using empirical equations suggested by different researchers. This important parameter used in numerical modelling serves to represent rock mass. Working at 12 hydroelectric plant tunnels and at 3 metro tunnels, having different rock mass conditions, rock mass deformation modulus calculated from different empirical equations were evaluated. In this assessment, results of numerical modelling that the calculated rock mass deformation modules used and in situ vertical convergence measurement results were compared and results are listed below: Rock mass deformation modules obtained from Rock mass deformation modules calculated through suggested empirical equation by Rock deformation modules obtained from empirical equations suggested by Performance of the equation suggested by This study is realized by utilizing number