Continuous sedimentation processes in a clarifier-thickener unit can be described by a scalar nonlinear conservation law whose flux density function is discontinuous with respect to the spatial position. In the applications of this model, which include mineral processing and wastewater treatment, the rate and composition of the feed flow cannot be given deterministically. Efficient numerical simulation is required to quantify the effect of uncertainty in these control parameters in terms of the response of the clarifier-thickener system. Thus, the problem at hand is one of uncertainty quantification for nonlinear hyperbolic problems with several random perturbations. The presented hybrid stochastic Galerkin method is devised so as to extend the polynomial chaos approximation by multiresolution discretization in the stochastic space. This approach leads to a deterministic hyperbolic system, which is partially decoupled and therefore suitable for efficient parallelisation. Stochastic adaptivity reduces the computational effort. Several numerical experiments are presented.In many technical applications one seeks to quantify the stochastic variability of the response of a nonlinear system, usually defined in terms of a partial differential equation (PDE), with respect to uncertainty in initial conditions, control parameters and coefficient functions. This uncertainty can be quantified by aleatoric variation of parameters and sampling corresponding solutions in a “Monte Carlo (MC)”-like manner. This method is easy to implement but very inefficient due to the slow convergence in the sampling variable. One therefore prefers deterministic models for at least a finite number of stochastic moments to quantify randomness (an overview is given by It is the purpose of this paper to extend the hybrid stochastic Galerkin (HSG) discretization introduced by In the clarifier-thickener and related multiphase flow models, many input parameters cannot be described with deterministic accuracy but behave stochastically. For instance, in mineral processing the uncertainty comes from the fact that the feed flow stems from other units that are not under control of the CT operator, while in wastewater treatment weather conditions, which may affect the operation of the unit, are unpredictable. To provide further justification of our approach we mention that utilizing spatially one-dimensional descriptions of clarifier-thickener units (known as As a classical approach in random perturbed PDEs one could apply the SG method for uncertainty quantification. This method is based on representing the random field by a truncated sum of orthonormal polynomials. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section The CT model is based on the conservation equations of the solid and the fluid. Both are considered as superimposed continuous phases with velocities Realistic parameter values are For a cylindrical vessel without sources and sinks, the equation In this work we assume that the feed concentration Assume that for a real-valued random variable Let (with a slight abuse of notation) To extend the one-dimensional stochastic discretization to Let Similarly to the treatment by Multiplying the governing equation For ease of notation we keep here a strong formulation in the deterministic variables. We replace Using now the orthogonality relation Due to the lack of the analytical knowledge about the SG system The SG-FV method defined in Section To focus on the main idea, let us concentrate for the moment on one single stochastic dimension (similarly to Let us consider an The vector space We now apply the stochastic discretization introduced above to the governing equation We now assume that For the convenient discussion of the final HSG-FV scheme we replace the index pair For the given stochastically one-dimensional approximation of By the method introduced by The system Similarly to the polynomial chaos based SG approach in Section In this section we exploit the possibilities to further reduce computational effort by applying adaptivity to the stochastic dimensions. We consider Similarly to Section The multi-wavelet space Similarly to the extension to the multivariate polynomial The algorithm of the adaptive multiresolution scheme for deterministic two-dimensional problems was described by We first introduce the concept of a multi-dimensional graded tree for dealing with the HSG-FV data structure. As usual, a Let us proceed with the description of the re-meshing subroutine. In our notation, Λ denotes the set of the indices of the existing nodes,  Re-meshing (Λ,  We define the tolerance   Finite volume method with  We now illustrate the performance of the hybrid stochastic Galerkin finite volume (HSG-FV) method described in Section We start with the description of the scenarios considered for numerical experiments with two and three stochastic dimensions, then we proceed with the results of the numerical simulations and analyze the accuracy and efficiency of the method presented. The point of interest for the application is the determination of steady-state solutions of In the numerical examples we consider problem To analyze the accuracy of the method we compare the expectation computed by the HSG-FV method with the Monte Carlo (MC) mean value, obtained by 10 In the next step we proceed with numerical examples for  The HSG-FV representation of the numerical solution allows a memory-efficient storage of simulation data. We only save the coefficients The simulations are performed on a computer cluster built up by 2× Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2680 v2 (2.80GHz, 10 Cores) per node, by using MPI+OpenMP parallelisation for The application of the HSG-FV approach yields a high-dimensional system. The structure of this system allows the parallel computation of the coefficients The dimension of the system resulted from the HSG discretisation for a given stochastic dimension As a first example, consider the computations for Let us proceed with Scenario 7 for In the next step let us discuss the strong scaling of the parallel execution of the method. For this purpose let us again consider Scenario 5 with The computational times presented show that the strong scaling of the method is almost linear for an appropriate number of cores. We can see that hybrid parallelisation allows us to perform efficient computations on single nodes and distributed systems. In particular, the MPI parallelisation over stochastic elements allows the use of several nodes without necessary of the fast communication between MPI ranks. Since the parallelisation over the polynomial order requires the complete synchronisation in each time step, the synchronization effort increases significantly with the increasing number of threads. Therefore it is most promising to use the maximal possible number of MPI ranks together with a low number of the OpenMP threads. Now we apply the stochastic adaptivity method presented in Section We start with two numerical scenarios for  Now let us discuss the application of the In this section we consider the application of the HSG-FV method to a realistic setting. Our point of interest in this section is the influence of the random perturbed parameters on the steady state solution. Therefore we start with a following deterministic scenario In the next step we extend this scenario by three random parameters In this paper, we discuss the application of the HSG-FV method on a clarifier-thickener problem with up to three random sources. Our numerical examples show, that the method allows us to obtain a fast and accurate approach. Further, the structure of the proposed stochastic discretisation allows efficient hybrid (MPI+OpenMP) parallelisation, that plays an important role for the computing on state-of-the-art cluster hardware. We complete our work with an stochastic adaptivity method, that allows us to reduce the computational effort, and in the same time still allows efficient parallel computation. While the adaptive parallel HSG methods gives good numerical results for the CT operator it must be pointed out that the overall approach can be applied to a wide range of conservation laws with uncertain coefficients. Finally, we emphasize that in the present manuscript perturbations are understood as perturbations of the time-independent constants A.B., I.K. and C.R. would like to thank the