The influence of towing speed on the effectiveness of the 4-sided impact roller using earth pressure cells (EPCs) is investigated. Two field trials were undertaken; the first trial used three EPCs placed at varying depths between 0.5 m and 1.5 m with towing speeds of 9–12 km/h. The second used three EPCs placed at a uniform depth of 0.8 m, with towing speeds of 5–15 km/h. The findings from the two trials confirmed that towing speed influences the pressure imparted to the ground and hence compactive effort. This paper proposes that the energy imparted to the ground is best described in terms of work done, which is the sum of the change in both potential and kinetic energies. Current practice of using either kinetic energy or gravitational potential energy should be avoided as neither can accurately quantify rolling dynamic compaction (RDC) when towing speed is varied.Improving the ground is a fundamental and essential part of civil construction. Compaction is a prevalent ground improvement technique that involves increasing the density of soil by means of mechanically applied energy to increase shear strength and stiffness or reduce permeability. This paper is concerned with rolling dynamic compaction (RDC) which involves traversing the ground with a non-circular roller. Typical module designs have 3, 4 or 5 sides. As the module rotates, it imparts energy to the soil as it falls and impacts the ground. More introductory information pertaining to RDC is included in At filled sites containing significant soil variability, it can be difficult to quantify the effect of a single variable. Similarly, the inherent soil heterogeneity of natural ground can also influence results, often making it hard to quantify the effect of towing speed alone. To overcome this limitation, two compaction trials that used homogeneous soil conditions are described in this paper. Both trials used buried earth pressure cells (EPCs) and were undertaken at a dedicated research site. Whilst replacing natural soil with fill material and conducting full-scale trials are expensive exercises, particularly where the trial is not part of a client funded project, having full control over a site enabled variables other than towing speed to be held constant. The aim of this paper is to determine the influence, if any, of towing speed on the energy imparted to the ground. The impact roller was originally developed in South Africa with the intention of improving the properties of granular soils, in particular to identify and improve collapsing sands within 3 m below the ground surface in southern Africa ( The typical operating speed range of the 4-sided impact roller, as shown in  Each time the module of an impact roller strikes the ground, a pressure wave is created that travels through the soil from the surface. A key aim of the trial is to measure the loading-induced stresses below the ground due to RDC. EPCs allow real-time measurements of stresses imparted to the ground. It has been well documented by researchers (e.g. A field trial was undertaken at Monarto Quarries, located approximately 60 km southeast of Adelaide, South Australia. The test site was primarily chosen because there was access to earthmoving equipment, and importantly, homogeneous quarry material was used for the field trial. An area within the quarry where the ground was flat, close to material stockpiles, yet away from quarry operations was chosen for the trial. Natural soil was removed to a depth of 1.75 m, over a plan area that was 10 m long and 5.5 m wide. Three Geokon Model 3500 EPCs were buried at nominal depths of 0.5 m, 1 m and 1.5 m within the quarry fill material that was placed in seven lifts of 250 mm thickness. Bedding sand was placed immediately below and above each pressure cell to ensure horizontal placement and to prevent gravel sized particles of the fill material from damaging the cells. Each lift was wheel-rolled using a Volvo L150E loader; a vibrating plate compactor was used to compact soil within 250 mm from each EPC to prevent possible damage. The fill material placed for the trial was a crushed rock with a maximum particle size of 20 mm that was readily available and locally produced. A summary of the particle size distribution and Proctor compaction test results for Trial A is given in The aim of Trial A undertaken in August 2012 was to measure the loading-induced stress at three different depths for 40 passes in total; 10 passes of the roller were conducted at each of the towing speeds of 9, 10, 11 and 12 km/h. Towing speed was controlled via the control panel in the towing unit (i.e. tractor) but was subsequently validated by dividing the distance between EPCs by the time interval between the peak pressures that were measured. Three EPCs were used to measure the pressure imparted to the ground, each offset by one-half of one revolution of the module (2.9 m) in the forward direction of travel.   Field Trial B was undertaken at Monarto Quarries during August 2014, albeit at a different location from Trial A. Natural soil was removed to a depth of 1.2 m, over a plan area 12 m long and 3 m wide. Three Geokon Model 3500 EPCs were placed at a constant depth of 0.8 m. Quarry fill material was placed in six equal lifts of 200 mm thickness, with each lift again being wheel-rolled using a Volvo L150E loader and a vibrating plate compactor used to compact soil within 200 mm from each EPC. The aim of the field trial was to measure the loading-induced stress at a single depth for 100 passes in total; 35 passes of the roller were conducted at a towing speed of 12 km/h prior to comparative EPC measurements being undertaken to achieve effective refusal. Five passes were conducted at each of the following towing speeds and in the following order: 12, 10, 8, 6, 9, 7, 5, 11, 14, 13 and 15 km/h, respectively. Due to time constraints, no EPC measurements were recorded between passes 90 and 100. The fill material placed for the trial was a crushed rock with a maximum particle size of 20 mm that was readily available on site. A summary of the particle size distribution ( Density measurements and other in situ tests were not undertaken during either field trial presented in this paper. However, the authors carried out in situ test from pre- and post-compaction in very similar soil conditions as this study during a separate field trial that was also conducted at Monarto Quarries. The results have been published in   To confirm the observations from the pressure cell data, a number of qualitative behaviours were observed; at lower towing speeds, the blows were delivered by the face of the module, which maintained a regular contact pattern with the ground. At faster speeds, the blows were delivered towards the corners, and the module was observed to skip along the surface from corner to corner, which is again consistent with the findings from In this paper, towing speed refers to the horizontal motion of the towing unit, whereas rotational velocity refers to the angular velocity of the module. To quantify the difference between the two,  Clearly, there is a need for further research as this finding is in stark contrast with that of The fact that In an attempt to quantify the effects of the spring-linkage system, From both field trials undertaken, it is evident that the towing speed of the module influences the pressure imparted to the ground, suggesting that gravitational potential energy alone does not accurately capture the ground response of RDC. Whilst In order to estimate the energy imparted to the ground as a consequence of RDC, the conclusions from the high-speed photography undertaken by The change in potential energy, It should be emphasised that Eq. The high-speed photography approach used by The double-spring-linkage system consists of two springs: a large outer spring and a smaller inner spring that fits within the internal diameter of the larger spring. To determine the contribution of each of the springs to the energy imparted by the module, the stiffness of both springs was determined. Each spring was placed separately in a large compression machine whereby the load versus displacement response was quantified. The maximum compression of the dual springs was governed by the limiting compression distance of the outer spring, as both springs compress together in the towing frame. The force in the spring is determined using Hooke's law in Eq. Based on The outer spring was found to contribute 84% of the work done by the dual springs combined, due to the larger spring stiffness ( A summary of the work done with varying speed is presented in This paper examined the effect of towing speed on the energy imparted to the ground from the 4-sided impact roller. This involved combining theory from It is proposed that the energy imparted by RDC to the ground needs to be considered in terms of work done, which is due to the change in both potential and kinetic energies. Current practice of describing the energy imparted to the ground using total kinetic energy should be avoided as it overestimates the energy imparted to the ground. Describing the energy via the use of gravitational potential energy should also be avoided, but for a different reason; it is counter-productive for the impact rolling industry to develop specifications stipulating target towing speeds when the rollers are described solely in terms of their gravitational potential energy. The change in potential energy is derived from a combination of both gravitational and spring energies for the 4-sided impact roller. The values presented in this paper for the potential energy delivered by the springs (5 kJ) and gravitational potential energy (12 kJ) are the maximum values that are theoretically possible. However, they are not values that will be achieved with every impact, as favourable ground conditions are needed for the full potential energy to be delivered. The change in kinetic energy is a function of the friction between the module and the ground surface. Quantifying the friction at the module–soil interface is extremely difficult to evaluate theoretically, as it depends on several variables associated with the module, such as the roughness of the module face in contact with the ground, the presence of wear plates or anti-skid bars, the contact area between the module and soil, and the towing speed. Properties relating to the ground are also significant, with soil type, grading, moisture content, density, elastic modulus and surface geometry all providing different frictional resistance, which makes it complex and extremely difficult to estimate the energy needed to overcome friction as it is material-dependent. If the energy imparted to the ground was only due to potential energy, then it would be theoretically independent of towing speed and would be limited to a maximum value of 17 kJ. The findings of this research confirm that towing speed does influence the energy imparted to the ground. There is, therefore, a need for specifications to detail a target towing speed range for RDC. Based on the authors' experiences, the optimum speed will vary depending on site conditions. To optimise the use of the 4-sided impact roller, a towing speed range of 10–12 km/h is recommended, which is consistent with the findings of the field trials reported in this paper. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors wish to acknowledge the following civil engineering students from the University of Adelaide who contributed to the field work referred to in this paper: Andrew Bradley, Gianfranco Canala, Chris Gauro, Dapeng Liu, Jackson March, Chris Smith and Richard Strapps. The authors are grateful to the instrumentation and laboratory staff at the University of Adelaide who have provided invaluable assistance over the years and to Cathy Cates for her assistance with word processing. The authors are also grateful to Broons and Monarto Quarries personnel for access to equipment and the test site, without their help and support, the work undertaken in the field trials featured in this paper would not have been possible.