The technique of developing curves of how the operation and product of a mill responds to a change in one of the prime operating variables is presented. This has been investigated to the great benefit of research into the comparison of mill performance when an operating parameter of interest is changed. These ‘grindcurves’ can be used to select the correct conditions for meaningful comparative tests. It is shown that the conclusions drawn from pilot work can be totally changed by shifting the mill to operate under optimal conditions for the comparison. The use of the technique in quantifying SAG mill performance is demonstrated.The operation of any mill has a distinct signature – which is a combination of the mill type and operating conditions, and of the ore properties – competence, size distribution, etc. This signature can be extracted by measuring the response of the mill to changing conditions. When the mill is progressively stepped through a range of one variable, and allowed to reach steady state at each new point, the response of the mill has been named by the authors the ‘grindcurve’. For example, the variable can be mill filling, and the output grindcurves the power, throughput, and This paper presents an applied approach to the problem, drawing on some practical examples and providing a description of the experimental techniques that were used. This aspect is emphasised as it appears to the authors that it is the fundamental techniques that are glossed over in studies, without an appreciation of the impact of poor experimental technique on the outcomes. Three different examples are presented, a pilot ball mill, a single stage closed circuit fine grinding SAG mill, and an open circuit coarse grinding SAG mill. Each application has completely different objectives, and criteria for assessing their performance, but the same set of grindcurves are appropriate to all of them, with the interpretation of the optimal performance zone being dependent upon the application. In this paper the emphasis is on the technique and its importance in establishing the baseline operation of a mill. The application of this information is then process specific. Some basic techniques that are used in the performance assessments presented in this paper are described here, specifically those that are not in the mineral processing textbooks. If available on site a Malvern gives a relatively quick assessment of size distribution, but it is often not accessible on sites or even pilot facilities, so a quick assessment technique using simple equipment is appropriate. The single-point screening technique has been used around the world in the past. The method the investigators use to assess the slurry loading in a mill is to crash stop the mill and then test the solids level. This applies to both production and pilot mills. A true crash stop is required, where solids and water feed, and the mill are all stopped simultaneously. For production mills this often involves opening the cyclone pump drain valves and draining the line and pump to spillage, so as to prevent line blockages. This stop is easy in pilot ball mills, provided there is a hatch for internal access. However, it is often the case that a pilot mill is not set up for easy access, so this simple check is neglected. Considering ball mills first. The slurry solids are allowed to settle and then the depth of solids is measured. All measurements are relative to ball level, not absolute slurry level, which for an overflow mill is a function of the discharge trunnion diameter. Ideally, the solids should settle to just flush with the top of the balls, coating the surface of the balls. If the solids are well below the ball level, with a watery layer above, then the mill is under-loaded with slurry. If there is a solid settled layer above the balls then the mills are overloaded. This physical inspection is the only technique known to the authors to check whether the ball mill has the correct slurry loading and thus an ideal power usage. If the solids level is below the ball level then the mill can have a higher feedrate or lower ball charge. For the overloaded condition, more balls should be added if possible, or the feedrate must be reduced, or the classifier cut size can be coarsened to reduce the recirculating load. For grate discharge ball mills the absolute slurry level should be flush with the surface of the charge, as a check on the discharge capacity of the mill. If the slurry level is well below the charge level, as in For single stage SAG/AG mills the slurry level should be just below the charge level, to maximise fine grinding. However, it is often the case that these mills suffer from slurry pooling, so this must be ascertained. For open circuit AG and SAG mills in two stage circuits the slurry absolute level is important in mill performance, and should be below the charge level. It can be well below the charge level for these mills, but above 0.6 void filling seems to be appropriate. If the slurry level is above the charge, forming a slurry pool, then the mills should be tested under a range of a few standard operating conditions, and if persistent, then the mill discharge must be improved. In the experience of the authors, the optimal percent solids does not vary with the other control parameters (except possibly with ball filling when the mill suffers from discharge constraints). In general an up-front test can be conducted, and then the chosen water addition maintained for further testwork. For mills producing a final product, such as ball mills and single stage SAG mills, the mill is started in a slightly dilute state and then the water is progressively cut back. The discharge is carefully watched for the consistency of the slurry. The slurry should be steaming and turbulent upon discharge. The moment the flow smoothes out, becomes lamillar, and the slurry is carried higher up the trunnion the slurry viscosity is too high, and the feed should be slightly more dilute. The resultant percent solids should then hold for that ore type. This transition point is important for maximising grinding rate. For a throughput driven mill, as is often the case for open circuit mills in two-stage circuits, the maximum throughput is achieved at a lower percent solids than the maximum grinding rate. This is driven by a balance of transport and grinding rate to maximise throughput. In this instance the optimal mill dilution may have to be independently checked. It is, however, unlikely be at more than 7% solids below the grinding rate maximum described above. This survey methodology has been developed to allow the rapid development of a grindcurve, while minimising sample processing. The principle is to select a test condition and stabilise the mill at that condition, usually by adjusting the feed rate. The rule of thumb of 3 residence times is used as a guideline. Single-point sizing is then used to check the stability of the product. Each sizing takes about 5 The mill condition is changed through sufficient range to find the peak in throughput, power, and fineness of product. The pertinent data is plotted as the tests progress so as to provide a live measure of the test progress. When snapshot surveys are combined with the single-point sizing technique, 4–8 conditions can be established in one (often long) day, depending on the size and residence time of the mill, and unplanned changes in mill feed. Based on the outcomes the optimal milling condition for the test work can be selected and the condition immediately implemented and the full survey can proceed with confidence. The authors have noted that many ball milling pilot comparisons are flawed through variable pulp loading in the mill. Almost all of a ball mills power draw is determined by the ball loading, with variation in the ore loading contributing only a few percent. For general pilot work, as opposed to a specially calibrated and usually cantilevered mill with a high level of accuracy in torque measurement ( Upon encountering this problem in some ball mill pilot work, where the changes in milling conditions did not result in the expected reduction in milling capacity, it was decided that there must be a technique that can give consistently meaningful results. However, when reviewing the literature ( Research work was being conducted at LonPlats pilot facility at the Karee Plant in the Rustenburg area of South Africa. This campaign was part of the thesis work of a Masters student, Mr. R. Moalosi, who was investigating the influence of ball scats on mill production. The 0.93 diameter by 1.5 For the second set of trials the water was adjusted to give the correct mill discharge percent solids of 78% and the mill loading checked to ensure that it was in the correct regime. However, for a grate discharge mill the slurry inspection technique is not as clear as for an overflow mill. The comparative tests were conducted and, as shown by the product size distribution in In response the authors decided to do a full range grindcurve of the feedrate versus grind relationship. The desired grind was measured as the % −75 The tests with scats was repeated over the same range of feedrates, and the grindcurve was dramatically different to the 0% scats curve. By chance the pilot trials had been conducted at the throughput where the two trends crossed over, at 750 Choosing 600 What is clear from this exercise is that depending upon the chosen feedrate, dramatically different conclusions can be drawn. Developing a full grindcurve for both conditions shows unequivocally that the seasoned ball only load is considerably better, and indicates where more detailed comparative tests, such as at different percentages of scats loadings, should be conducted. For the pilot mill that was used, there was no significant variation in power draw with the different tests, certainly not a trend that followed the feed rate or product size data. Only some of the tests had full size distribution data, as the primary goal of a number of the tests was to establish the operating regime for the primary comparison pilot runs. It would no doubt be informative in future work to conduct more rigorous pilot comparisons and model the breakage data to asses the changes in rates with mill loading conditions. It would also be most informative to empty the mill contents after each run to weigh them and conduct a representative contents sizing. As this was not the initial focus of this set of pilot work, the opportunity was lost in this instance. As a researcher on site a decision has to be made on what conditions to conduct trials at when investigating the performance of a SAG mill for the first time. Generally the input of the operator, plant records, and some short term step tests to check the response of the mill can be used to help determine the most favourable test conditions. Often the standard operating conditions are opted for by default. This strategy can be useful for setting up a base case model of the mill, but when testing the influence of changing some particular variable, for example feed type or size distribution, the results can be as misleading as the example of inappropriate ball mill pilot tests. It can also be the case that mill operators run a mill at a particular filling, speed, percent solids, etc. more by default than design. Many a site has hung tenaciously onto an historically established good operating regime, despite major changes to ore, liner design, ball load etc., resulting in the mill operating well off its peak performance potential. This is often an issue to be addressed in consulting optimisation work. In both instances it has been found invaluable to initiate the study by developing a full grindcurve of the mill. For a SAG mill there are many variables against which a grindcurve can be developed. The ones that can be most readily varied, and are common control parameters, are mill speed, mill filling, and percent solids. As the ideal percent solids can generally be established up front (as described earlier), and many mills have a fixed speed, the mill filling is the most common parameter to vary in developing a grindcurve, and this variable will be the basis of this discussion. A critical part of developing a filling grindcurve is establishing the relationship between percent filling of the mill and an external load measurement, such as load cells, bearing back pressure, or power when the other two are lacking. It is essential that the filling is accurately known, and this can only be assessed through entering the mill to physically measure the filling. The authors record for a standard four point measurement (to provide a reliable average along the mill) from mill stop to restart is 12 A minimum of 3 points are required to establish the relationship. If it has been previously established that there is a reliable linear relationship between mill load and filling, then two well separated points will suffice. A critical parameter in the load filling relationship, and in modelling a mills performance, is the ball load, and this should be established through grindout. The authors have found partial grindouts to be spectacularly misleading, and generally manage to prevail upon the sites to conduct one grindout. The filling data at the end of the grindout provides an excellent extreme point in the filling–load curve, and helps to give an accurate curve fit. A word of caution with load readings is that they can be indicators, rather than measures, especially if not supplied by load cells. In this instance the relationship may not be linear. Two load–filling relationships are illustrated in For a grindcurve covering 5–6 conditions, 2 crash stops and the grindout to measure ball filling are sufficient to establish the filling calibration. Convenient tests during the snapshot are chosen for the crash stop calibrations. For the remainder of the snapshot tests the filling is calculated from the calibration curve. Accuracies of 0.3% filling can be attained. Utilising the single-point screening technique with snapshot surveys and a few selected crash stops, a comprehensive grindcurve of a production SAG mill can be established in one day. If the curve cannot be completed in one session, then the tests can be continued the following day, with one cross-over test to check for changes in ore. A range of fillings are chosen and the feedrate adjusted to provide approximately the desired filling. The process of shifting through a range of throughputs is not easy, as the mill can easily shift into a series of cyclic swings with quasi-stable periods. It has been found that the gradual adjustment of feedrate in small steps is the most rapid path to a new filling and feedrate. An experienced operator who is accustomed to the mill and ore can be most useful, but beware of their tricks of the trade of shifting the mill rapidly into a state of quasi equilibrium, which is ‘maintained’ through adjusting peripheral parameters, such as mill dilution water. An example of an excellent grindcurve that was established as part of the P9N AMIRA test work conducted at the AngloGold Ashanti Kopanang site, The resultant grindcurves were used to establish the ideal conditions for the research test work. In addition the grindcurve is a production tool, which can be used to select the optimal target operating conditions. In this instance the mill should be operated at just below the power peak, to give optimal grind, with little sacrifice of throughput. It is also operationally more stable to remain below the power peak, rather than seeking back and forth over the peak and drifting into periods of poor operation. A combination of power seeking and the desired mill load can be used to control the mill. A grindcurve for a high aspect open circuit first stage SAG mill is shown in The new concept that was so successfully trialled on this pilot test campaign was to develop a grinding curve for the mill under each new test condition. The grinding curve is the product size as a function of feedrate, for a fixed feed size. It is proposed that for each new milling condition, in this case a change in the percentage of ball scats in a mill, the peak in the grinding curve must be sought, and that must be used as the comparative test condition. The single-point screenings were used for feedback in developing the curve during a relatively short series of stepped feed changes. Once the peak was established then more comprehensive sampling could take place at the appropriate throughput. Upon discovering just how revealing these curves are, the technique was changed to also taking a full sample, and keeping that for later processing. By developing the full grinding curve for each test condition the conclusions where dramatically changed from those drawn at any given throughput. In fact it was found that the conclusions are a function of the arbitrarily chosen mill throughput. It has therefore been concluded that no ball mill test work should be conducted without developing and comparing the grind curves over the full reasonable operating range of the mill. The data presented for the SAG mills once again reinforces the fact that the throughput and power peaks lie at different mill fillings. The application of grindcurves to SAG mill testwork has been found invaluable to conducting meaningful comparative tests. The resultant curves are also of direct use in establishing optimal control objectives of the mills, in seeking the balance between throughput and product size, or just seeking maximum throughput. With periodic tests used to establish the grindcurves as the ore type changes, and for variations in major operating parameters such as ball filling, a family of grindcurves can be established to provide outstanding control objectives, and checks on the circuit performance. Additionally, if the full product size distribution is obtained, and the feed size taken a few times during the range of test work, the models of SAG mills can be calibrated, validated, and possibly extended through such work. One such example by the authors is the study on varying the mill filling, and how this contributed to modifying the load relationship in the JKMRC SAG mill model, The extensive support of Mr. Bert Knopjes of Lonplats and the use of the Karee pilot milling facilities is gratefully acknowledged. The pilot work was conducted by Mr. Reuben Moalosi, as a part of his Masters studies. The funding of Anglogold Ashanti, and the cooperation of the personnel at Kopanang site is gratefully acknowledged. The permission to publish the site data is appreciated. A large portion of the work upon which this paper is based was funded by THRIP funding provided by the Department of Trade and Industry of the South African government. This gives the percent retained on a single screen size by using only a Marcy cup and scale or a measuring cylinder and balance, and the chosen screen. This takes only a few minutes, yet it has been found that when properly applied the results are within 1% of the fully screened sample. This technique is excellent for quick feedback when trying to stabilise a pilot or production circuit, or check the stability of a grinding circuit, or quickly developing a grindcurve. A representative sample is obtained by using the dirty sampler technique, whereby a dummy sample is cut and the sample decanted in the same manner as the sample is to be. The entire sample poured into a measuring cylinder for mass and volume measurement. The sample is then wet screened using the chosen screen size, often 75 For Subscripts: original sample    The fraction of screen oversize is given by Eq. It is important to collect exactly the correct volume of sample to fill the Marcy cup to avoid introducing errors associated with segregation of particles when too much sample is collected. This takes practice, and is the largest source of error in using a Marcy scale. The measuring cylinder and scale avoids this limitation. The percent solids and relative density corresponding to the ore specific gravity are then read from the Marcy scale. The same procedure is followed as for the measuring cylinder, but the Marcy cup is filled to the top for measurement of the oversize sample. A source of inaccuracy here is that with a low mass of plus screen size, such as in the cyclone overflow, the density is close to 1 for the full 1ℓMarcy cup. The percent passing calculation is given by Eq.