Neuropilin 1 (Nrp1) and Nrp2 are transmembrane receptors that can bind class 3 semaphorins (Sema3A-G) in addition to VEGF family members to play important roles in axonal guidance, vascularization and angiogenesis, as well as immune responses. Moreover, recent evidence implicates Sema3A/Nrp-mediated signaling in bone regulation. However, to date the expression of Nrp2 in bone has not been investigated and a possible role for Nrp2 in the maintenance of bone homeostasis in vivo remains unexplored. Here we show that Nrp2, together with its possible coreceptors (Plexin A family members and Plexin D1) and class 3 semaphorin ligands, were expressed during in vitro osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells. Moreover, Nrp2 transcript and protein levels were highly induced in hematopoietic bone marrow cell-derived osteoclast cultures. Osteoblastic as well as osteoclastic Nrp2 expression was confirmed by immunohistochemistry of the long bones of mice. Interestingly, Nrp2 knockout mice were characterized by a low bone mass phenotype which was accompanied by an increased number of osteoclasts and a decreased osteoblast count. Collectively, these data point to a physiological role for Nrp2 in bone homeostasis.Bone is a highly dynamic tissue that is continuously remodeled by bone-resorbing osteoclasts and bone-forming osteoblasts. This bone remodeling process is modulated by numerous local or systemic factors, which are secreted by either osteoblast-lineage cells and influence differentiation and activity of both osteoblasts and osteoclasts or are released by osteoclasts to regulate osteoblast activity To assess gene expression during osteogenic differentiation and mineralization, the bone marrow of the hind- and forelimbs of 8–10 Osteoclast differentiation was assessed by After culture for 7 The mouse monocyte-macrophage cell line Raw264.7 (ATCC, Manassas, VA) was maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 100 Total RNA for quantitative reverse polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis was isolated with the High Pure RNA Isolation Kit (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions. One microgram RNA was reverse transcribed using SuperScriptII (Invitrogen). The resulting cDNA was diluted 1/10 and used as a template in PCR reactions with the ABI-prism 7500 Fast Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). PCR primers were purchased from Eurogentec (Seraing, Belgium) and their sequences are reported in Supplemental Table 1. Fluorogenic probes were dual labeled with a fluorescent reporter molecule (FAM), attached at the 5′ end, and a quencher dye (Black Hole), attached to the 3′ end. In relative quantification, the 2( Total protein was isolated from hematopoietic bone marrow cells cultured for different time intervals in the presence of M-CSF and RANKL. Cells were lysed with a buffer containing 50 Nrp2 heterozygote mice in C57Bl/6 background were kindly provided by D. Ginty (The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD) and were maintained in a conventional animal facility Serum osteocalcin levels were determined by an in house radio-immuno assay kit  Dissected bones were fixed overnight in 2% freshly prepared paraformaldehyde. Subsequently, bones were decalcified in 0.5M ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) for 2 For general morphological analysis, paraffin sections were stained in hematoxylin (Prosan, Merelbeke, Belgium) and eosin (H&E; 0.6% eosin Y, 1% phloxine B, 2% orange G, Sigma Aldrich), for 30 Osteoclasts were visualized on paraffin sections stained for TRAP activity as described previously For immunohistochemistry, paraffin sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated. Thereafter, antigen retrieval, optimized for each of the different antigens, was performed. For Nrp2 and CD31 staining antigen retrieval was done by incubation with Antigen Retrieval solution (Dako) for 20 Osteoclasts and osteoblasts covering the trabecular surfaces were measured on two TRAP- and H&E-stained sections, respectively, and expressed relative to the total bone surface To analyze bone dynamic parameters, mice received two sequential i.p. injections of calcein (16 Osteoblasts were isolated from calvariae of neonatal In parallel, calvarial osteoblasts (80,000/well) were seeded in 12-well dishes. After 3 Statistical analysis was performed with the software program Statistica (Statsoft, Hamburg, Germany). All results are expressed as the means and SEM. For cell culture data, analysis of variance analyses, followed by a Fisher's Least Significant Difference multiple comparison test, and Student's t tests were carried out to detect significant differences. To assess the effect of genotype, data were compared with the non-parametric Mann–Whitney The expression of Moreover, semaphorin receptors were also present in As Nrp1 expression is controlled by RANKL through nuclear factor κB (NF-κB)-signaling Raw264.7 cells were incubated in the presence of RANKL (40 Finally, we confirmed the induction of The findings that transcript levels of Histological analysis revealed strong and specific Nrp2 staining in the long bones of mice ( Taken together, the abundant expression of Nrp2 in bone raised the question whether As visualized on the H&E staining, the macro-architecture of the long bones of Analysis of the cortical microstructure of the tibias of To investigate whether an increased bone resorption or a reduced bone formation or both were responsible for the reduced bone mass in Bone resorption was enhanced in Next to the enhanced bone resorption, a decrease in osteoblast numbers was also observed in Coculture experiments with calvarial osteoblasts from In the current study we illustrated by Nrp receptors are transmembrane receptors that are expressed on a range of cell types and mediate the effects of class 3 semaphorins to regulate axonal guidance and angiogenesis. Recently, it became clear that Sema3A–Nrp1 signaling is also important in bone homeostasis  Consistent with our Dynamic bone parameters were comparable between The Nrp2 receptor can initiate downstream signaling after interaction with the ligands Sema3B, 3C, and 3F but its interaction is best described for Sema3F, which specifically signals through Nrp2 during the development of the nervous system and in colon cancer However, recombinant Sema3F did not alter osteoclast number or the expression of osteoclast-specific genes in cultures of hematopoietic bone marrow cells that were treated with M-CSF and RANKL (data not shown). Moreover, the timing of Sema3F addition, In conclusion, the findings of our current study point to a newly discovered role for Nrp2 in the control of bone homeostasis. By means of This work was supported by grants from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at