The cycling behaviors of Co–Si alloy and multilayered films, which were prepared by co-deposition from separate pure metal sources and by alternating deposition of different metals, respectively, are investigated. The alloy films with near stoichiometric compound composition of CoSi2.06 and CoSi2.2 exhibit an excellent cycling stability, but alloying with large excess Si results in capacity fading during cycling. The cycling stability of multilayers with average composition of CoSi2.9 is improved significantly by post-annealing treatment at 350°C. Nano-structured multilayer films are suggested as promising anode materials for thin-film batteries.Thin-film microbatteries have been studied as a power source for micro-systems We investigated the electrochemical characteristics of Co–Si thin films as possible anode materials for thin film batteries, in which the electrode films were prepared by co-deposition or sequential deposition from pure Co and Si sources using electron beam evaporation method. Both Co–Si alloyed and multilayered thin film electrodes were obtained. Co–Si alloy thin films were deposited on a 12 mm diameter Cu substrate by electron-beam evaporator from separate pure metal sources. Multilayered films were obtained by succeeding deposition of different metals. For the Co–Si thin films, the evaporation time was determined by experimental calibration to give the film thickness of 1500 Å. The thickness of as-deposited films, as measured by using a surface profilometer, was around 1500 Å. The composition of films was determined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The surface morphology and roughness of the films were observed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Plan-view and cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy(TEM) were used to characterize the Co–Si alloy thin films and multilayered film, respectively. The specimens for TEM were prepared by conventional techniques, including mechanical polishing, dimpling, and Ar ion milling. For plan-view observations, the substrate was milled with Ar ions mainly from the back side, and the top surface of film was slightly milled for removing contamination. The detailed structural analysis of the films was carried out using a JEM-2010 electron microscope operating at 200 kV. The electrochemical measurements were performed in CR2016 coin cells with lithium counter electrode and 1 M LiPF   We also investigated the electrochemical properties of a thin-film electrode with multilayered structure. The Co/Si nano-composited multilayered films seem to be promising as anode materials since in this configuration nano scaled Si layers are separated by stable Co/Si mixed or silicide layers which act as a buffering phase for the formation of Li For Co/Si multilayers, alternating layers of Co and Si were deposited by electron beam evaporation at room temperature onto Cu substrates. The film was composed of a total of 14 layers (7Co and 7Si). The total film thickness was around 1500 Å. The overall composition of the multilayers was very close to 25.6 at% Co, 74.4 at.% Si, corresponding to the composition of CoSi However, considering that the top layer of as-deposited and annealed multilayer samples of Co–Si alloy films and Co/Si multilayered film have been prepared and investigated as anode materials for thin-film batteries. For Co–Si alloy films, the films with near stoichiometric compound composition, such CoSi This work was supported by the Korea Ministry of Science and Technology through the research program for “National Research Laboratory”.