The unstable scaphoid fracture can be treated by a variety of different methods, including open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), percutaneous fixation with either k-wires or cannulated screws, and arthroscopically assisted reduction and internal fixation (AARIF) with various cannulated screw systems. The drawbacks of ORIF include extensive soft-tissue dissection, disruption of the nondominant volar blood supply, division of the radioscaphocapitate and radioscapholunate ligaments and volar capsule, and prolonged rehabilitation. Percutaneous fixation avoids the aforementioned drawbacks, yet relies on fluoroscopic guidance alone to assure accurate reduction of the scaphoid fracture fragments and optimal positioning of the implant in the apex of the proximal pole. The technical limitations of plain radiography as well as fluoroscopy in detailed visualization of the oddly oriented scaphoid limit the accuracy of the percutaneous technique. AARIF avoids all the limitations of ORIF, yet allows direct visualization of the scaphoid fracture site and assures accurate reduction of the fragments before and during definitive arthroscopically assisted internal fixation. AARIF also assists in accurate targeting of the proximal pole apex or “sweet spot,” in addition to allowing detection of concurrent pathology in the radiocarpal or midcarpal joints. Delayed unions and stable nonunions with normal intrascaphoid angles, even with ischemic proximal poles, can be treated with AARIF augmented with percutaneous cancellous bone grafting from the trapezial ridge plus autologous platelet-derived growth factor gel.The fractured scaphoid continues to be a nemesis to both the patient as well as his or her surgeon. This oddly shaped, peanut-sized, carpal bone has nearly 80% of its surface area covered by hyaline cartilage and resides in a unique orientation in the human carpus at 47° flexion and 20° radial deviation. Currently, the accepted approach to treatment realizes the need for stable internal fixation in a significant subset of patients with an unstable scaphoid fracture pattern. An unstable scaphoid fracture, and thus an absolute indication for internal fixation, is “currently” defined as (1) any fracture displaced ≥1 mm; (2) a scapholunate angle >60° or a capitolunate angle >15°; (3) a lateral intrascaphoid angulation (ISA) >25 ± 5° or a posteroanterior ISA >35 ± 5°; and (4) proximal pole fractures, transscaphoid perilunate fracture dislocations, and an avascular proximal fragment. Herbert Arthroscopically assisted reduction and internal fixation (AARIF), as introduced by Whipple Percutaneous or limited incision techniques have several inherent potential technical pitfalls, including (1) the well-known limitations of plain radiography and fluoroscopy in adequately visualizing scaphoid fracture anatomy and, hence their reduction; (2) the tendency for problematic freehand screw insertion potentially resulting in further displacement, rotation, or even distraction of the fragments To further complement the percutaneous or limited incision techniques that are performed only under fluoroscopic guidance, Whipple Scaphoid AARIF is indicated only for nondisplaced to minimally displaced fracture patterns that can be reduced via arthroscopic manipulation. Relative contraindications would include displacement >2 mm, PA ISA >50°, lateral ISA >45°, comminution of any type, transscaphoid perilunate fracture dislocations, and ipsilateral scapholunate ligament ruptures with widely displaced or dislocated proximal pole fragments. These fracture patterns are essentially so unstable that attempts at AARIF prove to be most frustrating, if not impossible, and are best served by formal ORIF. Preoperative-dedicated CT of the scaphoid is necessary for assessment of the ISAs and, hence, the true degree of instability present in each individual fracture pattern. Each fracture should be measured with respect to displacement, PA and lateral ISA ( Under regional or general anesthesia, with upper-arm tourniquet control, the extremity is prepped and draped on a hand table with a countertraction strap applied over a well-padded brachium. The wrist traction tower (Linvatec, Largo, FL) or other similar traction device is recommended. A 12- to 15-mm oblique incision is centered over the volar tuber of the trapezium just radial to the flexor carpi radialis tendon and a transverse scaphotrapezial arthrotomy is performed. An inverted “T”-shaped extension is then made with a longitudinal incision distally over the trapezium with subperiosteal exposure of the proximal half of the trapezium ( The midcarpal and radiocarpal joints are distended by injecting several milliliters of fluid in the radial midcarpal (RMC) and 3-4 portals respectively. The RMC, ulnar midcarpal (UMC), 3-4, and 4-5 portals are established with dissection using a number 11 blade through skin only, and the underlying tissue is spread with a curved mosquito hemostat. The 2.7-mm arthroscope sheath and sharp trocar are gently introduced in the RMC portal up to the level of the joint capsule and then converted to the blunt trocar for completion of the portal. The UMC portal is established in similar fashion for the outflow catheter and then inflow is established through the RMC and any residual hemarthrosis is flushed. The capitolunate, lunatotriquetral, triquetrohamate, and the distal aspect of the scapholunate joints are surveyed for any evidence of concurrent pathology. If any significant additional pathology exists, the index of suspicion for a highly unstable scaphoid fracture pattern beyond the realm of AARIF is increased. The radial aspect of the head of the capitate is traced, the scope is walked distally following the ulnar border of the scaphoid, and the fracture line is closely examined for any evidence of displacement or angulation ( Once provisional reduction has been demonstrated, the scope is transferred to the 3-4 portal and the outflow transferred to the 4-5 portal; the radiocarpal joint is assessed for any concurrent pathology. A 1-2 portal is established, taking great care to spread the subcutaneous tissue liberally avoiding injury to the dorsal division of the superficial radial nerve. The surgeon should stay as dorsal as possible in the 1-2 portal to avoid the radial artery and then establish and dilate the portal to allow passage of the target hook on the tip of the alignment guide blade. The blade is advanced in an ulnar direction to the level of the scapholunate interosseous ligament (SLIL) with the target hook facing dorsally. The blade is gently rotated distally and the target hook is swept onto the dorsal aspect of the proximal pole about 1 mm from the SLIL ( Quite often, there is significant variability in the degree of SLIL breadth and, to achieve the “sweet spot” fluoroscopically, one must be prepared to insert the hook anywhere from 2 mm radial to the SLIL insertion or frankly in the fibers of the SLIL on the proximal pole of the scaphoid. The hook must be kept relatively dorsal to avoid volar screw cutout, which is achieved by placing the hook at the upper end of the visual field when using a standard 2.7-mm, 30°angle arthroscope with the scope rotated distally. When this most essential step is completed, the concave surface of the blade will hug the convex surface of the scaphoid, and the blade handle will be in a 45° angle to the long axis of the forearm in the sagittal plane with the wrist in neutral. Slight traction is maintained on the blade handle while the alignment guide barrel is attached. The thumb is hyperextended to shift the trapezium as far dorsal as possible, thus revealing access to the critical “starting hole” on the distal pole of the scaphoid. The barrel is slid down the alignment guide while distal traction is continuously maintained on the blade handle, and the barrel teeth are compressed against the distal pole articular surface ( The screw length is determined from the distal edge of the calibrated alignment guide. The guide sleeve is inserted into the barrel of the alignment guide. Wire depth can be controlled by using the depth gauge to measure the length of the primary guidewire as it is inserted into the wire driver. Using a wire driver with minimal axial pressure, the primary guidewire is inserted down the barrel insert sleeve. In young dense bone, which is so common in this age group, the surgeon should be patient and avoid excessive force as this compromises the cutting capability of the guidewire point and increases the risk of guidewire bending. The wire is inserted up to the premeasured stop point as it abuts the guide sleeve. Placement of the primary guidewire should be examined fluoroscopically to be absolutely certain there is at least 2 mm of bone around the guidewire in all projections. The surgeon should critically assess the proximity of the wire to the “sweet spot” in the proximal pole on the PA view. On the lateral view, the surgeon should make sure that the wire is at the bare minimum 2 mm away from the volar cortex at the waist ( In preparation for drilling, the distal pole cortex can be broached with the cannulated modular hand held broach, but this step is seldom necessary unless significant resistance is encountered with the step drill. The cannulated step drill is inserted over the primary guide wire to drill the pilot hole after the adjustable stop sleeve is slid onto the drill and set for the appropriate screw length. Although this can be done with power, it is preferable to attach the cannulated step drill to the modular handle and drill the pilot hole manually, so as to feel any untoward changes in resistance. Drilling should last until the adjustable sleeve bottoms out on the guide barrel ( The Herbert-Whipple screw is inserted by the modular screwdriver over the primary guide wire and down the barrel of the alignment guide. The screwdriver is turned until it bottoms out on the guide barrel. The screwdriver should be advanced a few more turns to further bury the head of the screw below the osteochondral junction to assist in hyaline cartilage healing as espoused by Lange and coworkers AARIF with the Herbert-Whipple system also can be used in the treatment of stable delayed unions/nonunions with normal ISAs, even in the face of mild cystic resorption and ischemic changes in the proximal pole ( Potential complications of scaphoid AARIF include the entire list of well-known complications of scaphoid fractures and their subsequent treatment regardless of type, including delayed union, nonunion, malunion, avascular necrosis, injury to the superficial radial nerve and/or the volar division of the radial artery, malpositioning of the implant, iatrogenic injury to surrounding articular cartilage, post-traumatic arthritis, and sympathetically maintained pain syndromes. There are no specific complications germane to scaphoid AARIF alone. Clinical experience with scaphoid AARIF is still relatively new; however, in the few limited series reported, there have been no reports of the more severe complications: delayed union, nonunion, and avascular necrosis. Postoperative care in our patients with the Herbert-Whipple implant has consisted of a bulky, cotton dressing in a thumb spica splint for the first week. After 1 week, sutures are removed, standard scaphoid radiographs are obtained, and a thermoplastic thumb spica splint is applied. Specific rehabilitation protocols are individualized based on specifics of fracture anatomy, stability, and relative vascularity of proximal pole. In most patients active range of motion is initiated at 2 to 3 weeks and splinting is discontinued at approximately 6 weeks and light activity is allowed. A dedicated scaphoid CT is obtained in approximately 6 weeks, depending on the plain radiographic appearance at that time. In most patients, trabeculations are visible on the CT crossing the fracture site and a home strengthening regimen is initiated. Return to heavy manual tasks and contact sport is allowed as strength returns, usually within a few weeks. The rehabilitative course of ischemic proximal poles and proximal third fractures must be individualized base on CT results and the extent of trabeculation seen at 6 and 12 weeks. The utopian goal in treatment of the patient with the fractured scaphoid is prompt union with the lowest incidence of complications and the least amount of disability. In those scaphoid fractures that are stable (Herbert A-1, A-2), conservative cast treatment is most appropriate, having the lowest rate of potential complications. A significant subset of the scaphoid fracture population will unfortunately present with higher degrees of instability in their fracture pattern such as Herbert B-1, B-2, and B-3 fractures. These fracture patterns, especially those with displacement and elevated intrascaphoid or intercarpal angles indicative of increasing degrees of instability, will require some form of internal fixation, preferably with interfragmentary compression. The highly unstable fracture patterns with displacement greater than 1 to 2 mm, PA–ISA >50°, lateral ISA >40°, scapholunate angle >70 to 80°, capitolunate angle >25°, trans-scaphoid perilunate fracture dislocations (Herbert B-4), or concomitant scapholunate ligament injuries are undoubtedly best served by ORIF to maximize union rates and minimize complication rates. Scaphoid AARIF is indicated for the subset of patients in between these 2 extremes. AARIF can offer significant potential benefits over ORIF for the following patients: (1) the patient with a nondisplaced fracture who elects to shorten his or her course of immobilization with operative intervention, (2) patients with mild degrees of displacement (<1 mm) and only mild elevation in their intrascaphoid or intercarpal angles or both, (3) the patient with a proximal pole fragment large enough to accept the leading threads of the Herbert-Whipple screw and leave no threads across the fracture site, and (4) patients with stable delayed unions and nonunions with normal ISAs, which can be augmented with trapezial ridge cancellous bone grafting and the application of PDGF gel. It is in this select patient population that one can offer stable interfragmentary compression by AARIF yet avoid the disadvantages of formal ORIF, including extensive soft-tissue dissection, disruption of the volar vascular supply, division of the radioscaphocapitate and radioscapholunate ligaments with the attendant permanent alteration in intercarpal angles, and prolonged rehabilitation. Scaphoid AARIF with the original Herbert-Whipple cannulated screw system and alignment guide offers certain distinct advantages over freehand, percutaneous, nonalignment guide systems. The alignment guide, with arthroscopic assistance, helps localize the proximal pole “sweet spot” in relation to the SLIL landmark. The guide allows for precompression of the proximal and distal pole fracture fragments, further assisting the eventual compression provided by the variable pitch screw. Moreover, precompression with the alignment guide affords a preview of the final construct. If dorsal gapping is present at the fracture site as visualized arthroscopically through the midcarpal portal, the surgeon receives a valuable warning that the guide/screw axis is far too volar. One can easily reposition the guide in a more dorsal position before beginning the intramedullary drilling process. This is a great value when stabilizing a bone that is “known for” giving surgeons little in the way of “second chances.” This experience also underscores the fact that, despite excellent anatomic alignment under magnified multiplanar fluoroscopic imaging, the arthroscope will still reveal persistent displacement or gapping. Such displacement or dorsal gapping may well lead to delayed union or possibly even nonunion and is more prone to occur in percutaneous or limited incision “freehand” techniques that rely on fluoroscopic assessment alone to determine the adequacy of fracture reduction. The alignment guide compression also prevents distraction of the fracture fragments as the screw is driven across the fracture site; a problem that can be experienced in percutaneous or freehand systems, especially when the proximal pole is not drilled or tapped to the exact appropriate depth during intramedullary preparation. The alignment guide accessory wire also decreases the probability of rotation during thread engagement in the proximal pole. In addition, cannulated systems with alignment guides are less prone to guide wire bending or binding during subsequent intramedullary instrumentation, as compared with those systems without alignment guides. The alignment guide does have one distinct disadvantage in that it is highly technique dependent with little margin for error. It is strongly recommended that one have full familiarity with the Herbert-Huene jig and the demanding technique involved in ORIF before progressing to AARIF with the Herbert-Whipple system. In that regard, cadaver training in the laboratory is extremely valuable in developing surgical technique. Undoubtedly, in the initial stages, AARIF is quite a cumbersome and laborious process because of the dual mediums of fluoroscopy and arthroscopy. In time, however, with continued experience, operative times start to shorten, and the process becomes more streamlined.