Nano-sized Sr0.5Ba0.5Nb2O6 (SBN50) powder has been synthesized, at very short reaction time, for the first time by a novel combustion method. Ba(NO3)2 and Sr(NO3)2 were used as source of Sr and Ba, respectively, while Nb-oxalate was used as the source of niobium. Urea, hexamethyltetramine (HMT) and glycine were used as fuel. The crystallite sizes in the powder ranged between 14–125nm. X-ray diffraction analysis showed complete SBN50 phase formation at 700°C, when urea/HMT was used as fuel, and at 800°C when glycine was used as fuel. Ferroelectric–paraelectric phase transition temperature (T
                     c) close to 40°C was observed when urea and HMT were used and the T
                     c was −49°C when glycine was used. When urea was used as fuel highest dielectric constant was observed for the pellets sintered at 1250°C for 4h. Low dielectric loss was observed when HMT was used as fuel. Larger grain sizes in the sintered pellets were observed when glycine was used as fuel.Strontium barium niobate (SBN), the ferroelectric relaxor material, is gaining attention in recent years because it facilitates fabrication of ceramics with desired Curie temperature, ferroelectric properties, dielectric constant and microstructure, by varying SBN, an important electroceramic material, is known to have very long calcination time and the solid-state process involves repeated calcinations and grinding steps to obtain the pure phase. Moreover, it is difficult to obtain a homogeneous product through the solid-state process. A number of wet chemical methods, such as coprecipitation Combustion-synthesis method has been applied for a range of materials such as the ferroelectric materials like PMN The starting materials used for synthesis of SBN50 were Sr(NO The stoichiometric composition of the metal nitrates and the fuels was based on the oxidizing and reducing valencies of the metal nitrates and the fuel The precursor Nb-oxalate solution was prepared by adding liquid NH The X-ray diffraction pattern of as-synthesized powders revealed the formation of pure tetragonal tungsten bronze SBN50 phase. The SEM micrograph of the as-synthesized flakes showed fibrous nature for Set 1, but it showed more porosity for Set 2 and 3. This is illustrated in  Measured density of the pellets for the Sets 1 and 2 was 90% of theoretical density ( Dielectric constant was calculated at 1, 10, 100 It is interesting to note that the Prior to this report, different Solution combustion method has been successfully implemented for the synthesis of SBN. Nano-sized powders, in the range 14–125 Access to SEM, TEM and ICP-AES facility provided by RSIC, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, is gratefully acknowledged.