The crystallization behavior and mechanical properties of melt-spun (Al90Fe5Ce5)100−xTix (x = 0, 4, 8 and 12 at.%) alloys have been investigated. The amorphous phase seems to be stable up to x = 8. The crystallization products for the amorphous alloys with x = 0–8 mainly composed of fcc-Al and icosahedral phases in the glassy matrix. The load dependent hardness behavior of amorphous alloys with and without Ti addition has been studied. The hardness value of the amorphous alloys has been found to be 3.72 and 3.07 GPa for x = 0 and 8 at 100 g load respectively. The annealed ribbons have higher hardness and strength as compared to that of as-synthesized ribbons. The enhanced values of hardness of the (Al90Fe5Ce5)100−xTix (x = 0, 4 and 8) alloys are attributed to the combined effects of icosahedral nanoparticles and Al nanoparticles in amorphous matrix. The absence of cracks around the indentation area up to 500 g of load for amorphous alloys suggests better capability to resist crack propagation in comparison to the annealed alloys. The formation of shear bands around the indentation periphery has been observed. The number of visible shear bands for the as-synthesized ribbons is higher in comparison to those of annealed ribbons. The values of yield strength and Meyer exponent of these alloys are also compared.A family of rapidly solidified Al-TM-RE (TM-Transition Metals, RE-Rare Earth Elements) amorphous alloys with high Al contents (>80 at.%) has been drawing attention due to their high strength to weight ratio The amorphous Al Several elements have been tried as an addition to Al-TM-RE alloy systems to study the crystallization behavior and glass forming ability of Al-based amorphous alloys. Yang et al. In the present investigation, (Al High purity Al (99.96%), Fe (99.90%), Ce (99.99%) and Ti (99.99%) were used for the preparation of alloy ingots of compositions (Al The structural characterization was done by employing X–ray diffractometer (X’Pert Pro PANalytical diffractometer) with CuK  A quantitative energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) was performed for knowing the composition. In this section, we present the results of mechanical behavior of as-synthesized and annealed ribbons of (Al  The hardness value permits us to compute the 0.2% offset yield strength (σ  The crystallization behavior and mechanical properties of (Al One of the authors (Devinder Singh) thankfully acknowledges the financial support by