Use of liquid/solid fluidization techniques for size classification is a common practice in mineral processing operations. Extending its application in gravity separation for finer feed particles (−0.5 mm) is not straightforward as these fine size particles tend to remain in a mixed state during fluidization. In this paper an effort is made to explore the possibilities of adopting liquid/solid fluidization technique to beneficiate fine-size feed. The study shows that separation is effective within a limited range of size (ratio) with proper control on superficial water velocity. This study is relevant to beneficiation of low-grade ore which typically liberates at finer size where beneficiation has been a challenge.Liquid/solid fluidization refers to holding solid particles in suspension by a liquid. The principles of liquid/solid fluidization have been applied in many areas of engineering applications. In many separation processes the process parameters are optimized to create different states of particle segregation—normal segregation and mixing, size separation, and density separation depending on the requirement. Some particulate systems are highly sensitive to process conditions and they tend to show reverse segregation where more dense (heavier) particles segregate above the less dense (lighter) particles. In the literature, the particle segregation states during fluidization have been explained using binary systems of particles ( It is well known, at least on theoretical grounds, that separation of a wide variety of particulate systems is feasible through liquid/solid fluidization. The pioneering work by Since nineteen eighties, mineral industry adopted (liquid/solid) fluidization based equipment for treating fine particles. Originally, the equipment was used as a teetered bed separator for size classification. More recently, Floatex Density Separators have been used as gravity separators to treat low-grade ore. These ores typically exhibit complex liberation characteristics that require beneficiation at fine size range. For example, the liberation size of low-grade Indian iron ore is less than 0.5 mm. This provides an opportunity to investigate and determine the scope and effectiveness of liquid/solid fluidization technique to separate minerals for finer feed passing 0.5 mm. In this paper the possibilities of adopting liquid/solid fluidization technique for the beneficiation of fine size feeds with proper control on size (ratio) and superficial water velocity is explored. Particle segregation during fluidization has been theoretically explained through equilibrium of forces acting on particles in suspension. A particle attains terminal velocity when the total interaction of forces such as drag and buoyancy match its weight. In the case of a single spherical particle in an infinite expansion state, In another way, If one define that the drag force This equation can be rewritten in a dimensionless form as The above correlation is obtained by transforming the where, Substitution of this equation into the Richardson–Zaki equation leads to Hence, Eq. The above equation shows that the terminal velocity of a spherical particle for a single component (mono-species) particulate system is a function of particle size, particle density, voidage, and fluid density. In mineral beneficiation, the fluid is usually water and hence terminal velocity is mainly a function of three parameters: size, density, and voidage. Effect of these three parameters on the terminal velocity can be calculated from Eq. The bulk densities of different particle species comprising the particulate system adjust during fluidization. The bulk density is defined here as In case of a density variant binary system of uniform size A size and density variant binary system is more complex than either a size or a density variant system. The driving force for particle segregation for this combined system is defined as The above equation can be modified by considering the voidage around smaller particles which can be expressed in terms of the voidage around larger particles and by assuming that both species are in the same (laminar) flow regime during fluidization. Thus Eq. In this equation, size ratio and relative density ratio are two primary parameters that control the bulk density difference of the two species of a binary system. This equation also considers the difference in particle density and average voidage as two other important input parameters for calculating bulk density difference. Based on Eq. Theoretical analyses were carried out to explore the application of fluidization technique in beneficiation of iron ore fines of size below 0.5 mm. This feed is complex in nature from fluidization standpoint with respect to variation in size and density of particles. However, for ease of understanding it is assumed that the iron ore feed consists of three broad density classes—concentrate, intermediate, and reject. The concentrate is liberated iron particles; the intermediate contains interlocked particles of iron and alumino–silicate (gangue) minerals; and the rejects are liberated gangue minerals. Theoretically, particle segregation for fine size iron ore feed during fluidization can be interpreted by assuming the make up of the feed as a mixture of three different density variant binary systems as shown in A fluidization column was designed and fabricated for this study. It is a cylindrical Plexiglas column of 1.0 m height and 6.0 cm in diameter as shown in The first set of experiments has direct relevance to the applicability of liquid/solid fluidization in mineral beneficiation. These experiments were carried out on each species separately and on the basis of the fluidization results, segregation behaviour of binary systems comprising of any two species was predicted. Segregation behaviour was analysed based on the difference in bulk density between the species as explained earlier on theoretical ground. The second set of experiments was undertaken to establish the usefulness of fluidization techniques in beneficiation of complex feeds. These experiments were carried out using several binary systems. The third set of experiment was conducted to explore the applicability of this technique to beneficiate low-grade and finer size iron ore. The findings from these three sets of tests are discussed below under separate headings. Four different particulate systems were studied separately and in each case 100 cc of mineral particles were tested. The relevant physical properties of these particle types are given in Three out of the six binary systems were chosen based on their natural colour which helped in distinguishing the particles after segregation. These three binary systems are ilmenite–quartz, bauxite–quartz, and bauxite–coal having size ratio of 3.89, 2.33, and 3.13 respectively. The relevant physical properties of these particles are given in In the experiment, particles from species/component 1 and 2 were manually mixed in equal volume and then 100 cc of the mixed particles were transferred to the fluidization column. In this set of tests the superficial water velocity was made to vary. All three binary systems remained in mixed state during fluidization and attained only partial segregation at a superficial water velocity specific to each system. These experimental results also validate the predictions of the theoretical model. The other significant observation from the experimental study is that these complex systems are highly sensitive to superficial water velocity. In these three systems, since size and density ratio is fixed, the segregation patterns could only be changed through superficial water velocity. In mineral beneficiation system, density ratio is governed by feed types and liberation characteristics of the feed and hence it cannot be altered during fluidization. However, size ratio and superficial water velocity can be suitably modified for improved particle segregation. To illustrate further, the next set of tests were carried out with finer size low-grade feed. Low-grade iron ore, generated during mining and beneficiation poses a huge problem. This low-grade fraction with complex liberation characteristics is difficult to upgrade. Grinding as a part of feed preparation is required to liberate the iron minerals from the gangue. However, iron beneficiation at a finer size (i.e. below 500 μm) is also a challenge. The solution lies in developing and adopting the most effective and relevant technology and in this context, fluidization techniques appear promising. Theoretical analysis indicates the possibility of separation between iron rich minerals (i.e., concentrate) and rejects containing gangue minerals by fluidization (see For the second part of the experiment, silica rich iron ore was used. The feed passing 0.5 mm screen size was separated into three fractions—concentrate, intermediate, and reject using gravity and magnetic separation. Equal volume fractions of concentrate and reject particles were mixed to prepare another feed for the next set of tests. Because of a wider feed size distribution, the size ratio for this feed is not constant, but the density ratio is around 1.6. Here only the density ratio was kept within the limit of normal particle segregation and then the combined effect of size ratio and superficial water velocity was studied. This feed was first tested on the fluidization column and then it was treated in a Floatex Density Separator (FDS). Samples from the top, middle and bottom ports of the fluidization column were collected from three separate fluidization tests and in each case fresh feed was used. Micrographs of these samples show that most of the finer size particles report towards the top of the fluidized column (see The second set of tests were carried out in a Floatex Density Separator (FDS) which works on the principal of liquid/solid fluidization and it is used for classification as well as gravity separation of minerals. This machine has a collection launder for overflow and underflow and accordingly products were collected from both these launders at different levels of superficial water velocity. Altogether five tests were carried out at five different levels of water velocity to collect five sets of product samples. All these product samples were chemically analyzed for total iron, silica, and alumina content by using wet chemical methods. Silica and total iron content in the overflow product is plotted against superficial water velocity in In the third and last part of the experiment, silica rich Banded Hematite Jasper (BHJ) was used. Particles passing 0.25 mm size was used to generate the feed for FDS study following the method described earlier. Total iron and silica content of the underflow products for five different tests are plotted against their respective superficial water velocity in In summary, all the experimental results show that the separation process is sensitive to size ratio and superficial water velocity. This realisation is important for beneficiation of low-grade iron ore which shows liberation only at fine size ranges. To beneficiate such fine size feed, classification of the feed to bring the size ratio close to one is an essential feed preparation step prior to treating it in an FDS or similar machine. Proper control of superficial water velocity is required in an FDS for better separation. Fluidization behaviour of a binary system of particles is studied. A theoretical analysis led to the identification of three important factors responsible for particle segregation: size ratio, relative density ratio of the components and superficial water velocity. During fluidization, relative density ratio between concentrate and reject cannot be altered whereas size ratio and superficial water velocity can be controlled. Size ratio depends on the size distribution of the feed and its range is big for a wider size distribution. For these reasons gravity separation by fluidization is most feasible for a size ratio below 1.0. Separation is also feasible between iron and gangue minerals at relatively wider range of size ratio (0.5–2.0) with proper control on superficial water velocity.  Volume of a particle. Acceleration due to gravity. Drag force. Buoyancy force. Drag co-efficient of a single particle. Apparent water velocity. Square root of the ratio of drag co-efficient. Regime-dependent exponent. Richardson–Zaki exponent. Archimedes number; ( Particle Reynolds number; ( Reynolds number at terminal velocity; ( Density of the fluid. Density of the particle. Density of lighter and heavier particle. Density of large light and small heavy particle. Bulk density of the fluidized bed with larger and smaller diameter particles. Bulk density of the fluidized bed with heavier and lighter particles. Bulk density of the fluidized bed with larger light and smaller heavy particle. Diameter of the particle. Diameter of large light and small heavy particle. Diameter of the larger and smaller particle. Voidage. Voidage around larger and smaller particle. Voidage around heavier and lighter particle. Voidage around large light and small heavy particle.