Two commercially available biopolymers are investigated as an alternative to classical surfactants in dye removal via foam flotation. Cationic dyes can be removed with efficiencies above 96% and enrichment factors in the foam of about 6. In comparison to the anionic surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), dye removal is slightly lower, but less water is needed to stabilize the foam. The removal efficiency of anionic dyes, e.g. methylene orange, with the pure biopolymer is low (about 5%) but increases significantly (up to 70%) in the presence of a cationic collector, e.g. dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB). These results show that we can replace the classical surfactant by a more environmentally friendly alternative.Flotation is a separation technique originally applied for the removal or concentration of small particles in mineral processing, but meanwhile, it has become a versatile method in different areas, e.g. wastewater treatment In this contribution, a new class of biomaterial with amphiphilic properties is used as alternative collector to classical surfactants for dye removal via foam separation. The biopolymers are produced from yeast and plant oils The anionic surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS,>99% purity) was obtained from AppliChem. The amphiphiles HeBra and HeSat were obtained from Faliten. The cationic surfactant dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB,≥98% purity), and the dyes crystal violet (CV, 1% w/v aqueous solution) and eosin Y (EY, 99% purity) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. The dye malachite green (MG, laboratory grade) was obtained from Fluka AG. The dyes methyl orange (MO, 0.1% w/v aqueous solution) and methylene blue (MB, 1% w/v aqueous solution) were obtained from Alfa Aesar. The dye cresol red (CR, laboratory grade) was obtained from Merck. All chemical were used without further purification. The structures of the dyes are shown in Aqueous solutions of HeBra, HeSat, and SDS, with a concentration of 0.67 With the Thin Film Pressure Balance (TFPB) technique free-standing horizontal liquid foam films can be investigated. Thus, information about drainage, stabilities thicknesses and interaction forces of thin foam films are accessible. Disjoining pressure isotherms were measured with the porous plates technique The flotation experiments were carried out at room temperature (ca. 22 The feed solution, the foam and the residual were analyzed by UV/Vis spectroscopy to obtain the dye concentration in order to calculate the dye removal efficiency using Eq. The dye concentration was measured by UV/Vis spectroscopy with a Lambda 35 (double beam) spectrometer from Perkin Elmer. In flotation experiments with HeBra and HeSat, water was used a reference solvent. In the presence of DTAB, a flotation experiment without the dye was performed and used a reference. To remove dissolved contaminants from water by flotation, the applied surfactant should have good foam properties, e.g. a high foam stability, and a positive interaction with the contaminant. As we planned to apply HeBra and HeSat for dye removal via flotation, we investigated the foam stability at first. For comparison, we measured the foam stability of SDS. As shown in To get more information about the foam behavior of HeBra, the foam film morphology was investigated using a thin film pressure balance (TFPB). HeBra and HeSat are from the same family of biopolymers and the TFPB experiments were done exemplarily for HeBra. The lamella structure can be seen in In In comparison to SDS, the thinning of the HeBra foam film is slower. Furthermore, metastable dimples are found for HeBra, but not for SDS films. Both slower thinning and dimple metastability can be contributed to less mobile and thus the more rigid surface of HeBra films. This can be explained by the significantly larger size of the HeBra molecule in comparison to SDS. Thus the molecules in the film are less mobile and the resulting structure is more rigid. The foam films made from SDS are significantly more stable with the maximum in stability not measurable with our equipment but up to 70 Based on the good foam properties of HeBra and HeSat, we applied them in dye removal via flotation. We selected three cationic (MB, CV, MG) as well as three anionic (MO, EY, CR) dyes and performed screening experiments with HeSat to check for HeSat/dye interaction. For the screening experiments HeSat concentration (0.5 Evidently, high removal efficiencies are obtained for the cationic dyes (R There are many parameters that can have an influence on the flotation performance. In our contribution, we were more interested in the interaction of the dyes with the biopolymers rather than in technical aspects, e.g. bubble size, surface area or gas dispersion. One important parameter is the ratio of the collector to dye. In our experiments, we kept the collector concentration constant at 0.5 Beside the variation in the dye concentration, we investigated the influence of the gas flow rate. The removal efficiency and enrichment factors for MG removal are shown in For SDS, which was used again for comparison, the removal efficiency is almost quantitative for all investigated flow rates, but the enrichment factor decreases from 4 to 1.5 with increasing flowrate. For the biopolymers, the removal efficiency decreases by ca. 5% for HeBra and ca. 10% for HeSat when the flowrate is increased by a factor of about 7. Also the enrichment factors significantly decrease from about 7 to 5 (HeBra) and 2.5 (HeSat), but are still significantly higher than that for SDS. The lower removal efficiency can be explained by a much shorter contact time between the gas bubbles and the dissolved dye at high flow rates. The lower enrichment factors show that much more water is needed to stabilize the form. However, these values show that even at higher flow rates, HeBra has good flotation properties. In all cases, the amphiphile concentration was 0.5 As cationic dyes show high removal efficiencies and anionic ones not, we tried to separate cationic and anionic dyes from each other by flotation. As feed, we used a mixture of malachite green and methyl orange. In the screening experiments with HeSat, MG and MO removal efficiencies were above 95% and below 10%, respectively. The removal efficiencies and the colour of the feed solution before and after floatation are shown in Before flotation, the mixed dye solution has a green color (a mixture of MG blue and MO yellow) and afterward, the solution is yellow. This indicates that the cationic dye which gave the blue color was removed highly efficient. Indeed, the removal efficiency of MG is about 95% and similar to the screening experiments. However, the removal efficiency for MO was a little bit higher than in the screening experiments. We assume that MG and MO are able to form a neutral ion-pair complex which can be easier removed by flotation than MO alone. As shown from the screening experiments, the anionic dyes, e.g. methyl orange, can’t be removed efficiently via flotation using HeSat, because of a missed interaction. From micellar enhanced ultrafiltration experiments (MEUF) it is known that anionic dyes can be removed by micelles of cationic surfactants, e.g. Khosa and Shah show that reactive black can be removed with cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC) or cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) at best removal efficiencies of 83% and 98%, respectively As obvious, the methyl orange removal efficiency increases by the addition of DTAB from less than 5% (without DTAB) to about 70%. There is no linear relationship between dye removal and DTAB concentration; in fact, a maximum at 0.5 Biopolymers like HeBra or HeSat have amphiphilic properties which allow for their use in foam flotation. The experiments have shown that they can remove cationic dyes with removal efficiencies above 96%, but anionic ones only to a small amount. In comparison to SDS, which can remove the cationic dyes almost quantitatively because of the much higher charge density, the biopolymers have lower cmc values, better foam properties, and are biodegradable. To remove anionic dyes with the biopolymers, a further collector has to be added. We found that the removal efficiency of methyl orange can be increased from about 5% to 70% by adding the cationic surfactant DTAB with concentrations of about 0.5