Emulsification is one of the most important stages in coal cleaning by using oil agglomeration. Reduction in size of oil droplets and increase in total surface area provided by emulsification result in coverage of entire coal surface with oil, thereby reducing the oil dosage and affecting rapid agglomeration. Ultrasonic emulsification which has been used recently in many sectors such as pharmaceutical, cosmetic, food, chemical industries may be a beneficial and promising operation in oil agglomeration of coal. In the present study, an oxidized fine coal with high ash and pyritic sulfur content was cleaned by oil agglomeration process after ultrasonic emulsification and the effects of power level and time of ultrasonic treatment on the performance of the agglomeration process were determined. Ash and pyritic sulfur rejections that was found to be 50.38% and 85.28%, respectively, at agglomeration test without ultrasonic emulsification was increased to maximally 56.89% and 88.69% by using ultrasonic emulsification before agglomeration. While increase in power of ultrasonic treatment did not affect ash and pyritic sulfur removals considerably, ultrasonic treatment time had positive affect at higher power levels. Contrary to expectations, ultrasonic emulsification affected the combustible recovery and separation efficiencies adversely.An emulsion is a dispersion of two immiscible liquids, one of which is dispersed into the other in the form of fine droplets Ultrasound is an alternative method to produce emulsion The above mentioned studies have not focused on the specific applications of ultrasonic emulsification and intended to show either mechanism of ultrasonic emulsification or effects of some variables on the emulsion stability. However, they have not been related to use of ultrasonic emulsification in oil agglomeration method that is used for fine coal cleaning. Mechanised mining has been resulting in production of large quantities of fine coals Oil emulsification is one of the most important stages in oil agglomeration. Emulsified oil droplets are smaller and have large surface area, and completely cover the coal surfaces, resulting in good oil usage and rapid agglomeration The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of ultrasonic emulsification on performance of the oil agglomeration process in terms of combustible recovery, ash rejection, pyritic sulfur rejection, ash separation efficiency and pyritic sulfur separation efficiency. For this purpose, laboratory scale oil agglomeration tests with and without ultrasonic emulsification were performed. Power level and time of the ultrasonic treatment were selected as variables. A coal sample from Muzret (Artvin-Turkey) coal deposit was used in this study. Proximate analysis was carried out and showed that Muzret coal had high ash and pyritic sulfur content ( At first, agglomeration test without ultrasonic emulsification stage was undertaken. Cylindrical glass vessel (11.7 Then, agglomeration tests including ultrasonic emulsification process were undertaken. For emulsification process, oil–water mixtures (5 Finally, agglomerates were analyzed for ash and pyritic sulfur contents by using standard analyses methods. The details of analyses methods can be found elsewhere In addition to above mentioned tests, photos of ultrasonically emulsified oil droplets and agglomerates were taken by using optical microscope (Leica Dm 4000 As seen from Contrary to expectation, combustible recovery of agglomeration process was reduced by ultrasonic emulsification despite formation of smaller size droplets by ultrasounds. This reduction sharpened with increase in power level and time of ultrasonic treatment. Combustible recoveries of 54.25–63.32% and 48.67–58.44% were observed during agglomeration tests after ultrasonic emulsification for treatment times of 0.5–2 Ash and pyritic sulfur separation efficiencies in oil agglomeration test without ultrasonic emulsification was found to be 14.00% and 48.90%, respectively. Except the test undertaken at ultrasonic power of 9.5 Close appearance of the agglomerates produced in the agglomeration tests is illustrated in Ultrasonic treatment was observed to be a successful method for emulsification process. Ultrasonic emulsification produced small size oil droplets and ensured homogenous distribution of oil droplets in the water. Size of the oil droplets reduced with increasing power and time of the ultrasonic treatment. Ultrasonic emulsification enhanced the ash and sulfur rejection from coal. Maximum ash rejection of 56.89% and maximum pyritic sulfur rejection of 88.69% was achieved by the agglomeration process after the ultrasonic emulsification. Ultrasonic emulsification had adverse effect on combustible recovery. This negative effect is considered to be eliminated by reducing the coal into finer particle sizes. In general, ash separation efficiency and pyritic sulfur efficiency of the agglomeration process were affected adversely by ultrasonic emulsification.