Cs2SnI6 is an air-stable and non-toxic perovskite variant photovoltaic material which exhibits p-type conductivity under doped conditions. In this work, we report the synthesis and stability studies of Cs2SnI6 towards its application as a solid-state Hole Transport Material (HTM) in Titania Nanotube (TNT) based Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs). Cs2SnI6 crystals were synthesized using precipitation method and its stability was assessed using X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA). Cs2SnI6 doped with SnI2 was deposited onto the TNT photo-anode as the HTM layer through dip coating. Deposition time was varied to obtain a continuous layer of Cs2SnI6 HTM over TNT photo-anode and cell characteristics were studied. We were able to fabricate air stable, all solid-state solar cells with a Jsc of 6 mA/cm2, Voc of 536 mV and PCE of 1.3%. The study propounds contemporary analysis on Sn based perovskite systems, in the field of DSSCs.Recently, there has been a surge of research interest towards developing hybrid organic-inorganic metal halide perovskites for applications in photovoltaics (PV) and other opto-electronic devices [ Lead free all-inorganic perovskites like cesium tin halides (CsSnX Recently, Cs Lee et al. reported ss-DSSC using Cs All these reports were based on DSSCs with mesoporous titania nanoparticle based photoanodes [ Cs Titania nanotubes were prepared by anodization of Ti foil (0.6 mm thick, 99.2%, TIMET) in ethylene glycol (Merck, 99%) solution containing 0.5 wt% of NH Anodized TNT films were washed in ethanol and annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. Annealed TNT films were dipped into 0.3 mM ethanolic solution of N3 dye (Solaronix) for 12 h. For deposition of Cs Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) transparent conductive glass electrodes (10 Ω/cm The samples were analyzed using scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL JSM-7600 F FEG-SEM). Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) coupled with the SEM was used to examine the chemical compositions. X-ray diffraction analysis was carried out with a PANalytical X'Pert Pro with an X'celerator detector. Thermogravimetric studies were carried out by Thermal analysis system (Perkin Elmer, USA). The current-voltage characteristics of solar cells were measured using a Keithley (model 2400) source meter under 100 mWcm Crystal structure of synthesized Cs When recrystallized from organic solvent, Cs XRD analysis of Cs Towards solar cell photoanode fabrication, titania nanotubes (TNT) were prepared by anodization of Ti foil. Anodized TNT films were washed in DI water and ethanol and annealed at 500 °C for 30 min. Dye sensitized TNT photoanodes was dipped in Cs  With increasing deposition time, the permeation of Cs Liquid electrolyte based DSSCs exhibits 4% photo-conversion efficiency for similar thickness of TNT photoanode (∼15 μm) with a Jsc of 9 mA/cm The limiting factor for low efficiencies in both TNT based and mesoporous photoanode based DSSCs can be poor permeation of Cs Incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) studies shown in Perovskite derivative Cs There are no conflicts to declare. The authors acknowledge financial support from the