The gold-processing industry is experiencing change. As free-milling and oxide ores become depleted, more complex polymetallic and refractory ores are being processed, coupled with increasing pressure for stricter environmental compliance. Recent years have also seen a steady reduction in mineral processing and metallurgy graduates and a gradual loss of older operating experience. A contribution to documenting current and future best practice in gold ore processing seems timely. The focus of this volume is on advances in current gold plant operation, from conception to closure; each chapter also covers recent innovations at the bench and pilot-scale level that would be expected to find commercial application at some stage. A coverage of essential chemistry and engineering aspects is included. Part I of the book focuses on project development, with an emphasis on the various aspects of feasibility study management and taking the path through commissioning, safety and environmental management in operation, and finally closure of both plant and tailings storage facility. With increasing pressures on the resource company to ensure minimal socio-environmental impact through the entire life cycle of the mine, it is important to aim at getting it ‘right first time’. Part II centres on the process plant, sequentially probing the generic gold-processing flowsheet for advances, best practice and potential future practical innovations. This is the heart of the book; there is coverage of the various unit operations involved with comminution, concentration, oxidation, leaching, gold recovery and disposal of residues and effluents. Innovations described in the comminution chapter include those undertaken at Freeport, which is the largest gold mill in the world (despite being a copper mine). Concentration of gold by gravity has seen innovation driven partly by the development of new items of equipment, and novel application within the milling circuit, such as is now commonplace in areas such as Western Australia. Flotation has similarly been influenced by the advent of flash and column flotation, as well as the application of differential floats for complex ores. Treatment of refractory ores has necessarily become increasingly important, and the section covering pressure and bacterial oxidation as well as roasting (both oxygenated and fluidized bed) has particular relevance to the modern gold metallurgist. While these technologies can now be deemed as established, the recent advances outlined in the book are clearly both novel and practical. Development of methods that increase recoveries while decreasing reagent consumption by minimizing cyanicide formation are clearly at the forefront of these areas and further development is certain. Again in the leaching section the emphasis is on treatment of problematic ores such as those arising from oxidation processes. There has been a drive in recent years towards the development of alternative lixiviants for gold, mainly as a result of environmental pressures. The most likely candidate for niche application is thiosulfate leaching; the amount of recent work in this area has warranted inclusion of this topic as a separate chapter. Cyanide has seen practical application for over 100 years now, and this will continue, with the ongoing positive initiatives in cyanide management such as the Cyanide Code (which has also warranted a chapter in its own right) and the inherent benefits of a reagent that, in a well-designed flowsheet, is low level and biodegradable. Advances in the recovery of gold from leach solution are again influenced by developments in equipment and reagents. Ongoing improvements in the refining of gold are also being made. Innovations such as the AAC pump cell contactor and gold-selective resin-in-pulp have found niche application at a few operating plants. The extent of their use will depend on a number of factors, but the trend towards polymetallic and refractory ores is likely to open up new applications that may require some innovative flowsheeting if the base-metal and precious-metal values are both to be economically recovered. There is another area that has a positive bearing on the future of cyanide in gold processing. The application of cyanide detoxification or recovery processes into flowsheets is becoming much more prevalent. This may well again reflect an increasing sense of environmental stewardship by resource companies, undoubtedly driven by the need for the two prongs of public and operator perception to meet in a common reality. A number of new technologies for the economic recovery and recycle of cyanide from plant tailings have now been developed, and this may well be a key element to the ongoing responsible use of cyanide. Perhaps the main area where public perception has been negatively influenced has been with tailings storage facilities. Placement of paste or dry tailings using techniques such as centrally thickened discharge, for example, is an innovation that addresses issues of dam stability and water recovery, whilst resulting in a more natural-looking landform on closure. Part III assesses the principles and developments outlined in the first two parts, by means of focused case studies of typical flowsheets for the two major types of problematic gold ores that are being encountered – polymetallic and refractory ores. A distinction is made on economic grounds between gold–copper ores and copper–gold ores; process flowsheets and issues differ between the two. Ores containing high silver, base-metal and platinum-group metal (PGM) grades will continue to be more often in resource companies’ fields of view as the quest for paydirt continues. As orebodies become more complex, so too do the process flowsheets, with an increasing reliance on hydrometallurgical treatments that result in a variety of products, not only gold but also copper, nickel, cobalt, silver, PGMs and sometimes lead and zinc. While refractory sulfides have been around for some time, an understanding is being gained of the subtle chemistry that can arise in high-pressure autoclaves treating a sometimes extensive mix of different sulfide minerals. As both the knowledge base and the number of applications increase, so the risk of applying these processes becomes smaller. The same can be said of other problematic ores, such as carbonaceous preg-robbing, tellurides and antimonial ores. The general principle behind the structure of the volume is that of flowsheeting based on unit operations and applied to a mineralogical classification of gold ore types. Knowledge of the mineralogy of an orebody is the key to unlocking the wealth contained within. The extensive chapter covering this aspect necessarily does so through process eyes; flowsheet definition can then follow using the building blocks comprising the unit operations described in the second part of the volume. Practical experience is vital to the successful development, operation and closure of any operation. The 42 chapters have been contributed by a total of 66 authors and co-authors who are experts from countries spanning the globe, and representing exhaustive practical knowledge covering many disciplines relevant to gold processing. Within the chapters are numerous tidbits of practical personal experience, much of which is as yet unpublished. It is hoped that the content will be useful to operators, engineers and researchers worldwide. The original intention was to provide a selection of appendices covering SI units, conversion factors, pulp density tables and the like. The ready availability of this information on the internet has made their inclusion redundant; however, a colour-coded Periodic Table kindly made available by Prof. Fathi Habashi has been included. This book is intended for mineral-processing engineers, metallurgists, process mineralogists, mining engineers, environmental engineers and consultants, as well as resource company managers. It will be of interest to professionals and students alike.