Nanoparticles have significant potential as new candidates for generating new types of flotation reagents with unique performance for wettability design and control. Hence, this study explores the wettability of a glass surface covered with polystyrene nanoparticles at various surface coverage percentage using molecular dynamics simulations. To investigate wettability on the bare and coated glass surface, the dynamics of water molecules, contact angle, density distribution profile, and hydrogen bonding patterns are analyzed as substrate wettability indicators. The results reveal that both unrelaxed and relaxed forms of glass surface tolerate a strong asymmetric distribution of surface energy in general, due to charge accumulation on the surface leading the surface to strong hydrophilic behavior. However, unlike chemical collectors, partial covering of glass surface with cationic polystyrene nanoparticles up to 10% reduces the surface tension to a favorable level of hydrophobicity for flotation.Flotation [ The potential of nanoparticles for these applications has promoted substantial interest and work on the reagent performance using nanoparticles as flotation reagents. Hajati et al. [ In this work, we particularly investigate adsorption phenomena and hydrophobicity of mineral surfaces from a molecular point of view. Considering acceptable results of simulation and modeling methods based on quantum mechanics [  To create stabilized polystyrene nanoparticles with desired sizes and density (1.04 g·cm To eliminate edge and boundary effects, the water cells and the polystyrene nanoparticles are located in a distance of more than 25 Å with respect to the glass edges of the simulation boxes. To minimize the direct repulsive effect of polystyrene nanoparticles on water nanodroplets and on its contact angle, the water and the nanoparticles cells are located on the opposite sides of glass surface at a distance of more than 20 Å. The water cells are located on the down left side of glass surface while the nanoparticles are located on the top right side of the glass surface in order to mitigate any effects of surface geometry on contact angle ( The MD simulations are performed using the open-source code Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) [ Adsorption, configuration, and mobility of water molecules on a solid surface are significant reflections of physics and chemical nature of the surface atoms and molecules. In other words, surface energy plays a significant role in wettability behavior and properties and investigating its origins and distribution will provide a better understanding of the wettability properties of the surface. To assess the origin and the quality of the energies distribution on the glass (0 0 1) surface, energy analyses [ Using the glass surface as a reference for the energy distributions reveals that the minimum values for Columbic energy in both forms of glass surfaces occur at the inner core of the glass surface compare to the edge regions due to the lower density of incomplete SiO Generally, the energy analysis results on the possible terminations of the glass surface show that despite a significant difference in values of surface energy on these surface arrangements, it is of the same nature resulting from accumulated partial charges, especially located at the edges due to dense presence of incomplete Si To determine the contact angles from MD simulations, it is necessary to make sure that the structure remain stable and fixed on the glass surface. In the following subsections, we present analysis and results on the stability of adsorbed nanoparticles and formed nanodroplets further, before contact angle calculations. In MD simulations of bio-molecules, polymers, and long-chains, the root-mean-square displacement (RMSD) [ To verify pinning of nanoparticle on the glass surface, the location of center-of-mass (COM) of adsorbed nanoparticle is monitored in the Stability analysis of formed water droplets is important in particular for calculation of contact angles and wettability analysis. Mean-square displacement (MSD) [ On coated glass surfaces with polystyrene nanoparticles, due to the decrease in the surface energy and wettability, a transition from one to two separate clusters is observed, which is associated with the increase of surface coverage. It is observable that the rate of ballistic motion over the coated glass surfaces is lower than its motion on the bare surface due to decrease in the surface tension. On coated surfaces, water nanodroplets form and adsorb to the glass surface in the first two nano-seconds of simulation time. During the remainder of the simulation, the water nanodroplets shapes are stable on the substrate due to the formation of hydrogen bonding between water molecules and theirs pinning to the substrate. As seen in For a solid substrate in contact with water molecules, wettability and contact angle results from a balance of cohesion and adhesion forces between water molecules and the surface, respectively [ Five percent covering of glass surface with polystyrene nanoparticle (GP05) leads the contact angle to increase from 25° to 55.58° and the position of COM of nanodroplet subsequently to shift to 11 Å with respect to the glass surface. By increasing surface coverage percentage from five to ten (GP10), water molecules affinity with glass surface changes from hydrophilic to hydrophobic indicating 10% covering of glass surface with polystyrene nanoparticles is sufficient to create a favorable hydrophobic glass surface for flotation. Previously, Pelton et al. with lab-scale studies had shown that 10% covering of the glass surfaces with polystyrene nanoparticles could promote high flotation efficiencies by increasing the contact angle to more than 85°, whereas chemical collector requires at least 25% or higher coverage for a good recovery [ Compared to the one nanoparticle with 10% of surface coverage (GP10), using two nanoparticles with 5% of surface coverage for each one (G2P05) also causes the contact angle to increase to 93.07 and the location of COM to shift to 15.4 Å with respect to the surface. These results confirm that several smaller-sized nanoparticles compared to a larger-sized nanoparticle have a much better effect on reducing surface wettability. Lab-scale studies had shown that the use of polystyrene nanoparticles with the dimension of 46 nm compare to 120 nm produced far more satisfactory results in the glass flotation. The recovery of glass flotation with 10% covering of glass surface with 46 nm nanoparticles increased to more than 90% which confirms, the surface coverage with small size nanoparticle led to a more homogeneous and uniform coating of the surface and further reduced the adhesion forces between the glass surface and the water molecules [ On the relaxed glass surface (GsP10), 10% of surface coverage causes the contact angle to increase to 94.66° and the location of COM for nanodroplet to shift to 15.5 Å with respect to the glass surface showing fairly agreement with the energy analysis results. The process of stability for COMs is in good agreement with water RMSDs and MSDs ( On a solid surface in immediate contact with water molecules, there is a direct relation between the arrangement of water molecules on the surface and surface energy [  On the coated glass surfaces with polystyrene nanoparticle, increasing the surface coverage percentage from five to ten leads the dense accumulation of water molecules in the interfacial layer to decrease. In addition, location of interfacial layer in the water nanodroplets shifts from 2.9 Å for GP05 to 3.41, 3.47, and 3.51 Å for GP10, G2P05, and GsP10, respectively. For coated glass surfaces with nanoparticles, the adjacent layers are also located at distances of 5.5 to 6 Å with respect to substrate. In addition, the convergence of water density to one (g·cm For a target atom on a solid surface, distribution profile shows the number of atoms as a function of distance from the surface. By increasing the percentage of surface coverage on the coated glass surfaces with polystyrene nanoparticles, as seen in The formation of hydrogen bonding between silicates and oxide minerals and water molecules is one of the most effective factors on strong wettability behavior of these minerals [ As seen in Associated with the increase of surface coverage percentage with polystyrene nanoparticles, a decrease in the average number of hydrogen bonds per water molecules is observed. In the GP05 system, 5% of surface coverage reduces the surface energy causing water molecules to increase the separation distance from the surface. Accordingly, the average number of hydrogen bonds per water molecule reduces to about 3.6. As seen in By increasing surface coverage percentage to ten (GP10, G2P05, and GsP10), the average number of hydrogen bonds per water molecule gradually converges to Flickering clusters [ Molecular dynamics is used to perform a feasibility study on using hydrophobic nanoparticle as a collector in flotation. Glass and stabilized hydrophobic polystyrene in various sizes are chosen as substrate and nanoparticle, respectively. To evaluate the wettability behavior of the glass surface, qualitative energy analyses are performed on both unrelaxed and relaxed forms of the glass surface. Despite significant difference in values, surface energies on both surface forms show a heavy asymmetric distribution, making the glass surface strongly hydrophilic. However, the covering of glass surface with polystyrene nanoparticles reduces surface tension and changes the wettability behavior of the glass surface from hydrophilic to hydrophobic. Unlike classical chemical collectors, a partial coating of glass surface with polystyrene nanoparticles, up to 10%, leads to major changes in glass surface wettability. In addition, associated with this coverage, we observe a transition from one to two separate clusters in water molecules adsorption on the surface and a gradual transition of the surface-wetting regime from the Wenzel to Cassie–Baxter state. The average number of hydrogen bonds per water molecule converges to the values typical of bulk water. The results also confirm that at the same surface coverage, the smaller the nanoparticles, the higher the hydrophobicity of the surface. In general, the results are in good agreement with previous lab-scale studies and show that nanoparticles can be considered as one of the promising alternatives for new types of flotation reagents. MD simulations and post-simulation analyses were performed using computing facilities at the University of Nevada, Reno, USA. We also would like to acknowledge funding from the The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at