Photocatalytic processes in the presence of titanium dioxide provide an interesting route to destroy hazardous organic contaminants, being operational in the UV-A domain with a potential use of solar radiation. Numerous photocatalytic reactions have been tested showing that organic contaminants in water can be completely mineralized (i.e. converted into CO2, H2O, NO3
                     −, SO4
                     2−, etc.) by irradiation in the presence of TiO2.
                  In this paper, the photocatalytic degradation of a monoalkyl dithiocarbamate (Vapam®) by TiO2 illuminated suspensions has been investigated at bench scale. The determination of the effects of various kinetic factors on the photocatalytic degradation and the determination of the nature of the principal intermediates form part of the focus of this study. This research also involves the characterisation of the titanium dioxide surface by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to obtain information about the composition and chemical state of the catalyst surface.
                  Preliminary field tests have shown that this pesticide can not be completely mineralized when treating diluted industrial wastes from manufacturing industries. The experimental results presented suggest that inactivation of titanium dioxide by sulphur occurs. These results have significant implications to commercialise solar photocatalytic detoxification technology since the catalyst cost has a major impact on the wastewater cost.The pollution of drinking water supplies by agrochemical compounds is an urgent problem for which remedial measures need to be found. Thiocarbamate derivative pesticides have found an important role in pest control in recent years Vapam A wide range of organic compounds are photocatalytically oxidised to carbon dioxide in the presence of titanium dioxide, with near-UV-radiation in aqueous solutions A considerable amount of literature has been published on the photocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds in water, but little is available on problems related to catalyst inhibition and poisoning. Evidence to date in photocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds indicates that in addition to a given reactant, many other molecules (solvent, reaction products, other reactants and other non-reactive solution components) will influence the observed reaction kinetics Researchers have established that “spectator components” in water can have adverse effects on the rates of destruction of the target compounds. Simple inorganic ions, such as phosphorus, sulphate, nitrate and chloride, have been found to reduce the performance of titanium dioxide photocatalyst Studies reported in this paper evaluate an inhibition phenomenon which takes place on the titanium dioxide catalyst during the photocatalytic degradation of Vapam X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), one of the most widely applied surface analysis techniques, was used to carry out these studies. The single most valuable attribute of XPS is its ability to obtain, at least, the semi-quantitative estimates of the relative abundance of the elements present on the outer surface of a sample (a few nanometres in depth) and to distinguish different oxidation states of an element All chemicals were commercially available and used without further purification. High purity HPLC methanol from Scharlau, S.A. was filtered before use (0.45 The liquid chromatography system consists of an LC pump (Model 1050 Hewlett-Packard) and a diode array spectrophotometric detector (Model 1040 M Series II Hewlett-Packard). The reversed-phase column used was a Some extracted fractions were also analysed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) to confirm intermediate identities. The equipment consists of a Hewlett-Packard 5710A coupled with mass detector VG 7035 operated in electron ionisation mode. Electron energy was approximately 70 The overall total organic content (TOC) of the suspension, including both dissolved and adsorbed organic molecules was measured directly from the slurries by using a Heraeus–Foss electric TOC-2001 apparatus (UV-peroxidisulfate method). Calibration was achieved by injecting standards of potassium phthalate. Anion analyses were made by direct injection of the filtered slurries into an ionic chromatograph (IC) system Dionex DX 120 equipped with an Ion Pac (250-mm long column). XPS analysis were carried out in a Leybold Heraeus LSH-10 apparatus, working at 0.13 Binding energies referencing for various oxidation states was performed using standard materials. The positions of these peaks in some standard compounds are included in The laboratory system consists of a recirculating batch photoreactor fabricated with pyrex, teflon and viton components, resistant to the chemicals under investigation. Water, contaminants and titanium dioxide are mixed in a tank and continuously recirculated through a 250 Irradiation was carried out by a solar simulator equipped with a 1000 Previous field tests conducted with real sunlight showed that this pesticide can not be completely mineralized when treating diluted industrial wastes from manufacturing industries The experimental results presented herein suggest that problems encountered when Vapam A specific set of experiments were prepared to study the formation of MITC as a final product of the overall degradation process by the simultaneous determination of Vapam In another set of experiments, some estimate of the degree of stability of MITC was obtained measuring the corresponding relative rate constants of the pure products under the same experimental conditions. For comparison, the data concerning The above results together with the state of the art of photocatalytic reactions, at least for TiO There is considerable evidence in the literature which implicates OH radicals as a primary oxidising species in the photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds Second preliminary research, initiated in our laboratories, relates to the characterisation of the titanium dioxide surface. This research involves the use of XPS technique in order to obtain information about the composition and chemical state of the catalyst. The following discussion will study the long-term inactivation which takes place when MITC degrades, demonstrating that the mentioned phenomenon should be associated to a decrease in catalyst performance. For the purpose of better comparison, two pesticides as Vapam TiO TiO TiO TiO For each sample, the following elements were analysed: carbon (C 1s); titanium (Ti 2p and Ti 3p) and sulphur (S 2p). Survey spectra showed the presence of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, titanium and sulphur in samples TiO The XPS bands of Ti 2p and S 2p are shown in The C 1s spectra for samples TiO The values of binding energies of Ti 2p spectra in samples 1–4 are shown in The XPS bands of S 2p spectra in samples 1 and 3 did not show sulphur under the experimental conditions of this study. The S 2p spectra of samples TiO On the basis of above discussion, the degree of inhibition found during the degradation of MITC could be explained by an adsorption phenomenon by sulphur deposition which deactivates the available titanium dioxide sites on the catalyst inhibiting further reactions. This may indicate that reactions involving MITC degradation have significant reactions paths leading to sulphur in addition to sulphate ions. The nature of this reaction is not fully understood at present. Sulphate inactivation has been reported by Abdullah et al. To confirm these results, some catalyst lifetime studies have been performed. In them, a standard system containing a water sample spiked with Vapam The results showed here have significant implications to commercialise solar photocatalytic detoxification technology since the catalyst cost is expected to play a dominant role on the economic viability of this process Studies reported in this paper evaluate an inhibition phenomenon, which takes place on the titanium dioxide catalyst during the photocatalytic degradation of Vapam We would like to thank Mr. J. Blanco and Dr. Sixto Malato from Plataforma Solar de Almerı́a for their invaluable support. Thanks are due to Prof. Michael R. Hoffmann from W.M. Keck Laboratories, California Institute of Technology for his invaluable discussions concerning the occurrence of substitution reactions in titanium dioxide photocatalytic reactions.