Forward osmosis (FO) seawater pretreatment was proposed for the removal of scale ions from seawater to the thermal desalination plant. In the current study, previously developed models were applied to estimate the effectiveness of FO pretreatment in the removal of divalent ions from feed solution to MSF/MED at elevated temperatures. The simulation results showed that the water and salt flux across the FO membrane increased with increasing the seawater salinity. However, for given seawater salinity, the water and salt flux across the FO membrane decreased with increasing the FO recovery rate. It was found that the concentration of Ca2+, Mg2+ and SO4
                     2− ions increased with increasing the operating temperature in the thermal plant but decreased with increasing the recovery rate of the FO pretreatment. Additionally, an FO pretreatment-MED Scale Index (FMSI) was developed to determine the required FO recovery rate and avoids scale problems at different MED operating temperatures. Initially, Ryznar Scale Index (RSI) of the feed solution was calculated for different MED operating temperatures. Then, RSI was plotted against the FO recovery rates and the desirable FO recovery rate was determined from the plot based on the operating temperature of the MED plant. The scale index was also applied to determine the required mixing ratio of NF permeate-makeup water in the NF-MED desalination hybrid system. The application of the FO pretreatment-MED Scale Index has the potential to reduce the required time and resources to determine the desirable FO/NF pretreatment ratio of feed water to the MED plant.From seawater desalination to power generation, FO process has increasingly found applications in wastewater treatment, drug delivery, and food industries In the process of seawater pretreatment, an FO membrane similar to that used in Elimelech et al. work  The FO-thermal desalination hybrid system is designed to achieve the following advantages To reduce the discharge of brine reject and cooling water to sea To reduce the cost and chemical use in the draw solution In the current study, the performance of FO-MSF/MED hybrid system was further investigated at an elevated TBTs. The operating TBTs of the MSF and the MED were increased over the conventional operating temperatures and the scale tendency of CaCO Different salinities were simulated in this study to evaluate the impact of seawater TDS on the performances of FO pretreatment and thermal plant in terms of distillate recovery rate and scale formation. Previously developed FO-Visual Design Software (VDS) was used to estimate the performance of the hybrid systems In Eqs.  Eq.  Calculate the required TBT in the MED plant to reach a higher distillate flow rate from Eq. Calculate the RSI of the pretreated feed solution to the MED from Eq. Plot RSI against FO recovery rates for different TBTs Find the desirable FO recovery rate and RSI for any TBT to operate the MED without severe fouling problems The impact of seawater salinity on the concentration of feed solution to the MSF was investigated. In the present studies, FO-VDS software was applied to simulate the performance of the FO-MSF hybrid system. The MSF plant was operated in brine recycle mode and its performance was evaluated at two TBTs; 111  Currently, MSF commercial plants are operated on TBT The hybridization of FO membrane system with MED plant was illustrated in a previous work Conventionally, the operating TBTs in MSF and MED plants are 111 Although high TBT enhances the performance of MED process, it increases the risk of CaCO An FO pretreatment-MED Scale Index (FMSI) was developed here to estimate the tendency of scale fouling in the FO-MED hybrid system depending on the seawater salinities and the operating temperature of MED plant. In the proposed index, a suitable recovery rate to the FO process can be determined based on the seawater salinity and the TBT of the MED desalination plant to alleviate the scale problem. In conjunction with Eq. The suggested scale index for FO-MED hybrid system can also be applied on the NF membrane pretreatment of seawater to the thermal desalination plant. In the latter process, a loose NF membrane is often used for seawater pretreatment with ions Ca FO pretreatment is for the entire feed solution and for the partial feed solution in the case of the pretreatment in the NF process. NF rejection rate is lower than FO membrane. In the current study the FO process was proposed for the removal of divalent ions from seawater to the thermal desalination processes. The simulation results showed higher concentrations of Ca An FO pretreatment MED Scale Index for FO-MED was developed here to determine the required FO recovery rate for any seawater salinity and operating TBT in the MED plant. This index was also used to estimate the NF-makeup water mixing ratio in the thermal plant. Finally, a future pilot plant test is required to demonstrate the efficiency of FO process in seawater pretreatment and also to develop an FO/NF pretreatment index for thermal plant which can be used as standardized method in membrane-thermal plant hybrid desalination processes. It should be noted here that there are some advantages in the implementation of FO process for the pretreatment of feed solution to the thermal processes such as the limited recovery rate of the FO process which is mainly dependent on the osmotic pressure gradient across the membrane. Furthermore, as an emerging technology, there are limited data about the performance of the FO process from pilot plant studies.