Steel backed Al–10wt%Sn strip has been prepared by the spray deposition of the molten Al–Sn alloy on a steel substrate, followed by rolling of the resulting composite strip. In the present paper the rolling behaviour of the composite strip at 473K, together with the characteristics of the spray deposit have been discussed. It has been shown that the Al–Sn spray deposit is a coalesced network of particles having porosity. The particles in the network are of spherical, ligament and irregular shapes. The study shows that the composite metal strip can be rolled well at 473K without any delamination or surface and edge cracking on the deposit layer. A rolling thickness reduction of 75% produces steel backed Al–10wt%Sn strip having optimum properties. During rolling, densification in the deposit, deformation in the deposit and substrate, and bonding between the deposit and the substrate take place simultaneously. The mechanism of densification in the deposit layer during rolling has been discussed on the basis of the examination of the microstructure of the deposit at different stages of rolling.The process route involving spray atomization of liquid metals by high pressure gas jets, deposition of metals droplets on a substrate, and subsequent hot and cold rolling of the deposit was first applied by Singer Spray forming has potential for making an adherent deposit on a substrate, viz. sleeve bearing strips. However, no significant work has been carried out in this area. A few patents are available in the literature, which describe the process for making laminated composite metal strips via spray atomisation–deposition–rolling/extrusion route Al–Sn alloys are important group of materials used in the sleeve bearing application, because they offer good balance between load bearing capacity and fatigue resistance, together with favorable conformability and embed ability. In sleeve bearings, steel is used as a strong bearing back on to which Al–Sn bearing layer is metallurgically bonded. Steel gives adequate strength to the composite bearing strip. Al–Sn alloys are completely miscible only above the liquidus line. In conventional casting, if a homogeneous single phase Al–Sn liquid cools below the liquidus line, it transforms into two liquids, viz. aluminum-rich and tin-rich. The minor tin-rich phase segregates out. On the other hand, if the homogeneous single Al–Sn liquid phase is rapidly cooled, as experienced in spray atomization, then the minor phase is dispersed uniformly in aluminum-rich matrix. Thus, it appears that the processing of Al–Sn alloy via spray atomization and deposition, which involves rapid cooling, would minimize the problem of segregation. A possible method for making steel backed Al–Sn strip based on “spray atomisation–deposition–rolling” could consist of gas atomization of the liquid Al–Sn alloy and subsequently the spray is allowed to deposit on a steel substrate kept below the liquid metal stream in the atomization chamber. Prior to deposition, the surface of the substrate should be shot blasted for the adherence of the spray deposit with the substrate. In a batch type operation, the thickness of the deposit would be controlled by the amount of the initial metal, whereas in a continuous type it is controlled by the speed of the traversing substrate. Subsequently, the laminated composite strip, i.e. bearing layer together with the steel substrate, is rolled at a suitable temperature to give nearly full density in the deposit, good metallurgical bonding between bearing layer and steel substrate and improved mechanical properties. In the present paper, an attempt has been made to spray deposit steel backed Al–10 A schematic view of the experimental set-up is shown in Spray atomization and deposition experiments were carried out in a covered chamber of size 540 Al–10 The deposit collected on the substrate had a variation in thickness along the longitudinal direction of the substrate. The thickness was maximum at the center and minimum at the edges of the deposit along the longitudinal direction. However, the variation in thickness of the deposit along the transverse direction of the substrate was not significant. A sample of size 30 The steel backed spray deposited Al–Sn strip samples was rolled at 473 The size of the bend test specimens were 15 Microhardness of the Al–Sn deposit was measured in MHP 160 Diamond Pyramid Micro Hardness Tester. A load of 10 Both fractured and polished surfaces of the “as spray deposited” and as well “spray deposited and rolled” specimens were observed under scanning electron microscope. The etchant used was Keller reagent. The “as spray deposited” Al–10  The spray deposited Al–10 At the time of reaching the substrate, the spray was found to contain particles of different shapes such as spherical, and ligament to irregular. A coalescence of ligament shaped particle is shown in Thus, it is apparent that a network of particles having porosity is formed during deposition. This network contained different shaped particles. There were also a few particles of size 20 The steel backed spray deposited Al–10   The effect of thickness deformation by rolling on the bending characteristics of the spray deposited steel backed Al–10  Rolling of steel backed spray deposited Al–10 In the present study, the spray deposition was carried out in a batch type experiment. This has resulted in the thickness variation in the deposit. Uniform thickness in the deposit can be achieved by the use of matched nozzles A coalesced network of particles having inter-particle porosity forms during spray deposition of Al–Sn on steel substrate. This is due to the semi-solid nature of the atomized particle. The deposit is adherent to the substrate. The deposit also exhibited layered structure at some places. The particles in the network were spherical, ligament and irregular shaped. During rolling, both densification and deformation in the Al–Sn deposit and as well bonding between the deposit and the steel substrate take place simultaneously. In the initial stages of rolling (i.e. about 40% thickness deformation), the metal flow in the Al–Sn deposit is mainly in the thickness direction resulting in the removal of porosity by rearrangement and restacking of spray deposited particles. Beyond this much deformation, plastic deformation becomes the predominant mechanism of densification during rolling. As a result the pores are removed by a process involving pore elongation in the direction of rolling followed by fragmentation into several smaller size pores. This process of elongation and fragmentation of pores continue with rolling. When the width of the pores becomes very small, the opposite faces of the pores collapse, and the porosity is eliminated. Elongation, fragmentation and collapsing of pores occur simultaneously during rolling. It is possible to prepare steel backed Al–10