In this study, a novel and a facile purification approach using an electric field was developed to improve the porous structure of raw diatomite by removal of impurities from its surface and clogged pores. Voltages of 50 and 100V were applied for 30min, and the feasibility and efficiency of this approach were determined by comparison of the properties of the product with those of raw diatomite. The chemical, physical, and microstructural results confirmed that the electric field successfully improved the porosity, specific surface area, and enhanced absorptive efficiency of diatomite. The results suggest that application of an electric field has reasonable potential as an alternative method for improving diatomite quality. This is the first report documenting the successful improvement of diatomite using an electric field.Diatomite, also known as diatomaceous earth, is a naturally formed non-metallic siliceous sedimentary material formed by the accumulation of the skeletal remains of single-celled algae. This material is mostly diatom shells of a wide variety of shapes and sizes, typically 10–200 Normally, if a uniform electric field is formed between electrodes in a fluid, electrophoresis causes movement of charged particles suspended in the fluid. Organic impurities tend to be positively charged, while diatomite is neutral; so that charged impurities are pulled along the field lines towards an electrode with a charge opposite that of the particles ( Natural diatomite powders with an average particle size of 50 The diatomite and water (D/W) ratio was fixed at 1:20 and was treated with applied voltages of 50 and 100 Chemical analysis of raw and purified diatomite, and each supernatant, was done using ZSX Primus-II X-ray fluorescence (XRF — Rigaku Co., Japan). The mineral content of the raw and purified diatomite was analyzed using Dmax 2500/PC X-ray diffraction (XRD — Rigaku Co., Japan). The morphology and microstructure of raw and purified diatomite were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and surface element analysis was also conducted simultaneously with the SEM, at the same surface locations, using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (S-4200, Hitachi Co., Japan). Physical properties (i.e., BET specific surface area, total pore volume, and average pore diameter) of the samples were determined using BEL-mini II model (BEL Japan brand); using nitrogen gas as adsorbate. In order to check the concentration of organic content in the supernatant, chemical oxygen demand (COD) was measured according to Standard Methods ( In order to confirm the feasibility of using an electric field for purification of raw diatomite, voltages of 50 and 100 The mineralogical analysis was carried out using XRD in order to investigate the crystal structure of raw and purified diatomite, as shown in The physical properties (i.e., absorptive efficiency of N Microstructural observation was done to verify the success of this process in producing highly-porous diatomite particles, and in maintaining the integrity of the porous structure of diatomite after employing the electric field. A selection of SEM images of raw and purified diatomite are presented in The aim of the present work was to develop a new and a facile purification approach for improvement of the porous structure of raw diatomite by applying an electric field. These results indicated that the electric field removed impurities from the surface and the clogged pores of raw diatomite. As a result, the chemical and physical properties of the diatomite were improved. Additionally, the average pore diameter became smaller than for raw diatomite after application of the electric field due to the exposure of previously blocked and hidden small pores. These results suggest that application of an electric field has reasonable potential as an alternative method for improving diatomite quality.  This work was supported by grants from the This work was supported by the