A 10mm hydrocyclone was operated using a barite suspension with a maximum particle size of d
                     max
                     =7μm. The test rig was equipped with a piston diaphragm pump for pressures up to 60bar. At 40bar and 20°C, cut sizes d50 were obtained down to 0.7μm; increasing the temperature to 50°C resulted in d
                     50 values down to 0.5μm for a throughput of 0.6m3/h. Another experiment was conducted at 40bar using a batch hydrocyclone technology. Only the overflow was recirculated to the feed box, whereas the underflow was discharged via a collection box. Increasing the number of recirculations increased the separation of fines in the submicron range. The results showed that after 20min particles with d
                     max
                     =1μm were obtained in the hydrocyclone overflow. After 120min, the particles size distribution had a d
                     max
                     =0.5μm and a mean size of d
                     50
                     =0.2μm. This procedure requires high energy consumption and is thus suitable only for fractionating small quantities of particles in the submicron range.particle size maximum particle size mean size of particles cut size at 50% of partition curve cut size at 90% of partition curve nominal diameter of hydrocyclone specific energy throughput feed pressure temperature mean tangential velocity in hydrocyclone filled tank volume kinematic viscosity of water water density Hydrocyclones can typically produce cut sizes The cut size  Mini-hydrocyclones are usually fed by centrifugal pumps that generate an inlet pressure up to 5 A further option is to increase the temperature of the suspension, which, in principle, should yield higher settling rates of the particles by decreasing the water viscosity  The subject of this paper was to enhance hydrocyclone separation of cut sizes in the submicron range. For this purpose, a 10 Experiments were performed using a 10 Overflow and underflow were recirculated to the 10 L-feed tank (4), as is typical for a test rig in a completely closed circuit. Only the overflow was recirculated to the feed box, whereas the underflow was collected in a box (2) using a throttled discharge. A thermostat (3) was installed in the overflow to prevent the suspension from overheating. Particle size analyses were conducted using laser diffraction. The barite powder was carefully suspended using a polyacrylate dispersant. Data obtained from the hydrocyclone experiments are listed in First, the 10 In theory, the throughput should increase with the pressure as   The partition curves in Under these conditions, the 90% value that was chosen for the cut size is reasonable. Thus, the coarse particles were separated more efficiently than the fine particles. On the other side of the partition curves, at the end of the fish hook is indicated that no more than the half of the finest particles appeared in the overflow.   A further test was conducted to maximize the separation of the fine particles. The test rig was operated at 40 The cycle time was estimated as the ratio of the filled tank volume  After 20 The high-pressure pumping in the closed circuit caused heating of the suspension, which was limited by a thermostat to 50 The objective of this study was to use a 10 Using a barite suspension, cut sizes were obtained down to 0.5 Operation at higher temperatures up to 60 A special procedure was performed, i.e., a batch separation in the 10