No previous studies have compared ultrasound (US)-guided fracture reduction to non-US-guided fracture reduction. Our objective was to determine if US-guided distal forearm fracture reduction improved first-attempt success rate. We prospectively enrolled a convenience sample of adult and pediatric patients over a 2-year period with distal forearm fractures requiring closed reduction in the ED. In the study group, we used US guidance to assess the adequacy of fracture reduction, and compared them to a similar historical cohort of patients who had closed reduction in the ED without US guidance. Pre-reduction data collected included mechanism of injury, degree of angulation, displacement, intra-articular involvement, and comminution. The primary outcome measure was first-attempt reduction success. An “attempt” was defined any number of reduction maneuvers followed by a confirmatory x-ray. Physicians used a standardized data form to report whether US was helpful, and in what ways. A blinded orthopedic surgeon was shown all pre- and post-reduction films, and classified the pre-reduction difficulty of reduction and the post-reduction adequacy of reduction. We calculated proportions and 95% confidence intervals. There were 47 patients enrolled in the US-guidance group and 49 in the matched historical control group. The two groups were similar at baseline with respect to mechanism of injury, fracture displacement, comminution, and perceived difficulty of reduction. However, in the US-guided group, 23% (11/47) had previous unsuccessful reduction attempts, versus none in the control group. The first-attempt success rate was 75% (95% CI, 61% - 85%) in the US-guidance group and 67% (95% CI, 53% - 79%) in the control group. In 23 cases, the physician felt the US-guided reduction was adequate, and the blinded orthopedic surgeon agreed in 21 (91%). Physicians considered US-guidance helpful in 94% (44/47) of patients, most commonly noting that US had demonstrated an incomplete reduction which required further maneuvers (57%), or a satisfactory reduction (52%). US-guided distal forearm fracture reduction demonstrated similar first-attempt success rate as compared to non-US-guided reduction, despite having a larger number of patients who had had previous unsuccessful reduction maneuvers. It was rated as helpful by a majority of physicians. We suggest a larger, randomized trial.