The hard diasporic bauxites are difficult to grind and difficult to digest during alumina production. The economy of their processing in this way is predominantly effected by the grinding, which is in a strong relationship with the chemical digestion. An ongoing systematical research programme at the University of Miskolc in cooperation with S&B aims at developing more precise design of ball mills and comminution process for grinding of bauxites, decreasing operation costs. The grindability tests were carried out in Bond and Hardgrove mills. In both tests, the grindability indices were determined in dry, aqueous, alkaline (NaOH) media, as well as after high pressure comminution. The effect of additives (CaO) was also investigated.Grinding has a significant impact on economical ore dressing and processing, therefore the development of the grinding process and the dimensioning of the mills have an outstanding role. In the usual case, the dimensioning of dry or wet (aqueous) mills for ore processing is primarily based on the determination of the Bond grindability index, using the Bond-Kjos-Rowland relations. In several cases, grinding takes place under conditions different from these and the grinding conditions have a great influence on the post-grinding process. This is particularly true for the grinding of bauxites where grinding takes place in alkali, often in high-temperature alkali (diasporic bauxites). So it is necessary to develop a testing method providing a reliable grindability index even under these special conditions and allowing a more precise mill dimensioning. The investigations of these issues is particularly important for S&B as this company possesses significant diasporic bauxite resources. The possibilities of processing these hard bauxites in Greece and exporting them are determined by the costs of grinding and chemical liberation. For these reasons, S&B—in cooperation with the Department of Process Engineering at the University of Miskolc—has set the following targets to develop a more favourable grinding technology: developing the grindability test for alkaline grinding conditions; using the grindability characteristics obtained thereby for developing a more correct mill dimensioning to reduce the investment costs; investigating the possibilities of using additives and a high-pressure roll press to reduce the grinding costs. To achieve the above targets, the Department of Process Engineering at the University of Miskolc is doing systematic research work, the most important results of which are presented in this paper. We developed the grinding conditions (alkali concentration, pulp density, additive) utilising the experiences of the wet grindability test carried out by Our striving to be able to conclude from the laboratory tests on the energy demand of in-plant grinding and the capacity of the grinding equipment as well as to determine the mill dimensions in a reliable way led to the development of several grindability tests. Up to this day, the use of the Hardgrove and Bond processes is most widespread in mineral industry and mineral processing. The Hardgrove process was developed in the US for the grindability test of coals. The essence of the process is as follows ( According to Bond developed a measuring method for determining the Thus, the purpose of the laboratory measurement is to determine the To determine the grindability indices of bauxites experimentally, first, we carried out dry grinding tests under the usual and standard conditions presented above. At the wet and alkaline grinding tests, we fed into the mill a suspension made from the prescribed dry bauxite and water or alkali. The concentration of solid material was 570 g/l for Greek bauxites and 640 g/l for Hungarian bauxites. We carried out the alkaline grinding tests in an industrial alkali with a concentration of 190 g/l Na  From the data, it can be established: The bauxites show similar behaviour towards the change of medium ( As opposed to frequent experience (see the correction factor At the same time, bauxites—especially boehmitic and gibbsitic ones—can be ground in an alkaline medium better (Bond index decreases by 30–35%) than in aqueous conditions: In this experiment series, we carried out only Hardgrove grindability tests with Greek diasporic bauxite. First, we carried out dry grinding, then alkaline grinding. Before grinding, we comminuted the sample material to <3 mm, then exposed it to increasing pressure in a roll press (seal press) with a diameter of 30 mm using an equipment serving for standard fracture test. From the material pre-crushed in this way, we screened out the fraction required by the Hardgrove test (590–1190 μm). The dry grindability test was followed by alkaline grinding combined with high-pressure pre-crushing. At the highest pressure, we examined the impact on grindability of feeding CaO aiding desilication. The result of these two measurement series is summarized in  It can be seen that by applying high-pressure pre-treatment the grindability of diasporic bauxite increases to 1.22 times the original one, which leads to an almost twofold (1.89) increase of the original grindability in the case of alkaline grinding with CaO feeding (for alkaline grinding without high-pressure pre-treatment the increase of grindability is 1.4–1.5, see The above facts prove definitely that it is very important to carry out regular alkaline grindability tests for bauxite grinding, both in the design phase and during operation. Alkaline grinding with a Bond mill is a bit complicated. The data show that under the investigated conditions there is a tight relationship between the Bond index and the Hardgrove grindability. Grindability tests of the different types of bauxite have been carried out to determine the Bond and Hardgrove indices in dry grinding, grinding in water, in caustic liquor and also in caustic liquor with lime as grinding aid. It was found that: The bauxites behave similarly but to different degrees towards dry, aqueous and alkaline change of medium. During wet grinding the grindability of bauxite—as opposed to other ores—improves slightly in comparison with dry grindability: The ratio of measured dry and wet grindabilities: Consequently, it is reasonable to introduce, besides the Bond dry–wet correction factor (for dry grinding Furthermore, it is reasonable to determine the dry–wet bauxite grinding correction factor by measuring (as quotient of the dry and wet Bond indices) as its value differs from the value of the known Bond factor ( It has been justified that both the Bond index and Hardgrove index in caustic liquor can successfully be determined and an extremely good correlation can be found between the obtained values (with Eq. As a new and fast method, the determination of the Bond index from the Hardgrove index (by calculation) under special conditions in alkaline process liquor of an alumina plant has been controlled and developed and is recommended. For hard (diasporic) bauxites, the use of a high-pressure roll crusher and CaO feeding is expected to result in a significant saving of the grinding and investment costs.