Electric arc furnace (EAF) dust is produced when automobile scrap is remelted in an electric arc furnace and about 10–20 kilograms are generated per ton of steel. The major elements present in the dust are usually zinc, iron and calcium with smaller amounts of numerous other elements such as lead, copper and nickel. Typically, in the pyrometallurgical EAF dust treatment processes, the lead and zinc are separated as a crude zinc oxide while the iron is generally not worth recovering. Copper and nickel are usually not recovered as they report either to the oxide residue or to any metallic iron that is produced. In the present research, the recovery of the non-ferrous metals in a multiphase system consisting of gas, slag, matte, metal and solid carbon phases was investigated. The equilibrium compositions of the various phases, resulting from the smelting of the dust, were calculated using the SOLGASMIX module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry. The effects of the following operating variables were investigated; carbon additions, sulphur additions, nitrogen and oxygen additions, temperature and dust composition. The thermodynamic modelling results show that the majority of the non-ferrous metals can be recovered, with the zinc and lead concentrating in the gas phase and the nickel and copper concentrating in the matte phase.The remelting of automobile scrap in an electric arc furnace (EAF) results in the conversion of about 1–2% of the charge into a dust. In North America, the annual dust production rate is over one million tons. The scrap contains a large number of metals, plastics and rubbers, glass, paint, oil and even salt. Additionally, as shown in vapourization of metals at the arc and the oxygen jet, ejection of liquid droplets at the arc and the oxygen jet, ejection of liquid droplets by bursting of carbon monoxide gas bubbles, bursting of liquid droplets in the freeboard of the furnace, and physical entrainment of low-density furnace additives, such as lime and coal. Scanning electron micrographs of a typical dust are shown in The major metals in the dust are usually zinc, iron and calcium. The zinc is typically present as zincite (ZnO) and zinc ferrite (ZnFe it contains toxic elements such as lead, cadmium and chromium, it is considered a hazardous waste in most countries, it has a very fine average particle size and is also hygroscopic, it is chemically, physically and mineralogically complex, and both the physical and the chemical properties of the dust are site-specific, since they depend upon the scrap analysis and the furnace operating practice. The dust treatment options are essentially restricted to either stabilization followed by landfilling or metal recovery. Since the dust contains valuable amounts of zinc, lead and iron, numerous techniques have been devised and tested for metal recovery ( chlorine and fluorine are penalty elements, dioxins can form during treatment, the presence of free lime leads to aqueous solutions with a high pH (∼12), the presence of calcium carbonate results in high acid consumption, a major portion of the zinc can be present as zinc ferrite, which does not dissolve readily in aqueous solutions, it is technically difficult to recover the metals in metallic form and they are usually recovered as oxides, and secondary wastes can be generated. Although considerable research has been performed, only a limited number of processes have been commercialized and these are mainly pyrometallurgical, which are also referred to as High Temperature Metal Recovery (HTMR) processes. The most successful processes are essentially variations of the Waelz rotary kiln technology ( One of the deficiencies of the current pyrometallurgical processes is the inability to recover and separate the nickel and copper, and also to fix the sulphur. These two metals have boiling points that are higher than the operating temperature of the HTMR process and as a result they are concentrated in either the oxide residue or the metallic iron-rich phase, from which they are not recovered. Copper is an impurity of significant concern as it is generally considered to be a detrimental impurity element in steel. Its presence lowers the value of the oxide residue or the metallic iron-rich product, if they are to be returned to an iron or steelmaking process for the recovery of the iron values. There is currently no viable method to recover the copper from the dust or from the oxide residue or from any metallic iron product or ultimately any iron or steel produced using these materials as a part of the feed. Typically, the copper impurity problem is resolved by diluting the copper-containing iron with another source of iron units with a much lower copper content. In order to investigate the possibility of recovering the copper and nickel from the dust, a matte phase was included in a thermodynamic model of a pyrometallurgical dust treatment process. In this proposed process, the zinc and lead are recovered in the gas phase as in the traditional methods, while the nickel and copper are collected in the matte phase. It would be expected that the matte would also contain some iron. Metallic iron can be produced, if the price of iron is sufficiently high. The effect of the operating variables on the deportment of elements of interest was studied using the thermodynamic model. The dust was assumed to consist mainly of the oxides of zinc, lead, iron, calcium, silicon, aluminium, copper and nickel. Also some sulphur was assumed to be present as metal sulphide. There can be dioxins and/or furans present in the dust and also they can form in the recycling process. Therefore, it was assumed that the halides, such as chlorine and fluorine, and any alkali metal chlorides or fluorides had been removed ( The reaction of the dust results in a multiphase system consisting of five potential phases as follows: a gas phase, a liquid slag phase, a liquid matte phase, a liquid metallic iron phase and solid carbon. The species considered in these phases were as follows: Gas: N Slag: Al Matte: FeS, Cu The activity coefficient of solid carbon was taken to be unity. For the liquid phases, it was necessary to determine the activity coefficient ( The major variables involved in the model of the proposed multiphase pyrometallurgical processing of EAF dust are: carbon additions, sulphur additions, amount of nitrogen, amount of oxygen, temperature and EAF dust compositional differences. The model should be optimized to achieve the following objectives: maximize the amounts of lead and zinc in the gas phase, maximize the amounts of nickel and copper in the matte phase, minimize the formation of a metallic iron phase, unless this is desired, minimize the amount of reagents or additives required, such as carbon, minimize the operating temperature, and mitigate the formation of additional waste streams, which could be considered hazardous or require expensive treatment steps. Each of the process variables is examined sequentially in the following sections and then the process is optimized based on the above mentioned objectives. The effects of each variable on the gas, slag, matte and possible metallic iron phases are discussed. The effect of carbon on the equilibrium amounts of species in the gas, slag, matte and metallic iron phases are shown in However, the dust also contains other oxides, such as hematite (Fe With regards to the slag phase, as shown in This results in a decrease in the zinc ferrite content and an increase in the amount of zinc oxide, magnetite and wustite and subsequently maximums in the zinc oxide, magnetite and wustite contents of the slag. With increasing carbon, the hematite, and ultimately the magnetite and wustite contents decrease. Once beyond the maxima, there is sufficient carbon available for reduction, and as a result the zinc oxide content decreases rapidly. The lead, copper and nickel oxides exhibit a constant level at low carbon additions and then a rapid decrease once there is sufficient carbon available for the reduction of the corresponding metal oxide. About 0.5 As shown in In order to form sufficient matte phase, it may be necessary to add additional sulphur. Not only are the nickel and copper converted to sulphides, but also some of the iron will be sulphidized and there could be insufficient sulphur in the original dust to completely react. Additionally, some other metals such as zinc and lead may be sulphidized and this again consumes some sulphur. Therefore, the addition of supplemental sulphur (S The results for the effects of sulphur additions indicate that some supplementary sulphur is required. However, excessive amounts of sulphur result in the loss of zinc and lead to the matte phase and excessive iron sulphide production. Therefore, to counteract the increase in the lead and zinc sulphide contents of the matte, additional nitrogen can be added to reduce the partial pressures of the zinc and lead vapours and thus promote the recovery of these species in the gas phase. Based on the above discussions, the carbon was fixed at 0.55 The addition of oxygen would favour the formation of metal oxides and thus for the case of iron it should favour the formation of iron oxide in the slag rather than iron sulphide in the matte. The effect of temperature on the equilibrium amounts of species in the gas, slag and matte phases is shown in The effect of dust composition on the process can be evaluated in terms of the stability of the various oxides. Calcium oxide, silica and alumina are essentially inert and report to the slag phase. The iron oxide is of intermediate stability and the iron distributes itself between the iron oxide in the slag and the iron sulphide in the matte. The non-ferrous metal oxides are relatively unstable and the corresponding metals concentrate in the gas or the matte phases. The equilibrium amounts of lead and zinc in the gas phase and the amount of copper sulphide in the matte are essentially independent of the dust composition and therefore the behaviour of nickel was utilized to evaluate the compositional effects. The effect of increasing one of the inert oxides, such as calcium oxide is shown in The optimum economic conditions for this proposed pyrometallurgical process for the treatment of EAF dust would correspond to the following requirements: The maximum recoveries of copper and nickel in the matte phase. The maximum recoveries of zinc and lead in the gas phase. The minimum formation of metallic iron. The minimum consumption of reagents, such as sulphur. The lowest temperature and thus energy consumption. However, since these constraints are dependent on each other, there are numerous potential combinations. Nevertheless, based upon the above discussion it is possible to evaluate the process at the conditions discussed previously, i.e. a nitrogen addition of 10  A thermodynamic model was developed, using the SOLGASMIX equilibrium module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry, to simulate a proposed process for the recovery of the non-ferrous metals in electric arc furnace dust. The zinc and lead are collected in the gas phase and the nickel and copper in the matte phase. The effect of the following operating variables on the gas, slag and matte phases was investigated; carbon additions, sulphur additions, nitrogen and oxygen additions, temperature and dust composition. Some carbon was necessary to reduce the metal oxides, such as the zinc and the lead oxides, and some sulphur was required as the dust did not contain enough sulphur to form the required amount of matte. Nitrogen lowers the partial pressures of the gaseous metals such as zinc and lead and favours their recovery in the gas phase. Oxygen favours the formation of iron oxide and thus the iron sulphide content of the matte is lowered. Increasing temperature favours the formation of gaseous lead and zinc and the recovery of iron as iron oxide rather than iron sulphide. The formation of metallic iron should be avoided as some copper and nickel will be lost to this phase. Utilizing a set of selected constraints, about 100% of the lead and 96% of the zinc could be recovered in the gas phase. With regards to the matte, about 100% of the copper and 90% of the nickel could be recovered in this phase. The author would like to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada for the support of this research.