A collection of computer programs to generate time series based on defined stochastic processes is presented. The programs can be used to simulate and analyse stratigraphic successions. A program for the graphical representation of up to 10 time series makes this package self-contained.
                  The programs are intended as an introduction to stratigraphic time series analysis and should be useful in the teaching of quantitative stratigraphy courses. Different examples are presented and discussed.Although the cyclic character of many stratigraphic sequences was recognized by some early geologists, it was only in the last three decades that an extraterrestrial control of some very regular sedimentary cycles became generally accepted. The Milankovitch theory, which links the cyclicity of the orbital parameters with climatic variations, provides a physical explanation for the formation of such cycles ( The recognition of cyclicity in sediments also encouraged the quantitative study of sedimentary successions, a development which coincided with very important advances in the theory of random processes and in time series analysis ( The advantage of a simulated series is that we know the underlying stochastic model of the process, while for a real stratigraphic sequence, a model has to be assumed. The statistical analysis of both types of series is the same. With simulation, one can further experiment by changing the parameters of the processes and directly investigate how this changes the appearance of the series and how it affects the results of the analysis. The various programs can be used to make oneself familiar with the behaviour of different time series and it is hoped that the programs will also be useful in teaching courses on stratigraphic time series analysis. To make the package self-contained, programs for the analysis of simulated series are also included. More extensive software for the analysis of stratigraphic successions is also widely available, in both the commercial and public domain versions (for example, CYSTRATI, The program ESTOCAS2 can be used to generate time series based on the following processes: white noise (both uniform and Gaussian), autoregressive process, moving average process, random walk, sinusoidal wave and any combination of the previous elementary processes. A number of programs are provided for the analysis of simulated artificial sequences as well as for the analysis of observed sequences. A basic assumption for a meaningful calculation and interpretation of correlation functions and power spectra is that the time series are trend-free or more precisely, second order stationary (i.e. constant mean and the covariance function between two points is a function of the distance between the points only). The program DETREND2 provides methods for removing trend by differencing and fitting of a polynomial drift, as well as the possibility of logarithmic transformation. The differencing option calculates first order differences. Higher orders can be obtained by a successive application of the first order operator. The estimation of the autocorrelation function may be performed by FUNCOR2. The program can deal with evenly spaced data as well as with unevenly located data. The evenly spaced sequence can also have missing data. The program PACOEFI2 calculates the partial correlation coefficients from the correlogram which has been obtained by FUNCOR2. The program can be used as a diagnostic tool to determine the order AUTORSE2 is the autoregressive spectral estimator that assumes that the time series has been generated by an autoregressive process of order Sometimes it may be of interest to estimate the power spectrum from an unevenly sampled time series without the necessity of interpolation to obtain constant sampling intervals. One possibility for achieving this is to combine the Blackman and Tukey approach with an autocorrelation function estimated by FUNCOR2 using the option for unequally spaced data. The power spectrum can then be calculated using the program BTUKEY2. As stated previously, the advantage of simulated series is that the process which generates the series is known. The program ARMAT2 can be used to calculate the theoretical correlogram and power spectrum of a known process. Such theoretical models can be compared with the statistics calculated from simulated series. Simulated time series as well as real stratigraphic data are always a single realization of the stochastic process and they are always of a limited duration (finite number of observations). Therefore, there will be differences between the estimated correlogram (or estimated power spectrum) and the corresponding theoretical model. For example, the power spectrum of white noise is a constant value (i.e. there is an equal contribution from all frequencies). In estimating the power spectrum from a sample, we invariably find maxima in the calculated variances, although we know that the process is not cyclic. Experimenting with different time series can provide a valuable insight into the “reliability” of the analyses of simulated or observed data. Different statistical tests are also available ( The time series, as well as the various calculated correlation functions, partial autocorrelation functions and power spectra, can be graphically displayed with the program PLOTXY10. This program is very flexible and can plot up to 10 time series or data sets containing A more detailed explanation of the different programs is given below. The collection of eight programs provided constitutes a self-contained library of programs for the performance of the time series analyses which are of special interest in cyclostratigraphy, although, of course, the number of approaches is much larger and may be found elsewhere (see, for example, CYSTRATI, Program for simulating time series according to a specified stochastic model.  Number of data in the series (maximum 1024) → Output file name → Random integer number → The random integer number is the seed for the random number generator. The stochastic models are: 1. Uniform [A, B] white noise. 2. Gaussian ( 3. Autoregressive process AR( 4. Moving average process MA( 5. Random walk. 6. Sinusoidal wave 7. Combination of the previous processes. Option → The In the LOWER INTERVAL LIMIT UPPER INTERVAL LIMIT In the VALUE FOR THE MEAN → VALUE FOR THE VARIANCE → An The order ORDER COEFFICIENT B(1) → … COEFFICIENT B( The program will check whether the coefficients are valid or not and will show the corresponding message. A The order ORDER COEFFICIENT B(0) → … COEFFICIENT B( The program will check whether the coefficients are valid or not and will show the corresponding message. A VALUE FOR THE MEAN → VALUE FOR THE VARIANCE → The sinusoidal wave: The period (or wavelength) is the inverse of the frequency 2 The different parameters must be specified: AMPLITUDE → WAVELENGTH (IN UNITS) → PHASE (BETWEEN 0 AND 2 A combination (as an additive model) of up to four of the possible sequences may be obtained: The program generates a time series { Time series detrending.  DATA FILE (CO-ORDINATE, VALUE) → DETRENDING AND LOGARITHMIC TRANSFORMATION 1. FIRST DIFFERENCES. 2. POLYNOMIAL DRIFT. 3. LOGARITHMIC TRANSFORMATION. OPTION → OUTPUT FILE → If option=2 DRIFT ORDER (0/1/2/3/4) → If option=3 BASE10 LOGARITHM (1) OR NATURAL (2) LOGARITHM → Given an input time series The first difference process gives the new series: Estimation of the autocorrelation function: The estimate of the covariance function is: File data with the time series DATA FILE (CO-ORDINATE, VALUE) → 1. EQUALLY SPACED DATA. 2. UNEQUALLY SPACED DATA. OPTION → NUMBER OF LAGS (200 MAXIMUM) → OUTPUT FILE → ESTIMATOR (1): 1/ If the location of the data is uneven it must be specified also: LAG LENGTH → LAG TOLERANCE → A file with the estimated correlogram for Estimation of the partial correlation coefficients. The program uses the Levinson–Darbin algorithm (  INPUT FILE WITH THE ESTIMATED AUTOCORRELATION →  OUTPUT FILE → The partial correlation is a diagnostic function to estimate the order Theoretical correlograms and spectral densities for different AR( Theoretical correlogram of an AR(1) process. Theoretical correlogram of an AR(2) process. Theoretical correlogram of an MA( Standardized spectral density of an AR(1). Standardized spectral density of an AR(2). Standardized spectral density of an MA(1).  OUTPUT FILE → NUMBER OF LAGS (MAXIMUM 256) →  Autoregressive spectral estimator. Given an AR(  DATA INPUT FILE → NUMBER (where OUTPUT FILE NAME → The estimated power spectrum. Power spectrum estimation by the Blackman–Tukey approach (  FILE WITH THE ESTIMATED CORRELOGRAM → ESTIMATED CORRELOGRAM STEPS: APPLY WINDOW OF: PARZEN 1. MODIFY PREVIOUS OPTIONS. 2. CARRY OUT CALCULATION. OPTION → If the option 1 is chosen, it is possible to modify the number of steps The estimated power spectrum.   NUMBER OF TIME SERIES TO REPRESENT (10 MAXIMUM) → [ DATA FILE ( DATA FILE ( TO REPRESENT BASE 10 LOGARITHMS (YES=1) ? → The program provides the minimum and maximum Graphic. MINIMUM MAXIMUM MINIMUM MAXIMUM   A uniform white noise; B Gaussian white noise; C autoregressive process; D moving average process; E random walk; F–G combination of two sine waves with added increasing Gaussian white noise. The uniform ( The series represented in   The autocorrelogram of the random walk does not decrease asymptotically to zero for larger lags, which is a characteristic of non-stationary series. Both white noise processes ( Finally, the correlogram of the moving average process ( The theoretical correlograms for the autoregressive (C) and the moving average process (D) are given in The power spectra calculated by the Blackman–Tukey approach using the 25 values of the estimated correlograms and a Parzen window are given in The power spectra, given in The autoregressive spectral estimator gives a higher resolution than the Blackman–Tukey estimate however, the order of the AR process must be introduced. The partial autocorrelation function may be used to determine this order. The partial correlation calculated for the simulated series C, E, F and G are shown in Although the number of examples and results that could be presented is much larger, the few ones that have been given suggest the flexibility of the approach and it is left to the user to figure out more examples. The wide availability of computers and software for time series analysis has opened up possibilities for the geologist to use numerical methodologies that otherwise would have been restricted to specialists. However, it is necessary to have some knowledge of how the numerical methods will react to the different stochastic processes which have to be used as models of real stratigraphic data. The interpretation of the results must be done carefully (even a pure random sequence presents a power spectrum with maxima!) and by critically taking into account the number of data and the lengths of the series. The programs permit experiments with series of different length and based on different processes. This experimentation and learning from the results will improve, we believe, the understanding and interpretation of true stratigraphic successions. The work of the first author has been supported by a European Community Training Fellowship in the Department of Meteorology (Reading University, UK) as part of the Training and Mobility of Researches (TMR) program. We would like to thank the reviewers for providing constructive comments.