The main goal of the current study is to clarify the effect of TiO2 particles size (micro and nano) on the crystallite size of microwave—combustion synthesized Al2O3/TiC composite. Al, C, both nano- and micron TiO2 have been mixed mechanically and milled using a planetary ball mill. The milled samples have been pressed before exposing to microwave with different powers. In order to validate the formation of Al2O3 and TiC phases, the samples have been analyzed by X-ray diffraction. Crystallite sizes of produced TiC and Al2O3 in samples containing micron TiO2 are about 46.6–87.9 and 63.8–208.8nm respectively and in samples containing nano-TiO2 are about 38.2–68.7 and 54.4–99.5nm respectively. It means that using nano-TiO2 as one of the raw materials leads to formation of nano-structure Al2O3/TiC composite. Microstructure of produced composites has been evaluated using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Microscopic evaluations show that Al2O3 phase in micron samples has a regular shape, unlike needle shape in nano-samples.Al According to the literature survey done by the authors there are many articles focused on synthesis of alumina/titanium carbide composites. The effect of different factors such as fabrication methods, using different heating sources, role of particle size of initial powders on produced Al Because of the interrelationship between the effective parameters, the analysis of the results is a labor and time consuming work, thus, Taguchi robust design method of system optimization with L In order to produce Al The exact reason of using extra aluminum can be attributed to the fact that the temperature increases during combustion synthesis process and based on the literature survey, it was found that a diluent (extra Al or Al It has been empirically suggested that combustion reactions will not become self-sustaining unless Four controlling parameters (extra Al, milling time, green density and microwave power) were chosen for experiments and maximum level of them is three. According to orthogonal arrays designed by Taguchi, they are respondent to orthogonal array L Primary mixtures were performed by mixing of powders based on Eq. In order to confirm the formation of Al A scanning electron microscope (SEM, LEO 1450 VP) was used to evaluate the microstructure of produced composite. According to X-ray diffraction patterns, both Al Since high temperature can be the main reason for the conversion of particles to whiskers, thus, one may conclude that in nano-samples the incremental combustion temperature is much higher than that of micro samples. Since combustion temperatures depend on green density, extra Al, milling time and power of microwave Crystallite sizes of Al Since, often, production a composite with finest crystallites and particles is desirable, thus Eq. For prospecting of the best level from each parameter, graph analysis was used. The mean S/N ratios for each level of the parameters are summarized in As seen in The effect of extra Al on crystallite sizes of TiC and Al Average S/N–milling time graphs for Al The effect of power of microwave on TiC and Al ANOVA method was used to clarify the contribution percent of parameters on crystallite size of alumina and titanium carbide phases. Details of this method were explained in elsewhere In the current study Al Crystallite size of Al The presence of nano-TiO The shape of Al 1 Milling time had the most influence on the TiC crystallite size in both groups of samples. Extra aluminum posed the most influence on the Al Power of microwave had the least influence on the TiC and Al