Background
                  Although tension-band wiring is the most widely used technique to fix patellar fractures, metal implant-related complications including implant failure and postoperative pain are very common and additional procedures are often necessary to treat the complications. The purpose of this study is to evaluate a totally metal-free technique using a transosseous suturing method and to compare it with the traditional fixation technique.
               
                  Method
                  A total of 25 patients (mean age of 59.60 years) with displaced patellar fractures treated by a transosseous suturing technique were compared with a 1:1 matched historical control group that underwent modified tension-band-wire fixation. Union time, union rate, operation time, number of procedures, mean hospitalisation days and complications were compared between cases and controls.
               
                  Results
                  Union time (8.43±2.92 vs. 8.64±2.82 weeks) and operation time (69.00±19.31 vs. 64.89±14.27min) were not different between the two groups. Mean hospitalisation days (4.04±1.40 vs. 5.76±1.50 days; P
                     <0.001), number of procedures and the frequency of complications were significantly lower in the transosseous suturing group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The transosseous suturing technique is safe and effective in the transverse or comminuted fractures of the patella. The complication rate is significantly lower than with the tension-band-wiring technique.The incidence of patellar fractures accounts for 1% of all musculoskeletal system fractures This prospective study was conducted in a 2500-bed teaching hospital from August 2010 to February 2011. We employed a matched control group (1:1 matching) of patients identified from the historical database of our institute. A total of 32 patients with patellar fracture were admitted to our institute from September 2010 to February 2011. With the approval of our hospital's institutional review board, 25 patients were enrolled in our study. The inclusion criteria were age >18 years, displaced >3 The historical cohort population was selected from patients who underwent surgery for patellar fracture in our institute from January 2000 to August 2010. There were 483 patients receiving open reduction and internal fixation with AO-modified tension-band-wiring technique for patellar fracture. A cohort of 25 patients matched 1:1 with the study group for age (±5 years) and gender were selected with the same inclusion and exclusion criteria as the study group. For example, if we had a 30-year-old man in study group, then we randomly selected a male patient with age ranging from 25 to 35 years from the historical cohort as the corresponding control. All of the patients in the transosseous suturing technique group underwent a standardised operation procedure by a senior fellow of orthopaedic traumatology in our institute. After spinal anaesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position with a pneumatic tourniquet inflated to 300 The Mann–Whitney The transosseous suturing cohort comprised of 15 men and 10 women with an average age of 59.60 years (ranging from 34 to 84 years). After 1:1 matching of sex and age, there were no statistically significant differences between the two groups regarding fracture type, time to union and operation time ( Traditionally, the tension-band-wiring technique has been the most commonly used procedure for the treatment of displaced patellar fracture To avoid metal implant-related complications, clinical applications of metal-free techniques have been developed and studied Qi et al In cases of comminuted fracture, we can use transosseous inter-fragmentary suturing to fix the small fragments so that they become large fragments. Lotke's suturing and the Wagoner's Hitch may then provide good inter-fragmentary compression and reconstruct the extensor mechanism. Additional figure-of-eight tension-band sutures passed through the quadriceps tendon and patellar tendon or circumferential sutures are useful in comminuted fracture or osteoporotic bone to enhance the fixation strength. Sometimes, the fracture is too comminuted and the fragments are too small to fix with sutures; thus, our method may be limited in that situation. However, the immobilisation period has shortened with improving surgical skill. We still have to protect comminuted fractures longer than simple transverse fractures in which the present technique might be a disadvantage relative to the tension-band-wiring technique. The union time and operation time were not different in the two groups whereas the mean hospitalisation length in the suturing group was significantly shorter than in the AO-modified tension-band group. Excellent inter-fragmentary compression, early range of motion and lack of metal implant irritation may be the causes of difference. We wish to emphasise some technical tips to achieve good result. First, the transosseous tunnels should be placed as deep as possible to purchase more bone mass and prevent tunnel failure caused by suture material breaking through the anterior surface of the patella, which was found in our experimental models during development of this technique. Second, the suture should closely contact the bone surface to achieve secure fixation and to avoid suture loosening after soft-tissue atrophy Our study has some limitations. In the prospective cohort, we used the Lysholm Knee Scoring Scale to evaluate the functional recovery. Although the visual analogue scale pain score was routinely recorded during every visit in our institute, we lacked the data of Lysholm knee scoring scale in the control group; therefore, we cannot compare the functional outcome at the same postoperative period. More high-quality, double-blinded randomised controlled trials with greater case numbers are needed to confirm the advantages of the transosseous suturing technique. Transosseous suturing of the patella has comparable results including union time and union rate compared with the traditional modified tension-band-wiring technique. The complications’ rate is significantly lower than in the traditional technique. Obviously, our method does not require removal of the painful implants and can be applicable not only in transverse patellar fractures but also in selected comminuted fractures. The method may also be applicable in fixation of olecranon fractures with some modifications. As the result of transosseous suturing comparing favourably with the AO modified tension-band fixation, our method could be an alternative to the traditional technique. No conflict of interest.