In the printing plate developing process, the offset printing developer undergoes changes, as well as enrichment by the various chemicals, i.e. metals, organic binders and photosensitive compounds. The objective of this study was to investigate the electrocoagulation/flotation (ECF) treatment efficiency for the removal of copper, turbidity and organic substances from the waste offset printing developer (WOPD). The effect of operational parameters, such as electrode materials, current density, interelectrode distance and operating time, was studied. Also, the response surface analysis was applied to evaluate the effect of main operational variables and to get a balanced removal efficiency of investigated WOPD parameters by ECF treatment. The removal efficiency increases significantly with the increasing of operating time and mainly increases with the increasing of current density. The obtained results show that the interelectrode distance and combinations of electrodes determine the removal efficiency of copper, turbidity and organic substances. Based on the obtained results, the optimized parameters for the ECF treatment removal of investigated WOPD parameters were identified as: Al(−)/Fe(+) electrode combination with interelectrode distance of 1.0cm, operating time of 5min and current density of 8mAcm−2. This study confirms the practical feasibility of ECF method for treating real printing industrial effluent under optimum conditions.The electrocoagulation/flotation process includes the in-situ generation of coagulants via the electro-dissolution of a sacrificial anode, which usually consists of iron or aluminum. Only a very few reports on the combined use of both aluminum and iron electrodes in the same cell were published ( The interaction between the coagulant and the pollutant is the most complicated aspect of the ECF process ( Compression of the diffuse double layer around the charged species by the interaction of ions generated by oxidation of the sacrificial anode. Charge neutralization of the ionic species present in wastewater takes place due to the counter-ion produced by the electrochemical dissolution of the sacrificial anode. These counter-ions reduce the electrostatic interparticle repulsion to the extent that the Van der Waals attraction predominates, thus causing coagulation. The flock formed as a result of coagulation creates a sludge blanket that entraps and bridges colloidal particles still remaining in the aqueous medium. Industrial growth is of utmost importance to mankind but the environmental pollution due to it is never desired. Heavy metal contamination exists in aqueous wastes of many industries and these usually contain metal-ion concentrations much higher than the permissible levels and do not degrade easily into harmless products ( The critical physicochemical phenomenon, during the developing processes in offset printing, is the generation of the non-image area on the printing plate surface by using an aqueous solution known as the offset printing developer. The printing plate is introduced in the developer bath, in order to make the image areas visible. The image areas become ink-receptive thanks to a chemical change on the previously coated printing plate surface. The non-image areas stay water-receptive ( The goal of this study was to investigate the feasibility and efficiency of ECF process in the removal of copper, turbidity and organic substances from WOPD under different operational conditions (electrode materials and combinations, current density, interelectrode distance and operating time). The analysis based on the response surfaces was used to obtain the best parameters for the optimum ECF process design with the least number of experiments and highest removal efficiency of investigated parameters from WOPD. The widely distributed offset printing developer, trade-named Fujifilm LP-DS developer, is described by the manufacturer as an aqueous, alkaline solution containing inorganic salts. The main characteristics of the initial (IOPD) and waste offset printing developer (WOPD) used in this research are presented in A digital calibrated pH-meter (EC30 pH meter) and a conductivity-meter (Cond 3210 conductometer) were used to measure the pH value and the electrical conductivity of the IOPD and WOPD according to the standard Copper analyses have been carried out by the Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (PerkinElmer Aanalyst 700) according to the standard method Turbidity has been determined by HI 93703 microprocessor turbidity meter (HANNA Instruments) according to the standard method The UV The ECF experiments have been performed in a batch cell with four plate electrodes connected in parallel (bipolar) mode. Also, four sets of experiments have been performed with different electrode combinations: (1) four iron electrodes (Fe(−)/Fe(+)), (2) four aluminum electrodes (Al(−)/Al(+)), (3) two aluminum (one was anode) and two iron electrodes (Al(−)/Fe(+)) and (4) two iron (one was anode) and two aluminum electrodes (Fe(−)/Al(+)). Only the outer electrodes have been connected to the DC power supply (DF 1730LCD), and anodic and cathodic reactions occurred on each surface of the inner electrode when the current passed through the electrodes. The experiments have been conducted in a cell, capacity of 250 In each batch ECF experiment, 220 To follow the progress of the ECF process, samples of 15 The ECF processes have been investigated at current densities of 2, 4 and 8 The electrodes were prepared in an appropriate way in order to ensure electrodes surface reproducibility. Before each run, the electrode surface was first mechanically polished with abrasive paper ( The removal efficiencies of copper, of turbidity and of organic substances based on UV The response surfaces are used to show the relationship between three operational variables and three responses on four different electrode combinations. As in similar investigations ( The values of temperature (from 25.4 to 25.6 With an increase in the current density from 2 to 8 The current density is expected to exhibit a strong effect on removal efficiency ( The results ( During the ECF process, the electrochemical reactions taking place at the sacrificial aluminum and iron anode produce the metallic cations (Al Choice of electrode material is one of the main steps to ensure maximum efficiency of the ECF process. Aluminum and iron are suitable electrode materials for the treatment of various wastewaters by ECF due to easy availability, low cost, and better dissolution than PbO Iron is relatively cheaper ( Iron more heavy than aluminum induces formation of higher flocks size which offers best solid phase (flocks) to the coagulated pollutants ( Iron is a 3d block transition metal that has better complexing properties with inorganic/organic pollutants ( However,  The effective electrode combinations for the removal efficiencies of turbidity and copper in the WOPD by ECF treatment go in the following order: Al(−)/Al(+), Al(−)/Fe(+), Fe(−)/Fe(+) and Fe(−)/Al(+). As can be seen ( Fe(−)/Al(+) electrode combinations have higher removal efficiency than Al(−)/Fe(+), Al(−)/Al(+), and Fe(−)/Fe(+) electrode combinations in the ECF deposition of organic substances from WOPD. At a current density of 4 The shorter interelectrode distance is desirable, because the electrical resistance (IR drop) increases with the interelectrode distance increase ( The highest removal efficiency of organic substances has been achieved with the interelectrode distance of 0.5 The removal efficiency increases with the increase of electrolysis time for all electrode combinations, which is in accordance with the results of other authors ( The turbidity removal efficiency (92.9%) was obtained after 1 The obtained results show that the type of pollutants in WOPD determines the operating time which would generate the highest removal efficiency. The experimental data are fitted with the quadratic and cubic models in order to obtain regression equations. The values of coefficient of determination  In order to study the interactive effects of process variables on the responses, 3D response surface plots constructed from three models on every of four different combinations of electrodes are used. The objective of the optimization was to determine the operating conditions that gave the maximum efficiency of copper, turbidity and organic substances removal from WOPD by ECF treatment. Based on the analysis, the optimum operating conditions for the removal of copper, turbidity and organic substances from WOPD by ECF treatment were predicted to be: Al(−)/Fe(+) electrode with interelectrode distance of 1.0 The results obtained in this study provide an opportunity for the application of the ECF process as a purification technology of the WOPD. The conclusion, that the treatment of the WOPD by ECF is effective, can be drawn from the following: The application of the ECF process on the WOPD showed higher removal efficiencies (>90%) of turbidity and of copper at a current density of 8 The application of the ECF process on the WOPD showed average removal efficiency (>50%) of organic substances at a current density of 8 The electrocoagulants produced by the electrodissolution of sacrificial aluminum and iron anodes showed high adsorption capacity in the removal of copper and turbidity. Based on the results obtained for the effective removal of copper and turbidity, ECF proves to be a very promising technology for the removal of a wide range of pollutants which can be present in the WOPD. The ECF process has been investigated in this study predominantly to point out the treatment’s removal efficiency, and not so much with respect to its fundamental aspects. The ECF is still an empirically optimized process that requires more fundamental studies to be conducted and fully exploited in the case of the WOPD treatment. Overall, the optimum operating conditions for metal removal from waste fountain solution by ECF were predicted to be: Al(−)/Fe(+) electrode with interelectrode distance of 1.0 In the future, a combination of the ECF process with other purification techniques, such as adsorption, could achieve a removal efficiency of organic substances higher than the results obtained in this study (52.6%). The authors acknowledge the financial support of the