For the first time, we report here that higher-order eight component Fe32.5-xCo10Ni25Cr15Mn5V10Al2.5Nbx (x = 5, 7.5, 10, and 12.5 at. %) eutectic high entropy alloys (EHEAs) are designed and developed by integrating thermodynamic simulation approach and non-equilibrium solidification processing technique. The developed EHEAs consist of FeCoNiCr-rich FCC solid solution phase and eutectics mixture between FCC solid solution phase and the Co2Nb-type Laves phase. The predicted microhardness of EHEAs for x = 7.5% and x = 10% by using artificial neural networks (ANNs) modeling is 501 H V and 618 H V, respectively, which is in good agreement with experimentally measured values having less than 5% error.Conventional alloys such as Commercial pure (CP)-titanium, NiAl-intermetallic systems, Mg-alloys, Fe-based alloys, Ti–6Al–4V (Ti64) alloy and Ni-based superalloys etc. typically comprise of one or two principal elements, and few minor elements are incorporated purposefully to modify the properties further [ To the best of authors’ knowledge, higher-order eight component EHEAs has not been reported in the open literature as well as the artificial neural network (ANN) analysis of EHEAs has not been investigated so far. Therefore, the primary objective of the current study are highlighted as follows: Single-phase FCC Fe Furthermore, an ANN model with a back-propagation (B–P) training algorithm has been established based upon the microhardness database of 51-HEAs, including current studied two EHEAs with x = 5 at. % and x = 12.5 at. %. The microhardness of two other designed EHEAs with x = 7.5 at. % and x = 10 at. % is predicted using the ANN model and correlated with the observed experimental value. High purity elements Al, Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, Nb, Ni, Nb, and V (purity level ≥ 99.7) were used as starting material. The Fe It is worthy of mentioning that the novel HEAs are designed by a thermodynamic simulation approach to optimize alloy parameters within HEA composition space [ An artificial neural network (ANN) based computational model, has been established to predict the microhardness of HEAs, along with studied EHEAs as a function of alloying elements. A data set of the 49 previously reported different multicomponent HEAs compositions with their microhardness and 2 datasets of present work has been taken into consideration for performing the modeling work in the present studied HEAs. Initially, the data set could be reduced to the value between 0 and 1 before applying for the training. The purpose of the reduction is to maintain the steadiness of the input data that could be achieved by the feature scaling. The equation of feature scaling can be presented as Eq. The back-propagation (BP) neural network, which alters the network weights to minimize the mean square error (MSE) was used. The model was tested, validated, and found that the excellent performance of the model was achieved. The Artificial Neural Network (ANN) model with the back-propagation 8-8-1 model (8, 8, and 1 are neurons in the input layer, hidden layer, and in the output layer, respectively) is used for the predicting microhardness. MATLAB 9.6 (R2019a) version is utilized as a simulation tool. A HEAs database with different compositions for the ANN model is given in It is important to note that the novel seven component FCC single solid solution phase and then eight components EHEAs based upon the FCC single solid solution phase are designed by an integrated approach of combining both experimental and thermodynamic simulation techniques.   The microstructural features of studied EHEAs ( It is worthy of mentioning that the hardness prediction of developed EHEAs has been made using ANN modeling. In order to determine the finest architecture, the process of training, testing, and validation have been iterated several times by changing the hidden layers. Thus, an appropriate back-propagation ANN model has been developed based on several trials for the numbers of neurons. The optimum structure of the ANN model with back-propagation is found to be 8-8-1 (8, 8, and 1 are neurons in the input layer, hidden layer, and the output layer, respectively). The performance ability of individual network has been evaluated based on the coefficient of correlation (R) between the experimental output and model output. The optimal structure of the ANN model for the prediction of microhardness is shown in Among the 53 different alloys data, 60% of data was used for training, 20% for validation, while 20% for the testing to observe the least mean square error (MSE) in predicting microhardness. The observed correlation coefficient (R) during training, validation, andtesting 0.98745, 0.92601, and 0.99659 are shown in The thermodynamics simulation study of investigated HEAs is performed to understand the phase formation during solidification using the CALculation of PHAse Diagram (CALPHAD) method, which is based on two classical solidification models such as equilibrium solidification model and Gulliver–Scheil model. It is important to note that Gulliver–Scheil models predict real solidification pathways qualitatively because of limited solute diffusion in the solid [ The objective of the current investigation is to develop an understanding of the phase transformation from single-phase FCC HEA to EHEA as well as to optimize the volume fraction of primary dendrites and eutectic microstructure in the present investigated HEAs by an integrated approach using thermodynamic simulation and experimental solidification processing technique. In the present study, a new strategy has been adopted to design and development of EHEAs by the judicious addition of Nb in single-phase FCC HEA and subsequently, analyze the microstructure of developed EHEAs using the SEM. The results obtained in the present study depict that Nb addition in the single-phase Fe It is observed that the microhardness of the Fe Furthermore, the predictability of ANN simulation results are evaluated using the MSE, which is shown in The following important conclusions emerge from this work: Fe Experimentally it is found that the eutectic microstructure in studied EHEAs consists of Co It is found that the developed EHEAs shows the experimentally observed microhardness ranging from 318 ± 3.5 HV to 614 ± 4.4 HV. The microhardness of EHEAs increases with the increase of Nb-concentration. The enhancement of property is attributed to the solid solution phase(s), the volume fraction of the Co A back-propagation ANN model is established, which successfully predicts the microhardness of designed EHEAs with an error of 0.062 at 9 iterations. It is found that the predicted microhardness of studied EHEAs using the ANN model matches well with the experimentally observed microhardness with less than 5% error.  The authors declare that they have no known competing for financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank Dr. Gandham Phanikumar, Professor at IIT Madras, for useful discussion. Mr. Rahul M R, Ph.D., is also acknowledged for his help in thermodynamic simulation. One of the authors (S. Samal) would like to thank The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at