The Sulfidation–Leaching process for the treatment of chalcopyrite concentrates is a non SO2 polluting alternative for producing copper. This process consists of roasting chalcopyrite with sulfur at temperatures lower than 400 °C followed by leaching of the sulfidized material to dissolve the copper. The present work is concerned with the kinetic study of the pressure leaching of sulfidized chalcopyrite concentrate in H2SO4–O2 solutions. The temperature range considered was 125–150 °C, and partial pressures of oxygen from 507 to 1216 kPa (5 to 12 atm). The results indicated that the copper dissolution rate increases with increasing temperature and partial pressure of oxygen. The leaching kinetics was analyzed by using a shrinking rim model given by: 1−(1−0.45X)1/3=kt, which represented well the experimental data. The determined activation energy was 93.5 kJ/mol and the rate of copper dissolution was first order with respect to the partial pressure of oxygen.The conventional smelting/converting technology for copper making from chalcopyrite concentrates produces inevitably SO Alternatively, leaching of chalcopyrite concentrates has been considered for many years as a viable option to produce copper minimizing atmospheric pollution. However, direct leaching of chalcopyrite concentrates presents yet problems concerning the low dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite ( It has been known that the dissolution of the secondary copper sulfides such as covellite and chalcocite is much faster than the dissolution of chalcopyrite. For this reason, the leaching of secondary copper sulfide ores is a common industrial practice by using bacterial heap leaching with crushed ore ( On this matter, This sulfidation reaction is temperature limited. If the sulfidation of chalcopyrite is carried out at temperatures higher than 400 °C, the reaction products will be idaite (Cu The product of sulfidation (CuS Leaching of the sulfidation product in sulfuric acid–oxygen system is an attractive processing alternative since the resulting pregnant solution can be incorporated into the conventional leaching-purification-electrowining circuits. Therefore, the following is a brief discussion on the dissolution of covellite and pyrite in H The covellite dissolution in this media has been shown to proceed according to the following reactions ( Similarly, the dissolution of pyrite can be represented by the following reactions ( Reaction The leaching of CuS according to reaction It should be pointed out that under pressure leaching conditions the ferrous ions produced by the leaching of pyrite will eventually oxidize to ferric ions by oxygen according to: Fe The reactions of covellite and pyrite with ferric ions to produce elemental sulfur or sulfate can be written as: It should be noted that the addition of reactions Recently, In the present work, experimental results on the pressure leaching of sulfidized chalcopyrite in sulfuric acid–oxygen in the medium temperature range 125 to 150 °C are presented. The main objective was the determination of the kinetics of copper dissolution. Flotation chalcopyrite concentrate was obtained from Andina Mine of CODELCO, Chile. This concentrate was classified by sieving into narrow size fractions. The chalcopyrite concentrate was sulfidized for the leaching experiments by treating it with gaseous sulfur at 375 °C for 90 min according to the methodology described by Alternatively, Leaching of the sulfidized chalcopyrite samples was conducted in a 1.5 L Parr titanium autoclave. This autoclave was equipped with a heating mantle, a PID temperature controller, a variable speed stirrer with two axial impellers, and an internally mounted cooling coil. All the experiments were carried out batch-wise using 2 g of sulfidized material, 1000 ml of acid leaching solution and pure oxygen. The procedure consisted on heating the solution to 95 °C; once at this temperature, the solid sample was added and the system was further heated to the set temperature for the experiment. At the set temperature, the oxygen was admitted and the partial pressure of oxygen was adjusted to the desired value, and the experiment was run for the preset time. At the end of the experiment, the autoclave was rapidly water cooled and the solution filtered for collecting the solid residues. The solution was analyzed for Cu and Fe by atomic absorption spectroscopy and the solid residues, in some cases, were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy and light microscopy. Additionally, the solid residues of some experiments were also analyzed for elemental sulfur by the Soxhlet extraction method, which is a gravimetric method where the elemental sulfur is extracted from the sample using carbon disulfide as the solvent. According to the leaching reaction  The influence of stirring speed on the dissolution of copper from the sulfidized chalcopyrite was studied in experiments conducted at 140 °C, 507 kPa of partial pressure of oxygen and 80 min of leaching time. The results are shown in It is evident from The effect of temperature on the leaching was studied in the range 125 to 150 °C because in this medium temperature range copper is dissolved at rates of industrial interest. The results are shown in The effect of oxygen partial pressure on the copper dissolution at 140 °C is illustrated in Since oxygen is the main oxidizing reagent in the leaching of the sulfidized chalcopyrite, knowledge of the values of the saturation solubility of oxygen in the leaching solution is of primary interest. Therefore, the molal solubility of oxygen in a 0.2 M sulfuric acid solution for various temperatures and partial pressures of oxygen was estimated using the correlation developed by The influence of particle size on the leaching rate is shown in The appreciable effect of temperature on the copper dissolution from the sulfidized concentrate suggests that this process is surface reaction controlled. Considering the morphology of the sulfidized particles, as seen in Where The apparent kinetics constant The experimental results for various conditions plotted according to Eq. The dependence of the kinetic constant on the partial pressure of oxygen can also be determined from the slopes of The results concerning the dissolution of iron from the sulfidized chalcopyrite are shown in From the experimental results on the leaching of sulfidized chalcopyrite the following can be concluded. A stirring speed over 600 rpm was sufficient to eliminate the effect of this variable on the rate study. The pressure leaching of sulfidized chalcopyrite concentrate in the range 125 to 150 °C occurs mainly through reaction The kinetics was analyzed by using the shrinking rim model: 1 The authors acknowledge the National Fund for Scientific and Technological Development (FONDECYT) of Chile for the financial support of this investigation through project No.1050948.