The main long term complications of tibial shaft fractures are ankle osteoarthritis and subtalar stiffness, postphlebitic limb, foot and ankle deformities due to acute compartment syndrome, chronic osteomyelitis, and local discomfort related to metal implants. Fracture malunion may theoretically result in an increased risk of osteoarthritis but clinically the association is not clear, probably because malunion does not necessarily move overall lower limb alignment outside of the normal range, and therefore not result in important changes in loading of the knee and ankle joints.Fracture of the tibial shaft is the most common long bone fracture, and there is a large volume of literature about different treatments and short- to medium-term-outcomes. Nicoll's paper on cast-treated tibial shaft fractures, published in 1964, is perhaps the best-known historical study. Over the succeeding decades, there has been a gradual move away from cast treatment towards operative intervention, mainly due to the development of interlocking nail systems which can be used to stabilise a wide range of fracture types. Such devices are undoubtedly a major advance over cast treatment in the management of high-energy tibial shaft fractures, because skeletal stability allows optimum management of the associated soft-tissue injury. However, the majority of tibial shaft fractures are caused by a lower energy mechanism, and are associated with a less severe soft-tissue injury. Operative treatment of such fractures usually produces good results, but cast or brace treatment also produces good results in the majority of these more favourable injuries. To date, there has been no randomised, controlled trial of operative Thirty years after a tibial shaft fracture, 34% of subjects have radiographic osteoarthritis of the ipsilateral knee, and 5% have sufficient knee pain and functional impairment to warrant consideration of knee replacement surgery. The cause of osteoarthritis is multifactorial, including genetic predisposition, direct injury to the knee, and abnormal loading as a result of injuries such as a meniscal tear or anterior cruciate ligament rupture. The influence of tibial shaft fracture malunion on the development of knee osteoarthritis remains uncertain. Unlike the knee, there is a significant excess of osteoarthritis of the ankle on the side of a previous tibial shaft fracture. Ipsilateral ankle osteoarthritis affects around 10% of subjects, While ipsilateral subtalar osteoarthritis is seen in 6% of subjects after a tibial shaft fracture, ipsilateral subtalar stiffness affects 32% of subjects. There are four components to fracture malunion: angulation, rotation, translation and shortening. The coronal and sagittal plane components of angular malunion can be measured on the anteroposterior and lateral radiographs respectively, but the true angle is almost always greater than either of these values because the plane of angulation lies somewhere between the two planes—most commonly a combination of varus and recurvatum (see Operative treatment does not abolish malunion completely. Even with intramedullary nailing, angular malunion can be a problem particularly with proximal and distal shaft fractures. Achieving correct length and rotational alignment at the time of surgery can also be difficult, particularly if there is severe comminution at the fracture site. There is no consensus in the published literature on what degree of malunion is significant. Many authors have suggested arbitrarily values of 5° or 10° as the limits of acceptable angulation. Several long-term follow-up studies of tibial fracture subjects have looked at the prevalence of osteoarthritis in relation to malunion and other fracture factors. Overall, the published studies suggest that malunions of the severity usually seen after cast treatment of tibial shaft fractures are not associated with an increased risk of subsequent osteoarthritis of the knee, ankle or subtalar joints. This may be because most legs remain normally aligned in spite of a malunited fracture. The cause of the observed excess of ankle osteoarthritis on the side of the fracture remains unclear. One possibility is a direct injury to the ankle joint at the time of the tibial shaft fracture, although this has not been proven. The small number of patients who have lower limb malalignment after a tibial fracture may have an increased risk of developing medial compartment osteoarthritis of the knee, The reported incidence of clinically apparent deep vein thrombosis (DVT) after a tibial fracture is 1% in those treated operatively. A DVT can damage the valves in the leg veins that normally prevent retrograde flow when the limb is dependent, resulting in chronic venous hypertension. This may lead to postphlebitic changes. The clinical features of the postphlebitic limb are aching, ankle swelling and superficial varicosities (stage I), progressing to brawny oedema and hyperpigmentation (stage II) and eventually to varicose eczema and frank venous ulceration (stage III). A follow-up study of subjects at a mean of 6.6 years after a proven DVT showed that the prevalence of postphlebitic limb was 82% (46% stage I, 29% stage II and 7% stage III), and this was more common in subjects with a calf thrombosis, those who were not adequately anticoagulated, and those with recurrent thromboses. Postphlebitic limb is not recognised as a major problem by many orthopaedic surgeons, probably because it tends to present years after the causal thrombosis, and most frequently in vascular surgery or dermatology clinics. Fractures of the femur and the tibia are said to be associated with subsequent postphlebitic changes in approximately 50% of subjects where no antithrombotic prophylaxis is given, Compartment syndrome is an ‘increased pressure within a closed fascial compartment causing local tissue ischaemia’. The reported incidence of compartment syndrome after a tibial shaft fracture is 1–9%, and tibial shaft fractures account for more cases of compartment syndrome than any other injury. The type of fracture, and the means by which it is treated, do not seem to affect the incidence of compartment syndrome. In spite of heightened awareness of compartment syndrome, cases continue to be diagnosed late or missed altogether. Failure of early diagnosis and treatment of acute compartment syndrome results in ischaemic muscle damage, which in turn may result in nerve damage, renal failure, infection, amputation, or even death. Damaged muscle heals by fibrosis, causing shortening of the musculo-tendinous unit. This may result in ankle stiffness or cavus foot deformity with clawing of the toes, depending on the compartments affected. Such deformities appear within the first year after injury. Muscle damage associated with the tibial fracture itself will also heal by fibrosis; it is important not to assume that the presence of foot deformities after a tibial shaft fracture means that a compartment syndrome must have been missed. In one series of tibial shaft fractures treated in casts, 6% of subjects at review had foot and ankle stiffness, and in one-third of these stiffness was attributed to ischaemic muscle damage. The main determinant of infection after a tibial fracture is whether or not the original injury was open or closed. With closed fractures treated in plaster, the infection rate is negligible. Operative treatment of closed fractures does result in a small but definite infection rate, in the range 0–15% for AO plate fixation and 0–1% for intramedullary nailing. Most infections after a tibial fracture are acute, respond to aggressive surgical treatment, and do not lead to chronic bone infection. Overall, approximately 10% of deep infections lead to chronic osteomyelitis. Treatment of this is difficult, involving removal of infected metalwork, excision of dead bone, stable re-fixation and antibiotics. Complex reconstructive procedures are often necessary to treat the resulting bony and soft-tissue defects. If treatment for infection is unsuccessful, below-knee amputation may give the best functional outcome; however, circular frame techniques have greatly increased the potential for limb salvage in these difficult cases. Unresolved infection persisting for many years has a small risk of amyloidosis. Many patients report intermittent aching symptoms at the site of a previous tibial shaft fracture, whether the fracture has been treated by operative or non-operative means. These symptoms probably lessen with time. Symptoms seem to be worse when the weather is cold, although the mechanism for this is not known. Intramedullary nails have a more definite association with local symptoms. Up to 40% of patients who have a tibial nail inserted complain subsequently of anterior knee pain, although this improves with time in half of these patients. The use of a patellar tendon-splitting approach, and leaving the tibial nail proud of the bone are two factors that may increase the incidence and severity of anterior knee pain after tibial nailing. However, a well-buried nail inserted through a medial para-patellar approach still caries a risk of anterior knee pain, and only about one half of affected individuals will get better following nail removal. Residual tenderness may be related to the presence of a scar on the front of the knee.  Tibial shaft fracture is associated with subsequent ankle osteoarthritis and subtalar stiffness of unknown cause Angular malunion which does not cause overall lower limb malalignment does not have a deleterious effect Asymptomatic deep vein thrombosis after a tibial shaft fracture is one possible cause of postphlebitic limb many years later Inadequate treatment of acute compartment syndrome after a tibial shaft fracture results in foot and ankle stiffness and deformities Persistent infection after tibial fixation carries a risk of amputation  Long-term follow-up study of young adults to define the range of lower limb alignment that can be tolerated without leading to osteoarthritis Elucidation of the mechanism by which tibial shaft fractures lead to ankle osteoarthritis Efficacy of strategies to prevent deep vein thrombosis on the long-term prevalence of postphlebitic Limb