This study describes a new arthroscopic method using a whip-stitch technique for treating a displaced type III tibial eminence fracture. A 12-year-old girl who sustained a displaced type III tibial eminence fracture was treated with arthroscopic fixation using the Arthrosew disposable suture device (Surgical Dynamics, Norwalk, CT) to place a whip stitch into the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). The Arthrex ACL guide (Arthrex, Naples, FL) was used to reduce the avulsed tibial spine fragment. Sutures were then passed through the tibial tunnel and secured over a bony bridge with the knee in 20° of flexion. At 9 months, the patient has a full range of motion with normal Lachman and anterior drawer testing, and she has returned to competitive basketball. Radiographs show complete fracture healing. KT-1000 and isokinetic testing at 9-month follow-up show only minimal side-to-side differences. The Arthrosew device provides a significant advantage in the treatment of type III and IV fractures of the tibial eminence by obtaining arthroscopic fixation within the substance of the ACL, thus obviating arthrotomy and hardware placement. This technique also restores the proper length and tension to the ACL, and provides a simplified, reproducible method of treatment for this injury.
                  Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic and Related Surgery, Vol 19, No 2 (February), 2003: pp E6–E6Fractures of the intercondylar eminence of the tibia have been well described in both children and adults. Meyers and McKeever Meyers and McKeever Consequently, arthroscopic treatment of these fractures is increasing using an anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tibial drill guide for fragment reduction with fixation to a screw and post A 12-year-old girl sustained a twisting injury to her left knee after falling off her bicycle. On presentation, she recalled a “pop” with immediate onset of pain and swelling. She had difficulty with weight bearing and knee stiffness. On examination, she had a 3+ effusion with a 15° extension lag. The knee was stable to varus and valgus stress testing; however, there was a 2+ Lachman without a firm endpoint and a positive anterior drawer test with moderate pain. Plain radiographs revealed a displaced type III tibial eminence fracture (Fig 1); therefore, arthroscopic treatment was recommended. Examination under anesthesia (EUA) showed full range of motion with a 3+ Lachman without a firm endpoint and a 2+ pivot shift. Arthroscopy revealed a large hematoma with avulsion of the tibial spine and the ACL. The intermeniscal ligament was trapped within the fracture, preventing reduction of the fragment. The ACL was grossly intact to visualization and probing, but the avulsed tibial spine was completely displaced and rotated, similar to a type IIIB variant of the Zaricznyj classification. Using standard anteromedial and anterolateral portals, the surgeon debrided the fracture site of clot and comminuted bone (Fig 2). The Arthrosew device was then placed through the lateral portal and the process repeated. An Arthrex ACL guide (Arthrex, Naples, FL) was then placed through the anteromedial portal and used to reduce the avulsed tibial spine and the ACL (Figs 5 and 6). The second tunnel was then drilled, leaving approximately 1 cm between the tibial exit holes. The same sequence was followed for this tunnel, pulling the sutures out through the tibial tunnel. Anatomic reduction was achieved, and the knee was held at 20° of flexion and the sutures were tied over an anterior tibial bone bridge (Fig 8). At the most recent follow-up, examination revealed full range of motion. Lachman testing on the treated side was equal to that of the uninvolved leg without laxity and with a firm endpoint. The patient shows excellent stability to anterior drawer testing and does not have a pivot shift. She reports a stable knee without pain. She participated in a weeklong basketball camp 6 months after the surgery without difficulty. Her activities during the basketball camp included running, jumping, pivoting, and lateral movements. KT-1000 testing at latest follow-up revealed near symmetric stability of both knees. Isokinetic testing 9 months after surgery showed 80% strength in the quadriceps and 93% hamstring strength compared with the uninjured side. Her radiographs at latest follow-up were normal Avulsion fractures of the tibial spine occur most frequently in children and adolescents, Surgical treatment is warranted for type III and IV fractures after reports of increased laxity, loss of knee extension, chondromalacia, quadriceps weakness, malunion, and nonunion in patients treated nonsurgically. Numerous arthroscopic Several methods of arthroscopic suture fixation have been described; however, this is the first described use of the Arthrosew suture device to perform a whip stitch securing the ACL. This technique provides the surgeon with a significant advantage in the treatment of displaced type III and IV fractures of the tibial eminence that have significant comminution. The whip stitch using the Arthrosew device obtains its fixation within the substance of the ACL itself, thereby obviating the secure bony fixation described in previous techniques. This stitch affords greater purchase of the avulsed fragment than previously described techniques by using a larger amount of the ligament for fixation. Furthermore, this arthroscopic technique restores the necessary tension on the ACL, obviates hardware, and incorporates many of the previously described techniques to facilitate a simplified, reproducible method of treating this injury.