The designs of tubular mills loaded with steel rods along its length as the grinding medium are described in this chapter. Details of operation and computations of mill capacities and the power consumption are explained with illustrative practical examples and solution of problems useful for both understanding the process and its practical operation. The importance of rod mills in comminution circuits is explained by flow diagrams and sketches. Mathematical correlations of variables are explained with examples and worked solutions.For rod mill operation only. For rod mills in a rod mill–ball mill operation. Tubular tumbling mills loaded with rods as the grinding media are used for primary grinding of rocks and minerals. Rods are placed parallel to the length of the mill, their length being about 150 mm shorter than the inside length of mills. The grinding action for size reduction of particles is almost similar to ball mills, but in this case the entire length of a rod is responsible for breakage of particles spread along the length of the mill. The breakage occurs more by a cascading action than by cataracting. The rods fall from a height and roll down the mill, so the rods impart an impact force as well as an abrasive action. As the feed enters the mill at one end of the mill, there is always a tendency for accumulation at that feed end, so that the initial size reduction starts more or less at the feed end. With time this action is more spread out along the entire length of the mill. The product size from a rod mill is much more uniform than a ball mill, but the overall size is much coarser. Hence, a rod mill generally precedes a ball mill in a grinding circuit, especially where a fine size product is required. The design characteristics of industrial rod mills are similar to ball mills. Most rod mills used in mineral processing are of the overflow discharge type as illustrated in The spout feeders are designed to have a head of about 1.5 m measured from the bottom of the hopper to the centre line of the feeder to enable smooth passage of the feed into the mill by gravity. The scoop or double scoop feeders are particularly useful where some breaking up of lumps is involved. The drum feeders are fitted with spirals to guide the feed into the mill. The diameters of the discharge end of the spout feeders are about 100–200 mm larger than the feed end. The mill lengths are more or less guided by the length of rods. The maximum rod length conveniently used is about 6.6 m. The lengths of the rods are about 100–150 mm shorter than the inside mill length. Data from Rowland The cross-section of the rods is generally circular, but rods having square and hexagonal sections have been used. Rods having cross sections other than round do not have any particular advantage on performance. Rods with round sections are possibly easier to handle. Liners protect the rod mill shell and are made of rubber or steel and are bolted to the shell with or without rubber backing. The liners are 65–75 mm thick and 60–90 mm in height. They have different contours and profiles such as waves, wedge bar or rectangular which act as lifters for the charge. The liners at the feed and discharge ends are also made of steel but have smooth surfaces. The headliner and wearing surface could be vertical or inclined as the materials charged into the mill have a tendency to accumulate at the head end and swells. This promotes greater wear to the headliner and also to the rods, which are found to wear down unevenly to almost a fine point in extreme cases. A general observation is that the liner wear in rod mills is much more severe than in ball mills. The discharge in overflow rod mills falls through a trommel to remove any tramp iron in the material stream. Due to relatively uniform coarse product size and low slimes, rod mill products have been generally used as feed material for ball mills. The comminution circuits are generally arranged to receive crushed ore from a secondary crusher first to rod mills and then to ball mills. The product from the rod mill is either fed directly to a ball mill or to a classifier. The coarser fraction is then fed to the ball mill. The rod mills are normally operated in open  In some cases, open circuit single stage rod mills are used, especially where the product is used directly for gravity concentration or for example in the iron ore industry where the product goes directly to a pelletising plant. Closed circuit rod milling is uncommon but may be used where a coarse grind and a tight tolerance are required on any oversize particles in the product. Rod mill charges usually occupy about 45% of the internal volume of the mill. A closely packed charge of single sized rods will have a porosity of 9.3%. With a mixed charge of small and large diameter rods, the porosity of a static load could be reduced even further. However, close packing of the charge rarely occurs and an operating bed porosity of 40% is common. Overcharging results in poor grinding and losses due to abrasion of rods and liners. Undercharging also promotes more abrasion of the rods. The height (or depth) of charge is measured in the same manner as for ball mill. The size of feed particles to a rod mill is coarser than for a ball mill. The usual feed size ranges from 6 to 25 mm. For the efficient use of rods it is necessary that they operate parallel to the central axis and the body of the mill. This is not always possible as in practice, parallel alignment is usually The bulk density of a new rod charge is about 6.25 t/m During wet grinding, the pulp charged to the mill is usually held between 60 and 75% solids by mass. Rod lengths greater than 6 m are seldom truly straight. Bent rods promote tangling and should be avoided. The rod dimension is also an inverse function of speed, which means that with higher speeds of rotation, smaller rods in larger numbers may be equally effective as a smaller number of larger diameter rods. The reason for this is at higher speed more energy is imparted to the charge to break the ore particles and the number of impacts per unit time will also be higher. The rods should be 152 mm shorter than the inside working length of the mill. Rods have a tendency to break during operation; therefore, the quality of rod should be carefully chosen. According to Rowland and Kjos Rod diameters have to be carefully chosen since during the grinding process they wear in different manners. For example, at the feed end where the wear is maximum, the rod wears down to a pointed shape. At the middle, it wears into an elliptical shape while at the discharge end it becomes conical. This produces uneven stresses along the length; as a result, the rods break into smaller sizes. The choice of rod diameter is also related to the ore characteristics, chiefly the work index, ore feed size ( ρ ϕ   However, as in ball mills, a gradation of rod diameters is initially charged to take advantage of the voids between the rods. During operation of rod mills, rods have to be replaced occasionally as they are subjected to wear and liable to break. The replacement rate should be equal to the rate at which rod size deterioration occurs so that equilibrium is maintained. Bond To use the table, determine the largest size of the rod to be charged using Equation The reduction ratio, where  Thus if If for a certain situation the actual reduction was 20 and The capacity of rod mills will depend on the tonnes of the finished product of required size produced per unit time and thus will be a function of mill characteristics, i.e., length, diameter, speed of rotation, lifters, feed (ore) characteristics, i.e., soft, brittle or hard, initial and final size of the ore, i.e., the reduction ratio. The capacity will also depend on the kinetic energy available for transfer from the rods to the feed during its passage through the mill. Under a given load and size requirement, the capacity of a rod mill is, therefore, proportional to the length and diameter. It is usually considered as Austin et al. The relationship between capacity and mill diameter and length is shown in The figure shows that the effect of an increase in mill diameter on capacity is more significant than an increase in mill length. This is illustrated by The capacities of larger mills are more sensitive to changes of reduction ratios. Working with eight rod mills of different sizes, ranging from 1.2 × 2.4 m to 4.1 × 5.7 m at two levels, Kurimoto The capacities of rod mills are limited by practical operational problems such as limitations of steel mills to produce perfectly straight steel rods more than 6 m long, tangling of rods, swelling of the charge, particularly near the feed end, increasing slurry density due to loss of water, faulty liners and lifters. As in ball mills, the power draft of a rod mill is the product of capacity and work index, which is the energy required to break a mineral of a given size to the required size. The mill power is also increased by increasing the rod charge and the mill speed, while the mill power and capacity are both increased with increasing mill length. Based on these observations and working on wet overflow mills, Rowland and Kjos   ϕ For small ball mills, the power draw under dry batch grinding conditions was derived by Austin et al.  Equation where the speed is in m/min for the mill diameter, The expression is applicable to mill diameters between 1.52 and 4.1 m and the speed of rotation should be chosen accordingly. In industrial situations where conditions differ from Bond’s set-up      To account for the effect of a mill diameter which is different from the 2.44 m mill diameter used by Bond in the determination of The solid line in  Oversize has been defined by Austin et al. For the different mill diameters commercially available, the values of The optimum feed size suggested by Rowland and Kjos The value of The correction factor  This factor is not required for a ball mill fed by a rod mill or if  A correction factor for fineness of grind is applicable when greater than 80% of the ground product is less than 75 μm in size. The correction factor is  This correction is mainly for low reduction ratios. The correction factor   Correction factor The correction is not always needed for high reduction ratios, but it is used if  If the ball mill reduction ratio is less than 6, a correction factor, This correction is particularly applicable for regrind mills.  For efficient operation of rod mills the feed should preferably be uniform in top size. The manner of feeding either from conveyors or directly from bins and chutes affects the power consumption and mill performance. To correct for feed preparation is difficult. The rule of thumb suggested by Rowland and Kjos The total correction For a milling condition when a certain factor is not applicable, it should be neglected. The total mill power will then be The above considerations for determining the mill power draw serve as a guide for the selection of mills for a particular job. A uniform discharge from a closed circuit jaw crusher is 200 t/h. The crusher feeds a wet rod mill such that 80% of the crusher product passes a 16 mm screen. The rod mill feeds a wet ball mill at a feed size of 1.0 mm (1000 μm) and produces a product with 80% passing a 150 μm screen. The rod mill is in an open grinding circuit. Determine: the shaft power of the rod mill, the size of the industrial mill. Data: Laboratory Standard Bond Test: Rod Mill: Grindability index at 10 mesh = 13.5 kWh/t From (A factor of 1.1 may be required if the work index is in kWh/short ton) Substituting values  Correction factor Correction factor Correction factor Since the feed size is 16,000 μm, correction factor Use Equation Reduction ratio ( Optimum feed size ( = 17,952 μm Since the feed is less than the optimum, no correction is necessary. Correction factor Correction factor  Correction factor Correction factor Total power required for rod mill = Preliminary selection of a commercially available rod mill may now be made from the manufacturer’s catalogue. For example, Allis Chalmer’s catalogue shows that the nearest mill size would require 655 kW Mill length = 4.88 m Mill diameter = 3.51 m (inside diameter = 3.31 m) Rod length = 4.72 Rod load = 40% Rod charge = 90.7 t The diameter efficiency factor, Hence, the corrected power = 640 × 0.941 = 602 kW. Referring again to Allis Chalmer’s rod mill performance in Appendix B-4, for a mill power draw of 618 kW, the following mill will be finally suitable: Mill length = 4.86 m Mill diameter = 3.35 m (inside diameter = 3.15 m) Rod length = 4.72 m Rod load = 45% Rod mass = 93.5 t The factor Since ( Rod Mill–Ball Mill Circuit: Consider the set-up in Grindability index for the ball mill = 12.0 kWh/t Product size from the ball mill = 150 μm Determine the size of the ball mill operated in closed circuit. The discharge from the rod mill is the feed to the ball mill. Therefore, in this case, the work, Correction factors Correction factor Correction factor Check for oversize using Equation The feed size (1000 μm) is less than this optimum feed size; therefore, the correction does not have to be applied. Correction factor Correction factor Correction factor Correction factor Mill power required = 6.0 × 200 = 1200 kW To determine the commercially available ball mill that would suit the conditions, refer to the manufacturer’s literature, for example, Allis Chalmers’ as published by Rowland and Kjos Ball mill length = 4.57 m Ball mill diameter = 4.57 m (inside liner diameter = 4.39 m) Ball mill load = 35% Ball charge mass = 113 t Ball size = 64 mm The diameter efficiency factor,  Hence, the correction factor, The factor Since ( Correction factor The corrected mill power then is given by Total power required for the ball mill = 1200 × 0.914 × 1.28 = 1407 kW Referring again to Allis Chalmers’ ball mill performance table, for a mill power draw of 1412 kW, the same mill dimensions will be suitable if the ball charge is increased to 45% with a charge mass of 144 t. A mill ready to start a grinding operation could be around 150 t in dead weight. Thus, the initial torque on the mill shaft is very high and an electric drive motor and drive is designed to cope with it. To cope with the situation one of the methods practised is to introduce an air clutch, which helps to start the motor with no load. When the motor is in full speed the clutch is released to transfer the load smoothly. An alternate arrangement is to use an induction motor or a synchronous motor coupled directly to the pinion shaft of the mill. As the considerations of rod mills are similar to the ball mills, some of the problems given below require the use of formulae described for ball mill operations in  The inner dimensions of a rod mill were 1.8 × 1.8 m and the largest diameter of rod charged was 76 mm. The mill consumed per tonne of rods was 25 kW/t. Assume the critical speed factor is equal to 0.72. Determine the limiting speed at which the mill should be permitted to operated, the mill loading. A 3 m × 3 m rod mill was charged with 100 mm diameter steel rods having a bulk density of 5.2 t/m the mill volume occupied by the charge ( the fraction of the mill volume occupied by the ore if the fraction of mill volume occupied by the rods, the mass of rods in the mill. A wet rod mill was loaded to 45% of its volume with a charge consisting of a gold ore and steel rods. The rods diameter was 70 mm. The mill had an inner diameter of 1980 mm and was rotated at 21 rpm with a rod load of 23.8 t. The rock volume was 0.4 times the rod volume after taking into account the porosity of the bed. Estimate the fraction of the critical speed at which the mill operates, the maximum power drawn, the difference in power requirements if the mill was filled to the same extent with balls having the same diameter as the rods. The length-to-inside diameter ratio of a rod mill was 1.5 when the length was 4.72 m. The true densities of the grinding media and the ore were 8.0 and 2.35 t/m Calculate the mill power required for operating at a 100 t/h throughput and under conditions of wet grinding, dry grinding, power required if the rod mill was a grate discharge type. The power consumed by a tumbling mill as measured at the shaft was 152 kW when the mill was loaded with 25.6 t of rods and the load was 45% of the mill volume. The bulk density of the rock charged was 2.6 t/m the inside dimensions of the mill (assume a the mill power and capacity. Data: Bulk density of rods = 5.6 t/m    The internal diameter and length of a dry rod mill measured 2.74 m × 3.6 m, respectively. The mill was loaded to 40% of its internal volume with rods weighing 36.1 t. The density of the rod material was 7.8 t/m the capacity of the mill under dry and wet grinding conditions, the power consumption at the pinion shaft under dry and wet conditions, the specific grinding energies under dry and wet conditions of grinding. The test work index of the feed to a rod mill was 10.1 kWh/t. Eighty percent of the feed passed 2 mm and 80% of the product from the mill passed 40 μm. The mill diameter was 3.9 m and the Gold ore was crushed successively in a primary and then in a secondary crusher. Product from the secondary crusher analysed 80% passing 2000 μm. The object was to further reduce the size by grinding to achieve the liberation size of 45 μm. It was, therefore, ground in a wet rod mill 2.85 m × 4.27 m using steel rods of 4.11 m in length. The total mass of the rod charge was 63.8 t. The test work index was 13.2 kWh/t. During steady-state grinding the mill consumed 6.41 kW/t of rods. Calculate the percent mill volume occupied by the charge during wet open circuit grinding, optimum operating speed (rpm) of the mill, mill capacity (t/h). Data: Bulk density of rods = 5.6 t/m ID of the mill = 2.85 m. Crushed nickel ore was ground in a wet over-flow rod mill with an inside liner diameter of 4.37 m. Forty percent of the mill volume was filled with steel rods having a maximum diameter of 70 mm and bulk density 5.6 t/m the rod diameter at commence of crushing, the rod length Data: ρ A wet overflow rod mill was operated at 75% of the critical speed and found to draw 8.5 kW/t of rods when the mill was loaded to 35% of its volume. A certain number of rods were then removed and the mill power increased to 8.95 kW/t of rods. Estimate: volume of mill occupied by the new charge, the diameter of the mill, mill capacity after removal of rods. Data:  A rod mill was fed from a cone crusher at the rate of 250 t/h with a copper ore. The product size from the cone crusher is 12,000 μm. The rod mill, operating wet and in open circuit, produced a product 80% passing size of 600 μm. The product was then pumped to a ball mill, which was operated wet in closed circuit. The product size ( the total power required in the operation, the diameter of the mills. Data: Rod mill Ball mill A wet rod mill (2.44 m × 3.66 m) was fed from a crusher operating in closed circuit. The feed was delivered by a conveyor at a rate of 50 t/h. The rod mill product was fed to a wet ball mill (2.44 m × 2.44 m). Bulk density of rods = 6.25 t/m  Grindability Laboratory Test Data: Between the rod and ball mill an intermediate separator in the form of a hydrocyclone was placed. Determine power at the pinion shaft (including loss due to bearings, friction, etc.) for wet rod mill grinding, wet ball mill grinding. Data: Both mills filled to 35% of their internal volumes. Both mills operated at 70% of the critical speed.