The objective of the present study was to investigate differences in oral activity when biscuits of the same type but with subtle composition differences are consumed and how performing a Temporal Dominance of Sensations (TDS) task modifies the way one eats. In addition, comparisons were made between performing a texture TDS (T-TDS) and a flavour TDS (F-TDS). Oral activity while eating biscuits with and without conducting a TDS task was recorded using a 3.dimensional motion capture system to monitor the evolution of jaw movements.
                  The results showed that oral activity evolved over the consumption time, differed depending on the texture of the sample and was affected to a small but significant extent when a TDS task was performed simultaneously (the differences averaged <4 cycles, 1 s in duration, 0.1 cycles/s in frequency, and 1 mm in lateral displacement). The biscuit samples were affected equally. Almost no differences were found on comparing oral activity during the execution of the T-TDS and the F-TDS tasks.
                  Overall, the present results show differences in oral activity even for food products of the same category with subtle differences in composition. Performing TDS tasks (regardless of their modality) during sample consumption affected the total number, frequency and lateral amplitude of the chewing movements which should be taken into account for future research. However, these differences were small and affected both samples equally.Sensory perception when eating a food product is a dynamic process and occurs during all stages of oral processing ( TDS is based on the concept of dominance and requires assessors to select the dominant sensation (the one that catches their attention) sequentially from a list of attributes at each point in time during consumption. Some variants of TDS have appeared in recent years: in TDS by modalities the sensations of texture and flavour are evaluated separately ( Texture and flavour perception are highly dependent on the structural breakdown of the food that occurs in the oral cavity during eating ( Some research has raised the question of whether focusing attention on a sensory task alters the natural oral activity of the participants and, if so, whether it can bias the sensory results ( Hence, more in-depth research is needed to ascertain how engaging in a TDS task affects natural masticatory behaviour. A number of methods and devices are currently used in food research to measure and quantify sequential jaw activity while eating ( Motion capture recording systems are less invasive alternatives compared to techniques such as EMG, EMA or JT with magnets and a headset. A number of studies have video-recorded the faces of the participants during consumption, using a sensory booth equipped with a single webcam, and subsequently used behaviour-observation software programs (The Observer, Elan, etc.) to decode eating events such as the number of bites, chews and swallows and their duration ( Most of the literature that has studied the impact on oral activity of performing TDS (and other sensory) tasks has focused on texture attributes. In the present study, a flavour TDS task is compared with a texture TDS task to ascertain how focusing on a specific sensory modality might have a different effect on oral behaviour during TDS. The authors of the present study hypothesised that any TDS task might have an impact on oral behaviour regardless of the modality. Although oral movements are involved in texture perception, aroma and taste release also depend on oral movements, so evaluating any of these could modify oral behaviour. In addition, subtle differences in oral behaviour are difficult to find when comparing very different food items; for this reason, the authors choose food of the same category and type (chocolate-chip biscuits). The present study aims to assess the impact of TDS evaluations of texture and flavour on oral activity, measured with a 3D motion capture recording system, during the consumption of two different chocolate-chip biscuits. Two commercial chocolate chip biscuits (store brands of two major Spanish supermarkets) were used in the present study (A and B). The weight (15.6 ± 0.3 and 16.1 ± 0.6 g for sample A and B respectively), diameter (61.1 ± 4.8 and 59.8 ± 7.4 mm for sample A and B respectively), thickness (10.2 ± 0.3 and 10.8 ± 0.3 mm for sample A and B respectively) and visual appearance of both samples were very similar. The biscuits were cut into quarters of similar shape and weight (4.0 ± 0.2 g), providing normal, comfortable 1-bite portions for the participants according to the preliminary tests. Sixteen subjects (11 women and 5 men, aged between 22 and 45) participated in the study. All of them were consumers of cookies on a regular basis. Other inclusion criteria were no allergies or intolerances to gluten, nuts or chocolate (self-reported), and self-reported good dental health status and non-smoking habits. The participants were recruited from students and employees of the Institute of Agrochemistry and Food Technology (IATA-CSIC) with previous experience of sensory evaluation and TDS. The participants gave their informed consent before taking part in the study. To track the motion of the jaw, six 4-mm-diameter reflective spherical markers (NaturalPoint Inc., Corvallis, OR, USA) backed with hypoallergenic sticky tape were placed on specific landmarks of the participant’s face ( The jaw movements were recorded with the Optitrack 3D motion capture system (NaturalPoint Inc., Corvallis, OR, USA), using 6 infrared cameras (100 Hz), one of which had a digital video function. Motive:Tracker software, version 1.10 (NaturalPoint Inc., Corvallis, OR, USA) was used to record the signals and MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc, Natick, MA, USA) for data analysis. The data were filtered by a one-dimensional median filter ( Oral activity was evaluated under three different conditions: 1) while performing a texture TDS task (T-TDS), 2) while performing a flavour TDS task (F-TDS), and 3) while just watching a video on the screen. This third condition, in which the participants did not perform any sensory evaluation task (No-TDS), was the control. The video was a nature video, and its purpose was to keep the participants watching the screen in the same way as they would in conditions 1 and 2. All the participants attended three sessions in triplicate on different days (9 trials in total). The two biscuits were assessed in randomized order. The first session was always under Control conditions (No-TDS), taken as the freer, natural consumption condition, not influenced by the “scientific” duty to consider a number of sensory attributes. The remaining two sessions (T-TDS and F-TDS) were conducted in randomized order. Before each session began, a “training” run (one of the biscuits, randomly selected) was conducted to ensure the participants were able to perform the task under the corresponding conditions. The samples were identified with random three-digit codes and were served at room temperature. In total, the participants assessed 7 samples per session (1 for training and 6 to complete the three replicates of the task). The participants had a 2-min rest between samples and were provided with still mineral water for rinsing their palates. The sessions took place in a closed, quiet room with artificial daylight and temperature control (22 °C). For all 3 study conditions, the participants were asked to sit in front of a laptop screen in a comfortable position, with their feet on the floor, and not to talk and not to touch their faces during the task. After receiving the signal to start from the researcher, the participants placed the whole sample in their mouths while starting to chew as usual. Under the two TDS conditions (T-TDS and F-TDS), simultaneously they had to click the “Start” button on the TDS screen. Following preliminary tests, the duration of the TDS tasks was set at 60 s, as was the recording time. Accordingly, the duration of the video viewed during the control session (No-TDS) also lasted 60 s. Under all three study conditions, the participants were told to remain seated in the same position (even if consumption had finished earlier) until the message “Raise your hand” was displayed on the screen, as a signal for the researcher to stop recording. At this point they knew that the task time was over. A preliminary trial was conducted to familiarize the assessors with the attributes and with the TDS screen and technique. As explained above, the texture and flavour sensations were assessed separately, in two different sessions (F-TDS and T-TDS respectively), in a balanced order across the participants. The list of sensory attributes was generated in preliminary tests and included the most relevant terms for characterizing the two biscuits during consumption and describing the differences between the samples. The texture attributes were Over the evaluation time, the participants had to select the sensation perceived as dominant or that triggered most attention at a certain point in time. They were free to choose the same attribute several times or never to select an attribute as dominant. Sample assessment lasted until the participants had swallowed the sample completely and the sensory sensations ceased. At this point they clicked the “Finish” button. The time each participant took to complete the task (time between clicking “Start” and clicking “Finish” on the screen) was recorded for each sample and each repetition. The order of attributes in the TDS list varied across participants, following a Williams Latin square design, but for each participant the list of attributes was kept in the same order for all the samples. The data collection and analysis were carried out using Compusense Cloud (Compusense Inc., Guelph, Canada). To study the factors affecting the participants’ oral activity under the Control conditions (no-TDS), a mixed 3-factor ANOVA [sample, 10-s period of time (P1, P2 or P3) and participant (random)] and binary interaction (sample × time period) were conducted on the following oral activity parameters: To study the effect of task and sample, a mixed 3-factor ANOVA [task, sample and participant (random)] and binary interaction (task × sample) were applied to Student’s From the TDS evaluations, the dominance rate (proportion of participants who selected an attribute at a certain point in the evaluation) for every 1-s interval was obtained by dividing the number of citations of an attribute across all replicates by the number of participants and replications. To build the TDS curves, the dominance rate for each sample was plotted against time. The chance and significance levels were displayed on the plots to facilitate interpretation of the TDS curves. The chance level represents the dominance rate that an attribute can obtain by chance and the significance level represents the smallest value of the proportion that is significantly (p = 0.05) higher than the chance level ( Under the Control conditions (No-TDS), the regular, rhythmic increases and decreases in the distance between the markers on the jaw and the forehead were identified as masticatory cycles. The signal was found to be mostly regular during the first 20–25 s of biscuit consumption, as preliminary trials had also shown. These cycles corresponded to a rhythmic chewing sequence and were divided into three 10-s periods (P1, P2, and P3) for analysis purposes. After this time, the signal started to change and became more irregular. The mean values of the parameters The ANOVA results showed that Individual values for the The The  The F-TDS results showed that The effects of sample and task on oral parameters were studied by ANOVA ( As there was no significant interaction between the sample and task factors, the effects of sample and task are discussed separately in The oral activity parameters varied depending on the sample ( The Sample A also showed higher The oral activity parameters differed significantly between tasks (  In the analysis, taking the three 10-s periods into account, in general the values for The oral activity parameters when conducting the F-TDS task showed almost no significant differences compared to the findings when performing the T-TDS ( The total duration of sensations (from clicking “Start” to “Stop” button clicking) registered in the T-TDS evaluation did not differ significantly from the oral activity duration computed from the video recording during the task (p = 0.154). However, the total duration of sensations in the F-TDS was longer (3 s more, p = 0.001) than the oral activity sequence value obtained from the video recording. The signal monitored for oral activity under “natural” conditions was regular (cyclic movements) during the first 20–25 s of consumption of both biscuits, indicating a chewing sequence. It became more irregular after this time, probably because of the tongue movements to collect and aggregate the biscuit particles into a bolus ready for swallowing. These clearance movements have been reported in a number of studies ( The oral activity values ( The jaw opening distance ( In the present study the lateral and vertical movements were of the same magnitude; this indicates that shearing is an important action in biscuit eating due the friable, crumbling nature of this food type. Consumption of sample A required more oral cycles than sample B, but no difference in the total duration because sample B was processed more slowly during periods P2 and P3. This is probably related to the The higher Previous studies have also linked food hardness to higher lateral displacement in a wide range of products ( The present results highlight that oral activity features can differ for foods of the same category (biscuits) and even of the same type (chocolate-chip biscuits). These differences arise from the differential oral handling required to break the foods down and prepare them for a safe and comfortable swallow. A number of previous studies have compared oral activity for food products of different types and natures, with very different textures, such as melba toast, carrots, peanuts, cheese, and breakfast cake ( Biscuit consumption took longer when performing a TDS task than under “natural” conditions. Similar results were reported by A smaller Taking the three 10-s periods into account, in general Regarding comparison between the texture and flavour evaluations, almost no differences were found between the oral activity values corresponding to the T-TDS and F-TDS tasks. This result would indicate that performing analytical sensory tasks (whether texture or flavour) during consumption increases the number of chews and their frequency until the consumption process ends. It may be noted that in T-TDS, 4–5 attributes reached significance whereas in F-TDS only 1–2 attributes reached significance, suggesting that the participants selected considerably fewer attributes in F-TDS than in T-TDS. However, the general oral activity results suggest that the reason why completion of biscuit consumption took longer was not the number of attributes to be selected but the search for the stimuli (sensations) needed for attribute selection. Only two parameter values differed between the two TDS tasks. One was that during F-TDS, the chewing frequency (at P1) was higher, although only slightly. This could be related to an interest in obtaining more flavour stimuli, as flavour release could be governed by chewing frequency: according to The duration of the T-TDS evaluation did not differ significantly from the total oral activity duration obtained from the video recorded while accomplishing this task (p = 0.154), whereas a difference was found for F-TDS. This difference between the flavour and texture tasks can be explained because aroma and taste compounds would remain in the mouth and nostril, stimulating the corresponding receptors, so flavour sensations do not necessarily finish at the same time as oral movement does. The 3D motion capture recording system used to follow the oral movements has proved useful for detecting differences in oral activity over the consumption time of two commercial biscuits of the same type. The system allowed analysis over different stages of consumption. The oral activity parameters changed between two food products of the same category and even of the same type (chocolate chip biscuits), depending on their characteristics. The parameter values were significantly affected by the performance of a TDS task, regardless of its modality (texture or flavour). This would imply that what makes for differences in total oral activity duration is not the kind of sensation the participants have to gather, but focusing on or paying attention to the analytical task. When the subjects conducted a TDS task, they made more oral movements, which were quicker and involved narrower lateral displacements. However, it should be noted that although the effect was significant its magnitude was small, and both samples were affected equally. In both modalities, the participants’ oral processing of the sample tended to last longer and show a higher frequency of chew cycles than under No-TDS conditions. The authors are grateful to the They also wish to thank Mary Georgina Hardinge for English language editing assistance. None. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: