 Many researchers who investigate the process of grinding and try to describe its kinetics, use the classical form of equations developed by Sedlatschek and Bass [ Heim and Olejnik in their previous papers [ The zero moment of the first order is identical to the mean grain size of the entire set. A common feature of the “classical” absolute measures of asymmetry and flattening is that they do not have a finite numerical interval which theoretically would include all possible values. In order to interpret the coefficients of flattening and asymmetry more easily, original modified forms presented by A characteristic feature of these modified coefficients is that their values are included always in the strictly determined intervals: the value of modified asymmetry coefficient The analysis of the state of knowledge on mathematical modelling of comminution (with particular reference to dry grinding in ball mills and requirements of the process design and control) provided a basis for carrying out experiments aiming at the experimental verification of the concept of mathematical modelling of dry grinding in the ball mills by means of the theory of moments. In particular investigation of the dependence of the detailed form of mathematical relations of this model on such process and equipment parameters as mass of the feed, the amount and size of grinding media and rotations frequency of the mill, taking into account different grindability of comminuted materials, determination of the optimum operating parameters of the mill for the investigated range of equipment and process conditions. In order to draw conclusions concerning the correctness of the proposed concept, it was decided to grind different rock raw materials in one mill at changing process conditions (rotations frequency of the mill, the mass of feed and balls). Carrying out the process in one apparatus at changing process conditions stimulates investigations of the process in kinetically different but geometrically similar grinding machines. In the investigations, a ceramic ball mill with a drum of inner diameter equal to 0.2 m and Grinding was carried out in a batch-wise system. The experimental series differed also in the amount of ground material Raw material was pre-grinded by jaw crusher into ∼ 0.0025 m fraction to obtain fed with very similar mechanical attributes. Soft inclusions, which might be the reason of mistakes, were shed in this way. The material was comminuted in a ball mill and screened to obtain a feed with particle size ranging from 0.001 to 0.0025 m. The process of grinding lasted until the weight fraction of the input material (0.0025 m) decreased to at least 2% (which corresponded to 0.0036 kg of the feed on the screen with mesh size equal to 0.001 m). The following raw materials were also ground: gabbro, quartzite, syenite and sandstone, with Mohs hardness number being 3, 6, 7 and 9, respectively. ( Examples of the results of screen analysis for one of the grinding series are given in Analysis of polynomial coefficients “ Hence, a possibility of correlating the results of grinding for different raw materials and the same equipment and process conditions by a single equation was investigated. It was found that for all tested raw materials the correlation gave high values of Taking the above into account, it was decided to continue the analysis without differentiating the materials ( When further analysing the results, it was assumed that a change in the feed mass, rotations frequency and mass of the balls were the only process variables which had been estimated. The analysis was carried out for steel and corundum balls separately. When comparing the results which referred to the effect of changes of ball mass on the To show that the impact of changes in rotations frequency, the mass of feed and balls on the modified coefficients of flattening and asymmetry on mean grain size To carry out statistical tests the data series were divided into three groups, and the criterion of division was if the experiments were carried out in specified process conditions (the effect of one of the process conditions, e.g. change in the feed mass, on Statistical tests were carried out by means of a standard ToolPack of Excel 97. The statistical data were verified using the The tests enabled a hypothesis that data from all trials came from the same population. The As a result of the final analysis of experimental data, changes in the modified flattening coefficient A separate problem is the determination of a function describing changes of mean grain size in time. For this purpose the analysis of different forms of correlation functions was carried out and finally the following equation was assumed:  gabbro and sandstone - feed volume 300 cm quartzite - feed volume 300 cm syenite - feed volume 450 cm In Changes of the modified coefficients of flattening When analyzing the relation of Such a character of changes can be explained by a preliminary comminuting of the material and selection of a narrow fraction of 1 to 2.5 mm before starting the studies on grinding. An initial reduction of grain size of the raw material gives as a result, a high value of the flattening coefficient — a high concentration of grains around the mean value. A significant dispersion of grain sizes, increased by grains from the interval 0 to 1 mm, obtained in the first period, is then decreased by elimination of large-size grains. The modified asymmetry coefficient When comparing the values of the first one, characterized by a decrease of the flattening coefficient the second one, for which the flattening coefficient reaches a minimum at almost linear the third one (which takes place for the final grinding times), for which both coefficients increase reaching their highest values - a high concentration of grains around a small value of the mean grain size. An increase of 