Litter decomposition is an important ecosystem process mediated by soil organisms. It has been widely estimated by determining mass loss rates of plant residues applied in litterbags. However, catabolic degradation of litter by soil organisms is overestimated when the transfer of undecomposed or partly decomposed litter outside the litterbags is not considered. To account for these constraints, 13C and 15N recovery rates of 15N labeled maize leaf litter were analyzed in litterbags and in soil below litterbags in topsoils of four arable agroforestry alley cropping systems (ACS) and one grassland ACS in Germany after 28 weeks of incubation. Litterbags with 2 mm mesh size were buried in soils under trees and in intercropped alleyways at various distances from the trees. Recovery rates of litter derived C and N significantly differed between tree rows and alleyways in arable ACS. In the mean of three arable ACS, mass loss rates of litter applied in litterbags, corrected for litter C recovered in soil, was 78 and 67% under trees and arable crops, respectively. In the grassland ACS, litter C and N not recovered in litterbags and soil below the bags was more than 80%, revealing no differences between decomposition rates in tree rows and alleyways. In tree rows, the transfer of litter derived C to soil accounted for 10–15% of C mass loss in litterbags. We suggest that transfer rates of litter derived C to mineral soil have the potential to increase C sequestration.Plant litter decomposition and related processes, like nutrient mineralization and carbon sequestration, are important ecosystem services ( Tracking litter derived C may be achieved by application of In alley cropping systems (ACS), annual agronomic crops or grassland are cultivated between rows of trees ( The aim of our study was: 1. to estimate litter decomposition of applied litter in coarse mesh sized litterbags by accounting for C and N transferred to the soil below litterbags, and 2. to quantify the effect of trees in ACS on these processes by considering tree distance and soil variability. The study was conducted at five German ACS ( Maize was grown on an experimental field on the premises of the research farm of the University of Kassel in Eichenberg, North Hessia. Plants were labeled at plant stage BBCH 15 with One hundred forty-four coarse (2 mm mesh size) litterbags (polyamide, 10 × 5 cm) were filled with 2 g (air dry weight) leaf litter of The total litter sample with adhering soil and a subsample of the soil sample below the litterbag were milled, before quantifying total Statistical modelling was carried out with SAS (Statistical Analysis System, version 9.4; SAS Institute Inc. 2013, Cary, NC, USA) according to the approach reported by Recovery of total litter derived C was lower under trees than in arable alleyways at all arable ACS ( Higher decomposition rates of litter under trees than under arable crops may have resulted from a longer period of root growth of trees and, thus, higher rhizodeposition inducing priming effects ( We used non-local litter at all sites and transect points; therefore, the effect of home field advantage ( The effect of trees on recovered litter C and N in soils of arable alleyways was only shown at the site Forst. Here, microbial biomass C at 0−5 cm soil depth was higher at 1 m than at 7 and 24 m distance from the tree rows ( An effect of mineral N on litter decomposition in transects of ACS may be observed, as the level of mineral N in soils under trees and crops may differ, due to the frequent applications of N fertilizer to crops in the alleyways. The overall concentration of mineral N in soils (0−5 cm) under trees was always lower during the investigated period, but did not exceed 1 mg mineral N m Decomposition estimated by mass loss expresses the disappearance of litter from litterbags but not its final mass loss, the majority of which may remain in the soil outside the bags ( Additionally, to the decomposition experiments with coarse mesh sized bags litter recovery rate was assessed using fine mesh sized bags (400 μm) under tree rows only. Under tree rows of arable ACS transfer of litter derived C and N out of fine mesh sized bags was significantly lower than in coarse mesh sized bags (Supplement 2). However, 6–9% of C mass loss and 5–8% N mass loss in litterbags recovered in soil below fine size mesh bags, demonstrating that transfer of litter derived C and N even occurs under fine mesh sizes. Fragmentation losses may be small according to the fine mesh sizes. Leaching of DOM may account for total C and N losses from coarse and fine mesh sized litterbags. Estimated leaching losses from surface applied litter on temperate soils ranged from 18 to 75% of the total C losses from litterbags ( Losses of litter derived C and N from bags may be compensated by processes leading to accumulation of litter derived C and N in the mineral soil. The rapid initial release of soluble N from beech litter predominantly accumulated in 0−2 cm soil depths within the microbial biomass ( Transfer of litter C and N by fragmentation losses or leaching are often not accounted for in litterbag experiments. Our results from four arable and one grassland ACS showed that degradation of litter is overestimated by between 10 and 15%, when transferred litter C below litterbags is not considered. Nevertheless, the loss by fragmentation, caused by incomplete assimilation of litter derived C, is probably higher, considering that we only used 2 mm mesh sizes. Higher decomposition rates of litter under trees may be attributed to the omission of tillage and a higher activity of roots, fauna and microorganisms, compared with arable cropped alleyways. By applying All authors have seen and approved the final version of the manuscript being submitted. The article is the authors' original work and hasn't received prior publication and isn't under consideration for publication elsewhere. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The Journal policies detailed in the guide of Pedobiologia have been reviewed and considered. Research was funded by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: