A new method for determining the electrical conductivity of ion-exchange membranes was implemented with four commercial membranes (AMX, CMX, MK-40 and MA-41). It is based on lateral resistance measurements without direct contact between electrodes and membranes. The cell configuration made it possible to determine the membrane conductivity over a wide range of electrolyte concentrations (measurements were carried out in the range 10−5–5×10−1
                     M). The structural parameters of the different membranes were inferred from AC conductivities and the microheterogeneous model. They were found in good agreement with literature results obtained by normal measurements (i.e. with current lines oriented normally to the membrane surface), thus confirming the reliability of the proposed method. The main advantage of our method is the possibility to characterize ion-exchange membranes even at low salt concentration unlike usual non-contact methods based on normal measurements.
                  Counterion diffusion coefficients and transport numbers within the membrane gel phase were estimated. The inter-gel phase volume fraction of an anion-exchange membrane (AMX) was also determined for the first time from membrane DC conductivity inferred from streaming potential and streaming current measurements. An excellent agreement was found with structural parameters obtained from AC measurements.Ion-exchange membranes (IEMs) are used in various industrial processes and electrochemical devices such as electrodialysis or fuel cells, respectively. Electrical conductivity is one of the most important characteristics of IEMs that defines their practical suitability. For example, in electrodialysis the electrical potential gradient (driving force) applied through an IEM, and so the specific energy consumption required to operate a given separation, depend on the membrane electrical conductivity. This latter can be determined from electrical resistance measurements. It has been reported, however, that the experimental value of the electrical conductivity may depend on the measuring method The different methods that can be implemented to measure membrane resistance can be split into different categories according to three main criteria, namely (i) the current lines can be oriented normally or parallel to the membrane surface, (ii) electrodes can be in contact with the membrane or not, (iii) direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC) can be used. Normal measurements performed in both AC and DC modes were reported in the literature. In AC mode, the most used techniques are (i) the difference method in which the membrane resistance is obtained from the difference between the cell resistance measured with and without the membrane Electrical resistance measurements performed with lateral configuration were also reported in AC mode In the present work we propose a new method to determine IEM electric conductivity over a wide range of electrolyte concentrations. Notably, it enables accurate measurements at low electrolyte concentrations unlike standard methods based on normal measurements. The method is based on lateral measurements performed with a measuring cell without electrode/membrane contact. Measurements were carried out with a commercial electrokinetic analyzer (SurPASS instrument, Anton Paar GmbH) allowing direct resistance measurements in AC mode as well as indirect DC resistance determination from both streaming current and streaming potential measurements. Structural parameters of four commercial IEMs (AMX, CMX, MK-40 and MA-41) were obtained from the microheterogeneous model and further combined with the Donnan exclusion model in order to assess ion transport numbers through the membrane gel phase. Four commercial IEMs were used in this work, two cation-exchange membranes (CMX Neosepta®, Tokuyama Soda, Japan; MK-40, Shchekinoazot, Russia), and two anion-exchange membranes (AMX Neosepta®, Tokuyama Soda, Japan; MA-41, Shchekinoazot, Russia). AMX and CMX membranes are homogeneous membranes made of functionalized polystyrene cross-linked with divinylbenzene and mixed with finely powdered poly(vinylchloride) (PVC), which are coated on a PVC cloth used as a reinforcing material. The membrane fixed-charge comes from the presence of sulfonate groups (–SO On the other hand, MA-41 and MK-40 heterogeneous membranes are composite materials made of ion-exchange resins embedded in polyethylene. Ion-exchange resins consist in functionalized polystyrene (with The main properties of these IEMs are collected in Electrolyte solutions were prepared from KCl and NaCl (Fisher Scientific, analytical grade) and deionized water (resistivity: 18 Membrane thickness was measured with a Dial Indicator (model 2046S, Mitutoyo, Japan) equipped with a 10 Membrane electrical resistance were measured with a SurPASS electrokinetic analyzer (Anton Paar GmbH, Austria) after thickness measurements. The cell we used required two samples of the same membrane materials. Each membrane sample was cut and adjusted to the sample holder dimensions (length ( Measurements were conducted with an adjustable-gap cell inside which both membrane samples face each other (see schematic of the measuring cell shown in The SurPASS electrokinetic analyzer also allows determining the membrane electrical resistance from electrokinetic measurements, which is equivalent to measuring the electrical resistance in DC mode. In this case, the measuring solution is forced through the streaming channel formed by the two membrane samples facing each other (see Both streaming potential and streaming current were measured by applying pressure differences up to 300 All From the electrical point of view, the measuring cell consists in an electrical circuit with three parallel connected branches, i.e. membrane/solution-filled channel/membrane ( The cell resistance that is accessible experimentally ( The membrane resistance can therefore be determined from: The membrane conductivity ( In addition to the electrical conductivity, IEMs are commonly characterized by their specific resistance. The electrical resistance depends on the cell configuration (normal or lateral measurements; see As mentioned above, electrical resistance measurements were performed in lateral configuration by means of an adjustable-gap cell. It was then possible to perform a series of measurements by varying the distance h Performing measurements for various We first demonstrated the reliability of our measurements performed in lateral configuration by comparing the specific resistances of four IEMs reported in the literature with our own measurements. These latter were performed in AC mode with a 0.5 Specific resistances obtained from our new lateral method were compared with both manufacturer’s data and some literature results. All data are collected in Membrane electrical conductivity was determined in KCl solutions of various concentrations ranging from 10 Additional measurements were performed by varying the distance between the membrane samples in the lateral measurement cell. According to The previous sections aimed at validating our new method for IEM characterization. The microheterogeneous model developed by Zabolotsky and Nikonenko IEM structure is characterized by the gel and inter-gel phase volume fractions referred to as Within the scope of the microheterogeneous model the membrane AC conductivity ( The isoconductance concentration ( Near the isoconductance point Zabolotsky and Nikonenko showed that  The volume fraction of the inter-gel phase ( Knowing  As discussed above, the conductivity at the isoconductance point ( The counterion diffusion coefficient in the gel phase of the different IEMs was found to lie in the range 4×10 The gel phase conductivity, which can be obtained from The electroneutrality condition in the gel phase reads as follows: The interfacial Donnan equilibrium is given by, For mono-monovalent electrolytes The counterion transport number in the gel phase ( The transport numbers of counterions in the gel phase were found around 0.99 for all IEMs ( As mentioned in The transport number of counterions (Cl According to The electrical conductivity of four commercial IEMs (AMX, CMX, MK-40 and MA-41) was determined by a new method based on lateral resistance measurements without direct contact between electrodes and membranes. It was first demonstrated that the cell configuration permitted probing the entire membrane volume and that conduction did not occur only along the membrane surface. Moreover, the parallel arrangement of the membrane samples and the electrolyte solution inside the measuring cell made it possible to determine membrane conductivity even at very low electrolyte concentration unlike usual non-contact cells. The microheterogeneous model was used to estimate the structural parameters of the different IEMs from electrical resistance measurements performed in AC mode. Transport parameters (counterion diffusion coefficients and transport numbers) within the gel phase of IEMs were further determined from the membrane AC conductivity and the combination of the microheterogeneous model with the Donnan-exclusion approach. Finally, the membrane DC conductivity was determined for the first time from both streaming potential and streaming current measurements. The inter-gel phase volume fraction of AMX membrane inferred from these electrokinetic measurements was found in excellent agreement with AC measurements.