Mathematical modeling and numerical simulation have become standard techniques in the study and engineering of geothermal reservoirs. They are used to assess the generating capacity of geothermal fields, to design production and injection operations, and to assist in various reservoir management decisions. Geothermal reservoir simulators are widely available, can be run on inexpensive personal computers, and have been used in several hundred field studies worldwide. A recent review ( In the technical community there is an increasing trend towards “coupled process” simulations, where thermal and hydrologic aspects are considered in their interplay with geochemical or geomechanical processes. This can provide more realistic and better constrained reservoir models. At the same time, “conventional” flow simulation is becoming more sophisticated, in response to the increased demand for managing geothermal reservoirs in an environmentally friendly and sustainable manner. There is also growing interest in using reservoir simulation to extract geophysical information. The current trends in geothermal reservoir simulation were on display at the “TOUGH Symposium 2003,” which brought together users of the TOUGH family of codes at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) in Berkeley, California, for three days of information exchange in May 2003. The papers presented at that symposium covered a wide range of topics: in addition to geothermal reservoir engineering, they also included fracture flow and vadose zone hydrology, nuclear waste disposal, mining engineering, reactive chemical transport, environmental remediation, and gas transport. This Special Issue contains revised and expanded versions of selected geothermal papers presented at the symposium. Three papers address the simulation of specific geothermal fields. One of the longest producing geothermal fields is Wairakei, New Zealand, for which numerical simulation models have been developed since the 1970s. In a somewhat more generic vain, Two papers deal with applications of the TOUGHREACT code to chemically-coupled processes. Tracer tests have contributed much useful knowledge in different geothermal fields, and two papers are devoted to this topic. The final paper in this collection was written by an Italian–US collaboration led by Most papers assembled in this issue were completed in final form less than four months after their preliminary versions were first presented at the TOUGH Symposium. This guest editor would like to thank all authors and reviewers for being so responsive and supportive, making possible this publication. It is a pleasure to thank the editors for the opportunity to put this issue together. Last but not least I would like to acknowledge the support extended over many years by the U.S. Department of Energy to the advancement of geothermal technology. Without this support the TOUGH codes simply would not exist.