The effects of various physical parameters on the rupture of bubble films in two-phase foams were investigated in order to develop a better understanding of the behaviour of coarse particles in the froth phase of a novel flotation cell. This novel flotation technique is based on the fact that coarse particles, if they are selectively rendered hydrophobic by conditioning, would act as bubble film breakers. If the feed was introduced onto the surface of the froth, such particles would settle through the froth under gravity to be recovered as an underflow (concentrate) product, while the hydrophilic gangue would be supported by the bubble films and be recovered as a float (tailings) product.
                  The efficiency of this technique––reverse froth flotation––depends on the interaction between various characteristics of particles and the froth. In order to simulate the experimentally observed trends, and hence investigate the various mechanisms qualitatively, a fundamental model of these interactions was developed. Various particle properties were taken into account, including surface properties, shape, size and density. To account for the changing nature of the froth at different positions in the cell, the model predicts the trajectory of a particle over discrete time events. This was accomplished by calculating bubble flow streamlines and modelling the bubble size, thickness of bubble films, air hold-up and bubble velocity at any point on the streamline.The earliest possible recovery of valuable material from a mineral processing circuit could have numerous advantages, such as preventing over-grinding of minerals, reducing flotation time and increasing the recovery of valuable minerals. The decrease in size of the later stages of the circuit will moreover reduce the capital and working cost of the process, while the energy efficiency of the overall process will improve. It is well known that coarse particles are difficult to recover with conventional flotation techniques. Several modifications have been made to conventional flotation systems in an attempt to float coarse particles of coal (  The efficiency of the technique depends on the interrelation between various particle and froth characteristics. Decisive parameters of the particles in the feed include density, shape, surface characteristics (wettability and roughness) and size. The bubble size, residence time of the bubbles in the flotation cell, and rigidity and thickness of the bubble films, are important froth characteristics. In order to improve and optimise the process, a more fundamental understanding of the principles involved and interaction of parameters is required. The aim of this paper is to investigate the effects of various physical parameters on the rupture of bubble films in two-phase foams, in order to develop a better understanding of the behaviour of coarse particles in the froth phase of the novel flotation cell.   Particle characteristics such as size, shape, orientation and surface characteristics as well as froth characteristics such as thickness of bubble films, bubble size and residence time of bubbles in the cell, are incorporated. Due to the lack of published work on the field of particle support by bubble films, it is attempted to describe the behaviour of particles in terms of the  By calculating the Let If Then, define the shape factor, The equivalent diameter, Bubble flow streamlines will have to be calculated to predict the settling velocity of the particles accurately. At any position on a streamline the froth structure will have an influence on the particle recovery. The froth structure will therefore have to be modelled at any position in the cell, including factors such as bubble size, thickness of bubble films, residence time of the bubbles in the reverse froth flotation cell, air hold-up and bubble velocity. Apart from the above froth structure and particle properties, the dynamic interaction between the particle and the bubble films must also be taken into account. Once the film thickness in contact with the particle can be calculated, the interaction of the particle with the bubble films must be determined. In order to simplify the model, it is assumed that any one of three actions could take place: (1) The film thickness is greater than the particle size (typically near the pulp-froth interface). The particle will be immersed into the bubble films and no bubble film thinning and rupture would take place. The particle will therefore be transported by the bubble films, along a streamline, to the next discrete time event. (2) The bubble film thickness is less than a critical bubble film thickness, which will cause the bubble films to rupture upon contact with a particle. A force balance therefore needs to be conducted on the particle to determine whether the particle will fall through the froth to a lower position in the froth. Alternatively, the particle will be supported by surrounding liquid films and be carried along the relevant streamline to a new position in the froth. (3) The process of film thinning will take place. It is assumed that during the time of film thinning the particle will be carried along a streamline to a new position in the froth. Once the film breaks, however, a force balance needs to be conducted on the particle as in (2) above. In all three these actions, streamlines of the flow profile of the froth will have to be calculated in order to predict the direction and speed of particle travel in the froth. In summary, by combining all the above discrete events, the trajectory of any particle in the reverse flotation cell froth can be predicted. The aim of such a model is not to predict exactly the experimental observations, but rather to simulate the observed trends and hence be able to investigate variables in isolation, which is not always possible in experimental work. The development of the various sections of the dynamic model will be described below. The froth model is merely a tool to predict the trajectory of any particle in the froth over discrete time. By observing the flow of bubbles in the cell, it was found that the bubbles follow distinct flow patterns. The froth bed was subdivided into three areas in order to describe the flow of bubbles. These are depicted in As described above, the model predicting the profile of a particle in the novel flotation cell could have one of three “states”. The bubble film thickness could be greater than the particle size, the bubble film thickness could be less than a critical thickness or the action of bubble film thinning will take place. During all three these “states” the particle will be supported by the bubble films, or lamellae, and will be transported to a new position in the flotation cell over a discrete time period. In order to calculate the “new” particle position in the froth, the If Vel If it is assumed that air obeys the ideal gas law, and that the hydrostatic pressure decays linearly with height in the cell: The fractional air hold-up, The concentration of water at selected { The UCT bubble size analyser is incapable of measuring the bubble size distribution in the froth phase. However, to obtain an indication of the average bubble size in the froth phase of the flotation cell, the probe was positioned just beneath the liquid–froth interface. Since it is assumed that air obeys the ideal gas law, The fundamental model of a cellular foam as developed by The volume of a spherical bubble of diameter In the steady state the height of the froth is determined by the coalescence of the bubbles or by the physical dimensions of the flotation cell. The flow of liquid removed from the froth phase, The downflow of liquid By combining To predict the trajectory of a particle in the froth, the interaction of the particle with the bubble films at any froth position must now be determined. By “stepping through time” at discrete time events, the particle trajectory in the reverse froth flotation cell could then be predicted.  If the curvature of the interface (or meniscus formed at the particle/film contact point) is convex then the pressure at the contact point is higher than in the rest of the liquid film, resulting in liquid being pushed away from the contact point and subsequent film thinning. Conversely, if the curvature is concave, the low pressure zone will result in bubble film stabilisation.  To analyse the film breakage time, The position of the contact point of the liquid film with the surface of the particle is given by Due to the particle configuration (volumes of revolution), and the assumption of flat liquid films, the first principal radius of curvature ( In order to calculate the breakage time for particles of different shapes, The above integration method can be used to calculate the volumes ( In the case of particles which have a volume of revolution shape, the meniscus in contact with the particle will be rotationally symmetrical. Since the A simplified approach is used to solve this highly complex problem. The approach is based on the Young–Laplace equation, and calculates the volume of liquid removed from the particle bubble contact point, as well as the pressure drop causing the movement of liquid, by numerical integration (similar to the approach of Consider the complete Young–Laplace equation ( Similar to the approach of From Now, As shown in Therefore, by choosing the integration parameter, Once Only This section derives the force balance to which a particle of specific shape is subjected while being supported by the bubble films. The net force acting on any particle in a vertical plane is: Therefore, The drag coefficient on the particle, To calculate the net force interacting on a particle in the froth, the volume of the particle ( The net force acting on a particle suspended in the froth of the novel flotation cell can be calculated from A particle trapped in a bubble film just before it is about to break the bubble film and fall to a deeper level in the froth, is shown in From The computational procedure is used to calculate the trajectory of any particle in the froth phase of the reverse flotation cell. All the froth models and particle/film interaction models are incorporated in the computer program, which was written in Borland Pascal to carry out the calculations. The computational procedures include: (1) calculation of the bubble flow profile, (2) estimation of the air hold-up, (3) prediction of the bubble size, (4) calculation of the bubble film thickness, (5) selection of the particle shape, (6) calculation of the particle velocity components, (7) calculation of the particle velocity in froth area #1, (8) calculation of the particle velocity in froth area #2, (9) calculation of the particle velocity in froth area #3, (10) prediction of the particle trajectory, and (11) estimation of the film breakage time by particle. The volumetric flow rate of air through the spargers directly affects the velocity of the bubbles in the reverse froth flotation cell (see In Similarly, a classification of the same particle can occur if the air flow rate in sub-compartment B is manipulated. In In summary: Particles with identical properties will classify more to the tailings with an increase in air flow rate in sub-compartment A. A secondary classification can be obtained by manipulating the air flow rate through sub-compartment B. A rod/cylindrical particle of 3.38 mm long×2.08 mm diameter with a density of 3.5 and a contact angle of 96° was used in the simulations. The operating conditions (Y and Z) are shown in The effect of the bubble size at the liquid–froth interface under the operating condition Y is shown in The particle trajectories for operating condition Z, i.e. a liquid–froth interface height of 240 mm, are shown in The spread in particle trajectory with varying interface bubble size can be attributed to two main reasons: From From A novel flotation technique for the recovery of coarse, hydrophobic particles from hydrophilic gravel was developed. The technique is based on the fact that coarse particles, if they are selectively rendered hydrophobic by conditioning, would act as bubble film breakers if the feed is introduced onto the surface of the froth. Such particles would settle through the froth under gravity to be recovered as an underflow product, while the gangue would be supported by the bubble films and be recovered as a float product. The process differs from conventional reverse flotation in that the separation is effected in the froth phase only. The process is therefore called “reverse froth flotation”. The efficiency of the technique depends on the interaction between various particle and froth characteristics. In order to improve and optimise the process, a more fundamental understanding of the principles involved and interaction of parameters was required. Visual observations of the behaviour of particles in the froth phase of the cell have shown that the particles are positioned in the froth at a level where they are best supported by the bubbles. This suggested that there is an optimum froth condition, at a particular bubble size, for the flotation of a particle of a certain size, shape and surface characteristics. Therefore, to understand and interpret the factors that influence the dynamic behaviour of particles, a fundamental model of the various mechanisms in the froth was developed. The aim of the model was not to predict the experimental observations exactly, but rather to simulate the observed trends in a qualitative manner. Variables could therefore be investigated in isolation, which is not always possible in experimental work. Since the froth properties will be different at any position in the cell, the model predicts the trajectory of a particle over discrete time events. Various particle properties were taken into account, including surface properties, shape, size and density. To account for the change in nature of the froth, bubble flow streamlines were calculated. At any position on a streamline, the bubble size, thickness of bubble films, air hold-up and bubble velocity were modelled. The sensitivity analysis has shown that both the air flow rate and bubble size distribution could affect the trajectories of the particles significantly. The operating condition of the cell can either accentuate the spread, or reduce the effect. It was found that the dynamic model was capable of predicting the trends of ideal particle trajectories. In addition, it provided a unique understanding of the interrelationship between the various parameters which otherwise would not have been gained by alternative modelling methods. The financial support of De Beers Industrial Diamond Division, the former Foundation for Research Development in South Africa and the Australian Research Council is gratefully appreciated.