Nickel matte (Ni3S2) is the most common feedstock for producing nickel oxide and nickel metal in associated refineries. Nickel matte is produced from sulfide or laterite ores, and contains around 73 wt% nickel. This study investigated the dissolution parameters of nickel matte in dilute sulfuric acid media in the presence of air as oxidant with the goal of presenting a cost-effective process for leaching nickel matte. The dissolution experiments were carried out to examine the following effects: air flow rate, stirring speed, S/L ratio, acid concentration, reaction temperature, reaction time and the amount of ferrous sulfate added. Nickel extraction of 90% and cobalt extraction of 80% were achieved using dilute H2SO4 and sparging of air as a source of oxygen. To increase the dissolution percentage of the matte, ferrous sulfate addition was studied and the oxidation and reduction potential (ORP) was measured to investigate the effect of ferrous ions on nickel and cobalt recovery. The highest nickel dissolution percentage (95%) was observed with the initial addition of 1200 mg/L Fe (II). Characterization of samples has been carried out with quantitative X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy, along with an energy dispersive system (SEM-EDS).Approximately 65% of nickel is consumed in the production of stainless steel and special alloys. The remaining nickel is used in different applications, such as coatings, coinage, electronics and portable batteries. In the current industrial practice, nickel sulfide concentrates are smelted to high grade mattes, which are then converted into metal via various pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical and electrometallurgical processes ( Roasting using pure oxygen ( Direct electrolysis ( Ammonia pressure leaching ( Chloride leaching ( Sulfuric acid leaching using air or oxygen at elevated or ambient pressure ( Refined nickel is recovered as nickel oxide or as a metal powder or cathode using electrolysis/hydrogen reduction as the last step of the above processes. Roasting nickel matte in order to produce nickel oxide is a process, which is generally used by companies based in Asia. This process is applied in a number of plants such as Inco TNC Limited Matsuzaka Plant in Japan. A reduction process should be added after oxidation in order to obtain melting–grade product which contains either 95 wt% or 97 wt% nickel ( Electrolytic nickel is produced via direct electrolytic refining of matte ( Hydrometallurgical refining processes have been applied for the treatment of intermediate nickel bearing materials, such as anode nickel, nickel‑copper mattes, or reduced laterite ore ( The Sherritt ammonia pressure leach process is notable for direct treatment of nickel sulphide concentrates without prior smelting. The ammonia-ammonium sulphate pressure leach process was originally developed for the recovery of nickel from sulphide concentrates and was commercialized by Sherritt Gordon in the early 1950's ( Chloride leaching is another refining process for extracting nickel. Hydrochloric acid which is a common lixiviant in nickel hydrometallurgy, has been used in several lab-scale studies and commercial plants ( Sulfuric acid has also been used as a lixiviant for nickel and cobalt extraction. The leaching process using sulfuric acid may be divided into two process regimes: pressure leaching ( The NiS can undergo further oxidation to produce elemental sulfur according to the reaction below ( The acid leaching process in the absence of oxidants is described by Eq. To decompose Ni The reaction above results in the formation of a sulfur rich phase on the nickel sulphide surface. An initial fast leaching rate occurs because the inactive sulfur rich layer is thin. Once this layer reaches its steady state thickness, the leaching rate becomes constant. Oxidants are expected to enhance the oxidation rate, resulting in a faster direct oxidation and a thicker inert layer ( The leaching of nickel matte may be conducted with the ferric ion as an oxidant. Ferrous ion is continuously formed according to the reaction below (Eq. High content copper mattes are treated by both atmospheric and pressure sulfuric acid leaching and also by hydrochloric acid leaching. Occasionally, two-stage pressure leaching is used to treat non-magnetic nickel-copper mattes from which the magnetic metallic fraction containing most of the precious metals has been removed. The pressure leaching process is generally preferred for treating nickel-copper mattes. This process is similar to the Sherritt process, which uses autoclave technology between 135 °C and 160 °C ( Cobalt is generally recovered as a byproduct of hydrometallurgical refining of nickel and as a co-product of copper. Cobalt is commonly recovered during the hydrometallurgical treatment of nickel mattes and laterite ores as an impure precipitate that is heavily contaminated with nickel. Cobalt is precipitated as a mixed cobalt-nickel sulphide from ammoniacal leach solutions and either as mixed cobalt-nickel(II) hydroxides, or as mixed basic carbonates from acid-sulphate leach solutions ( The main objectives of this work are to develop an applicable, straightforward and inexpensive process to achieve high levels of nickel and cobalt extraction under ambient atmospheric condition. Employing air rather than costly oxidants ensures lower cost. It will also lead to purer nickel compounds and reduced environmental impacts compared with the use of other oxidants such as dichromate. The effect of various experimental parameters on the dissolution of nickel was examined to obtain the optimum conditions for the leaching process. The oxidation and reduction potential (ORP) was measured to understand the effect of ferrous sulfate addition and its catalytic role. Characterization of solid samples from leach tests was performed via quantitative X-Ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy, with an energy dispersive system (SEM-EDS), which improved our understanding of the leaching mechanism. Commercial grade nickel matte (Ni The as-received granulated matte sample comprises of particles of different sizes, as shown in All experiments were conducted by immersing the leach reactor in a water bath for constant temperature conditions. Temperature was measured using a hand-held digital thermometer. A 1 L three-neck round bottom glass flask was used as a leaching reactor. An air inlet tube, outlet tube and sample collection tube were inserted into the flask. Air was continuously fed into the reactor via a plastic pipe from a compressed gas cylinder. The water bath and solution in the reactor was heated and stirred using a hot plate and a magnetic stirrer. Analytical grade sulfuric acid was used (BDH, 98%, ACS grade). The pH of the leach slurry was measured throughout the experiment. The ORP of the slurry was recorded using a combination electrode with reference to a saturated Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The ORP values are reported against the Ag/AgCl reference scale (0.21 V versus SHE at 25 °C), unless otherwise stated. The experimental conditions are given in For each experiment, 5 g of the nickel matte sample was used (except for one experimental series) to study the effects of air flow rate (LPM), stirring speed, L/S ratio (mL/g), and leaching temperature on the nickel extraction rate. A small sample (0.5 mL) of solution was taken at different time intervals to analyze the nickel concentration in the solution for the calculation of extraction. The slurry samples were filtered using a Whatman filter paper (grade 1), dried at 60 °C in an oven and weighed. The residues were characterized via XRD and SEM-EDS to investigate the unreacted phases. The concentrations of nickel were determined by complexometric titration (EDTA, Sigma Aldrich, Ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid disodium salt dihydrate reagent grade, 98.5–101.5%) using murexide as the indicator. At the end of the leaching experiment, nickel sulfate solution was separated from the leach residue by filtration. For the purpose of increasing the concentration, nickel hydroxide was first precipitated from the solution using sodium hydroxide and then treated with sulfuric acid solution to obtain concentrated nickel sulfate solution. Nickel sulfate crystals were subsequently precipitated by the addition of ethanol. For the precipitation experiments, 25 mL of nickel sulfate solution were placed in a beaker, and variable amounts of analytical grade ethanol were added and agitated at 500 rpm with a magnetic stirrer for 30 min at room temperature. The solution mixtures were subsequently centrifuged to separate nickel sulfate crystals. In order to calculate nickel precipitation percentage by this method, the nickel content of the centrifuged solution was then measured. The chemical composition is presented in According to As shown in As shown in  An extraction of 52% for nickel and 49% for cobalt was observed with 0.125 M H The effect of temperature on the solubility of oxygen in sulfuric acid aqueous solutions was explained by Kaskiala ( The leaching conditions were selected based on the results of the experiments presented in the previous sections. As seen in Generally, the leaching of the matte was found to be slower beyond 12 h, although 90% nickel and 80% cobalt recoveries were achieved after 36 h at 60 °C (see To understand possible dissolution mechanisms of the nickel matte and identify the un-dissolved phases after leaching, the matte and the residues were examined using XRD and SEM-EDS. The results of these analyses are presented in According to the EDS results provided in The EDS analysis (see The oxidation and reduction potential (ORP) profiles of the solution are shown in Ferric ions are continuously reduced to ferrous ions during the dissolution process ( After obtaining nickel sulfate solution from the matte, nickel hydroxide was precipitated using sodium hydroxide. Subsequently it was treated with concentrated sulfuric acid (98%) to obtain concentrated nickel sulfate which was then selectively precipitated using ethanol. These experiments were carried out to show the crystallization of nickel sulphate from acidic media using ethanol (see in The effects of air flow rate, stirring speed, L/S ratio, acid concentration, reaction temperature, reaction time and addition of ferrous sulfate on nickel matte dissolution were investigated. The experimental results revealed that nickel could be effectively dissolved in a sulfuric acid and air leaching system. The leachability of nickel matte in sulfuric acid is shown to be dependent on both temperature and time. The increase in H Further work is recommended to increase the percentage of nickel and cobalt leaching using better agitation design which may scour the sulfur product layer and enhance the kinetics of leaching. Also, ethanol precipitation tests should be investigated to further study for producing nickel sulfate hexahydrate (NiSO The financial support provided by the