Stage efficiency of a pilot plant Hanson mixer-settler extraction column with seven stages was measured by using toluene-acetone-water system. The experiments were carried out for both mass transfer directions. The effects of agitation speed, flow ratio, total throughput and solute concentration on stage efficiency were investigated and found to be significant. The comparison of investigated column with some other type of extractors showed that the stage efficiency of this column is high, while its throughput is small. Finally an empirical correlation was proposed for prediction of stage efficiency and very good agreement between experimental data and calculated values was obtained.A mixer-settler extraction column (vertical mixer-settler) has the advantages of the horizontal mixer-settlers with high stage efficiency and low interstage mixing, while requiring a small ground area and no additional pipes and pumps In this paper, the stage efficiency of Hanson mixer-settler extraction column is measured for both mass transfer directions. The effects of agitation speed, total throughput, flow ratio of the dispersed phase to continuous phase and solute concentration on the stage efficiency are investigated and an empirical correlation is proposed for prediction of stage efficiency. A pilot plant Hanson mixer-settler extraction column is used in these experiments. Two sides of column are made of stainless steel and the other sides are made of Plexiglas. The column consists of seven stages with 12 In each stage, the light and heavy phases are mixed in the mixing zone for providing initial contact, after that the unstable emulsion is transferred to a settler zone through the port ‘A’. This port is located in the middle of a dividing wall and in front of it a vertical plate ‘B’ is placed to decrease the effect of centrifugal rotation in the settler so that the drop coalescence is improved. In the settler zone, the phases are separated, so the heavy phase is led to the previous stage mixer through a weir ‘C’ and the light phase is led to the next stage mixer through a port ‘D’. The column geometry is listed in The liquid system that studied was toluene-acetone-water as recommended by the E.F.C.E. The system was allowed to reach steady state, which necessitated three changes of column volume. The interface of two phases was kept fixed by using an optical sensor. The samples were collected at the inlet and outlet of the first, forth and seventh stages and they were analyzed by GC. The photographs of the droplets were taken during steady state conditions and used to determine Sauter mean droplet size. The holdup of dispersed phase was measured by rapid withdrawal of 100 The performance of a separation device with well-defined stages can be expressed in terms of stage efficiency. The stage efficiency For the investigated mixer-settler column, the stage efficiency is strongly dependent on the agitation speed. Also, it was found that mass transfer direction has a significant effect on stage efficiency. As it can be seen in The effect of throughput on stage efficiency is given in The effect of flow ratio on stage efficiency is given in The effect of solute concentration on stage efficiency is given in A comparison of the separation performance of the present mixer-settler column with some other type of extractors is shown in This plot is of value in providing a rapid comparison of the relative areas of application of the various extractor types, despite being based on data for single system, viz. toluene-acetone-water at a phase ratio of 1.5. As it is shown in this plot, the present mixer-settler column reached values of between 3.65 and 6.4 The experimental data of stage efficiency are correlated in terms of dimensionless numbers The average absolute value of the relative error, AARE, is used to compare the predicted results with experimental data. This is defined as follows: The stage efficiency of the investigated mixer-settler extraction column increased with agitation speed and reached a maximum, but after having reached to its maximum, it decreased with further increase in agitation speed, because axial mixing became significant for high agitation speed. It was observed that the stage efficiency varied little with total throughput for mass transfer direction  cross section area of the mixer ( Sauter mean drop diameter ( impeller diameter ( stage efficiency based on organic phase concentration (–) Froude number ( acceleration due to gravity (m/s distribution ratio (–) rotor speed ( flow rate (m Reynolds number ( slip velocity (m/s) mass fraction of acetone in continuous phase (–) mass fraction of acetone in dispersed phase (–) equilibrium mass fraction of acetone in dispersed phase corresponding to continuous phase (–) viscosity (Pa density (kg/m holdup of dispersed phase (–) continuous phase dispersed phase equilibrium value