Phosphate rocks such as fluorapatite often contain significant amounts of rare earth minerals and considered as rare earth ores. They can be processed to produce phosphoric acid as well as rare earth metals. The mineralization, however, is commonly associated with other rare earth minerals such as monazite ((Ce,La,Th,Nd,Y)PO4), florencite ((La,Ce)Al3(PO4)2(OH)6), xenotime (YPO4) and cheralite ((Ca,Ce)(Th,Ce)(PO4)2). The treatment of fluorapatite for rare earth extraction commonly requires a pre-leach stage with a mineral acid. Calcium, sodium, magnesium, aluminium, potassium, iron, manganese and a range of other metals including uranium and thorium may enter the solution depending upon the oxide/phosphate/silicate mineralogy. Further processing may involve partial neutralisation to precipitate any rare earth metals which may have solubilised during pre-leach, acid bake of the residue or precipitate with sulphuric acid, water leach followed by purification and precipitation. This paper describes results from a comparative study conducted on pre-leaching a phosphate rare earth concentrate using perchloric, hydrochloric, nitric and phosphoric acids under various leach conditions including different acid concentrations, temperatures and solid/liquid ratios. Through equilibrium constants and kinetic data including measured leachability of relevant metal ions, the study suggests an alternative process route which involves a selective phosphoric acid pre-leach causing low deportment of rare earth elements, uranium and thorium leading to a potentially more efficient downstream process.The rare earth elements (REEs) are a unique group of metals regarded as being among the most critical elements that are highly valued for their specialised applications in many modern technologies. In recent years, REEs have become a significant topic of interest in the metals industry due to a global supply shortage and strengthening demand ( Any rare earth metal ions leached with hydrochloric acid can be precipitated by the addition of limestone to produce a pre-leach residue and precipitate, rich in phosphate and REEs. The pre-leach liquor could then be passed onto a number of stage-wise precipitation processes where limestone and lime are added to recover the uranium, fluoride, gypsum (CaSO For this reason, a better understanding of solubilities of rare earth metal ions and controlling the deportment of elements such as uranium, thorium, iron and aluminium are particularly important. Recent studies have focussed on a systematic study on (i) the solubility of rare earth metal ions in different acids and liquors of compositions similar to those of process liquors, (ii) leachability of metal ions from fluorapatite as well as from a rare-earth phosphate concentrate and (iii) the treatment of the pre-leach liquor to precipitate calcium phosphate as a saleable product ( This work aims to briefly review the previous studies and compare the leaching of fluorapatite in different acids (perchloric, hydrochloric, nitric and phosphoric acids) at comparable conditions using two natural fluorapatite samples and a rare earth bearing fluorapatite concentrate. The reason for using perchloric acid for comparison was to specifically compare the effect of anions. The study also aims to investigate the effect of phosphoric acid concentration, temperature and pulp density on the leaching of fluorapatite and the concentrate. Arguably the most common use of apatite is in the production of fertilisers and phosphoric acid due to the high content of phosphorus ( The solubility of rare earth phosphates in phosphoric acid, which is also produced in Reactions 2 and 3 in Test work into the acid pre-leach stage of a rare earth phosphate concentrate using nitric acid and hydrochloric acid has been conducted previously by  The lack of comparability of conditions in Investigate the leachability of fluorapatite and a phosphate concentrate using perchloric, hydrochloric, nitric and phosphoric acids under comparable conditions (i.e. controlled temperature, acid concentration, pulp density, agitation rate and leach duration). Investigate the use of phosphoric acid as a potential lixiviant for leaching fluorapatite by examining the effect of changing acid concentration, pulp density, operating temperature and leach duration. Examine the deportment of rare earth elements, as well as other key elements such as uranium, thorium, iron and aluminium in both leach liquor and solid residue. Explain the trends using equilibria related to solubility and complex formation. The particle size distribution (PSD) for the concentrate was determined using a Microtrac S3500 laser sizing machine. After obtaining the 80% passing size (P High purity millipore water was used throughout all experiments, to reduce the potential for contaminants affecting the results of the leach studies. All acids used in the experiments were analytical grade. The reactor used in all leaching experiments contained three baffles evenly spaced around the inside of the vessel. The lid of the vessel housed the overhead agitator (3 blades) and drive motor. A digital tachometer was used to measure rotation speed of the agitator maintained at 1100  The assays of the leach residues of the phosphate concentrate obtained in different acids are listed in The leach duration for tests FAP1 and FAP2 using H A summary of the results from the leaching experiments of the concentrate using HClO  As shown in  The results in  A summary of the results from the experiments at different pulp densities is shown in As noted in A comparative study on the acid pre-leach of fluorapatite and a rare earth phosphate concentrate was conducted to investigate the leachability of the fluorapatite component using HClO