The water activities of sodium molybdate in aqueous solutions at T = (303.15, 313.15, 323.15 and 333.15) K were determined, using vapor pressure osmometry. The range of salt concentration was from 0.06 to 2.2 mol kg−1. The results show that sodium molybdate has a significant effect on the water activity. Values of the vapor pressure, osmotic and activity coefficient of the solutions were determined from the activity data. Finally, the studied system was modeled with the Pitzer model which allowed correlating the properties of these aqueous solutions obtaining a good agreement between the experimental data and the correlated values.Chile is one of the largest world producers of copper and molybdenum concentrates. In the production of these concentrates, the molybdenum is one of the most important products. Molybdenum is one of the rare metals with high-melting point, which is used extensively in many industries, such as agrochemical, steel, general electronic and nuclear. The common use of this metal is due to its essential characteristics, such as its ability to resist extreme temperatures without significantly softening or expanding, its high degree of weld ability, its ability to significantly resist corrosion and its low density [ Thermodynamic property data of aqueous electrolyte systems are useful in varied fields such as hydrometallurgy, geochemistry, oceanography, chemical engineering, etc. The thermodynamic properties such as water activities, osmotic and activity coefficients of sodium molybdate were scarcely reported. Robinson and Sinclair [ Ning et al. [ In the present work, water activities of sodium molybdate in aqueous solutions at Sodium molybdate dihydrate and sodium chloride with purities of >0.995 were purchased from Merck and used without further purification. Deionized water was used in all experiments (Milli-Q, Millipore, The water activities for the binary system were determined using a KNAUER K-7000 vapor pressure osmometer with temperature control of ±0.001 K at T = (303.15, 313.15, 323.15 and 333.15). With the help of a microsyring, droplets of pure solvent were applied to the thermistors. After the baseline was stable, the reading was adjusted to zero. The measurements were made by replacement of one drop of pure solvent with one drop of the solution. Consequently, it leads to a difference in vapor pressure between the two drops. With the increase of vapor pressure of the solution droplet, the temperature increases and the temperature difference (ΔT) between the thermistors is achieved. This increase is measured as a difference in their resistance (ΔR), because the thermistors are part of a Wheatstone bridge. The same size and shape of the drop attached to both thermistors should be maintained. A minimum of five readings were carried out for each solution and the mean value was calculated. The equipment was calibrated using aqueous NaCl solutions of known osmolality with water as reference, for which the osmotic coefficient data were taken from literature [ The experimental water activities of the Na The water activity is related to the total osmolality of the aqueous multicomponent solution by Refs. [ The vapor pressure can be calculated based on the experimental data of activity: The vapor pressures values of pure water 4.241, 7.375, 12.34 and 19.92 kPa at T = (303.15, 313.15, 323.15 and 333.15) K were used, respectively [    First, considering the experimental uncertainty of the water activity measurements, which is around 0.0004, the water activity values below 1 mol kg Secondly, Rard [ On the other hand, The difference between the reported data by Wu et al. [ As can be seen, the high solubility of the sodium molybdate is reflected in the water activities, i.e. the water activity decreases as salt concentration increases.  For single electrolytes, the equations for the excess Gibbs energy, The dependency of For each electrolyte the two parameters The Pitzer model [ The calculated Pitzer parameters as temperature function are shown in The obtained average absolute deviation (AAD) shows that the Pitzer model correlates satisfactorily the experimental data. Moreover, Osmotic and activity coefficients and excess Gibbs free energy are reported in   With the intention of analyzing the non-ideality of studied aqueous solution, water activities of ideal solutions for the Na Activity coefficients can be greater than one (positive deviations from ideality) or between zero and one (negative deviations from ideality). In this case, the Na Ning et al. [  On the other hand, for the sodium molybdate solutions, the concentration dependence of the These results also show that long-range forces are important at low concentrations, while short-range forces become more important as the salt concentration increases. Simoes et al. [   Water activities and vapor pressures of the binary Na A good agreement between experimental data and the correlated values with the Pitzer model at different temperatures was observed. The obtained values of the Pitzer parameters indicate that it is likely that ion/pairs complexes are formed and that the long-range forces are important at low concentrations and that the short-range forces become more important at high salt concentrations. The authors thank  Debye-Hückel coefficient for the osmotic function water activity second virial coefficient of water vapor constant of Pitzer model excess Gibbs energy ionic strength solubility product molar mass of water molality mol number of solvent adjustment parameters vapor pressure of pure water vapor pressure universal gas constant temperature molar volume of liquid water number of ions produced on dissociation of stoichiometric number of M ion in dissociation stoichiometric number of X ion in dissociation charge of M ion in dissociation charge of X ion in dissociation  constant of Pitzer model solute-specific interaction parameters of Pitzer equation osmotic coefficient activity coefficient  calculated value experimental value number of experimental data points