Polyelectrolyte-protected gold nanoparticles have been facilely obtained by heating an amine-containing polyelectrolyte/HAuCl4 aqueous solution without the additional step of introducing other reducing agents. All experimental data indicate that different initial molar ratio of polyelectrolyte to gold can lead to the formation of dispersed nanoparticles, quasi one-dimensional aggregates of nanoparticles or bulk metal deposits. More importantly, the growth kinetics of gold particles thus formed can be tuned by changing the initial molar ratio of polyelectrolyte to gold.Nanoscale particles of noble metals hold promise for use as advanced materials with novel electronic, optical and thermal properties as well as catalytic properties due to their potential applications in the fields of physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, material science and their different interdisciplinary fields In recent years, the use of polyelectrolytes as building blocks for the creation of multilayer thin films has undergone rapid expansion because of the simplicity and wide variability of this method and the film thickness-controllable capability To our knowledge, polyelectrolyte has never been used as reducing agent for the preparation of gold nanoparticles. We present herein that linear polyethylenimine (LPEI) shown in LPEI (molecular weight: 423) and HAuCl TEM measurements were made on a JEOL 2010 transmission electron microscopy operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Samples for TEM characterization were prepared by place a drop of gold colloidal sample on carbon coated copper grid and dried at room temperature. UV–vis spectra of the seven samples 1–7 and another two samples for in situ experiments were performed on a CARY 500 Scan UV–vis-near infrared (UV–vis-NIR) spectrophotometer. Seven samples 1–7 with corresponding initial molar ratio 2:1, 3:1, 3.5:1, 5:1, 6.5:1, 8:1 and 9.5:1 of LPEI (repeating unit) to gold were prepared to examine the influence of initial molar ratio on as-prepared nanoscale gold. Photograph of samples 1–7 is shown in  The UV–vis absorption spectra of the freshly prepared seven samples are shown in To gain further insight into the influence of the initial molar ratio on the growth kinetics of as-prepared gold particles, another two in situ UV–vis absorption experiments were performed at constant temperature 60 °C with the time interval of 60 s. We have presented a thermal process for the one-step synthesis of polyelectrolyte-protected gold nanoparticles or quasi one-dimensional aggregates of nanoparticles by changing initial molar ratio of polyelectrolyte (repeating unit) to gold, with the use of polyelectrolyte to serve as reducing agent and protective agent. More importantly, gold nanoparticles thus formed are highly useful, for example, in variety of catalytic applications We thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support of this research (NO. 299750258 and 20075028). X. Sun appreciates support for this work from the Department of Chemistry, Xihua Normal College in changchun.