The surface complexation model as previously applied to the sorption of ions onto charge-bearing surfaces has been applied to the simultaneous sorption of heavy metal salts and strong acids onto sorbents prepared from aminated chitosan. From the uptake of metals and acids in simple systems generalized separation factors can be calculated from describing the sorption of anions and cations. Plotting these separation factors vs. the dimensionless loadings of the solid phase with metal salts and with strong acid yields two sets of equilibrium constants describing the sorption. The important feature of the theoretical approach is that these constants remain unchanged in multicomponent systems. Therefore, the prediction of multicomponent equilibria is possible. The method has been demonstrated for systems with copper, nickel, and nitric acid as an example. Evaluation of results reveals a satisfactory agreement between experimental data and predicted equilibria of the ternary system.The metal ion binding in biosorption involves different phenomena, such as complexation, coordination, electrostatic attraction, micro-precipitation, and ion exchange. Results from investigations of metal sorption on biosorbents have been presented by a large number of authors. The respective sorption equilibria are usually described by means the well-known Langmuir or Freundlich relationships (e.g., The chitosan-based exchanger used in this study contains a reactive amine group and is therefore a weakly basic anion exchanger. In general, weakly basic anion exchangers are applied to the removal of strong acids In the investigations presented here, the competitive uptake of acid and metal salts in binary and ternary systems by a chitosan-based ion exchanger and the prediction of multicomponent equilibria has been investigated using copper and nickel nitrates and nitric acid as an example. Nitric acid and metal nitrates were considered because there are no metal complex species that complicate both the experiments and the mathematical derivation. The surface complexation theory as presented in several earlier publications has been applied for the evaluation of experimental results and prediction of usual and amphoteric ion exchange equilibria For the derivation of the mathematical description, a binary system consisting of a mixture of metal nitrate (M(NO For the sorption of strong acid HNO For the sorption of metal nitrate (M(NO Here By these means, two relationships for the uptake of acid and metal salts can be derived: In these equations For these simpler equations, the quantities In order to predict the equilibrium of the competitive sorption of metal nitrate and nitric acid, four constants ( For a ternary system, nitrates of two metals M In these equations, all the Finally, the value of the parameter Prediction of binary and multicomponent systems requires the (numerical) solution of systems of coupled nonlinear equations including the conditions of electroneutrality in the liquid and adsorbent phases, mass balances for each species, and the relationships The sorbent applied in this study consisted of beads of aminated chitosan. Chitosan is a biosorbent produced from fishery waste. For the synthesis of the exchanger beads, commercially available chitosan (85% of deacetylation degree) from Sigma-Aldrich (USA) was used. A solution was prepared by dissolving chitosan flakes into an acetic acid solution. This solution was dropped into NaOH, which neutralizes the acetic acid within the chitosan gel and thereby coagulates the chitosan gel to uniform spherical gel beads. These beads were crosslinked with glutaraldehyde. The resulting material was aminated in two steps by means of chloroacetic acid to introduce carboxyl groups and by treatment with ethylenediamine and carbodiimide. Details of the synthesis of the exchangers are given in literature The final product contains amino groups with two different types of coordination sites. The concentrations of amino groups were measured by means of the uptake of HCl and amounted to 8.02 meq/g. The p For the determination of equilibria, a series of samples with an increasing amount of biosorbent (0.5–2.0 g) were contacted and equilibrated with 200 mL of mixtures of HNO The development of the logarithm of the generalized separation factors in the systems with only one heavy metal are plotted in   To confirm the feasibility of this model, the equilibrium of a ternary system with two metal nitrate (Cu(NO The model again reflects the affinity of the sorbent for the acid and for the two metal species. Because of the strong preference, the amount of copper ions adsorbed is almost the same as in the binary system. For the less preferred nickel ions, however, the loading is smaller than in the binary case. Thus, the effect of nickel ions on the uptake of copper ions is small, whereas the influence of copper on the uptake of nickel is considerably greater. This phenomenon coincides well with data of other systems with competitive adsorption The surface complexation model has been applied to the prediction of the sorption of heavy metal salts onto an aminated chitosan biosorbent. To account for the influence of pH the equilibrium is described as the competitive sorption of metal salts and the free acid. Equilibrium parameters have been deduced from binary metal/acid systems. By means of these parameters, binary and ternary equilibria have been predicted. Comparison demonstrates a good agreement with experimental results. Copper and nickel nitrates have been selected for this study to facilitate both the experimental investigations and the mathematical predictions. By means of suitable data for the sorption of other metal salts, predictions are possible, at least for systems with nitric acid. Systems including sulfuric acid still need some further research because some metal sulfates like CuSO This study was supported by a research fund provided by the Karlsruhe Research Center, Germany.