Recent impetus on utilization of different types of nanomaterials for modification of asphalt binders has motivated the authors to undertake the present study. The present study evaluated the rutting, fatigue and moisture damage performance of nanoclay (CL-30B) modified asphalt binder based on newly adopted test methods. Based on Superpave rutting parameter, it was observed that rutting resistivity of a binder increases with an increase in CL-30B content. Moisture resistivity of CL-30B modified asphalt binder with different types of aggregates system was studied using Surface Free Energy (SFE) approach. The SFE components of nanoclay modified binder were measured using Wilhelmy plate method. Four different types of aggregates (Basalt, Limestone, Sandstone and Granite) were chosen for the study. Overall increase in total SFE of the binder was observed with addition of CL-30B. Increase in work of cohesion and decrease in work of debonding was observed with an increase in CL-30B for all type of considered aggregate. Based on Energy ratio (ER), asphalt binder with basaltic aggregate was found to have better moisture damage resistivity among different types of aggregate selected in this study. The fatigue performance of CL-30B modified binder was evaluated using Linear Amplitude Sweep (LAS) test which is based on Visco Elastic Continuum Damage (VECD) theory. The analyses of the data showed that addition of CL-30B enhances fatigue life of a binder. The study showed potential of CL-30B to enhance various rheological performance of a binder for better and long lasting pavements.There has been increasing interest in highway community on improving quality of asphalt binders to enhance design life of flexible pavements. Though polymer modified binders have been immensely popular, the high cost and thermal instability of these binders encouraged researchers to explore new materials to improve performance of binders. Recent impetus on utilization of different types of nanomaterials namely, nanoclay, nanosilica, nanozinc oxide, and nanolime for modification of asphalt binders has motivated the authors to undertake the present study Similarly, effect of nanoclay on fatigue performance of asphalt binders is evaluated by some researchers using different approaches. For instance, fatigue life of asphalt binder containing nanoclay was evaluated by Liu et al. Recently, Golestani et al. Considering limited work reported on characterization of nanomaterials modified binders, the present study focuses on evaluation of rutting, fatigue and moisture damage potential of nanoclay modified asphalt binder using some recently developed advanced test methods and approaches. It is expected that present study would help in developing better understanding on characterization of nanoclay modified asphalt binders. The specific objectives of the present research study are to: Evaluate rutting behaviour of nanoclay modified asphalt binders using Superpave rutting factor. Evaluate effects of nanoclay on moisture susceptibility of asphalt binder and aggregate system using SFE approach. Assess fatigue performance of asphalt binders with and without nanoclay using LAS test. The SFE is defined as the magnitude of energy required to increase the unit surface area under vacuum condition Using acid-base theory, work of adhesion (ΔW A higher value of work of adhesion indicates that higher energy will be required to create unit area of new surface in dry condition. Likewise, in wet condition, water tries to displace asphalt from aggregate surface, and creates two new interfaces (i.e., water - aggregate and asphalt-water), resulting in release of energy. Based upon the concept of interfacial energy, external work required for displacing binder from aggregate-binder interface is “−λ Considering work of adhesion and work of debonding, Little et al. The LAS test uses VECD theory in order to quantify the damage to asphalt binder due to repeated application of load. The major advantage of this test is that by conducting a single test, it is possible to predict the binder behaviour under varying strain level. The VECD theory has been extensively used by numerous researchers in order to study the damage analysis to binder and asphalt mixes Finally, fatigue equation can be expressed as given by Eq. AC-10 grade asphalt binder was obtained from a known source for the present research study. AC-10 is a softer grade of asphalt binder which is used for preparation of different modified binder. Basic properties of AC-10 are presented in  The CL-30B was mixed with virgin binder (AC-10) using a high shear mixer. Mixing of different doses of CL-30B (2, 4 and 6% by weight of asphalt binder) with virgin binder was carried out at 155 Degree of dispersion of CL-30B in binder was evaluated using the XRD technique by measuring the change in basal spacing (spacing corresponding to similar face of adjacent layer) based upon Bragg’s law (Eq. Rutting resistivity of CL-30B modified asphalt binder was examined using Superpave rutting parameter (G The SFE components of asphalt binders with and without CL-30 modified binders were measured using Wilhelmy Plate method as per NCHRP: 104 The LAS test was conducted on PAV aged CL-30B modified asphalt binders using DSR on sample having 8  Though bulk of rutting resistance of asphalt mixes comes from the structure of the aggregate skeleton, selection of an appropriate binder also play an important role for production of stronger, stable and rut resistant mix. Variation of rutting factor on short term aged sample for different binder combinations is shown in The contact angle can be considered as the inverse measurement of wettability. Contact angle value below 90° represents higher wettability, whereas contact angle above 90° corresponds to lower wettability Variation of different SFE components (acidic, basic and Liftshitz-van der Waals component) as well as total SFE value with different CL-30B content is shown in The ratio of acidic to basic component of SFE for asphalt binder may play an important role in deciding the bond of adhesion between asphalt and aggregate surface. With increase in acid to base energy ratio of asphalt binder, the bond of adhesion between acidic aggregate such as sandstone and granite may decrease and hence they may be susceptible to moisture damage Four different kind of aggregate types (basalt, limestone, granite and sandstone) were selected in the present study in order to capture the wide range of surface charge ranging from acidic to basic in nature. Different SFE component of aggregates selected in this study has been adopted from previously published literature (Bhasin et al. A higher value of ΔW A higher magnitude of ΔW Based on the ΔW  Finally, it can be observed that moisture susceptibility was in very poor [D] category without addition of CL-30B (except basalt which falls in poor [C] category) which improved their category to the next class with addition of CL-30B in all the cases. Overall, it can be concluded that, in the case of CL-30B modified asphaltic mixture with aggregate of basaltic origin will have best performance against moisture damage among all considered cases.   In this study, an attempt has been made to check whether the addition of CL-30B has influences on Linear Visco-Elastic (LVE) limit of asphalt binder or not. This present study examines rutting, moisture damage and fatigue performance of CL-30B modified asphalt binder. Superpave rutting parameter was used for investigating the rutting performance while the SFE approach and the LAS test were selected for evaluating moisture damage and fatigue performance respectively. The following conclusions can be drawn from the results and discussion presented above: Improvement in rutting performance of asphalt binder was observed with addition of CL-30B. The PG grade of the control binder increases by 1 PG and 2 PG with addition of 4% and 6% of CL-30B; however, no PG grade change was noticed for 2% CL-30B modified binder. The SFE component measured from Wilhelmy plate method shows that acidic component of asphalt binder increases, while basic and Vander wall components decrease with addition of CL-30B. The total SFE of asphalt binder increases with an increase in CL-30B content. Work of adhesion increases with addition of CL-30B, indicating CL-30B helps in improving aggregate-asphalt binder bond in dry condition. The highest value of work of adhesion was observed for sandstone aggregate followed by granite, limestone and basalt aggregates. Work of debonding decreases with an increase in CL-30B content irrespective of aggregate type considered which is desirable for improvement in moisture damage resistivity. Lowest value of work of debonding was observed for basaltic aggregate. Increase in ER value was observed with addition of CL-30B to asphalt binder irrespective of type of aggregate considered. Based on ER value, it may be concluded that addition of CL-30B to asphalt binder may result in a moisture resistant mix. The ER value of basaltic aggregates was found to be in the highest followed by limestone, sandstone and lowest for granite type of aggregate. This shows basalt aggregates may have a better moisture resistant among all the consider aggregates types followed by limestone, sandstone and lowest for granite type. Based on the LAS test, it was found that number of load cycle to failure increases with an increase in CL-30B content. Results show improvement in fatigue life of asphalt binder with addition of CL-30B. However, this inference cannot be generalized and needs further detailed investigations in this direction for reaching at appropriate conclusion in this regard. The LVE range of asphalt binder decreases with addition of CL-30B, indicating a stiffer binder with addition of nanoclay. It is expected the data generated in the present study would be helpful to understand behaviour of nanoclay modified asphalt binders. The current study presents conclusions based on the limited laboratory investigations conducted on nanoclay modified asphalt binder. The behaviour of nanoclay modified asphalt binder may change with type, source and chemical composition of control binder used, thus a future study needs to be conducted in this direction. In addition, rutting resistance of nanoclay modified mixes should be evaluated in the laboratory. The moisture sensitive in the present research study has been investigated using SFE components of asphalt binder and aggregates, however, an appropriate laboratory study should be further conducted on asphalt mixes to validate the result obtained through this approach. Further, LAS test in the present study indicated increase in fatigue life, although stiffness of binder increases with addition of nanoclay, thus it is recommended that a future study be conducted to evaluate fatigue life of asphalt mixes modified with nanoclay to reach at appropriate conclusion regarding fatigue life. The authors would like to acknowledge Department of Earth Science, IIT-Bombay for providing facility for conducting XRD studies on various samples used in the present study.