The enrichment of valuable metals from sulfuric acid leach liquors of various nickeliferous oxide ores has been investigated. Suitable enrichment processes based on sulfide precipitation and the Na-jarosite process have been tested and proved to be effective for recovering Ni, Co, and Cu from high-magnesium and high-iron pregnant liquors. Once the major impurities of magnesium and iron had been separated from the valuable metals, the resulting concentrated sulfate solutions mainly containing valuable metals (Ni, Co, and Cu) could be used for further metal separations by solvent extraction methods. It is hoped that such sequences may also be applied for the recovery and enrichment of valuable metals from dilute pregnant leaching liquors.Recently, our groups have reported a new SAWL (concentrated sulfuric acid acidolysis and water leaching) method for recovering valuable metals from low-grade nickeliferous oxide ores in China ( During the last century, the AMAX High-Pressure Sulfuric Acid Leaching Process was developed as an efficient means of extracting valuable nickel and cobalt from low-grade oxide ores such as laterites ( However, the sulfide precipitation method could not solve all of the problems during the enrichment steps; the amount of iron in the sulfide precipitate, especially for the pregnant liquor of high-iron nickeliferous oxide ores, could not be ignored ( A pH of 1.5–2.0 seems ideal for jarosite formation at about 100 °C ( In this work, suitable processes have been investigated for the enrichment of valuable metals from two sulfuric acid leaching liquors of different nickeliferous oxide ores. Because of the varying solution compositions, a common process for both liquors was not sought. Aiming instead at delineating optimal processes for enriching valuable metals for each different pregnant liquor, the sequence and conditions of sulfide precipitation and jarosite precipitation were addressed and then the optimal conditions were identified. Satisfactory experimental results were thereby achieved. The pregnant leaching liquors containing nickel, cobalt, and copper were obtained from high-magnesium and high-iron nickeliferous oxide ores by the SAWL process. The average compositions of these pregnant solutions are listed in Sulfide precipitation tests were carried out under mechanical stirring in a 200 mL beaker. A 100 mL aliquot of the appropriate pregnant liquor was placed in the beaker and then 10% (w/w) aqueous Na Na-jarosite precipitation tests were performed at 95 °C using 50 mL aliquots of the respective pregnant liquors. As a first step, a suitable oxidant was used to quantitatively oxidize Fe A high-magnesium pregnant liquor contains magnesium and iron as major impurities (see Other research groups ( Considering that magnesium and iron sulfides have larger In A series of sulfide precipitation experiments was first conducted by varying the reaction temperature and the charge of precipitant. In the next experiment, 200 mL of leaching liquor was treated under the precipitation conditions of sample 8 at room temperature. The chemical analysis results obtained are shown in As shown in Before the Na-jarosite precipitation tests, an oxidant had to be used to quantitatively oxidize the remaining Fe In For the high-iron pregnant liquor (see To find an effective and low-cost neutralizer, a series of Na-jarosite precipitation experiments was first conducted using several different neutralizers, specifically Na The concentrated sulfide product could then be calcined and the residue dissolved in sulfuric acid to obtain a concentrated sulfate solution containing mainly the valuable metals. The above two enrichment process, which are based on sulfide precipitation and the Na-jarosite process, have been proved to be optimal for the recovery of valuable metals from the high-magnesium and high-iron pregnant liquors, respectively. All the processes are operationally simple and effective, yielding a concentrated valuable metal sulfate solution that can be further separated by means of suitable solvent extraction methods ( Suitable enrichment processes have been proposed and shown to be effective for the recovery of valuable metals from high-magnesium and high-iron pregnant liquors. For the high-magnesium pregnant liquor, the sulfide precipitation process has been shown to be an effective means of leaving the major impurity of magnesium in the mother liquor. Only a minor content of about 1.5% magnesium becomes incorporated in the valuable metal sulfide concentrate. At the end of the sequence shown in This work was supported by the fund LY20062904 (Doctor Fund of Ludong University).