A comparative study of sample treatment for removing the organic matter (mainly alcohol) to analyse red wine samples for metal content (Al, Ba, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, Sr and Zn) from ICP-OES has been carried out. Thus, three procedures have been assayed before metal analysis: Dry ashing (DA), wet ashing (WA) and the removal of alcohol by evaporation (AR). The obtained results showed that the three methods lead to unbiased recoveries close to 100%. However, the uncertainty of AR method was about twice of the remainder ones. From practical considerations, the DA procedure was considered more suitable for determining metal elements in wine samples by ICP-OES.Metals in alcoholic beverages, like wine, are commonly determined by atomic emission spectroscopy The organic matter present in wine samples has to be destroyed to avoid important matrix effects during the measurement step. Dry ashing or wet ashing with oxidising reagents are the most usual options Anyway, although these two studies are of noticeable interest, none of them cover the metals selected in our work. Moreover, the sample matrices are somewhat different. In the first case samples are anisette ones, rich in alcohol and in the second one, fino wines with higher body content. In our case our matrices are red wines (of the “Valle de la Orotava” D.O.) and accordingly it is advisable to carry out the treatment study separately. In the present paper, a comparative study of sample treatment for removing the organic matter (mainly alcohol) to analyse red wine samples from Canary Islands for metal content (Al, Ba, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, Sr and Zn) from inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) has been carried out. Elemental analyses were carried out on a Thermo Jarrell Ash Atom Scan 25 inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer (Genesis Laboratory Systems Inc, Colorado, USA). Five samples of red wines of different brands with D.O. trademark “El Valle de la Orotava” from Canary Islands were purchased in liquor retails and markets. The alcoholic content ranged from 12 to 14% (v/v) ethanol for all wine samples. The plastic containers used for storing and treating the samples were cleaned to avoid contamination of the samples with traces of any metal. Containers were treated with 5% nitric acid during 24 h followed with two washes with Milli-Q water. According to Thiel and Danzer This technique probably represents the most used approach for the mineralization of the organic-based sample An aliquot of 25 mL of each sample were placed in porcelain crucibles. To avoid cross-contamination between the samples, single used plastic tools were utilised to transfer the material. Each sample was placed in a low-temperature oven (50 °C) and heated overnight. The crucibles with the residues obtained after the vaporization of the water and of the most organic compounds were then introduced in a high-temperature muffle furnace and ashed at 450 °C. The temperature in the muffle oven was increased at a rate of approximately 50 °C/h and maintained at 450 °C during 18 to 24 h. The following morning samples were cooled, and the residues were treated with nitric acid with a gentle warming on a hot plate, after that all the samples were transferred to the muffle furnace during 24 h in the same conditions as before. The white ashes obtained with this procedure were dissolved in a suitable beaker with 20 mL 5% (v/v) nitric acid. After solution, the content was transferred to a 25 mL volumetric flask by rinsing with 5% v/v nitric acid and adding the washing liquids until the mark. To improve the precision of the measured elements concentration, all the samples were replicated three times. This approach is also very common for mineralization preventing loss of volatiles Alcohol was removed by heating about 25 mL of red wine at 80 °C on a hot plate until a final volume of 10 mL, which was mixed with 5% nitric acid up to its starting volume. With this technique, it is possible to have a direct reading of the metal concentration without any further manipulation of the sample. All the samples were replicated three times. Because these three procedures are “open vessel” treatments, several precautions have to be considered for preventing contamination and avoid loss phenomena. In our case, all sample containers and reaction vessels must be suitably cleaned and treated with 5% v/v nitric acid during 24 h followed with two washes with Milli-Q treated water. Nitric acid used as reagent and cleaning agent was of suprapure (Merck) quality (65% purity, density 1.39 g/cm Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) CertiPUR®. ICP-multielement standard solutions of about 1000 mg L ICP-OES metal determinations were performed according to a procedure commonly used in our researches on food and beverages  The standard addition method was used throughout this work for evaluation of possible proportional bias derived from the sample treatment step and expressed as the recovery of the investigated metals To perform the comparison among the selected mineralization methods on the basis of proportional bias, and taking into account that there are no CRMs available The analytes have been spiked at a single level for the recovery study that cover the metal range expected in wine samples. Proportional bias is easily assessed through recovery assays working with fortified samples according to Barwick and Ellison Once recovery is computed, it should be checked for fulfilling the accuracy criteria according to the AOAC guidelines, depending on the analyte concentration level The three sample preparation methods, DA, WA and AR were subjected to one way ANOVA for each element for the sake of comparison. Accordingly, the three mineralization methods ( As the goal defined is the comparison of the mineralization methods, the between methods variance is compared for the sake of bias with the error pure variance as indicated in If the experimental value is higher than the critical two-sided tabulated one In order to evaluate a global uncertainty to be ascribed to each mineralization method, another one way ANOVA was performed, now for each method, taking the different metals analysed as factors. In this instance, the recoveries refer to a method instead of an element, and they are represented as Accordingly the uncertainty corresponding to the total recovery The expanded uncertainty, The results corresponding to the native and observed metal concentrations obtained from the three treatments studied in the five samples of “Valle de la Orotava” wines are gathered in Metal elemental recoveries were calculated according Eq. The values of On the other hand, in order to estimate the uncertainty of each mineralization method, the second ANOVA scheme ( Similarly to Eq. The global recoveries The three methods are equivalent in the sense that any of them gives a very suitable recovery for the metal assayed. However, it seems to be clear that in our study, the uncertainty of DA and WA was lesser than the AR one. This makes us to decide between dry and wet ashing mineralization procedures. Considering a rather practical criterion, the DA method has been considered more adequate to our purposes because with this method neither acid mixture is added to the sample that could produce high blank values sometimes. In addition, wet ashing procedures are prone to produce interferences unless very expensive ultra pure reagents are used. Besides, in these cases, an extra evaporation step has to be carried out to eliminate the excess of acids. Thus, from both statistical and practical considerations it seems to be advisable to apply DA method in the analysis of wine samples. A comparative study of three mineralization methods for wine samples has been carried out. A dry ashing (DA) method, a wet ashing (WA) protocol and an alcohol removing (AR) procedure were tested. The obtained results showed that the three methods lead to unbiased recoveries close to 100%. However, the uncertainty of AR method was about twice of the remainder ones. From practical considerations, the DA procedure was considered more suitable for determining metal elements in wine samples by ICP-OES.