The oxidation kinetics of interstitial free (IF) steel were shown to differ remarkably, by more than one order of magnitude, with the crystallographic texture of the metallic substrate. More specifically, γ-fiber or ND||<111> grains oxidized preferentially and provided epitaxial or pseudo-epitaxial growth of the corresponding oxide grains. Below 843K, the initial magnetite (Fe3O4) grains had a ∼45°<001> epitaxial orientation relationship with all the substrate ferrite grains. Specimens oxidized at temperature > 843K, on the other hand, had a pseudo-epitaxy: ND||<111> metallic-substrate grains generated ND||<001> pro-eutectoid magnetite. In both cases, the oxide grains growing from ND||<111> ferrite had more dislocations and higher tensile residual stresses. They also had more magnetite and less hematite. It was proposed that the oxide phase growing from ND||<111> ferrite grains, with higher dislocation content, has faster ionic diffusion. Faster diffusion in the magnetite also appeared to reduce the protective (lower ionic diffusion) outer hematite layer. A combination of these two generated thicker oxide layers on the ND||<111> ferrite grains.Oxidation of a metallic material is an elevated temperature chemical reaction between the metal and oxygen Oxidation of Fe has attracted extensive, but usually empirical, studies. These include studies of alloy chemistry In the literature on oxidation of iron and steel, investigations relating to oxidation behavior to the microstructure of the metallic substrate are rather limited [ Interstitial free (IF) steel is fully ferritic Hot rolled (4 mm thick plate - finished rolling at ∼1183K) IF steel, whose composition is given in Controlled oxidation studies were conducted in a TGA - TA Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD), on substrate plus oxide films, was performed on a Fei In order to quantify the fractions of magnetite (Fe As seen in   Values of the apparent Y axis intercept (c values) were almost always less than zero, which may indicate some short-term interfacial inhibition of iron oxidation at the metal-oxide interface. However, there were one unphysical but very small Given the faster oxidation of iron with strong ND|| <111> substrate texture, it was important to find any relationships, between preferred oxidation (if any) and substrate crystallography. For this, an experiment with minimal oxidation was first used: oxidation at 573K for 10 min in the dilatometer. Two IF steel specimens, with extreme V The observations in GIXrD plus Rietveld quantification (using a commercial software HighScore-plus As expected from the weight gain studies ( There was much more hematite in the V In the V There is also interesting difference was in the Finally, there was clear (and unexpected) evidence of Cross-sectional EBSD, The current kinetic results ( To investigate the first hypothesis, bulk as well as grain scale measurements were conducted. The bulk measurements found that substrates with stronger ND||<111> texture did indeed have higher dislocation densities in the magnetite phase: at both 773K ( The dislocation density observed in the oxide phase, as estimated from the X-ray peak profiles ( Further characterizations of different oxide films, grown on substrates with significant differences in crystallographic textures (V Insight into the surface point defect microstructures, of the oxide formed at 773K, was sought by Mott-Schottky (M-S) analysis. This was conducted on the surface of the oxide films, which were grown to different thicknesses (by longer oxidation times) in a muffle furnace. The M-S results are shown for oxides grown on Fe substrates with V The first significant observation of this study was the faster oxidation behavior of Fe-substrates with stronger crystallographic texture (V It was also apparent that the faster oxidation kinetics did arise from the greater oxide film thickness. In order to understand the defining role of substrate crystallographic texture on the oxidation behavior, a series of investigations were undertaken on the microstructures of the oxides with extreme substrate crystallographic textures (V Very short oxygen exposure (573K - 10 min), Earlier literature [ The suggested good-fit between the Fe-Fe Earlier publications [ Hussey et al. The present results are in contradiction with Hussey et al.’s model The influence of the ferrite microstructure, grain size and texture, on the oxidation kinetics will depend not on the ferrite microstructure directly but from its influence on the microstructure of the resulting oxide. It is across the oxide microstructure that ion transport occurs. At 773K the magnetite grains have the same grain size, 56 µm, as the ferrite in the two samples with very different textures. At 973K however, the magnetite grains were found to be larger at ∼1.2 µm, when formed from near ND<111> ferrite grains but were smaller, ∼0.5 µm on ferrite grains most misoriented from ND<111>. Clearly, though grain boundary diffusion in the magnetite is expected to accelerate ionic diffusion, the faster oxidation on ND||<111>grains cannot be due to finer grain sizes in the resulting magnetite: They are either the same grain size, 56 µm at 773K, or they are coarser, at 973K. There is also another interesting observation at both temperatures (773K and 973K): the faster oxidizing samples, with their higher frequency of ND||<111> ferrite grains, showed more magnetite (and less hematite) in their thicker oxides ( So the reduced hematite content is seen near the surface in the faster oxidizing samples, with the higher frequency of the ND||<111> ferrite grains, provide additional support for the proposed model of faster dislocation assisted ionic diffusion There is also an interesting observation of higher electronic defect densities at the external surface ( Finally, there is an interesting, apparently not previously reported, result of internal oxidation: wüstite formation at the sub-surface ( Combinations of cold rolling plus annealing provided a test matrix of six different specimens: specimens with different average grain size (d The present study used a combination of cold rolling plus recrystallization annealing. The prior processing led to an increase in Direct observations (at 573K) revealed that the ND||<111> grains were the During oxidation at 973K, it appeared that the original inner layer of wüstite (Fe Oxide films grown on two different Fe-substrate, with The lower hematite to magnetite ratios in the samples with faster oxidation rates also provide additional support for faster the diffusion of iron towards (and oxygen away from) the hematite-magnetite interface. Hematite with its lower anion and cation diffusion rates (as compared to magnetite and wüstite) is expected to reduce oxidation rates. Thus, the reduced hematite in the samples with stronger ND||<111> texture provides an additional factor for faster oxidation in these specimens. The Mott-Schottky analysis showed a clear increase of The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge support from CoEST (centre of excellence in steel technology, IIT Bombay). Supply of the material from Tata Steel, and partial financial support from DST-SERB are also acknowledged. Measurements were conducted at IIT Bombay SAIF-CRNTS (Raman measurements) and at the National Facility of Texture and OIM (X-ray + EBSD). Finally, a special word of gratitude to Dr. Renè de Kloe (Application Engineer: TSL-EDAX Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi: 