Fracture failure analysis of an agitator shaft in a large vessel is investigated in the present work. This analysis methodology focused on fracture surface examination and finite element method (FEM) simulation using Abaqus software for stress analysis. The results show that the steel shaft failed due to inadequate fillet radius size and more importantly marking defects originated during machining on the shaft. In addition, after visual investigation of the fracture surface, it is concluded that fracture occurred due to torsional–bending fatigue during operation.In order to mixing of fluids, mechanically stirred vessels are widely used for variety of purposes such as homogenizing single or multiple phases in terms of concentration of components, physical properties, and temperature. Processing during mechanical mixing occurs under either laminar or turbulent flow conditions, depending on the impeller Reynolds number, defined as Typically, a large vessel consists of three main parts: agitator shaft with impeller, top structure with motor and gearbox and fixed vessel to foundation including anchor bolting. The agitator shaft consists of two parts, namely, upper shaft and lower shaft. These two parts are tightly connected by means of a rigid coupling to construct the main shaft In general, shafts are an important component used for power transmission in machinery and mechanical equipment. Failures of such components and structures have engaged scientists and engineers extensively in an attempt to find their main causes and thereby offer methods for their possible prevention The failed shaft was inspected macroscopically and microscopically by means of optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) while a great care was taken to avoid damage of fracture surfaces. Atomic absorption spectrometry was employed to determine chemical composition of the alloy. Room-temperature tensile and impact (Charpy) tests were performed in conformity with the ASTM E-8 and ASTM E-23 standards requirements, respectively. Test-samples for impact (Charpy) toughness are made in compliance with the ASTM-E23 of the size 10 According to manufacturer’s documents, the shaft was made from AISI 304L stainless steel.  The all values of impact toughness were above the minimal required values of 116 As shown in High number of machining grooves which were formed during manufacturing process were revealed by careful macroscopic examination of the exterior surface of the agitator shaft ( Radial zone contains both many radial coarse lines directed to center and concentric circles about center. In early phases of crack initiation, each crack propagates at different planes ( To calculate The asterisk is used to indicate only one geometric parameter (the crack depth Torque calculation on the shaft during process determined through delivered power to a given fluid at a constant rotational speed As given in Eq. (5) the power number, Regarding the available information In this study, the commercial Abaqus software was employed to analyze stress propagation at start-up regime of the shaft during mixing operation. The 3D geometry model of the agitator shaft is shown in Before performing the simulation, several assumptions were made: (1) shaft weight was not to be taken into consideration, since during mixing operation, the axial (upward) forces created by impeller due to blade angle of 45° are opposite to the shaft weight, (2) drum pressure acts as a hydrostatic pressure equally over the shaft and has no effect on the general yielding, thus, it helps to increase the yield of the shaft material. (3) operation temperature (216° In order to study numerical simulations of the agitator shaft, hexahedral brick elements C3D20R which are the quadratic reduced-integration elements were adopted. These elements are not susceptible to shear locking, even when subjected to complicated states of stress. Therefore, these elements are also generally the best choice for the most general stress/displacement simulations. The mesh is graded in a way such that there is a higher mesh density at shaft to flange connection. This improves the accuracy of the solution around the shaft without tremendously increasing the computational time. Mesh in the all parts generated by sweep method. Abaqus/CAE creates swept meshes by internally generating the mesh on an edge or face and then sweeping that mesh along a sweep path. Normally, a higher mesh density provides for higher accuracy but also increases the computational time, therefore, a trade-off between time and accuracy becomes crucial. In this case, three different mesh densities were investigated. The shaft were initially meshed with 7855 elements with a higher mesh density closer to the shaft to flange and then mesh density changed from 10,165 to 11,705 in order to reach successful convergent. After obtaining the torque (372 Dynamic analysis in Abaqus/Standard uses implicit time integration method to calculate the transient dynamic response of a system. These time integration operators are implicit, which means that the operator matrix must be inverted and a set of simultaneous nonlinear dynamic equilibrium equations must be solved at each time increment. This solution is done iteratively using Newton’s method Depending on the variables of machining technique and the quality of the cutting tool, machining can lead to fairly sharp grooves. To understand the effect of machining grooves on stress concentration, a single machining mark with a depth of 0.2 Static analysis in Abaqus/Standard was carried out to understand stress distribution during steady state operation of the shaft. Experimental and numerical simulation of the agitator AISI 304L stainless steel shaft was studied. Results showed that mechanical properties (uniaxial tension, impact and hardness tests) and chemical composition of the failed shaft were in acceptable range. Calculations showed that torque applied to the shaft during mixing operation at constant speed of 70