We describe a new technique for nuclear disassembly of a hard nucleus in cataract surgery. The drill-and-crack technique, which combines phaco chop and the prechopper, makes a deep hole (drill) in the central nucleus with the phaco tip and divides the nucleus (crack) with the prechopper inside the hole.
               
                  Financial Disclosure
                  No author has a financial or proprietary interest in any material or method mentioned.Phacoemulsification is the principal choice of most ophthalmologists for elective cataract surgery. However, phacoemulsification of a hard nucleus is challenging and characterized by certain problems, especially corneal endothelial damage from the ultrasound energy. When used for a hard nucleus cataract, the phaco-chop technique A standard temporal 2.75 mm triplanar clear corneal incision is made and a side port created with a 1.0 mm blade approximately two-and-a-half clock hours away. After a continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis is made, hydrodissection and hydrodelineation are performed. The exposed phaco tip is extended to about 2.5 mm and then inserted into the anterior chamber with the bevel down. The superficial cortex and the epinuclear plate are removed. With the phaco tip bevel down facing the nucleus, a deep, narrow hole is made by embedding the phaco tip near the geometric center of the endonucleus ( We adopted the drill-and-crack idea from mining engineering. Miners drill a hole in the rock, insert dynamite, set off the explosion, and remove the small debris. In drill and crack, after a deep hole is made in the nucleus with the phaco tip, a prechopper is inserted and the nucleus is cracked, creating small fragments that can be aspirated and emulsified. The phacoemulsification technique with a phaco drill was proposed by Joo et al. A technique similar to drill and crack has been described. The drill-and-crack technique can be easily and effectively used for a hard nucleus. It has also worked successfully on a rock-hard nucleus, but a posterior leathery plate sometimes caused incomplete nuclear disassembly, as in a conventional phaco-chop technique. In a soft nucleus, inadvertent posterior capsule rupture can occur during phaco drilling and nucleofractis may not be possible because of its softness. Thus, drill and crack may not be applicable for a soft cataract. The drill-and-crack technique has several advantages over conventional nuclear disassembly. First, it can minimize unwanted ultrasound energy to the corneal endothelium because ultrasound energy is used for only the formation of a narrow space for the prechopper and the bevel down technique is used for the drilling. Second, the technique is easy even for beginners unfamiliar with phaco chop and does not have a steep learning curve. Third, a one-handed phaco surgeon can use it. Fourth, the technique eliminates many challenges of small pupil phacoemulsification because the maneuvers are done centrally and there is little need to operate blindly behind the pupil. Fifth, it can be used when phaco chop fails in a hard nucleus because the phaco-tip-drilled hole can be reused in drill and crack. The technique has some disadvantages. First, posterior capsule rupture can occur during phaco drilling. To prevent this complication, low vacuum and bit-by-bit drilling similar to sculpting are desirable, with only the exposed phaco tip impaled in the nucleus. Second, injecting OVD into the anterior chamber before each cracking procedure to maintain chamber formation and clear vision extends the surgery time and increases the amount of OVD used. The following should be considered carefully when using this technique. Surgeons should not push the nucleus with the phaco tip but instead use continuous ultrasound energy, similar to sculpting, which will prevent zonular stress. The first division of a hemisphere can be done using the drill-and-crack maneuver, but the remaining hemisphere is so mobile that conventional horizontal chopping can be used. Experience has also shown that the Akahoshi prechopper with a sharp blade facing downward fits the deep hole well. When a hole is made with low-vacuum phaco, the nucleus cannot be removed completely in the center of the hole. In this situation, the prechopper can be inserted with the open blade ( In conclusion, the drill-and-crack technique offers easy and effective nuclear disassembly in patients with a hard nucleus cataract. We believe this technique will be helpful to trainee as well as experienced surgeons. 