Gold nanoparticles synthesized by in situ chemical reduction of HAuCl4 with the use of polyelectrolyte serve as reductant and stabilizer. At the same time, gold nanoparticles were observed self-assembly into dimer and trimer aggregates, which were evidenced by TEM. The nucleation and growth kinetics was characterized by in situ UV–vis experiment. A model was proposed to illustrate the formation mechanism.Metal nanoparticles are certain to be important building blocks of future nanoscale electronic and optical devices. The preparation of metal nanoparticles has been extensively studied. Metal nanoparticles protected by polymers can be highly useful for a variety of applications Polyelectrolytes have been widely used as building blocks for the construction of functional multiplayer thin films On the other hand, methods for assembling metal nanoparticles into well-defined architectures must be found because new properties often emerge from the particle aggregates that are distinctly different from the corresponding isolated nanoparticles. Much effort has focused on the formation of organized arrays of nanoparticles by modification of particle surface chemistry and application of Langmuir–Blodgett Herein, we present a polyelectrolyte-based “synthesis and link” strategy for the synthesis and self-assembly into dimer and trimer aggregates of gold nanoparticles by heating aqueous solution of HAuCl Branched polyethylenmine ( Gold nanoparticles were prepared as following: in brief, 200 μl of HAuCl Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of as-prepared colloids was acquired on a JEOL 2010 transmission electron microscopy operated at 200 kV. The X-ray diffraction analysis of the products was carried out on a D/MAX 2500 V/PC X-ray diffractometer using Cu (40 kV, 200 mA) radiation source. UV–vis experiment was performed on CARY 500 Scan UV–vis–near infrared (UV–vis–NIR) spectrophotometer. The structures shown in The XRD pattern of precipitates obtained from centrifuging sample is given in A model shown in We have provided a simple polyelectrolyte-based “synthesis and link” strategy for the facile formation self-assembly into dimer and trimer aggregates of gold nanoparticles in aqueous solution. This method is very simple Although current experiment cannot provide the well controllable formation of dimer and trimer aggregates, further work will be done to examine the most optimum parameters. This work was supported by the project of the science committee of Jilin province (No. 2001101).