Frothers are used in mineral flotation to form small bubbles and a froth layer. As surfactants, frothers may also disperse oily collectors and promote their adsorption on mineral surfaces. Following the previous work showing that aliphatic alcohol frothers inhibited the dispersion of dodecane in de-ionised water, but promoted the dispersion in NaCl solution, this study examined the effect of polyglycol-type frothers, including Dowfroth 250 (DF250) and Dowfroth 400 (DF400), on the dispersion of dodecane in de-ionised water and NaCl solution. Dispersion tests, interfacial tension measurements, zeta potential measurements and viscosity measurements show that DF400 and DF250 were able to enhance dodecane dispersion in both de-ionised water and NaCl solution by promoting the formation and stabilisation of dodecane droplets. DF250 dispersed dodecane more than DF400 mainly through producing more stabilised dodecane droplets driven by stronger electrostatic and steric repulsion. Although NaCl inhibited dodecane dispersion in water, synergy occurred between NaCl and DF400/DF250 to facilitate dodecane dispersion.Froth flotation has been widely applied in mineral processing to separate valuable minerals from gangue minerals. In this process, hydrophobic particles contact and attach to air bubbles, float to the surface of the pulp and then enter the concentrate while hydrophilic particles remain in the flotation cell ( Emulsification, a process of dispersing one liquid in a second immiscible liquid, is typically improved by the use of surfactants. The level of emulsification is governed by droplet formation and the resistance of coalescence of formed droplets ( In addition to droplet formation, the adsorption of surfactant molecules at the interface is supposed to affect the electrostatic repulsive force by changing the zeta potential of oil droplets, which plays a role in preventing oil droplets from coalescing. Compared with ionic surfactants, the variation of zeta potential of oil droplets with the addition of non-ionic surfactants is determined by the structure of these surfactants that cause the change of hydroxide ions on the surface of oil droplets ( Besides electrostatic repulsion, the adsorption of surfactants on oil droplets can transform the steric repulsive force between oil droplets, which can also affect the resistance to coalescence of droplets. The adsorbed surfactants at the interface allow the intermolecular hydrogen bonding between surfactants and water and the hydrophobic interaction between neighbouring surfactant molecules to take place, resulting in a more stable interfacial film with a simultaneous increase in interfacial viscosity of oil droplets. The interfacial film formed can enhance the stability of oil droplets through steric repulsion, which is associated with the structure of surfactants ( Frothers are a kind of surfactants consisting of hydrophilic functional groups (such as hydroxyl) and hydrophobic hydrocarbon radicals and therefore are capable of inserting into the oil/water interface. Many studies have reported that frothers including MIBC and polyalkylene oxides can be used to emulsify oily collectors by reducing the interfacial free energy ( In recent years, polyglycol-type frothers consisting of PEO (polyethylene oxide), PPO (polypropylene oxide) and PBO (polybutylene oxide) with longer hydrophobic chains and larger hydrophilic head groups than aliphatic alcohol frothers have been widely used in flotation plants. In this study we investigated whether polyglycol-type frothers can promote dodecane dispersion in de-ionised water and NaCl solution in terms of the formation and stability of dodecane droplets. Dodecane (CH For each experiment in this study, 0.4 mL dodecane was added into 200 mL de-ionized water or NaCl solution in line with the oily collector dosage used in flotation ( Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd, Worcestershire, U.K.) was used to detect the dispersion level of oil droplets in water by measuring obscuration ( The static interfacial tension between dodecane and water was measured at room temperature (25 °C) with a tension meter (Sigma 700) based on the Wilhelmy plate principle. In a 100 mL measuring flask, DF250 or DF400 was dissolved in de-ionized water or NaCl solution at different concentrations. A platinum plate was slowly dragged out of the water/dodecane interface to measure the interfacial tension (mN/m) between the two phases. Before the measurement, the following steps were performed: (1) washing the plate three times with alcohol and de-ionised water and flaming it before the measurement; (2) stirring at 200 rpm for 10 min to distribute the frother into water evenly; and (3) adding a large amount of dodecane to ensure the platinum plate under the surface of dodecane completely. The interfacial tension was calculated using Eq. The measurement of zeta potential of dodecane droplets was conducted using a Malvern Zetasizer NanoZS system that has been used to measure the electrophoretic mobility (a parameter used to calculate Viscosity measurements were made using a Discovery hybrid rheometer (HR-1 model, TA Instrument, USA), by which the steric stabilization of the interfacial film formed after the addition of DF250 or DF400 was investigated, following the previous studies ( The obscuration of dodecane dispersion was measured in the absence and presence of DF250 or DF400 in de-ionised water first. The results are shown in The obscuration of dodecane dispersion was then measured in NaCl solution. As indicated in The formation of oil dispersion is to overcome the formation barrier, deforming the oil into small droplets, which is determined by the interfacial free energy at the interface between oil and water.  The decreased interfacial tension in NaCl solution in the current study is due to the low NaCl concentration (86 mM) used. In summary, the addition of DF250 and DF400 can decrease the interfacial tension between dodecane and water significantly in line with their promotion of dodecane dispersion. Although NaCl can potentially coalesce dodecane droplets, DF250 and DF400 are more interface-active in NaCl solution, promoting the formation of dodecane dispersion. However, DF400 reduces the interfacial free energy more than DF250 at low concentrations, which is inconsistent with the dodecane dispersion results. As the level of dispersion is not only determined by the formation of oil droplets, but also affected by the stability of oil droplets, the effects of DF250 and DF400 on the stability of dodecane droplets was studied further below. Electrostatic repulsion plays an important role in the stability of charged droplets in dispersion systems ( As shown in It has been found that electrolytes reduce the electrostatic repulsive forces between oil droplets by compressing the electrical double layers of oil droplets ( The adsorption of surfactant molecules on the surface of oil droplets prevents the droplets from aggregating with one another by forming protective films (  In NaCl solution, the apparent viscosity of dodecane dispersion decreased to 2.36 Pa s, indicating that NaCl reduced the strength of protective films around dodecane droplets. The addition of DF250 and DF400 increased the strength of the protective films as shown by the increased apparent viscosity to 4.35 Pa s and 4.42 Pa s at 1000 ppm, respectively ( DF250 and DF400, the polyglycol-type frothers, were able to promote the dispersion of dodecane in de-ionised water and NaCl solution by improving the formation and stabilization of dodecane dispersion. In terms of the formation of dodecane dispersion, DF250 and DF400 reduced the interfacial tension because they can insert at the interface and reduce the interfacial free energy between dodecane and water. The addition of DF250 and DF400 also improved the stabilization of dodecane dispersion by increasing the magnitude of zeta potential and the apparent viscosity of dodecane droplets. The adsorption of DF250 and DF400 on the surface of dodecane droplets is responsible for the increased magnitude of the zeta potential by forming hydrogen bonding with hydroxide ions on the surface of dodecaen droplets. The improved viscosity of dodecane dispersion is attributed to the stronger protective films formed by the adsorption of DF250 and DF400 molecules that are supposed to generate intermolecular hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions with neighbouring frother molecules at the interface of dodecane/water. The difference in surface activity between DF250 and DF400 is due to their molecular interaction energy and adsorption at the interface. At low concentrations, the higher surface activity of DF400 with a HLB value of 8.2 is due to its higher molecular interaction energy between hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions compared with DF250 with a HLB value of 7.8. At high concentrations, DF400 molecules with more branched hydrophilic heads tend to adsorb at the interface inefficiently, leading to lower surface activity compared with DF250. Although NaCl decreased the electrostatic repulsive force between dodecane droplets, giving rise to the coalescence of dodecane droplets, it enhanced the role of DF250 and DF400 in the formation and stabilization of dodecane dispersion. The adsorption of DF250 or DF400 at the interface become higher because of the reduced interfacial tension at a low NaCl concentration. Furthermore, the improved intermolecular interactions by the formation of ion–dipole interactions between Na  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors greatly appreciate financial support from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: