Pentlandite oxidation behavior in the temperature range 530–600°C was investigated by microscopic and kinetic methods. A clear four-step reaction sequence was identified through monitoring the reaction progress by Rietveld quantitative phase analysis of quenched samples. The first step involves the transformation of pentlandite to monosulfide solid solution (mss), (Fe,Ni)S. This is followed by the transformation from mss to α-NiS in the second step, the oxidation from Fe3O4 to Fe2O3 in the third step, and the oxidation of α-NiS to NiO in the final step. Avrami/Arrhenius analysis indicated rapid transformation of pentlandite to mss with rate constant increasing from 3.8×10−4
                     s−1 at 530°C to 2.1×10−3
                     s−1 at 600°C and an activation energy of 140kJmol−1; the rate constant for the transformation from mss to α-NiS increases from 6.7×10−5
                     s−1 at 530°C to 4.4×10−4
                     s−1 at 600°C with an activation energy of 151kJmol−1, and for the oxidation from Fe3O4 to Fe2O3 increases from 3.2×10−5
                     s−1 at 530°C to 1.7×10−4
                     s−1 at 600°C with an activation energy of 127kJmol−1. Such clear reaction mechanism and the associated kinetic data can be applied to optimize the operation conditions in industrial rosters and flash smelters to improve process efficiency and Ni recovery.Pentlandite [(Fe,  The dominant mechanism for the overall oxidation reaction is the preferential oxidation of Fe and S over Ni, which results in a partially oxidized Ni-enriched product ( The kinetics of pentlandite oxidation was studied by Therefore, a detailed study employing appropriate methods is required to resolve the discrepancies in the early studies and to reveal a clearer picture of the mechanism and kinetics of the complex process of pentlandite oxidation in roasting and flash smelting. In this work, we conducted isothermal pentlandite oxidation experiments in the temperature range 530–600 The standard silica-tube method was employed for pentlandite synthesis ( An anneal-quench technique was employed for the pentlandite isothermal oxidation experiments. These were performed in muffle furnaces at ambient atmosphere at 530 The progress of pentlandite oxidation was followed by phase identification of quenched samples using room temperature powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). Diffraction patterns were collected on a Huber Guinier Image Plate G670 with Co The sample textures were examined on a Philips XL30 field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). The samples were embedded in epoxy resin, polished, and coated with an evaporated 20-nm thick carbon film prior to examination to reduce electron beam charging effects. Backscattered electron micrographs were recorded under an accelerating voltage of 15 The compositions of the various phases were determined by wave dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (WDS) on a Cameca SX 51 electron microprobe. The electron probe microanalyses (EPMA) were performed at an accelerating voltage of 20 For kinetic analysis, the quantitative phase evolution during the oxidation process was determined using the From these weight fractions, the reaction extent Using the reaction extent, the reaction kinetics can be modeled. The rate of a kinetic process can be expressed as: The Therefore, by plotting ln ln[1/(1 The pentlandite oxidation rate is temperature-dependent and is assumed to follow the Rewriting Eq. The activation energy The reaction mechanism of pentlandite oxidation was revealed by following the evolution of the product phases identified by XRD analysis. For example, In step 1, the transformation from pentlandite to In step 2, the preferential Fe and S oxidation over Ni continues but at this stage Fe and S atoms are diffused from the newly formed Step 3 commences at the point when Fe Step 4 is the oxidation of the only remaining sulfide, Therefore, the overall reaction for the complete oxidation of Fe and Ni is written as, However, for the roasting and smelting processes, the oxidation of pentlandite should be regarded as adequate after complete oxidation of Alternatively, the stepwise reaction mechanism can be viewed based on the evolution of the Fe and Ni species. Two distinct and parallel reaction pathways can be constructed. The first pathway is the Ni species evolution from pentlandite to The second pathway is the Fe species evolution from diffused Fe atoms to Fe The reaction kinetics for the overall pentlandite oxidation in roasting and smelting conditions (reaction The transformation from pentlandite to The transformation from The data points in the The oxidation rate from Fe To summarize, this work identified a clear four step reaction sequence for the oxidation of pentlandite under conditions close to those for industrial roasting and flash smelting, and found one dominant sub-reaction in each step. The first step involves the rapid transformation from pentlandite to This clear stepwise reaction sequence and the associated reaction kinetic data can be applied to guide the optimization of reaction parameters in industrial roasters and flash smelters. Clearly, for maximum Ni recovery, the transformation of pentlandite to This work is financially supported by the Australian Research Council (DP1095069). This is TRaX publication #194.