 Walter Charles Cooper passed away on March 20, 2007 in Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada, following a short illness. His death was due to pulmonary fibrosis, a disease in which the lungs became scarred by rheumatoid arthritis, and this prevented the normal uptake of oxygen to the tissues. He is survived by his loving wife, Frances Victoria Law, after 58 years of marriage, his daughter, Cynthia Joan, his son-in-law, Joe Stephenson, his son, David Charles, his daughter-in-law, Heather Cain, his grandchildren, Mark and Michelle Stephenson, his sister, Lillian Money of Sooke, B.C. and brother, Norman of Pleasantville, New York, cousins, nephews, a niece, and their families. He was born in Victoria, B.C. on October 30, 1921, a son of the late William and Kathleen Cooper. He graduated from Victoria High School in 1939 as the top student in the Victoria District. He attended Victoria College and the University of B.C., graduating in 1943 in Honours Chemistry as the Lefevre Gold Medalist. After receiving his M.A. at UBC in 1945, he attended Princeton University, where he earned his Ph.D. in chemistry in 1949. After serving as Instructor at the University of Wisconsin, he joined Noranda's Montreal subsidiary, Canadian Copper Refiners Ltd. in 1953, as Chief Chemist and later Technical Superintendent. In 1962 he was appointed head of the Research Division at the Noranda Research Centre in Pointe Claire, Quebec. From 1970-1975 he was Project Manager with the United Nations Development Programme in the establishment of a national mining and metallurgical research centre (CIMM) for the Chilean Government in Santiago. Returning to Canada in 1975 he was appointed Professor of Metallurgical Engineering at Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario. Upon retirement in 1989 he became Professor Emeritus and moved to Vancouver where for the following 10 years he was an Adjunct Professor in the Department of Metals and Materials Engineering at UBC. Professor Cooper was a prodigious researcher and made many important contributions to the broad field of extractive metallurgy. He is especially known for his work on the chemistry and technology of selenium and tellurium. He edited the authoritative volumes “Tellurium” and “Selenium” published in 1971 and 1974 respectively. He was one of the founding members of the Copper–Cobré series of conferences and was present at the first meeting in Chile in 1987. Charles acted as an editor of the inaugural volume on Copper Hydrometallurgy and Electrometallurgy from the conference. He continued editing Copper–Cobré volumes and other CIM Metsoc conference proceedings in “Leaching” and “Nickel and Cobalt” as part of his service to the metallurgical community. During his tenure at Queen's University, Professor Cooper was instrumental in building up a research and teaching group in the field of extractive metallurgy and hydrometallurgy. He undertook wide research in solvent extraction and ion exchange of base and precious metals, Fischer-Tropsch catalysis and electrochemistry. His students went on to take senior positions in government, industry and academia. All of his students remember fondly the friendship, support and encouragement received from Charles as they navigated their graduate studies. Charles was awarded the CIM Fellowship in 1988 in recognition of his many contributions to the metallurgical field. After joining the University of British Columbia in 1989, Professor Cooper continued in active research and graduate student supervision. He again contributed to the development of a new generation of students. During this period he helped organize the International Hydrometallurgy Symposium in Vancouver in 1992 to celebrate and honour the retirement of Ernie Peters and co-edited the Special Issue of this Journal and book of papers published by Elsevier. Soon after in 1994, he stepped into the role of co-editor of the Journal of Hydrometallurgy when he took over from the founding editor Gordon Ritcey. He held this position for a number of years until 1999 when Professor Kwadwo Osseo-Asare assumed his role. He was an enthusiastic and meticulous editor and helped the Journal grow and maintain the leading position it occupies in the field. During this same period, Charles developed an association with Abbeyfield Houses for seniors, serving as a director of Abbeyfield House St. Margaret of Scotland Society in Burnaby, Chair of the Abbeyfield BC Chapter, Secretary-Treasurer of the Abbeyfield BC Trust Society, a director of Abbeyfield Houses Society of Canada and an Alternate Director of Abbeyfield International. In 2003, he was awarded the Queen's Golden Jubilee Medal for his work with Abbeyfield. Submitted by his colleague David Dreisinger in celebration of the life and work of Charles Cooper.