The Reflux Classifier consists of a conventional fluidized bed, with a set of parallel inclined plates immediately above. The fluidized suspension passes into the inclined channels where relatively fast settling particles segregate, slide down the plates and return to the fluidized bed. The slower settling particles pass up through the inclined channels and into the overflow. By increasing the aspect ratio of the inclined channels, the effective sedimentation area of the vessel increases, in turn increasing the hydraulic capacity of the device. Laskovski et al. [Laskovski, D., Duncan, P., Stevenson, P., Zhou, J., Galvin, K.P., 2006. Segregation of hydraulically suspended particles in inclined channels. Chem. Eng. Sci., doi:10.1016/j.ces.2006.08.024], however, have shown that there exists an asymptotic limit to this hydraulic capacity, due to an increased tendency for particle re-suspension within the inclined channels as the aspect ratio increases. Laskovski et al. (2006) showed that the re-suspension facilitates the separation of the particles on the basis of density, reducing the dependence on the particle size. A conventional fluidized bed does not offer the benefits of the mechanism identified by Laskovski et al. (2006). In this study, the Reflux Classifier was used to recover and concentrate the heavy minerals presented in a low grade feed of mineral sands. Enhanced separation was achieved using inclined channels having a large aspect ratio of about 200, thus promoting the particle segregation of the denser particles while also promoting the re-suspension and hence hydraulic conveying of the lower density silica sand. With the aspect ratio of approximately 200, recoveries of heavy minerals in excess of 90% were achieved at solids throughputs of up to 40t/m2
                     h. A heavy mineral recovery of 97% was achieved at a solids throughput of 21t/m2
                     h. The separations resulted in heavy mineral grades approaching 100% in the size range of 90–180μm.The Reflux Classifier, which consists of a conventional fluidized bed attached to a set of parallel inclined plates ( In our previous publications on gravity concentration, the performance of the Reflux Classifier has only been described in terms of the separation of coal and mineral matter over the size range 0.25–2.0 With mineral sands the density ratio is less favorable, with a typical buoyant density ratio of (3300−1000)/(2600−1000) Our initial attempts to use the Reflux Classifier to recover and concentrate mineral sands, however, were encouraging, with a heavy mineral recovery of 81% obtained using a solids throughput of 8.4 In this paper, the separation of heavy minerals from silica sand was investigated using an enhanced Reflux Classifier. The objective was to achieve a very high recovery of the mineral sands and a high upgrade at a high solids throughput. To accomplish this objective, we have used inclined channels having an aspect ratio of about 200, the aim being to promote the re-suspension of the silica particles, while still allowing the heavy minerals to segregate onto the inclined surfaces and return to the lower zone and hence the underflow. The paper begins with an assessment of the findings of  In one specific series of experiments, the number of inclined channels was increased from 1 to 12, with the superficial fluid velocity held constant. Hence the channel spacing was made progressively narrower, resulting in higher and higher shear rates. In this work, it was discovered that as the number of inclined channels spanning the vessel width was increased from 1 to 12, the particle separation size initially decreased due to the increase in the segregation area, before increasing in size due to the increase in the shear rate. The increase in the separation size was especially significant for the lower density particles, with little or no increase observed for the higher density particles. Presumably the shear induced hydrodynamic dispersion ( The re-suspension also appears to have been promoted by buoyancy driven convection, attributed to the formation of a clear water zone below the downward facing surfaces of the inclined channels, which in turn is amplified by the aspect ratio of the channels ( The actual throughput factor, In order to apply Eq. Using  The laboratory scale Reflux Classifier used in this study is shown in When operating the Reflux Classifier, it is essential that the flow through each of the inclined channels be very similar. The fluidization below the inclined channels certainly helps to ensure a similar suspension feed to each of the inclined channels. However, when there is the potential for interactions to develop between different channels, a reverse flow through one channel and an increased flow through another can arise. Clearly, this situation must be avoided. In a full-scale Reflux Classifier an internal launder arrangement is used to ensure that each channel functions independently of the other channels. A similar arrangement was also used in the present study, resulting in a very even flow up through each of the channels. In order to evaluate the quality of the separation, samples of three streams, namely, feed, underflow and overflow, were taken after the operation reached steady state. The pulp density and particle size distribution for each stream were then obtained. A computer program was used to balance the data of the three streams, distributing the errors by minimizing the value of an Objective Function. A partition curve was then constructed to assess the quality of the separation, based on the mass proportion of particles that reported to the underflow as a function of the particle size. Independent analysis of the heavy minerals in each size faction was conducted by Amdel using the sink–float method at a fluid density of 3300 Previous experiments, conducted prior to the study of In the light of the analysis in the previous section, the separation of heavy minerals and silica sands was carried out in a new laboratory scale Reflux Classifier using six 2.0 Following an optimized mass balance of the experimental data from Run 1, the feed solids throughput was found to be 20.9 The experimentally measured heavy mineral grades for the feed, overflow, and underflow, covering the size fractions in the range −355 The high recoveries achieved in Run 1 indicate that a higher solids throughput could be achieved using the Reflux Classifier. Experiments were therefore conducted at higher solids throughputs as shown in However, in Run 4, a much lower solids reduction of 14.4 was targeted, with the feed throughput set at the exceedingly high level of 40.3 In all four Runs, it is evident that very high heavy mineral product grades of almost 100% were obtained using this Reflux Classifier technology in the size range −180 This study has shown that mineral sands can be processed effectively in the Reflux Classifier at a solids throughput of about 30 t/m The enhanced performance of the Reflux Classifier is attributed to the use of high aspect ratio inclined channels. The study of The Reflux Classifier was used to recover and concentrate heavy minerals from a low grade mineral sands feed. These separations are difficult to achieve in a fluidized bed because of the particle size disparity between the silica sand and the heavy minerals. In conjunction with the work of The authors acknowledge the on-going support for the Reflux Classifier by Ludowici MPE.