Production of ultrafine particles by grinding in attritor mill has been successfully applied in chemical, pharmaceutical and mineral processing industries. It has also been demonstrated as a cost effective and efficient method for production of nanoparticles. The present study attempts to relate the effects of operating variables on the Rosin Rammler equation parameter (X
                     d), which is indicative of the size of product. Operating parameters considered for the investigation are initial size of particles, ball loading, slurry mass fraction, diameter of grinding media, pin tip velocity and ratio of Young's modulus. The results indicate that the ratio of Young's modulus and initial size of particles have significant effects; ball loading, diameter of grinding media and pin tip velocity have moderate effects; and slurry mass fraction does not have a significant effect on the final size of the powder. The paper illustrates how statistical analysis, when appropriately applied, can be used to analyze complex unit operations such as the attritor mill and can be effective in gathering of process understanding.Nanoparticles have been utilized for fabrication of products with desirable characteristics such as higher homogeneity, higher solubility and/or higher strength The choice of the equipment for superfine and ultrafine grinding depends on the end-use of product, required product size distribution, purity requirements, and sensitivity of the material to heat Grinding experiments were carried out in a vertical attritor mill in batch mode. The particle size distribution (PSD) of the sample was measured by dynamic laser scattering (DLS) using a Nanosizer CS 90 (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK) in dilute aqueous suspensions. The suspensions were ultra-sonicated (UCB-30, Spectralab Instruments Pvt. Ltd., India) prior to the measurement in order to disperse (disintegrate) the agglomerates. NaOH solution was used to maintain the samples at pH 12 to maximize stability of the dispersion Digital pH meter (alpha pH 190, Digital pH meter, Eutech Instruments, India) was calibrated before starting titration at pH Silica sample used for the present work was obtained from industrial ball mill at Somany Wall and Floor Tile (SPL), Haryana. Slurry was prepared in distilled water and the pH was adjusted to 12 by adding NaOH to maintain stability of the dispersion Rosin Rammler equation was originally developed to model the data from sieve analysis of pulverised coal and has been found applicable to describe other powders obtained from grinding Multiple linear regression is a means to express the relationship between response variable The model fits a response variable Where Regression analysis is used to obtain a least square estimate of parameters, estimate the error term, estimate standard error of parameter estimates, test hypothesis about parameters, calculate predicted values using the estimated equation, and evaluate the fit or lack of fit for the model. JMP® statistical software is user friendly software for analysing statistical data. In this study this software has been used to model the experimental data using regression modelling. The effects of independent variables ( is the value of output corresponds to the operating parameter is the is the is the In this study, parameters having % Effect Experimental data involving grinding of silica particles was segregated into two sets; one for which the time of milling was at 10 To study the effects of the different independent variables on the size distribution of the powder milled in attritor mill, equations were generated by performing linear regression of the experimental data using JMP®. The input parameters for the model examined were initial particle size (   This observation is also corroborated by published studies on rod grinding and stirred bead milling that indicate that a finer initial size results in lesser energy requirement to achieve the targeted product particle size   This observation can be explained if we consider the mechanism of energy transfer from the grinding media to product particles as a simple spring–mass model without any damping   Optimum value of ball loading has also been reported at 80% of mill volume in literature after which further increase in ball loading has not been found to lead to a further decrease in product particle size  Becker et al. have studied the relationship between grinding media and product particle size and reported no/little grinding when small size media were used (< In the present study, feed size was varied from 300 to 28030  In the range of   In our study,   Analysis of the experimental data shows that initial particle size; The statistical model created in this study can be used for optimization of the milling process. To get a finer A lower feed particle size requires lesser energy to reach the desired product particle size. Hence, use smallest possible Grinding media should have a higher value of Young's modulus than the material being ground. In this study, the ratio of Young's modulus ( A higher value of ball loading increases the number of stress events. This in turn increases the rate of grinding. In this study, the ball loading was varied from 50 to 80% of mill volume and best results were obtained at 80%. Size of the grinding media affects stress intensity. A higher value of stress intensity is desirable for efficient grinding. In the present study, the ball diameter was studied from 0.4 to 3 Square of pin tip velocity, Mechanistic modelling of mineral processing equipment such as attritor mill is a complex task due to the large number of variables and their possible interactions. Statistical analysis software enable us to perform regression modelling in a simple and efficient way to model data from such equipment. Besides the estimation of the main effects and the interactions, statistical modelling also allows us to predict the optimal conditions for running the given unit operation. We have demonstrated how statistical modelling can be used for an improved understanding of experimental data. Silica sample has been obtained from Ms. Somany Wall and Floor Tile (SPL) in Haryana. Overall model Where    ball loading; ball diameter; ratio of Young's modulus ( pin tip velocity; Table A1: Constants in equation A1 for the overall model equation. Table A2: Comparison of summary of fit. Glossary of important statistical terms Least square estimate: Estimation of coefficients that minimize the sum of the squares of the errors Error term: The variance in dependent variable unaccounted by the independent variable in the model Standard error of estimate: Measures accuracy of model's prediction Test hypothesis: Method of drawing inferences about data based on statistics   T-ratio: Distribution of the ratio of two random variables which follow the bivariate t-distribution