This study was conducted to determine the effects of timing rumen evacuations on kinetic parameter estimates of wall digestion and passage. Another objective was to estimate the rate constants of rumen neutral detergent fibre (NDF) kinetics in cattle fed grass hay using rumen evacuations, and to compare the results to those obtained by conventional methods (in situ incubation, marker kinetics). Four young cattle were used in a switch-back design and fed a grass hay diet either twice daily at 7.00 and 19.00h or 18 times per day starting at 7.00h. Rumen evacuations were made just before morning feeding (7.00h) and 11.00 and 15.00h. The ingested feed, rumen and duodenal digesta and faeces were divided into five particle size fractions by wet sieving. Particulate matter retained on the sieves were analysed for NDF which was further subdivided into digestible (DNDF) and indigestible NDF (INDF) by 12-day in situ incubation. The rate constants were derived from average rumen pool sizes by pooling the particle fractions into large, medium and small particles (three-pool) or into large and small particles (two-pool). Feeding frequency had no effect on ruminal or total digestibility, average rumen pool size or kinetic parameters. The results showed that kinetic parameters, estimated from a single evacuation, can be severely biased due to under- or overestimation of rumen pool size. The rate of particle breakdown based on rumen INDF kinetics was slower than the passage rate of small particles (0.033h−1 
                     versus 0.047h−1). Digestion rate of medium particles was faster than that of large or small particles. The passage rate of both DNDF and INDF increased with decreasing particle size and it was slower for DNDF than for INDF irrespective of particle size indicating selective retention. Digestion rate of DNDF estimated by the in situ incubation was lower than that derived from rumen evacuation. Model calculations suggested that the values based on the in situ incubations were underestimated. Ytterbium labelled hay underestimated the residence time in ruminal compartments compared with INDF estimated by rumen evacuation technique (42.5h versus 49.8h). However, the passage rates of small particles estimated from the marker kinetics were similar to those derived from rumen evacuation.Variation in forage digestibility in ruminants results almost entirely from the concentration of cell wall carbohydrates, often analysed as neutral detergent fibre (NDF), and its digestibility, since the true digestibility of cell contents shows little variation and is almost complete ( The progress in developing experimental methodology for estimating the most important parameter values for dynamic digestion models has, at least partly, been limited by reliable reference methods. Passage kinetic parameters are generally estimated by labelling feed particles with external markers ( Mean residence time of indigestible entity such as indigestible NDF (INDF) or lignin can be directly measured via rumen evacuation or slaughter methods. By this approach the passage rate ( The slaughter technique was used already in 1950s by A prerequisite of reliable estimation of digestion and passage kinetic parameters using rumen evacuation and slaughter technique is that the animals are in steady-state or that the evacuations are carried out frequently enough to allow an accurate and precise estimation of the average rumen pool size. Another prerequisite is that the evacuation procedures do not interfere with normal rumen functions. The present study was designed to investigate the effects of rumen evacuation schedules on passage and digestion kinetic parameters by feeding the cattle either twice daily or continuously (18 times daily). A second objective was to estimate kinetic parameters from rumen evacuation using steady-state models and to compare these values to those derived from conventional marker and Four young cattle, three Friesians bulls and one Ayrshire heifer, with mean initial live weigh (LW) of 440 The diets were fed either twice daily at 07:00 and 19:00 Digestibility of the diets was estimated by a 5-day total faecal collection commencing on day 13 of each period. A sub-sample of faeces was frozen for particle size analysis. Duodenal flow of nutrients was estimated using a graphic alternative ( Rumen digesta (400 Digesta passage kinetics was estimated using ytterbium (Yb) labelled hay as a marker. Chopped (2–5 Digestion kinetics of NDF in experimental hay was determined by incubating triplicate samples of 4 The total weight of rumen contents was estimated by manual evacuation before, and 4 and 8 Frozen samples of ingested feed, rumen contents and duodenal digesta were thawed, and weight distribution was determined by a wet sieving technique. Triplicate samples of ingested hay (40 The concentration of indigestible neutral detergent fibre (INDF) for hay, rumen contents, duodenal digesta and faeces, and for the particle size fractions of ingested hay, ruminal contents, duodenal digesta and faeces was determined by incubating the samples in nylon bags of 6 Digestion kinetic parameters (potential extent and rate of digestion and lag time) were estimated by fitting the values for disappearance of NDF to the equation proposed by Both duodenal and faecal marker excretion curves displayed ascending and descending phases, and therefore the data was fitted using two-compartmental mathematical models. The first was a simple age-independent model (G Parameters were estimated using the non-linear, least-squares iterative procedure of Passage and digestion kinetics for cell wall fractions from rumen evacuation data was calculated as described by Rate of passage values were estimated for the total NDF, DNDF and INDF and for the particle size fractions of INDF and DNDF. The rate of digestion was estimated for DNDF. The proportion of ruminal NDF digestibility of total NDF digestibility for the particle size fractions was calculated as (1 The parameter values for ruminal INDF particle kinetic parameters were estimated according to a three-pool model of the rumen ( When the INDF pool size, intake ( When Because both DNDF and INDF are physically in same particles, it may be assumed that the rate of comminution estimated for INDF could be used for DNDF. This would allow estimating fractional digestion rates for different particle size fractions in the rumen. Changes in rumen DNDF pools can be described by the following equations: When the pool sizes and the rates of intake, passage and particle comminution are known, digestion rates for different particle size fractions can be solved. The Similar approaches were used to estimate the kinetic parameters for a simplified two-pool model. Large particles were comprised of the two largest particle size fractions (>3.0 and 1.0–3.0 The concentration of NDF inclusive residual ash was determined according to The effects of diets were analysed with the following model:  Passage rate values of INDF and DNDF and digestion rate of DNDF estimated from single rumen evacuations were compared by a paired The hay contained (on a DM basis) 931, 110, 634 and 87 The animals consumed all the feed supplied. The effects of feeding frequency on OM and NDF digestibility are shown in Increasing the feeding frequency from 2× to 18× did not influence potential extent (0.841 Rumen evacuations did not influence rumen microbial activity, when estimated from DM and NDF disappearance from the nylon bags incubated before rumen evacuation procedures and after each evacuation. Disappearance of hay DM after 24 Feeding frequency had no influence on the duodenal non-ammonia N flow or on the efficiency of microbial protein synthesis ( The mean pool size of total digesta, DM and NDF fractions was not influenced by feeding frequency ( Feeding frequency had no effect on the rumen pool size of different particle size fractions ( Rumen evacuation derived estimates of passage rate for various NDF fractions showed no significant effects in response to feeding frequency ( The kinetic parameters estimated on the basis of single rumen evacuations are shown in The rate constants for the kinetics of INDF and DNDF derived from the three-pool model are given in  The effects of feeding frequency on the passage kinetics of Yb-labelled hay were small ( The main objectives of the present study were to evaluate the effects of rumen evacuation strategies on the estimates of digestion and passage kinetic parameters and compare parameter values estimated by conventional methods to those derived from rumen evacuation. The cattle were fed at relatively low level (about 75–80% of Deviation from the steady-state conditions in the rumen of cattle fed twice daily did not influence rumen or total digestibility of dietary components compared with more frequently fed animals, in agreement with  Feeding frequency did not show any significant effect on passage kinetic parameters based on duodenal or faecal excretion of Yb-labelled hay, which is in agreement with results reported by The present results and many others suggest that increasing the feeding frequency to obtain steady-state conditions, a prerequisite for unbiased estimation of digestion and passage kinetic parameters by rumen evacuation technique, does not influence digestibility and passage kinetics. Rumen evacuation technique is a useful and widely used tool in rumen studies. The use of the technique is based on two critical assumptions: the procedure does not disturb normal rumen functions (1) and a steady-state rumen pool size is estimated (2). In the present study rumen evacuation procedure did not seem to have an effect on normal rumen functions, as indicated by similar In continuously fed cattle rumen DM pool showed very little variation between the evacuations. Because neither the mean rumen pool size nor kinetic parameters derived from rumen evacuations were influenced by feeding frequency, it may be assumed that the evacuation times used in cattle fed twice daily estimated the mean rumen pool size of different fractions accurately. However, estimating the kinetic parameters from only one time point resulted in severe biases on kinetic parameters. When the animals were fed at 12 Because feeding frequency had no effects on rumen digesta kinetics, the following discussion will focus on the methodological aspects of determining digesta kinetics. The rumen evacuation derived The estimate of Rumen digesta had a higher LP (>1.0 The rate of breakdown of LP fraction averaged 0.033 Estimates of INDF kinetic parameters based on the two-pool model suggest that the rate of LP breakdown rather than the rate of SP passage was the rate limiting step of rumen INDF clearance. The proportion of LP (>1.0 The probability of particles to escape from the rumen increased with decreasing particle size in the present study and in other studies ( The passage rate of DNDF was slower than that of INDF indicating selective retention of feed particles in the rumen. This finding agrees with earlier reports of Compartmental residence time estimated by rumen evacuation technique was longer than that derived from duodenal Yb excretion using a two-compartment model with time-dependency in the first compartment (49.8 Interestingly, marker techniques based on duodenal Yb-excretion curve and a two-compartment kinetics model with G The small difference in the estimates of compartmental residence time based on either duodenal or faecal sampling (42.6 The method used to estimate passage kinetic parameters for rumen models has a most important influence on estimated NDF digestibility. Using the rumen evacuation derived With regards to rumen evacuation schedules this study suggested that three equally spaced rumen evacuations in animals fed twice daily at 12 With regards to cell wall kinetics the feeding frequency had no effect. The kinetic analysis suggested that the rate of particle breakdown was a more limiting step of rumen clearance than the