Laminated metallic composites, for example, the Damascus steel, have been known from ancient times. Recently, there has been renewed interest in metallic laminates in an attempt to exploit them in many industrial applications In the past roll bonding The thrust of this study is to fabricate steel-brass multilayer laminates with layer thicknesses in the nanometer range and to evaluate their mechanical properties. Repeated cold rolling of multilayer stacks was adopted to produce the laminates, because the relative simplicity and the low-cost nature of this process can allow the scaling-up of the technique to the level of commercial-scale production. This work is a continuation of a previous study Multilayer laminates of AISI 1010 steel and CDA 260 brass (Cu-30 wt.% Zn) were prepared in different bilayer thicknesses by repeated cold rolling. The starting materials were the commercially available 0.025 mm thick steel and brass sheets. The sheets, cut into slices of 40 mm × 40 mm in size, were stacked alternatively and diffusion bonded in the temperature range of 450 to 550 °C for 4 to 8 hours under a pressure of about 16 MPa. To reduce the friction as well as to prevent the bonding between the stack and the platen, the top and bottom surfaces of the stack were covered with graphite sheet. The stack was also completely wrapped with two layers of tantalum foil to reduce oxidation during bonding. There was a reduction in thickness of about 20–40% after bonding. Diffusion bonding of monolithic brass and steel stacks was also done under the same conditions. Cold rolling was performed in a two-high rolling mill having 150 mm diameter rolls. The stacks were rolled to total reductions in thickness ranging from 69% to 99.97%. More details on the processing of these multilayers are given elsewhere Since the objective of the present study was to make laminates with layer thicknesses in the nanometer range, it was necessary to roll the stacks to reductions beyond 98%. The laminates that were rolled to a certain level of reduction were trimmed on the edges, sliced into rectangular pieces, re-stacked after cleaning and degreasing, and re-bonded. Following this, cold rolling was performed to achieve total reductions of up to 99.97%. In this process, the reduction in each pass was kept low to prevent the alligatoring along interlayer boundaries and cracking along the edges. Transverse sections of the rolled sheets were metallographically polished down to 0.05 μm diamond level and etched with 2% nital solution to reveal the steel layers. Microstructures were examined in a Cambridge Stereoscan scanning electron microscope (SEM) at 20 KV. The layer thicknesses were determined from optical and SEM micrographs of unetched specimens. It was possible to resolve the layer boundaries due to surface relief on the polished surfaces, at large bilayer spacings. However, below a bilayer thickness of 550 nm, it was difficult to resolve the layer boundaries even in SEM. For these samples, the bilayer thicknesses were taken as the total sheet thickness divided by the number of bilayers in the stack. This is considered accurate, since all the layers appeared to deform uniformly without peeling and tearing. Tensile tests were conducted at room temperature in an MTS 810 machine at a strain rate of 2 × 10 The microstructures of the multilayers are given in The microstructures of the rolled monolithic brass and steel multilayers after annealing are shown in The tensile properties of the multilayers are summarized in The tensile property data are presented in In the previous study In Correspondingly, in terms of bilayer thickness, assuming equal layer thickness for brass and steel layers, this range varies from 39.2–78.4 nm. This range is identified as the critical bilayer thickness range in Although the transition from Hall-Petch type mechanism to the Koehler mechanism cannot be exactly located in  The variation of the % total elongation of the multilayers as a function of the inverse bilayer thickness is illustrated in  Repeated cold rolling has been successfully used to produce high strength brass-steel nanoscale multilayers. A bilayer thickness as low as 15 nm and yield strength as high as 850 MPa was achieved. The existence of two different strengthening mechanisms in the cold-rolled and annealed brass-steel multilayers has been found. The critical bilayer thickness range was found to be between 39.2 and 78.4 nm, below which the strength levels did not change much, suggesting the Koehler strengthening mechanism. Above this critical thickness range, Hall-Petch type strengthening appears to be responsible for the strong increase of strength, with a decrease in bilayer spacing. The ductility in these multilayers decreased strongly with a decrease in bilayer thickness and there was the correspondence between the saturation of strength levels and that of the ductility level, at low bilayer thicknesses. Although the minimum ductility was consistent with the Koehler mechanism, the predicted and experimentally observed transitions differed significantly. 