In the process of coal seam mining, stress and gas pressure are two important parameters for the occurrence of gas disasters. Although many scholars have studied the parameters evolution during mining, the coupling of the parameters and the comparative analysis of gas pressures distributions in the matrix and fractures are rare. Here, the spatial distribution of stress and gas pressures during mining are simulated. The results illustrate that the stress, matrix and fracture gas pressures all exhibit a distressed zone, a concentration zone and an original zone with increasing distance from the coal wall of the working face. However, the change of gas pressures occur before the change of stress, and the peak gas pressure in the matrix is obviously higher than that in the fracture, so it is necessary to pay attention to the role of matrix gas pressure during mining to prevent the occurrence of gas outburst accident.In the program for the medium and long-term development of energy, it is clearly noted that coal will still be the main source of the energy supply in China. However, gas accidents that are very serious, such as gas explosions and coal and gas outbursts, still account for a very large proportion of the disasters occurred in coal mines and pose great danger [ Mining dynamics often lead to large-scale movement and stress redistribution of overlying strata, especially the load-bearing stress changes of coal and rock mass in the front of the working face. For a long time, the study of abutment pressure distribution around coal face, especially in front of coal face, has been the core of mining engineering discipline research and is the basis of roof control and roof management. In the process of coal mining, the coal and rock mass in the front of the working face undergoes a complete dynamic process from the original rock stress, to the axial stress rising and the confining pressure decreasing (unloading), and ultimately to unloading-induced failure. The stress distribution areas in the front of the mining face could be divided into three parts (distressed zone, stress concentration zone and original stress zone) [ The stress and gas pressure in coal seams have a typical coupling effect [ There are two main existing states of gas in coal seams: adsorbed and free gas [ Therefore, stress disturbance and gas pressure are two factors of gas outburst in the process of coal mining. Many scholars have studied the influence of the coal seam mining process on the mechanical properties and stress distribution law of coal seams, the influence of stress change on gas migration, etc. However, the coupling of gas pressures and stress in the front of the working face during mining and the comparative analysis of the gas pressure distributions in the matrix and in the fractures are rare. In this paper, a dual-porosity gas-solid coupling model was established. The distributions of stress and gas pressures in the matrix and fractures in the front of the working face during mining were simulated by COMSOL Multiphysics, based on an established model. The coupling effects of gas pressure and stress and the difference in matrix gas pressure and fracture gas pressure were analyzed, which provide a theoretical basis for the prevention of gas outbursts. Coal is a dual-porosity medium. The main forms of gas in coal seams are adsorbed gas and free gas, which have different effects on the mechanical process of coal. The effect of gas on the stress state of coal can be expressed by effective stress [ Matrix shrinkage deformation is caused by gas desorption from coal, which is proportional to the content of adsorbed gas [ The geometric equation, the strain-displacement relation, is: Based on Eqs. Gas migration in a coal seam matrix is a diffusion process. When the gas pressure in the matrix is greater than that in a fracture, the gas in the matrix will diffuse into the fracture system. According to Fick's law, the mass balance equation of the gas in the coal matrix can be expressed as [ When the equilibrium is destroyed, the gas in the matrix diffuses into the fractures, and the gas migration in the fractures is governed by a mass conservation Eq. [40]. Porosity and permeability are the main factors of gas migration. The in situ stress and gas pressure change, so the porosity changes dynamically. Porosity can be expressed as follows. Strain caused by gas pressure Strain induced by sorption and desorption. The strain due to the sorption and desorption can be expressed as The total deformation of the grain skeletons in the matrix is: Then, the deformation of the coal matrix can be approximately expressed as [ By substituting Eqs. Fracture porosity can be expressed as [ stress, Coupling Eqs. To verify the correctness of the model, the numerical simulation results are compared with the measured data of the Xieqiao Coal Mine in Huainan [ The numerical simulation is carried out on the 15.16–24,130 working face of a mine in central China. The ground elevation is +320 ~ +450 m, and the working face elevation is −660 ~ −735 m. The coal seam thickness is 2.6–3.7 m, and the average coal thickness is 3.2 m. The roof and floor are rock strata. A part of the working face is selected for numerical simulation to analyze the distribution of stress and gas pressure during the mining process. The geometric model and meshing are shown in Under the condition of high situ stress due to a deep burial depth, the original coal rock is in equilibrium state. Movement and stress redistribution of the overburden strata will be caused by mining. With the advancing of the working face, the abutment pressure (vertical stress) in the coal rock gradually increases to the peak stress. With the destruction of the coal body, the coal rock enters the state of pressure relief. Coal is a typical dual-porosity system that consists of coal matrix surrounded by intersecting fractures, therefore, two pressures systems are present: one in the fractures and the other in the coal matrix [ Comprehensive control of gas predrainage was carried out before mining in the working face. According to To quantify the coupling relationship between gas pressure and stress in the mining process, relation curves of coal seam stress and the gas pressures of the matrix and fracture with distance from the coal wall of the working face are illustrated in Due to the influence of mining, the nearby coal body is loosened, and the numbers of pores and fractures increase sharply. Therefore, the stress value within 2.6 m distance from the coal wall is very small, and this area is called distressed zone. Correspondingly, permeability is particularly sensitive to stress: the stress decreases, and the permeability increases exponentially. The gas in fractures migrates rapidly to the goaf, and the gas in the matrix is desorbed into the fractures because of the pressure difference. The values of the gas pressure in the matrix and fractures within 1.8 m diatance from the coal wall of the working face are very small, and they increase as the distance increases. The area with lower gas pressure can also be regarded as the distressed zone for gas pressure. The matrix pressure is higher than the fracture pressure, and before the peak pressure is reached, the gap between them increases with the distance from the coal wall of the working face. For example, when the distance is 0.5 m, the matrix pressure and fracture pressure are approximately 0.25 MPa and 0.21 MPa, respectively, and when the distance is 1.6 m, they are approximately 0.50 MPa and 0.40 MPa, respectively. Because of mining extrusion, the stress of the coal seam at the distance greater than 2.6 m from the coal wall of the working face exceeds the original rock stress, increases continuously and reaches its peak value at the distance of 3.7 m. The peak stress is approximately 26 MPa, which is 2.2 times higher than the original rock stress; then, the stress decreases to 17.0 MPa at a distance of 7 m. This area with high stress is called the concentration zone. Correspondingly, when the stress increases sharply due to mining extrusion, the numbers of pores and fractures decrease sharply and the gas accumulates, which leads to the increase of gas pressure. However, the peak area of gas pressure occurs ahead of the peak area of stress, which is in agreement with the field measurements [ To describe the coupling relationship between stress and gas pressure more clearly, an enlarged graph of the local stress, matrix pressure and fracture pressure distributions on the YZ plane when X = 25 m are illustrated in The gas-solid coupling model of a dual-porosity medium is embedded in COMSOL to simulate the spatial distribution of coal rock stress and gas pressures during coal seam mining. The conclusions are as follows. In the process of mining, the coal stress is very low near the coal wall of the working face; then, it rises to a peak value and gradually decreases to the initial value with increasing distance from the coal wall of the working face. Therefore, the coal seam in front of the working face is divided into a distressed zone, a concentration zone and an original zone. The spatial distribution of gas pressures is similar to that of stress, but the change of gas pressures occurs ahead of the change of stress. When the stress increases sharply due to mining extrusion, the numbers of pores and fractures decrease sharply, and the gas accumulates, which leads to an increase of gas pressures. However, the peak area of gas pressure is ahead of the peak area of stress. Correspondingly, when the stress declines, the gas pressure decreases gradually to the initial pressure with increasing distance from the coal wall of the working face. The gas pressures in the matrix and the gas pressure in the fractures also exhibit a distressed zone, a concentration zone and an original zone with increasing distance from the coal wall of the working face. However, the peak gas pressure in the matrix is obviously higher than that in the fractures, so it is necessary to pay attention to the role of gas pressure in the matrix during mining to prevent the occurrence of gas outburst accidents. This study was financially supported by Coupling of Stress and Gas Pressure in Dual Porosity Medium during Coal Seam Mining. Yuexia Chen wrote the manuscript, Xuexi Chen provided the ideas for the manuscript, Tingxiang Chu analyzed the data and provided ideas for revision, Peng Chen revised the manuscript. All persons have made substantial contributions to the work reported in the manuscript. Yuexia Chen, Tingxiang Chu, Xuexi Chen, Peng Chen. We declare that we have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.