In the present investigation we have synthesized the nano-decagonal phase by mechanical milling of a pre-alloyed Al70Co15Ni15 decagonal phase. The milling was performed at a speed of 400 rpm for 5, 10, 20 and 40 h under a hexane medium with a ball: charge ratio 20:1. The nano-phase constituents were confirmed by X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy techniques. The stability of the nano-D phase in the milled powder was also investigated under various annealing treatments. After 10 h milling, the evolution of the nano-decagonal phase was observed. This nano-phase was found to be stable up to 40 h of milling. The milled powder after 40 h of milling confirms the existence of a nano-decagonal phase. The particle size of the milled powder was ∼10–15 nm. An isothermal heat treatment of the milled sample at 500 °C for 10 h still shows the existence of the nano-decagonal phase, although a coarsening of the nano-domain has been observed.Quasicrystalline phases exhibit a high degree of long-range quasiperiodic as well as orientational order The Al  Deformation induced transformations are very common in many alloys during high energy ball milling. In the present case, the energy input was such that it reduced the crystallite sizes from the micron to the nano-range. The nano-phase formation in this case suggests that amorphous phase formation is not essential to obtain a nano-phase. During mechanical milling, shearing among the atomic planes takes place, which ultimately induces many defects, most prominently dislocations. After a critical strain which accumulates in the structure during mechanical milling, the structure relaxes to nano-crystalline phases. In the present case a milling time between 5 and 10 h gives a favourable condition for nano-domain formation. With further milling, the reduction of nano-domains is expected to relax the strain induced during mechanical milling. It is interesting to note that, after the annealing treatment, the nano-phase neither changes to a micron-size phase nor to any other phase. This indicates a resistance of the nano-phase towards grain growth, supporting the view that nano-crystals exhibit a sluggish grain coarsening behavior A nano-decagonal-phase with an average grain size ∼15 nm has been synthesized from a pre-alloyed Al–Co–Ni alloy by high energy ball milling. This phase is quite stable, up to 40 h of milling time. The grain sizes decrease with milling time; the average grain sizes were 18, 15 and 12 nm after a milling duration of 10, 20 and 40 h respectively. The nano-decagonal-phase did not transform during an annealing treatment at 500 °C for 10 h. In all cases for the milled powder with milling times of 10–40 h, the annealing treatment led to a sluggish coarsening of the nano-domains, showing a stability of the nano-decagonal-phase against the thermal treatment. The authors would like to thank Professor S. Ranganathan, Professor P. Ramachandra Rao, Professor S. Lele, Dr R.S. Tiwari and Dr A.K. Singh for many stimulating discussions. The financial support from Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources, New Delhi, India is gratefully acknowledged. This work also derives support from Department of Science and Technology (Project under SYS: HR/OY/E-10/96), India.