Air entraining admixtures (AEA) are generally used for increasing the workability and resistance to freezing and thawing in concrete. These admixtures generate air bubbles with diameters ranging from 10 μm to 1 mm, providing spaces for the expansion of ice, and therefore facilitate frost protection. In this study, performances of AEAs were investigated based on surface tension measurements, accounting for the effect of AEAs on surface tension. For this purpose, a new test method was developed which depends on surface tension measurements according to the Du Nouy ring method. All types of AEAs used in the scope of this research presented a substantial influence on the surface tension. It was observed that a significant relationship between the air void system and surface tension exists. The surface tension method was found as a useful tool to determine the AEA type and content to obtain the desired air void system in concrete.In concrete technology, air entraining admixtures are used especially against frost attack. Content, size, spacing and specific surface of air voids are important parameters with respect to the long term performance of concrete Air entraining admixtures contain surface active molecules (surfactant), consisting of a hydrophilic head (polar) and a hydrophobic (radical) tail Several methods are suggested for the evaluation of AEAs performance in concrete It has been well documented in the literature of colloids, surface and interfacial chemistry science that the formation, size and stability of the bubbles are controlled by the surface tension of the solution. Although AEAs decrease the surface tension of the mixing water In order to obtain adequate freezing and thawing resistance certain air void system parameters (4–6% air content, 200 μm spacing factor and 24 mm In recent years, new types of AEAs were developed with the advances in chemistry of admixture technology. From this point of view, determination of the performance of new types of AEAs, before concrete production, receives higher attention. This study is focused on the development of a practical and reliable test method, based on the surface tension measurements in water-cement systems, when AEAs are introduced. The surface tension method can be useful in order to determine the admixture content to obtain the required air void system and size of the bubbles in concrete, which maybe beneficial not only for the freeze-thaw effect but also for improving the consistency of fresh concrete. CEM I 42.5 R type cement was used in the testing. Specific gravity and fineness (Blaine) of the cement are 3.15 g/cm Physical properties and particle size distributions of aggregates are given in Six different commercially available air entraining admixtures were used in testing. Codes, chemical essence and physical properties of the AEAs are given in In this research, air void systems were determined using Air Void Analyzer, which is described in the next section. Due to the limitation of the maximum size of the aggregates to 6 mm in this method, tests were performed on mortars sampled from fresh concrete. Proportion of the natural to crushed sands was 0.92. The cement dosage was kept constant at 357 kg/m In this research, the relation between surface tension and entrained air void system in the concrete was investigated. For this purpose, surface tension, foam index and mercury intrusion porosimetry tests and air void system analysis were conducted. In this study, a new test method which depends on surface tension measurements, was developed in order to determine the performance of air entraining admixtures. Surface tension tests were performed on a supernatant solution which represent the liquid phase of the fresh concrete. The supernatant solution was prepared by mixing cement and water at desired ratios. Cement and water were mixed and agitated for five minutes and then, after the solid part of the mixture is precipitated, the liquid part of the mixture (supernatant) was drained and sampled for surface tension tests. pH and specific conductivity measurements (by zeta-meter 3.0) were made in different water-cement ratios to determine the water-cement ratio ( 100 g water and 50 g cement were mixed using a magnetic stirrer for about 5 min. As the solid part of the mixture precipitated, the supernatant was collected in a cap. 50 ml of supernatant can be obtained from 100 g water and 50 g cement. Surface tension tests were performed on the supernatant solution. 100 ml of supernatant was mixed with a magnetic stirrer while a diluted AEA (50:1) was added. After about five minutes supernatant-AEA mixture was tested for surface tension. In this research, surface tension test was performed on the tensiometer (Krüss-K6 model) using Du Nouy ring Foam index (FI) test is usually applied to determine the amount of AEA to obtain adequate air content especially when fly ash is used. Generally, 10 g cement and 25 g water are used in FI test, but in this study 20 g cement and 50 g water were used because of the larger volume of our jar. However, the w/c ratio for foam index test was not changed. Also, in this study, a supernatant which has w/c = 2 was prepared for surface tension measurements. Furthermore, w/c = 2 was found to be suitable for the surface tension test but it proved to be very liquid and unsuitable for the FI test. In FI test, water and cement were initially placed into the glass jar and shaken for about 45 s, then diluted AEA (50:1) solution was added. After each addition, jar was vigorously shaken for 15 s and stability of the foam was observed. The minimum amount of diluted AEA needed to produce a stable foam is determined as the foam index of the mixture. Analyses of the air void system of mixtures were performed using the AVA-3000 For MIP tests, cubic molds (7 × 7 × 7 cm) were filled with the mixtures which were described in Section Surface tension of mixtures depending on the AEA amount and types are given in Normalized surface tensions versus admixture contents are presented in As it can be observed from Surface tension versus air void system parameters (air content, spacing factor, specific surface) are presented in Spacing factor and specific surface parameters are often used to determine the frost resistance of concrete Specific surfaces increase with decreasing surface tension for all types of AEA. Resin types do not so much affect to reduce the surface tension and increase the specific surface, compared to the other AEAs. This observation is elaborated further in the next section, based on the size of air voids. There is a significant relationship between the air void system and surface tension, however, it should also be noted that, the parameters of air void system continue to change even when the surface tension reaches a constant value. Although resin type of air entraining admixtures are less effective to reduce the surface, a sufficient air void system can be obtained using resin type admixtures as well. Minimum AEA content to cover the surface was determined according to the Foam index test which is described in section Corr et al. Both foam index test and surface tension measurement, developed in the scope of this study, can be used for achieving the desired air content in concrete. However, solid contents of AEAs were considered only in surface tension measurements, so synthetic types of AEAs exhibited lower performance in surface tension measurements than foam index test. However according to the both test more AEA content required to obtain adequate air content for resin types. Pedersen et al. Relationship between the surface tension with AEA contents and specific surfaces are presented in Relation between surface tension and specific surface revealed that AEAs which have lower influence on the surface tension may generate coarser bubble size. The validity of this result was investigated with AVA (air void analyzer), MIP (mercury intrusion porosimetry) and also SEM (scanning electron microscopy). Size distributions of air voids in cement paste (almost same amount) for voids less than 2 mm obtained by AVA are presented in Size distribution of air voids were also investigated by MIP. Normalized pore volume versus pore diameter histograms are presented in Size of air voids in mixtures were observed visually by SEM (Jeol JSM-5410 The amount of AEA to produce adequate air content in water-cement system can be approximated by surface tension measurements, in addition to foam index test. Foam index test is a basic and rapid test where the inspection is made visually. However, the surface tension measurement is quantitative and more accurate. The proposed surface tension method can be useful in order to determine the admixture content to obtain sufficient air void system in concrete. Also, the sizes of the air voids can be compared from surface tension measurements. There is a reasonable relationship between the air void system and surface tension of water-cement system ( Performances of two different AEAs are compared in All types of AEA's used in the scope of this research had a substantial influence on the surface tension. Distribution of entrained air void sizes varies with the type of admixture used. For instance, while resin types of AEA's form coarser bubbles, synthetic and fatty alcohol types generate mid-sized and smaller bubbles, respectively. Although surface tension test can be useful for determining the performance of AEA, unexpected results can also be obtained because of cement-superplasticizer incompatibility. To overcome this effect, surface tension tests following and the procedure proposed in this study can also be modified to include superplasticizer. This study has been completed as a part of the project (BAP No:34556) of the Istanbul Technical University, Institute of Science and Technology.