Organic species are thought to exert an important effect on the formation of the mineral materials by their electrostatic attraction with the cations of minerals. In this work, a series of polyaspartic acids with different hydroxylation degrees (PAsp-x%OH) have been used as crystal growth modifiers to direct the synthesis of calcium phosphate. The change of x in the PAsp-x%OH can precisely adjust its electrostatic interaction with calcium ions and, thereby, modulate the formation process and property of calcium phosphate, such as morphology, crystallinity, organic component content and calcium-to-phosphate ratio. Two competitive reactions are suggested in this system, that is, the combination of calcium ions to PAsp-x%OH and the precipitation of calcium hydrogen phosphate dihydrate. The trends of these two reactions are determined by variation of x in the PAsp-x%OH: lower value of x tends to involve the former, while the higher tends to latter. It has been found that the mineralization process involving PAsp-15%OH displayed a special point to counterbalance the two competitive reactions, leading to the longest induction time. These findings indicate that how an organic species controls the morphology and the formation dynamics of inorganic crystals in biomineralization by the slight modification of its molecular structure.A variety of biomineral materials existing in nature possess abundant morphologies and structures Generally, biomacromolecules involved in the biomineralization process usually contain a high number of serine, glutamic acid and aspartic acid residues; that is, they are rich in carboxyl and hydroxyl groups. It is considered that carboxyl residues have strong interactions with calcium ions and dramatically work on the crystallization process of biomineral materials In this work, a series of poly-aspartic acid (PAsp) with different hydroxylation degrees ranging from 0% to 100%, i.e. different carboxyl/hydroxyl ratios ( SEM images were obtained using a Philips XL 30. The XRD patterns were taken with a Rigaku D/max-γB diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation at 40 Calcium acetate was obtained from Shanghai Qianjin reagent factory. Sodium dihydrogen phosphate was purchased from Shanghai Xinhua reagent factory. All solutions were prepared with distilled water. PAsps with different hydroxylation degrees (named as PAsp- The products were prepared by quickly mixing 5 PAsps with different hydroxylation degrees from 0% to 100% (   The TGA experiment was adopted to detect the content of organic components embedded in the products obtained over 3 days ( The FT-IR spectra of the samples prepared by the different PAsp- Electrostatic interactions are widely recognized as a significant factor in the mineralization. The negatively charged biomacromolecules could effectively attract cations in the solution and provide nucleate centers for the inorganic crystals, and the inorganic crystals would include the negatively charged species in their texture. The crystalline morphology and structure of the inorganic compounds thereby could be greatly modulated by the electrostatic interaction between the biomolecules and inorganic species. In this work, the negative charges of PAsp- When PAsp-0%OH, which has the strongest interaction with calcium ions, was used, the product aging for 3 days included high amount of organic species ( Another noteworthy phenomenon is the induction time during the formation of precipitation. The formation of the product presented an unusual long induction time in the presence of PAsp-15% ( According to the variation rules of induction time, composition and structure, it is suggested that the two different reaction trends exist during the reaction. Eq. When When When To further illustrate the effect of the carboxyl proportion on the evolution of DCPD, the PAsp-15%OH was employed at higher concentration. The induction time was greatly prolonged in this system ( A series of PAsp- This work is supported by the NSFC (20721063, 20873025, 30828010) and STCMS (05DJ14005, 08DZ2270500) and Major state basic research development program. Also, the authors thank Prof. J. Chang and Dr. W.Y. Zhai in Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academic of Sciences for cell experiments. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 