Medial humeral epicondyle fractures represent approximately 12% of elbow injuries in children. It is a controversial topic in paediatric fracture management, as there is a trend towards extending the indications for surgical management that is not supported by high-quality evidence. In fact, the current literature can be contradictory and consists of mainly retrospective studies including small numbers of patients. The only absolute indication for surgery is when the medial epicondyle fragment becomes incarcerated within the elbow joint. In this article, we will present the important anatomical, physiological and interventional factors to allow independent interpretation of the literature. The current literature will be reviewed and a pragmatic approach to treatment presented. Due to the porosity of the current evidence on medial epicondyle fractures high-quality research is urgently required in the form of a adequately power definitive randomized control trial.Paediatric medial humeral epicondyle (MHE) fracture management is one of the most controversial topics in paediatric fracture care. Historically, simple displaced MHE fractures have been treated conservatively with excellent to good results. However, in recent years there has been a trend to treat these fractures surgically. The indications have been insidiously extended, with some authors relating outcomes such as grip strength and elbow instability to the amount of fragment displacement. There is broad consensus for surgical fixation in MHE fractures with associated injuries, such as open fractures and incarceration of the medial epicondyle. Some controversy remains on the relative indication for surgery in elbow dislocation. In the UK, a recent review of practice In this article, we summarize the important anatomical, physiological and interventional factors that will allow the reader to independent interpret the current literature but also offer a pragmatic approach to the treatment of MHE fractures. We also outline a recently funded nationwide UK-based clinical trial addressing this question, and the rationale for the chosen methodology. To understand the rationale of treatment for medial epicondylar fractures, it is important to have a good working knowledge of the complex anatomy, development and physiology of the paediatric elbow. Thus, allowing our understanding of the underlying concepts of treatment, to draw one's own conclusion from the current literature. We shall outline the importance of each structure and their relevance to the common treatment strategies. The shape of the distal humeral physis changes significantly with age. Before the age of 5 the physis is almost transverse. From 5 to 10 years of age the growth plate becomes irregular and angulated. The medial epicondyle then begins to separate from the trochlea with the development of a metaphyseal flare on the medial physis. After the age of 10 years the physis is undulating and all ossification centres are present. As the physis and ossification centres develop the areas of biomechanical weakness change and thus the fracture patterns can be associated with age. Transphyseal fractures are most common in the very young owing to the little resistance offered to shearing forces by the smooth, transverse orientation of the physis ( As the ossification centres continue to develop, the capitellum and the trochlea become more biomechanically stable. Around the age of 10 years old the medial epicondyle is at its most susceptible to fracture as it is an apophysis and the last physis to fuse in the elbow (      See As the elbow moves through its range of movement there is a transition of the primary constraint to coronal stress. The ligament closest to the lateral anatomical line of the humerus during a valgus or varus forces offers the primary resistance, that is, in extension; a valgus force is resisted by the anterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament first and a varus force is resisted by the radial collateral ligament first.  On the medial side of the elbow there is a periarticular anastomosis which consists of the two descending branches of the superior and inferior ulnar arteries and two recurrent branches of the ulnar artery. The medial epicondyle has a single vessel supply in 27.5% of patients, but in most cases it has anterior and posterior vessels and therefore has a low rate of avascular necrosis (AVN) compared to some other fractures, such as lateral condyle fractures. See Elbow stability post-displaced medial epicondyle fracture management is a major concern in the paediatric population. This is particularly true in regions where baseball, American football, basketball and wrestling are popular. However, long-term studies do not reflect these concerns and elbow instability is uncommon even after conservative treatment of medial epicondyle fractures. The most commonly described mechanism is an avulsion of the medial epicondyle by falling onto an extended elbow with a valgus force and supination of the forearm. Other mechanisms included direct impact in which results in comminution of the fragment and avulsion and direct trauma together which has been theorized as the mechanism of dislocation. There is no consensus in the literature on the most appropriate classification system to be used in categorizing medial epicondylar fractures. The AO Foundation has recently modified their original classification of medial epicondyle fractures. The original AO classification was 13-A.1.2 (.1 undisplaced, .2 displaced, .3 fragmented) and 13-A.1.3 for incarcerated fractures. The modified paediatric AO classification is 13-M/7m, which is broken down like this: 1(humerus) 3(distal) –M (metaphyseal)/7(epicondyle) m (medial). Several authors have offered classification systems for medial epicondylar fractures. These classifications have developed with time to include more variations of fracture displacement and associated injuries. Smith et al 1950 was the first classify the fracture and this classification was based on the displacement of the fragment. There have been subsequent modifications including that by Papavasiliou et al The most recent classification by Wilkin et al is a descriptive classification and includes displacement, dislocation, incarceration and comminution of acute fractures. It also includes tension stress injuries under the heading chronic fracture (see Whilst these classifications exist, they offer little benefit to surgeons or patients in terms of guiding treatment strategies, or the ability to prognosticate. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral, internal oblique views have been advocated in medial epicondyle fractures however the predictive accuracy of displacement is at best 60%. Edmonds et al compared the ability of radiographs to assess displacement with CT as the comparator. As we have previously suggested, they concluded that the most common direction of displacement was anterior and that AP radiographs can miss up to 1 cm of displacement when compared to CT. This suggests the possibility that displacement may be underestimated and that inadvertent conservative treatment of displaced fractures may frequently occur. Although shown to be the most sensitive and specific modality to assess displacement of the fracture, it is not indicated in simple fractures due to the radiation exposure. MR imaging is suggested in complex elbow dislocations to identify possible chondral shear fractures and lateral collateral ligamentous injury. This may aid preoperative planning. MR is also useful if after attempted reduction there is still subluxation of the elbow on radiographs and there is no evidence of fracture fragment incarceration. In these cases, MR can identify loose bodies as the cause of subluxation. In unossified medial epicondyle fractures MR is the only modality that will identify the injury. These injuries should be considered in patients were there is medial sided bony tenderness with a consistent mechanism and no evidence of ossification of the medial epicondyle on plain radiographs. Management of displaced medial epicondyle fractures has recently been highlighted as one of the top areas requiring paediatric orthopaedic research. There remains no consensus as to the optimal treatment modalities, which is a reflection of the poor quality of the available literature. One of the major concerns regarding conservative management is that there will be loss of function and instability related to the degree of displacement of the fracture. Computer simulations have predicted a mean of 2% wrist flexor power loss for every 1 mm of displacement, however, there is no clinical evidence to support this in vivo. Standard conservative management consists of 3–4 weeks in an above elbow cast in 90° of elbow flexion. Some advocate less than 2 weeks in plaster followed by conversion to a hinged elbow brace, but at present there is no evidence to support this. Results of plaster immobilization appear functionally comparable to surgically treated fractures. The frequency of fibrous non-union has been reported as high as 89%, The position of minimally displaced fragments has been observed to improve with time. Lim et al reported a reduction of displacement with conservative management with a maximal period of immobilization of 35 days. They showed a mild improvement of approximately 20% in minimally displaced fractures. These findings cannot be extrapolated to more displaced fractures but may offer some explanation for the excellent outcomes of conservative treatment. Stability of the anterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament has remained a concern after conservative treatment of displaced medial epicondylar fractures. Farsetti et al Young athletes are a subgroup that have been identified as having a lower threshold for surgical fixation, Incarcerated fragments are an absolute indication for surgery. Long-term incarceration of the medial epicondyle fragment can lead to chronic elbow instability that is almost untreatable. Cases have been reported where the incarcerated fragment has been extruded from the joint and the fragment treated without operative fixation, with good outcomes and a recommendation that in the absence of instability the fragment may be treated expectantly. Current indications for surgery are open fracture, fracture fragment incarceration. Current relative indications for surgery are concurrent elbow dislocation, displacement greater than a radiographic threshold (typically 5 mm), and fracture among upper-limb-dependent athletes. The variation of treatment within Great Britain has been demonstrated by a recent study by the Elbow Study collaborative.  Partially threaded screws negate the need for bicortical fixation, which has been shown to increase the risk of iatrogenic radial nerve injury. A recent radiological study     Having reviewed the literature we have developed an algorithm for the management of medial epicondyle fractures ( There are a wide variety of outcomes used to report success or failure in medial epicondyle fractures. The heterogeneity in outcome reporting is part of the problem propagating treatment uncertainties. Agreement as to the core set of outcomes is urgently needed, to standardize the reporting of studies, and enable systematic comparisons between studies. Core outcome sets (COS) are increasingly common across medicine and surgery, and they seek to identify, by consensus, the most important outcomes from participant groups involved in the treatment of a condition which should universally be recorded. There is widespread agreement that functional outcomes should be measured, using patient reported outcome measures (PROMs). The three most commonly used paediatric upper limb PROMs in orthopaedics are the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) upper extremity questionnaire, the Paediatric Outcomes Data Collection Instrument (PODCI) and the ABILHAND. Of these the PROMIS upper extremity questionnaire appears to have the greatest face-validity in this patient population. However, at present, there the minimally clinically important difference (MCID) is not known for PROMS related to this patient population, and there is ongoing work seeking to resolve this. Other adult PROMs have also sometimes been used in this injury (i.e. DASH), but are not validated in the paediatric trauma population. Non-union rates in conservative treatment have been reported as high as 50.8% with the majority of these cases asymptomatic. There is a lower rate of pain at final follow-up for the non-surgically treated cases versus surgically. Range of movement has been shown to be reduced in both treatment modalities. There is an average reduction of extension reported as 15° in non-operative group and 37° in the surgical group. Earlier mobilization in the surgical group has been advocated from day 2 post-operation to reduce this. Cubitus valgus rates post medial epicondyle fracture range widely in the literature from 0 to 35.5%. The prevention of instability has been suggested as an indication for surgery in young athletes. However, long-term follow-up have shown even in this high demand group that there is no difference in the incidence of elbow instability between surgical and conservatively managed cases Ulnar nerve injury is rare but is associated with elbow dislocation and the highest rate is seen when the medial epicondyle is incarcerated. There is debate on the appropriate treatment of ulnar nerve injuries sustained preoperatively. Transposition has been both advocated to increase the rate of recovery and discouraged due to the risk of ulnar nerve neuritis. Ulnar nerve palsy after reduction of dislocation is a relative indication for surgical exploration and fixation. An incarcerated medial epicondyle fragment is not a surgical emergency and delays in surgery of up to 40 hours have shown no detrimental effect on outcome even in association with ulnar nerve palsy. Reduction of the elbow joint does, however, remain an emergency and priority should be placed on this.  Historically medial epicondyles treated conservatively with excellent/good outcomes Associated with (up to 50%) elbow dislocation rate and (up to 20%) incarceration of fragment rate No evidence in long-term studies that any difference in outcome (including grip strength and instability) between conservative and surgically treated case Some articles report higher levels of pain and reduced range of movement in surgically treated patients Asymptomatic non-union rate up to 50% in conservatively managed cases Incarceration of fragment and open fractures absolute indications for surgery Amount of displacement not been shown to have an effect on outcome Displacement poorly measured on standard anteroposterior views Axial distal humerus view has best correlation with CT measured displacement Recent review of practice in the UK showed wide variation in management – Elbow Study Upcoming UK national SCIENCE trial