Up to now, separating Pb-Sb alloy obtained from jamesonite by conventional pyrometallurgy processes has many drawbacks such as long technological process, high energy consumption, and unsatisfactory separation efficiency. Thinking about the facts that antimony is used mainly in the form of Sb2O3, and separation of Sb2O3 with good volatility from the lead melt is very easy under vacuum, vacuum dynamic oxidation process, a new and effective process for separating lead and antimony from Pb-Sb alloy, was developed in this work. Experimental results revealed that the content of antimony in Pb-Sb alloy decreased from 42% to 0.30%, that the removal percent of antimony reached 99.59%, and that the PbO content in the distillate was 0.12% under melt temperature of 953 K, vacuum treatment time of 210 min, and air flow rate of 3 L/min, corresponding to the system pressure of 14 kPa. This study is of significance for separating Pb-Sb alloy obtained from jamesonite.Jamesonite (FePb However, there exist many disadvantages in this conventional method. For instance, the temperature of oxidation blowing in reverberatory furnace usually needs to be maintained about 1223 K and the temperature of antimony white's reduction is 1373 K [ Many researchers in China devoted themselves to improving existing process and investigated some methods such as vacuum distillation, reducing-matting smelting, and leaching technology in chloride system [ The Pb-Sb alloy used in the experiments, containing about 42% by weight antimony, was provided from Guangxi province in China. The vacuum level of system depends not only on the vacuum pump, but also on the seal condition of experimental equipment. Therefore, before the experiment, the whole system was first ensured in a good seal state and then the valve of glass rotor flowmeter was opened and adjusted so that a certain flow of air was introduced into reaction system. When the flow rate of air reached stability, the system pressure also reached stability. Each of the flow rates of air has the corresponding system pressure, in other words, if the flow rate of air has been set, the system pressure was determined. The flow rates of air and its corresponding system pressure were respectively given on two abscissas in Firstly, the apparatus was installed correctly as described in In this study, oxygen in the air is used as oxidizing agent. Because the percentage of oxygen in the air is a fixed value, the mass of oxygen can be controlled by adjusting the flow of air bubbled into the reaction system, namely, by adjusting the system pressure. Obviously, the higher the system pressure is, the more oxygen enters the system. This is the basis of controlling-oxygen method under vacuum. The main chemical reactions of this system are expressed as follows: The feasibility of the oxidation reaction can be determined by The Vacuum separation is based on different vapor pressure of each substance at the same temperature, and the substances which have a higher vapor pressure should be evaporated preferentially. As observed from the To research systematically the separation efficiency of Pb-Sb alloy, the factors influencing separation of Pb-Sb alloy were investigated under controlled conditions which includes melt temperature, air flow rate (the system pressure) and vacuum treatment time. The experiments were carried out at five different melt temperatures, 893 K, 913 K, 933 K, 953 K and 973 K for 60 min and the air flow rate of 2 L/min, corresponding to the system pressure of 11 kPa. As shown in The influence of air flow rate on separation of Pb-Sb alloy was investigated by adjusting the air flow rate in the range of 0.2–5 L/min, corresponding to the system pressure range of 5.8–22.6 kPa and the melt temperature of 953 K, vacuum treatment time of 60 min. The results were shown in As observed in To investigate the influence of vacuum treatment time on separation of Pb-Sb alloy, a series of experiments were carried out in vacuum treatment time range of 120–240 min. The melt temperature was kept constant at 933 K or 953 K, and the air flow rate of 3 L/min, corresponding to the system pressure of 14 kPa. In the previous experimental section as shown in As shown in  Moreover, In this paper, vacuum dynamic oxidation process was developed for removing antimony from Pb-Sb alloy. All factors of melt temperature, air flow rate, and vacuum treatment time, have an important effect on separation of Pb-Sb alloy. The results revealed that 99.59% of antimony was removed, that the content of antimony in Pb-Sb alloy decreased from 42% to 0.30%, and that the PbO content in the distillate was 0.12% while experimental conditions were as follows: the melt temperature of 953 K, vacuum treatment time of 210 min, and air flow rate of 3 L/min, corresponding to the system pressure of 14 kPa. In the existing reverberatory blowing process for separating Pb-Sb alloy, the temperature of reverberatory blowing is over 1223 K, and the separation efficiency of Pb and Sb is only about 80%. However, the temperature of vacuum dynamic oxidation process for separating Pb-Sb alloy is about 953 K or lower, the removal percent of antimony can reach above 99% and the residuum contains more 99% by weight lead under the optimum experimental conditions. Moreover, because no slag is produced, the loss of lead and antimony is fewer compared with the existing techniques. In vacuum dynamic oxidation process, the requirement for degree of vacuum is about 14 kPa. It is easy to attain such system pressure in the large scale (technical scale) furnace of vacuum treatment. Obviously, vacuum dynamic oxidation process has many advantages for treating Pb-Sb alloy such as energy saving, high efficient removal percent of antimony, simple technological process, and no or low environmental pollution. This work provided an efficient and promising way for separating lead and antimony from Pb-Sb alloy obtained from jamesonite. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at