Only a few publications discuss the mechanism of injury and morphology of the greater tuberosity fracture. Often, it is described as an avulsion fracture of the rotator cuff. The exact pathobiomechanics is uncertain. We performed a retrospective study and evaluated the mechanism of injury, fracture morphology, and displacement in 103 patients over a 16-year period. Fifty-nine patients sustained a greater tuberosity fracture as part of a traumatic shoulder dislocation. In 44 cases, an isolated greater tuberosity fracture was diagnosed. Of the patients, 47.6% reported a direct mechanism of injury and 32% reported an indirect mechanism of injury. There was one abduction–external rotation injury thought to be the cause of the greater tuberosity fracture. Of the patients, 20.4% were unable to reconstruct the mechanism of injury. Radiologic evaluation revealed an inferior displacement of the fracture on the anteroposterior view in 25% of cases. Our data contradict the theory that this fracture is the result of a bony avulsion of the rotator cuff. Potential mechanisms of injury are discussed. We conclude that there has to be a specific mechanism of injury for greater tuberosity fractures. Further investigations would be beneficial.Only a few publications in the medical literature over the last several decades have dealt with isolated greater tuberosity fractures. Different mechanisms of injury for greater tuberosity fractures have been proposed. The fracture is commonly described as an avulsion fracture of the rotator cuff. Radiographic evaluation requires radiographs of the shoulder in two planes. The recommended views are true anteroposterior radiographs in internal or external rotation, an axillary view, and a scapulolateral view. Classifications of the greater tuberosity fracture are primarily based on the morphology of the fracture. Our clinical experience with mechanism of injury is different from that reported in the literature. The aim of this retrospective study was to analyze the exact mechanism of injury and evaluate the fracture morphology of patients with fractures of the greater tuberosity. All patients who sustained a fracture of the greater tuberosity, either isolated or as a concomitant injury in shoulder dislocation, and were treated at our trauma department between January 1985 and March 2001 were reviewed and included in the study. Patients with pathologic fractures, open fractures, or inadequate documentation (incomplete x-ray series, incomplete history because of death, unknown whereabouts, or mental incompetence) were excluded. Data were collected from patient history and medical records by use of a standardized questionnaire. Patients were asked about the exact mechanism of injury at the initial evaluation in the emergency department. A follow-up questionnaire by telephone was then used to recount the mechanism of injury. This was compared with the documentation at the initial visit to ensure accurate information and recollection of the mechanism of injury. In addition, typical mechanisms of injury that were identified to be responsible for these fractures were suggested: (1) direct injury (a direct force or blow to the shoulder with the arm in adduction or a direct fall on the lateral aspect of the shoulder) and (2) indirect injury (a fall on the extended arm or flexed elbow or abduction–external rotation trauma). The patient had to select the appropriate mechanism. The injuries were also divided by severity into three groups: (1) low energy (ie, fall at home), (2) intermediate energy (ie, bicycle accident), and (3) high energy (ie, severe traffic accident). Radiographs were obtained in the standard anteroposterior and axillary views (before and after reduction) ( The descriptive and deductive analysis of the data was calculated with SPSS software (release 10.0.5, standard version; SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). For evaluation of the correlation between the mechanism of injury and appearance of the greater tuberosity fracture, the χ To give information about the degree of disagreement among the 3 observers, the evaluation of the radiographic results was calculated by use of the χ We evaluated 141 patients (73 male and 68 female patients; mean age, 48.7 years [range, 9-87 years]). There were 57 isolated fractures and 84 fractures that occurred in combination with a traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation. On the basis of the criteria of inclusion, 38 patients were excluded from the study: 11 had died, 19 were unavailable for documentation, and 8 were deemed mentally incompetent. Ultimately, 103 patients with a mean age of 49.7 years (range, 13-84 years) fulfilled the inclusion criteria of the study. There were 50 female patients, with a mean age of 53.3 years (range, 13-84 years), and 53 male patients, with a mean age of 46.4 years (range, 21-81 years). Of the patients, 59 (57.3%) sustained a greater tuberosity fracture as part of a traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation. In 44 cases (42.7%), an isolated greater tuberosity fracture was diagnosed. Of the fractures, 52 were caused by low-energy trauma, 35 by intermediate-energy trauma, and 16 by high-energy trauma. Of the patients, 21 (20.4%) were not able to reconstruct the mechanism because of concomitant head injuries. A direct mechanism was reported by 49 patients (47.6%), with a direct force to the shoulder in 2 and a direct fall on the shoulder in 47. An indirect mechanism of injury was reported by 33 patients (32%), with a fall on the outstretched arm in 25, a fall on the flexed elbow in 7, and an abduction–external rotation trauma in 1 ( The radiographic analysis revealed that, in 59 patients who sustained the fracture as part of a traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation, 36 had multiple fragments, 13 had 2 or 3 fractures, and 10 had a single fragment fracture of the greater tuberosity. In 34 patients in this group, the entire greater tuberosity was involved; in 13 cases, 50% to 75% of the greater tuberosity was involved; and in 10 cases, less than 50% of the greater tuberosity was involved. Analyses of 44 patients with an isolated greater tuberosity fracture showed multiple fragments in 19 cases, 2 or 3 fragments in 6, and a single-fragment fracture in 19. The entire greater tuberosity was involved in 26 cases, 50% to 75% was involved in 8, and less than 50% was involved in 7. A small fragment was found in 5 cases. Further details including the Spearman rank correlation coefficient (ρ) are presented in In 10 cases (9.7%) (χ Of the 59 patients with a greater tuberosity fracture as part of an anterior shoulder dislocation, 24 had an undisplaced fracture in the anteroposterior view, 9 had less than 1 cm of displacement, and 7 had more than 1 cm of displacement in the superior direction. Of these patients, 19 showed an inferior displacement, with 11 having less than 1 cm of displacement and 8 having more than 1 cm of displacement. Evaluation of the isolated greater tuberosity fracture revealed an undisplaced fracture in 30 cases, less than 1 cm of displacement in 5 cases, and more than 1 cm of displacement in the superior direction in 2 cases. Inferior displacement in this group was evaluated in 7 cases. Of the patients with a greater tuberosity fracture as part of an anterior shoulder dislocation, 27 had an undisplaced fracture, 7 had less than 1 cm of displacement, and 25 had more than 1 cm of displacement in the axillary view. Of the isolated greater tuberosity fractures, 19 were undisplaced, 5 had less than 1 cm of displacement, and 20 had more than 1 cm of displacement in the axillary view. Further details including the Spearman rank correlation coefficient (ρ) are presented in Isolated fractures of the greater tuberosity are rare. Typically, they are discussed in combination with proximal humeral fractures or in conjunction with a shoulder dislocation. Approximately 80% of the patients were able to provide detailed information about the trauma and mechanism of the injury. Analysis of the patients revealed that in 60% a direct mechanism and in 40% an indirect mechanism caused the fracture or shoulder dislocation with accompanying fracture. Data in the literature dealing with the mechanism of injury are contradictory. Different mechanisms are discussed, but the exact mechanism is still unknown. Greater tuberosity fractures are included in the accepted classification for proximal humeral fractures of Neer Our experience with the mechanism of injury was different from that in the literature. According to our data, in shoulder dislocations with associated greater tuberosity fractures, it appears that avulsion is not the leading mechanism of injury. Regarding the radiographs with shoulder dislocations, no displacement or inferior displacement of the greater tuberosity was detected in 78% of cases. Therefore, shearing against the glenoid rim with concomitant impression or depression fracture seems to be a more convincing mechanism as a cause of greater tuberosity fractures. This theory is further supported by the study of Richards et al. Weaknesses of the study include the retrospective design and the fact that patient recollection of the mechanism of injury, in some situations, is not reliable, depending on when they were asked to recount the mechanism. In our experience, we believe that comparison of the initial documentation to the follow-up phone interview does attempt to ensure consistent recollection of the mechanism of injury. Strengths of this study include the methodology and the large patient population. In conclusion, it appears that different mechanisms lead to greater tuberosity fractures. The common Hill-Sachs lesion in anterior shoulder dislocations, defined as an impression fracture at the posterolateral aspect of the proximal humerus, presents itself in its completed form as a greater tuberosity fracture. Further studies are recommended for a continuing understanding of the greater tuberosity fracture. 