This note describes a web based application called “Datamap” that has been developed to address the major challenge of capturing, classifying, organizing and making available geotechnical research data. Datamap is illustrated using an example project at the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF). The example project illustrates the interactive and accessible nature of the web-based application for hosting in-situ and laboratory site investigation data, field testing, construction details, monitoring results, reports and bibliography of related papers.Approaches for managing and sharing geotechnical data are out of step with the pace of advances in geotechnical testing techniques, methods of interpretation and development of new design methodologies. Presenting geotechnical data in a well-organized, systematic and easy to access manner is a challenge given the quantity and variety of laboratory, in situ characterization and field testing data and the spatial distribution of these data across a site. Indeed this is a major challenge in many scientific disciplines, where data is expensive and time consuming to collect and must be accessible to ensure value. The accessible results of a researcher’s work on a particular dataset are typically limited to a published paper. The actual data usually remains on the researcher’s or research institute’s hard drive, disconnected from fellow researchers working in the same field. The more researchers that are able to access the same dataset, the more likely it is that this dataset will be transformed into new and useful knowledge. This is consistent with international trends in major science initiatives, such as the publically accessible use of genetic sequence databases (e.g. see A novel web application, named “Datamap”, has been developed specifically to address the major challenge of capturing, classifying, organizing and making available geotechnical data. The application uses Google Maps to display pins distributed across a site that represent test locations that have been defined by recording GPS coordinates. Each pin provides a link to data collected from that location. For convenience, data can be filtered by location (or Pin ID) and by data (or test) type. This provides an intuitive approach for indexing information using an interactive map and avoids information overload that occurs with a typical computer file system. Datamap was developed to allow researchers to create and share “Projects”, and therefore provides a general platform for sharing geotechnical data. The use of Datamap is illustrated in this note via an example project at the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF) that forms part of the activities of the Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Geotechnical Science and Engineering (CGSE). The purpose of this note is twofold, firstly to showcase the Datamap web application to academics and practitioners from around the world and provide guidance on how to access and use the platform; and secondly to share an extensive data set from site investigation and field testing at the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF) by providing details on how to access the data through Datamap. Supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC), the Centre of Excellence for Geotechnical Science and Engineering (CGSE) established the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF) in Ballina, Northern New South Wales The Australian NFTF is a 6.5 Ha site on the Richmond River floodplain, located south of Emigrant Creek and west of Fishery Creek in Ballina, NSW, Australia. An aerial photograph of the site is shown in Three large scale trial embankments have been built One of the aims in establishing the Australian NFTF was to leave a lasting legacy to the engineering community by making the data freely available in digital form. This will ensure that this comprehensive data set can be reused by academics and practitioners from around the world and therefore maximize the impact of this publically funded research project. Access to the NFTF dataset can be accomplished in two steps. First, users register with the system at Once logged in, the user navigates to the “Join Project” tab (shown in In view mode, Google Maps is used to display pins that represent test locations across the site (see When a pin is selected, the metadata (i.e. information about the data) associated with that pin is displayed (see The left side of the screen provides users with the ability to filter the data by Pin ID or “Data type”, so that information of interest can be easily identified. For example, if a user is interested in “Triaxial” data only, then the box next to the “Triaxial” can be selected and after selecting the “Filter” button, only pins that contain triaxial data remain visible (see Datamap was developed as a general platform to enable researchers to create their own projects and share data. A user can create a project by selecting “My Projects” from the Map view screen and selecting “Create Project”, as shown in A project name must be entered, along with a project code. These details are required by other users to access the data contained within the project. Access details can be shared with a selected colleagues and treated much like a secure user name and password, or, as in the case with the NFTF project, they can be published to allow anyone to access the data. A “terms and conditions” message can also be specified, so that when a user joins the project, they must agree to specific terms and conditions in accessing the data. Once a project is created it can be selected for editing from the list of projects. There are four main menu options in editing a project, as shown in Pins can be added to the map under “Manage Pins”. This can be done using a street address, by specifying latitude and longitude or by clicking and dragging an interactive pin on a map. Managing data types simply involves specifying the types of data that will be contained within the project so they can be sorted or filtered later. For example, Datamap was built for the Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud platform. The system architecture, illustrated in This note describes a new web based platform for capturing, classifying, organizing and making available geotechnical data. The platform is illustrated using data from the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF), which is part of the ARC Centre of Excellence for Geotechnical Science and Engineering (CGSE). The web application was built using modern cloud-based technologies that minimize the hosting cost, maximize the reliability. The application ensures that the comprehensive NFTF data set can be reused by academics and practitioners from around the world and will therefore help maximize the impact of this publically-funded research project. Datamap also enables users to setup and manage other projects, and therefore provides a general platform for sharing geotechnical information. This work forms part of the activities of the Centre for Offshore Foundation Systems (COFS), established in 1997 under the