Some soils under tropical forests in western Thailand are derived from skarn complexes of hydrothermally metamorphosed granitic, calcareous and ultramafic rocks. We used data from six large, long-term forest ecological research plots to compare the soils derived from skarn with forest soils derived from granites and sedimentary parent materials elsewhere Thailand. The soils derived from skarn are Vermic Phaeozems and have deep, dark, worm-worked topsoils and bimodal particle size distributions of coarse sand and grit in clay or fine loam matrices. They are eutrophic with respect to both labile and non-labile forms of the mineral nutrients. The soils derived from other parent materials are mostly Acrisols. Analyses of variance for the cationic nutrients taken independently clearly distinguished the Phaeozems from the Acrisols. The two groups are also stoichiometrically distinct with respect to the main cationic nutrients, as depicted graphically by nutrient roses and as quantified as M+:TEB ratios. The cationic stoichiometric proportions also differentiated between the Acrisols on different plots and parent materials; and between the Phaeozems in our study and eutrophic soils in lowland forests elsewhere in the lowland tropics, with the Phaeozems having lower exchangeable Ca and Mg contents but higher exchangeable K. Subsoil cationic stoichiometric profiles appear to derive from parent materials, but those of the topsoil may be modified by selective biotic recycling. Nonetheless, inherited lithogenic stoichiometric ratios are still apparent in our topsoils. The forests on skarn in West Thailand are varied and overlap with those on Acrisols and other soils. This confirms earlier findings that climate and disturbance history have more influence than soils on the regional distribution of forest types in Thailand, although soils can be important at more local scales.Skarns (calcsilicates) form when siliceous hydrothermal fluids suffuse carbonate or mafic country rocks in contact zones around granite intrusions. They are mineralogically heterogeneous, depending on the compositions of the suffusing fluids and the host rock. Many skarns have porphyritic structures, with coarse quartz or feldspar crystals embedded in fine-grained matrices of intermediate, mafic or ultramafic composition. Skarns are common in contact zones around large granite intrusions, but their outcrops are not extensive. Their location and mode of formation give considerable scope for mineralization, and skarn ore bodies have been prospected and mined for a wide range of resources, including arsenic, copper, gold, molybdenum, tin, tungsten, and rare earth elements. Many studies of soils derived from skarn focus on their potential as pedochemical indicators for mineral prospecting ( There are few studies of the pedological and edaphic aspects of soils derived from skarn. The combination of porphyritic quartz and base-rich matrices can give rise to eutrophic soils with high contents of siliceous coarse sand and fine gravel. This mixture gives soils derived from skarn unusual combinations of mineralogical, chemical and physical properties. Soils derived from skarn in Portugal have distinctive clay mineral composition, with substantial contents of pedogenic talc ( Some of the lowland tropical forests of the Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary in Western Thailand are located on a complex of skarn and less metamorphosed calcareous and igneous country rocks ( The stoichiometric balance between nutrients can be as important as their individual contents. Most previous stoichiometric studies in tropical forest soils have focused on relationships between anionic macronutrients, i.e. C, N and P ( We here compare forest soils derived from skarn with those on other parent materials in Thailand. We test whether cation stoichiometry enhances the differentiation between the Phaeozems derived from skarn and the Acrisols; between Acrisols on different plots and parent materials; and between the Phaeozems derived from skarn in Thailand and eutrophic forest soils elsewhere in the tropics. We characterized the soils of six large long-term inviolate forest ecological research plots in Thailand, including three on the skarn complex in the Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary in the west of the country. The plots span 12 degrees of latitude ( All six plots are located on the Sibumasu terrane of the Eurasian continental macro-plate (   Auger samples were collected from the main horizons in the pit profiles, and at depths of 0–10 and 40–50 Auger samples were collected from the main horizons in the pit profiles, and at depths of 0–10 and 40–50  Differences in nutrient contents and stoichiometric ratios were compared by one-way analyses of variance (Anova) and ‘t’ tests for non-paired data. Highly correlated soil attributes were consolidated by factor analysis after removing silt, total N and CEC to avoid linear dependence. After a preliminary scree test, the first five principal components were simplified by Varimax rotation. We used SPSS v21 for the statistical analyses. The soils of the plots on skarn in West Thailand were described and sampled in 2004 and 2005, by the same operators using the same methods. Preliminary Anova showed no significant inter-annual variations for the morphological and granulometric variables, soil organic matter attributes (Organic C, Total N, and C:N) or for labile (available and exchangeable) nutrients. The data for these variables from the two years were consolidated. However, inter-annual differences for total nutrient contents were significant. The discrepancies probably arose during extraction, rather than in the sampling or assay stages. They precluded consolidation, and the 2004 and 2005 data for total nutrients were treated separately. The soils on the Khao Chong, Chiang Dao, and Mae Ping plots are morphologically similar, moderately deep, reddish loams ( The soils on the Khao Chong, Chiang Dao, and Mae Ping plots are morphologically similar, moderately deep, reddish loams (  The Acrisols are acid and have low or moderate exchangeable base status. The Acrisols at Chiang Dao are less dystrophic than the others, and have base saturations > The subsoils of the deep decalcified colluvial red Ferralic Acrisols at Mae Ping have similar exchangeable base status to those at Chiang Dao, but the topsoils are more dystrophic. The Skeletic Acrisols on the meta-sediments in the south of the plot have fewer exchangeable cations in the subsoil than the decalcified clay but have moderate total K. This combination of low exchangeable with moderate total K is characteristic of many tropical forest Acrisols on argillaceous parent materials ( The Phaeozems derived from skarn are distinctly eutrophic, with nearly neutral topsoils and only slightly acid subsoils, and base saturations The contrasts between the Phaeozems and Acrisols are less clear for total than labile nutrients ( The first five principal components accounted for 70% of the total variance, and were Varimax-rotated ( The first five principal components accounted for 70% of the total variance, and were Varimax-rotated (Supplementary Table S2). The first Varimax factor (26% of total variance) is a cline of labile nutrient fertility, and clearly segregates the Phaeozems from the rest. The second (21%) is granulometric, and clay content is positively associated with totals of some nutrients, especially the micronutrients. There are also strong associations of total Ca and Mg with sand on this factor, which are attributed to the feldspathic coarse sand in the Phaeozems and limestone fragments in the Eutric Cambisol at Mae Ping. The third factor (10%) identifies a weak cline from shallow and stony to deep and stone-free soils, and probably reflects available moisture capacity. This factor is also positively associated with C:N, and negatively with total K and Cu. The significant loadings on the fourth factor (7%) appear to be associated with the proportion of micas in the parent material. The fifth factor (6%) is associated with the regional contrast in micronutrient contents. Anova showed that differences between the plots were significant for the contents of Ca, Mg and K in both topsoils and subsoils. When the comparisons were restricted to the Acrisols, only P (both available and total), base saturation and Fe failed to show highly significant inter-plot differences at both depths. Exchangeable Ca, organic C, and total Mn were highly significant for topsoils but only marginal in the subsoils ( Anova showed that differences between the plots were significant for the contents of Ca, Mg and K in both topsoils and subsoils. When the comparisons were restricted to the Acrisols, only P (both available and total), base saturation and Fe failed to show highly significant inter-plot differences at both depths. Exchangeable Ca, organic C, and total Mn were highly significant for topsoils but only marginal in the subsoils (Supplementary Table S3). The stoichiometric roses ( The differences between the Acrisols for stoichiometric ratios were significant at p The differences between the Acrisols for stoichiometric ratios were significant at p We compared the Phaeozems with a range of eutrophic forest soils in other parts of the tropics. Comparisons between legacy soil data are complicated by methodological variations between laboratories and over time. The discrepancies are particularly acute for total nutrients, because of the different extractants used. Most legacy data for exchangeable cations were obtained by leaching with neutral ammonium acetate, and comparisons between them are less problematic. For our comparisons, we extracted data for eutrophic forest soils in Sarawak ( For our comparisons, we extracted data for eutrophic forest soils in Sarawak ( Soil survey in Thailand has focused on agricultural areas, and there have been only limited surveys in forests. This makes correlation of the soils of the plots with national soil series problematic. We therefore classified the soils according to the World Reference Base ( For the soils derived from skarn, the dark, worm-worked upper horizons and Ca contents of satisfy the criteria for the mollic epipedon, and the soils qualify as Phaeozems. The depth of wormcast material is enough for most of them to be Vermic Phaeozems. The dominant pedomorphic role of earthworms is unusual for tropical forests, where they are generally subordinate to termites ( For the soils derived from skarn, the dark, worm-worked upper horizons and Ca contents of satisfy the criteria for the mollic epipedon, and the soils qualify as Phaeozems. The depth of wormcast material is enough for most of them to be Vermic Phaeozems. The dominant pedomorphic role of earthworms is unusual for tropical forests, where they are generally subordinate to termites ( The stoichiometric ratios significantly differentiate the Phaeozems from the Acrisols. They also significantly improve differentiation within the pantropical set of eutrophic soils. As well as confirming morphological and other pedo-taxonomic differentiae, stoichiometry has edaphic implications and can indicate potential nutrient imbalances and effective deficiencies that may not be apparent in data for single nutrients. The stoichiometric ratios suggest that cationic imbalances are less likely in Phaeozems derived from skarn than in the other tropical eutrophic soils, in which excessive Ca or Mg may cause K deficiencies. Our comparisons stress the lithology of the source rocks, and assume that cation stoichiometric profiles are largely inherited from the composition and weathering of the soil parent material. However, as soils are increasingly leached and the primary minerals are progressively weathered, selective plant uptake and recycling may modify soil nutrient balances. Labile stocks of limiting nutrients are hypothesized to become increasingly concentrated in topsoils and to occupy increasing proportions of topsoil exchange complexes ( As soils and forest both vary with climate, the distinction between climatic and edaphic influences on the regional distribution of forest types is problematic. The total annual rainfall and the length and intensity of the dry season appear to be the main determinants of the regional distributions of forests types in Thailand ( Although the three skarn plots in Western Thailand are within a few kilometers of each other, and have similar climates, parent materials, and soils, they support different forests ( The Acrisols in this study are similar to, but slightly more fertile than, those of other Asian dipterocarp forest soils ( Cation stoichiometry supplements and complements conventional taxonomic differentiation of forest soils in Thailand. Stoichiometric ratios enhance the characterization of soil nutrient status, and highlight possible nutrient imbalances. As stoichiometry involves no additional laboratory analyses and resources, it is a potentially useful additional data analysis for the routine edaphic characterization of tropical forest soils. We are grateful to many colleagues for assistance in the fieldwork and data processing, particularly the forest inventory teams at Huai Kha Khaeng and Khao Chong. All of the plots are maintained by the National Parks Wildlife and Plant Conservation Department of the Royal Government of Thailand. The 50  The following KMZ file contains the Google map of the most important areas described in this article. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version, at