Small companies may not have an established salary structure and simply pay what is required to hire or keep an employee. Most companies maintain a salary structure to prevent inconsistencies, provide fairness, and for budgeting. The most common salary structure is to “stair step” the salary in an orderly way usually dependent on the employees increasing value to the company.Small companies may not have an established salary structure and simply pay what is required to hire or keep an employee. Most companies maintain a salary structure to prevent inconsistencies, provide fairness, and for budgeting. The most common salary structure is to “stair step” the salary in an orderly way usually dependent on the employees increasing value to the company. Here is a simplified example of how this works: The aforementioned annual salary rates are fictitious and are for illustration purposes only. The actual salary paid to an employee would depend on their position and their performance. In the case of a new hire junior engineer, for example, with no experience, might start at the minimum salary $50K. Thereafter, for every year of employment, the salary is adjusted based on the engineer’s performance. After several years, the employee might receive a salary adjustment equating to the “mid”point of $65K. This would imply that the engineer’s performance is equivalent to that of an average engineer in that company/department. In another situation, an experienced senior engineer is beyond the midpoint at, say, $90K and receives an excellent annual review. It may be entirely appropriate to Because of inflation and market competition, salary ranges are often adjusted upward particularly during periods of high inflation, say +3%. When this occurs, employees often receive salary increase corresponding to the movement of the range. Therefore the revised scale for a principal engineer might, for example, look like the following: Often the employee’s raise consists of two parts, +3% for range adjustment and +3% for performance enhancement, totaling +6%. Or if no performance improvement is realized, the employee receives only +3%. Some companies identify the range adjustment as a result of inflation and may present it in that way to the employee so they recognize the difference between performance and inflation. Inflation adjustments were particularly significant during the 1980s when we witnessed double digit cost increases. Many companies will maintain the salary stair step data confidentially. However, you may want to ask approximately where you are in the salary range. This will help you determine whether you are progressing satisfactorily and if you may be in line for a promotion to the next level. If you are topped out or near the maximum and not a candidate for promotion, you may want to think about a job change. To complete this topic, one should be curious as to what current salaries look like for technical careers. A recent salary survey was compiled by the Wall Street Journal title “What’s My Major Worth.” The point of the article was that if you are looking for a high paying job, “you might want to consider some sort of engineering.” Based on 2016 salary data,