Transport and storage of low temperature sensitive products is an issue worldwide due to changes of the lifestyle and population increase. In the recent years, thermal energy storage (TES) using phase change materials (PCMs) is being highly studied and developed for cold storage applications. Furthermore, the PCM are normally encapsulated in containers and added in the available systems, usually in food processes. Therefore safety constraints as the compatibility of the PCM with other materials have to take into account. Hence the main goal of the paper is to study the corrosion effect of different metals and polymer materials in contact with some PCM used in low temperature applications. Results show that copper and carbon steel must be avoided as PCM containers, and aluminium is not recommended; stainless steel 316 is recommended when in contact with the tested PCM. Moreover, PP, PS, PET, and HDPE are not affected by a process of degradation and are also compatible with the PCM studied.Food transportation and storage at low temperatures have shown significant development over the recent years. Moreover in order to reduce energy demand, cold storage systems at low temperatures are being modified in order to store energy when it is available but not needed and, to release it when it is needed. It is well known that phase change materials (PCMs) are one of the possible solutions to provide high energy density in thermal energy storage (TES) systems. Some researchers have investigated the addition of PCM in different cold storage systems and units in order to enhance food quality and, to reduce electricity consumption during storage and transportation Nowadays, different types of chemicals such as inorganic salts, organic compounds as alkenes, and water are used as low temperature PCM for cold storage Nine PCM formulations were analysed in this paper. Three of them were based on commercial options used in previous studies to improve the thermal performance of freezers and low temperature storage and transportation units PCM-D, which is 19% Ammonium Chloride (NH Four common metals were selected as PCM containers: copper, aluminium, stainless steel 316, and carbon steel. Metal samples used had the dimensions of 50 Four polymer materials were selected as PCM containers: polypropylene (PP), high density polyethylene (HDPE), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), and polystyrene (PS) provided by PHYWE. Their dimensions were 12 The experimental methodology was divided in three steps: Preparation of the sample. Corrosion and degradation test for metal and polymeric materials, respectively. Sample cleaning-up. The method of preparation was different for metals and polymers materials. Metal samples were obtained from cutting big plates; therefore they had to be cleaned with acetone in order to remove the oil coming from the cutting process. In contrast, no cleaning process was done to polymer samples since manufacturers sent samples clean with the required dimensions. Both kind of samples were weighted in a precision balance (4 decimal digits) AG135 from Mettler-Toledo before starting the experimental process. The test methodology was the same for both metals and polymer materials. Once the samples were weighted, they were immersed inside glass test tubes containing the PCM formulations in order to combine each metal and polymer sample with the nine different PCM formulations. Then, the glass tubes were covered with plastic paraffin to avoid contact with environmental agents. As the phase change temperature of all the PCM tested were around −18 Both metal and polymer materials were removed from the test tubes after 1 Based on the previous methodology used On the other hand, in order to evaluate the polymer materials, mass change (Δ As two different families of materials were analysed here, the results and discussion of the experimentation done is divided in metal and polymer materials. Tubes containing PCM-G (19% NH The corrosion rate results (mg/cm In the case of copper samples, some test tubes presented blue On the other hand, when aluminium is used, bubbles appeared from the beginning of the experimentation with all PCM formulations except with PCM-A (C-18) ( When carbon steel is analysed, in all PCM combinations orange precipitate appeared, hence it is a clear indication of corrosion, despite no significant pH change was observed. In the case of stainless steel 316, neither visual phenomena nor significant pH change were observed (  The results of mass gain (%) for each PCM/polymer combination in time are presented in In this study the corrosion effect of metal/PCM and polymer/PCM combinations used in low temperature processes is analysed. Copper, aluminium, stainless steel, and carbon steel were the metals considered as containers. Polypropylene (PP), high density polyethylene (HDPE), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polystyrene (PS) were the polymers selected. Three of the nine PCM studied were commercial products, while the rest were developed at the University of Lleida taking into account the phase change temperature (around −18 The suitability of metal and polymer samples was determined considering the corrosion/degradation rate through the time (1, 4 and 12 Copper and carbon steel must be avoided as PCM containers in any case due to their high corrosion rate mainly, but also because of the presence of precipitates and pH changes. Furthermore, aluminium is not recommended because of pitting and bubbles appearance on its surface which could cause changes in material properties such as holes in the container. On the other hand, the low corrosion rate reached by all the PCM combinations with stainless steel 316 allows recommending it for long use as PCM container material. In all cases analysed, the candidates that were thickened provides a great improvement in preventing corrosion. Second, PP, PS, PET, and HDPE do not show important changes in weight or physical appearance of the samples. In addition, they have no formation of precipitates or pitting processes, or bubbles. This means that they are not affected by a process of degradation and are compatible with the PCM studied. To sum up, the most suitable metal to act as a cold storage container to encapsulate PCM containing salts solution is stainless steel. Moreover, the addition of little quantities of a thickening material in the PCM formulations reduces significantly the corrosion rate. On the other hand, PP, PS, PET and HDPE can be perfectly used as cold storage container to encapsulate the studied PCM. The work is partially funded by the Spanish Government (ENE2008-06687-C02-01/CON and ENE2011-22722) and the European Union (EFFIBUILDINGS). The authors would like to thank the Catalan Government for the quality accreditation given to their research group GREA (2009 SGR 534). Eduard Oró would like to thank University of Lleida for his research fellowship.