The catalytic influence of Sulfolobus metallicus in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite at 70 °C and pH 1.5 was studied in shake flask experiments. Leaching was conducted in an iron-free basal medium with a −80 #+120 # chalcopyrite sample, and was characterized from monitoring in solution the pH, Eh, copper and iron concentration, and cell population. In order to evaluate separately the influence of planktonic and attached cells on the catalytic process, in some experiments the microorganisms were prevented from reaching the chalcopyrite surface by keeping them in a chamber separated by a 0.1 Millipore membrane. In a complementary experimental series, the concentration of different sulfur species dissolved in the solution was determined with HPLC at different conditions, under nitrogen or air, abiotic or inoculated with S. metallicus.
                  Maximum copper dissolution was reached when at least one fraction of the inoculated microorganisms were able to approach chalcopyrite surface. In this case, notably, the fraction of the population of microorganisms that were prevented from reaching chalcopyrite was still observed to increase. In experiments where all the inoculated microorganisms were prevented from reaching chalcopyrite, the cell population did not grow. In this case copper dissolution was only 50% of the amount reached when full bacterial contact was allowed, and was similar to the amount of copper dissolved at aerated–abiotic conditions. HPLC results on the analysis of dissolved sulfur species showed that when microorganisms were able to reach chalcopyrite there was accumulation in solution of thiosulfate (S2O3)−2 and sulfite (SO3)−2, in addition to the formation of bisulfite (HSO3)−, bisulfate (HSO4)− and sulfate (SO4)−2 which was also observed in aerobic–abiotic conditions. It could be concluded that in bioleaching of chalcopyrite in the presence of S. metallicus there is a cooperative action between attached cells which can oxidize sulfur-containing surface layers on chalcopyrite, forming thiosulfate, sulfite and bisulfite, and planktonic cells which further oxidize these intermediate compound to bisulfate and sulfate. Removal of surface passivating layers under the catalytic action of attached microorganisms is a key catalytic factor as it greatly enhances the oxidative action of ferric iron on chalcopyrite.Chalcopyrite can be dissolved at convenient rates in the presence of thermophilic microorganisms such as In the bioleaching of chalcopyrite with The aim of the present work is to study in more detail the catalytic role of Leaching experiments were conducted using a − The microorganism was a pure strain of Leaching experiments were conducted in 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 ml of iron-free basal medium at pH In one experimental series, series A, four experiments of chalcopyrite leaching in iron-free basal medium were conducted in duplicate in the following conditions: experiment (a) in aerated conditions, with In a complementary experimental series, series B, three similar experiments of chalcopyrite leaching in iron-free basal medium were conducted in duplicate, using standard shake flasks: experiment (a) in aerated conditions with basal medium inoculated with Results of experimental series A on copper dissolution, iron dissolution, sulfate and microorganisms population are shown in Results in These results can be explained by the different iron oxidation states that predominated in abiotic and inoculated experiments, evidenced from monitoring solution Eh during chalcopyrite leaching. In abiotic conditions, either in aerated conditions or under nitrogen, Eh values stabilized in the range 600–620 mV/SHE, indicating that about 99.7% of dissolved iron was present as Fe   Planktonic cell numbers determined in compartment A in experiment (a) reached up to 1.3 The increase of planktonic cells observed in experiment (a) can be in principle analyzed in terms of the possible growth of these microorganisms out of the oxidation of dissolved ferrous ion produced during chalcopyrite dissolution. One can estimate the maximum population of microorganisms that could have grown assuming the extreme situation in which chalcopyrite is solely dissolved by ferric leaching and all the required ferric ion had been generated by the microorganisms. Assuming that ferric leaching of chalcopyrite occurred according to the stoichiometry: 4Fe A complementary experimental series was conducted, series B, in which sulfur intermediate compounds were monitored during chalcopyrite leaching. Results of copper dissolution in these experiments (data not included) confirmed the trends observed in series A: maximum copper recovery was reached in experiment (a) where inoculated A summary of the different intermediate soluble sulfur compounds detected under the three different experimental conditions is the following. When chalcopyrite was leached in abiotic conditions under nitrogen, experiment (c), only the species SO  Following the scheme proposed by other authors for the oxidation of elemental sulfur by attached and planktonic Accordingly, the net rate of formation of the intermediate S The relatively faster rate of reaction Data of copper dissolution in series A, experiments (a), (b) and (c), were analyzed according to the unreacted core kinetic model ( In the leaching of chalcopyrite in iron-free basal medium at 70 °C under abiotic–aerated conditions, the presence of oxygen triggers dissolution of chalcopyrite, which shows as an increase in copper and iron concentration with respect to the one obtained under nitrogen (see When Finally, when at least one fraction of the inoculated  In bioleaching of chalcopyrite with The presence of The population of Planktonic population of This work was funded by the BHP Billiton and Conicyt Chile under Fondef Project D 00 I 1050. V. Gautier thanks CONICYT for the scholarship for doctorate studies.