A sequential aerobic completely stirred tank reactor (CSTR) following the anaerobic migrating blanket reactor (AMBR) was used to treat a synthetic wastewater containing 2,4-dinitrotoluene (2,4-DNT). A Box–Wilson statistical experiment design was used to determine the effects of 2,4-DNT and the hydraulic retention times (HRTs) on 2,4-DNT and COD removal efficiencies in the AMBR reactor. The 2,4-DNT concentrations in the feed (0–280mg/L) and the HRT (0.5–10 days) were considered as the independent variables while the 2,4-DNT and chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal efficiencies, total and methane gas productions, methane gas percentage, pH, total volatile fatty acid (TVFA) and total volatile fatty acid/bicarbonate alkalinity (TVFA/Bic.Alk.) ratio were considered as the objective functions in the Box–Wilson statistical experiment design in the AMBR. The predicted data for the parameters given above were determined from the response functions by regression analysis of the experimental data and exhibited excellent agreement with the experimental results. The optimum HRT which gave the maximum COD (97.00%) and 2,4-DNT removal (99.90%) efficiencies was between 5 and 10 days at influent 2,4-DNT concentrations 1–280mg/L in the AMBR. The aerobic CSTR was used for removals of residual COD remaining from the AMBR, and for metabolites of 2,4-DNT. The maximum COD removal efficiency was 99% at an HRT of 1.89 days at a 2,4-DNT concentration of 239mg/L in the aerobic CSTR. It was found that 280mg/L 2,4-DNT transformed to 2,4-diaminotoluene (2,4-DAT) via 2-amino-4-nitrotoluene (2-A-4-NT) and 4-amino-2-nitrotoluene (4-A-2-NT) in the AMBR. The maximum 2,4-DAT removal was 82% at an HRT of 8.61 days in the aerobic CSTR. The maximum total COD and 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies were 99.00% and 99.99%, respectively, at an influent 2,4-DNT concentration of 239mg/L and at 1.89 days of HRT in the sequential AMBR/CSTR.2,4-Dinitrotoluene (2,4-DNT) (CAS No. 121-14-2) is one of the six dinitrotoluene isomers and is used commercially as an intermediate in the production of dyes and as a precursor to toluene diisocyanate, which is used to manufacture polyurethane foams. Besides, DNT is used as a waterproofing, plasticizing and gelatinizing agent in explosives and as a modifier for smokeless powders Biological methods have been proposed as a more affordable and complete solution for degrading DNT Combined anaerobic/aerobic processes are a viable alternative for the treatment of xenobiotic compounds such as 2,4-DNT that are difficult to treat by traditional processes The AMBR was developed as a high rate anaerobic treatment system that combines compartmentalization, continuous flow, short hydraulic retention time, simple design, no gas–liquid separation, with no feed distribution system and no recycling The Box–Wilson design is a response surface methodology, an empirical modeling technique, devoted to the evaluation of the relationship of a set of controlled experimental factors and observed results. This optimization process involves three major steps: performing the statistical design experiments, estimating the coefficients in a mathematical model, and predicting the response and checking the adequacy of the model The major objectives of this study were to investigate the effects of HRT and influent 2,4-DNT concentrations on the removal efficiencies of COD, 2,4-DNT; total, methane gas productions, methane percentages, the pH levels, TVFA and TVFA/Bic.Alk. ratios in effluent of the AMBR using a Box–Wilson statistical experiment design method and to determine the optimal conditions maximizing the percentage of COD and 2,4-DNT removal in the AMBR. Furthermore, the effect of the aerobic CSTR reactor on the yields of COD remaining from the AMBR and 2,4-DNT metabolites produced in the AMBR reactor was investigated. A continuously fed stainless steel AMBR and CSTR were used in sequence for the experiment. A schematic diagram of the lab-scale sequential AMBR/CSTR used in this study is presented in The AMBR was divided into three equal compartments with two vertical stainless steel sheets and was operated by reversing the flow periodically. Round openings with a diameter of 2.5 Synthetic wastewater contained glucose, NaHCO Partially granulated anaerobic sludge was used as seed in the AMBR and was obtained from an UASB reactor containing partially granulated biomass (containing Total suspended solid (TSS) and mixed liquor suspended solid (MLSS) in granulated and activated sludge were measured by the filtration technique using membrane filters with pores sized 0.45 Bicarbonate alkalinity (Bic.Alk.) and TVFA concentrations were determined by titrating the sample with 0.1N of standard sulphuric acid solution to first pH 5.1, then from pH 5.1–3.5 2,4-DNT, 2,4-DAT, 2A4NT and 4A2NT were determined by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) The AMBR was operated through 30 days only with glucose under steady-state conditions for acclimation of partially granulated anaerobic biomass in the AMBR. The steady state was arbitrarily considered as variation of COD in the effluent and the variations of the methane gas production and methane percentage less than 5%. COD removal efficiency and methane gas percentage were measured as 92% and 56%, respectively, after 30 days of operation period in the AMBR. After this operation time, the COD removal efficiency and methane gas percentage were constant for 7 consecutive days, showing that steady-state conditions were reached in the AMBR without 2,4-DNT addition. Continuous operation with 2,4-DNT was started after the start-up period.  The experimental conditions through continuous operation of AMBR were determined by the Box–Wilson statistical experiment design. This method was used to investigate the effects of the two independent variables (HRT and 2,4-DNT concentration in the influent) on the response functions (COD removal efficiency, 2,4-DNT removal efficiency, biogas production, effluent pH, TVFA and TVFA/Bic.Alk. ratio) and to determine the optimal conditions maximizing the percent COD and 2,4-DNT removals in the AMBR. In the experimental procedure, 2,4-DNT concentration ( In this study, COD and 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies, biogas production, effluent pH, TVFA concentration and TVFA/Bic.Alk. ratios were considered as dependent variables in the Box–Wilson statistical design method. The design principle includes three type of combinations: the axial ( The predicted COD removal efficiency ( Experimental results found in this study were used to determine the coefficients of the response function (Eq. The coefficients determined from the response function ( A significant correlation between the experimental and the predicted 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies was found in the AMBR (    A decrease in the predicted COD removal efficiencies of the AMBR in the effluent of the AMBR with reduction of HRTs and an increase of 2,4-DNT concentrations are expected phenomena (see Variations of predicted 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies versus increasing 2,4-DNT concentrations are illustrated in In the present study the optimum HRT was considered as the HRT which gives the highest COD and 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies in the AMBR. Thus, the optimum HRTs and 2,4-DNT concentration in the influent resulting in maximum COD (96.70%) and 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies (around 100%) were determined between 2.5 and 10 days and <40 The results obtained in this study were higher that those reported by Sponza and Atalay If the AMBRs were to be operated at lower HRTs giving higher COD and 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies, the recommended optimum HRTs would change depending on influent 2,4-DNT concentrations.  The maximum methane gas productions were found around 4.0 As shown in The studies performed previously using the same AMBR The predicted methane gas percentages with increasing 2,4-DNT concentrations in the AMBR are depicted in The methane gas percentage decreased with decreasing of HRTs due to high TVFA accumulation in the AMBR at low HRTs and at high 2,4-DNT concentrations ( pH, alkalinity additionally volatile fatty acids are integral expressions of the acid–base conditions of anaerobic microbial treatment process, as well as an intrinsic index of the balance between two of the most important microbial groups, the obligate methanogens and the aceticlastic methanogens TVFA production is an important step for the metabolism of organisms under anaerobic conditions. Low VFA concentration indicates a stable reactor performance. In anaerobic compartmentalized reactor, the first compartment is referred as “acid fermentation” and involves the production of volatile fatty acids (VFA), while the second phase is referred as “methane fermentation” because the VFAs are converted to methane and carbon dioxide production Alkalinity is one of the most central concepts because it controls the pH and this is a measure to buffer the pH in the presence of acids in the anaerobic reactors TVFA/Bic.Alk. ratio gives necessary information to determine the stability of the anaerobic reactor. If the TVFA/Bic.Alk. ratio is lower than 0.4, the reactor is stable. When the TVFA/Bic.Alk. ratio is lower than 0.8, the reactor system is moderately stable or unstable, as reported by Behling et al. A CSTR following the AMBR was used for the residual COD removal and mineralization of 2,4-DNT metabolites. The predicted or experimental effluent COD concentrations and the COD removal efficiencies in the aerobic reactor are shown in It is reported that 2,4-DNT was transformed to aminonitrotoluenes such as 2,4-diaminotoluene (2,4-DAT), 2-amino-4-nitrotoluene (2Am4NT), and 4-amino-2-nitrotoluene (4Am2NT) in the AMBR  A Box–Wilson statistical experiment design was used to determine the effects of operating parameters such as HRT and 2,4-DNT concentrations in the feed on COD and 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies, total gas and methane gas productions, methane percentage; pH, TVFA and TVFA/Bic.Alk. ratio in the effluent of the AMBR. In a Box–Wilson statistical experiment design, response function coefficients were determined by regression analysis of the experimental data and predicted results obtained from the response functions were in good agreement with the experimental results indicating the reliability of the methodology used. The COD remaining from the anaerobic reactor and mineralization of 2,4-DNT metabolites were performed in the aerobic stage in the CSTR. In AMBR, 2,4-DNT was converted to 2,4-DAT via 2-A-4-NT and 4-A-2-NT, which are easily degraded in the CSTR. The maximum total COD and 2,4-DNT removal efficiencies were 99.00% and 99.99%, respectively, at an influent 2,4-DNT concentration of 239 This study was executed as a part of the research activities of the Environmental Microbiology Laboratory of Environmental Engineering Department of the Projects numbered