Ten production blasts and one single-hole confined blast have been monitored in two quarries in order to assess the measurable forms of energy in which the energy delivered by the explosive is transformed in rock blasting. The seismic field from seismographs readings, the initial velocity of the blasted rock face obtained from high-speed video camera records, and the fragment size distributions from image analysis of the muckpile material are used to determine the seismic wave energy, the kinetic energy and the fracture energy, respectively, transferred in the blasting process. The blasting data and the methods of calculation of the energy terms from those are described in detail. Heat of explosion and useful work to 100MPa have been used as descriptions of the energy of explosives. The maximum total energy measured accounts for not more than 26% of the available explosive energy if this is rated as the heat of explosion, though lower figures are usually obtained. The values measured for each of the energy components range from 2% to 6% of the total energy available for the fragmentation energy, 1–3% for the seismic energy and 3–21% for the kinetic energy. For the confined shothole, the seismic energy was 9% of the heat of explosion. The uncertainty of the calculated energies is analyzed from the variability of the measured data. Particularly important influential parameters are the treatment of the fines tail of the fragment size distribution in the determination of the fragmentation energy, and the use of P or S wave velocity values, and whether these are determined from in situ or from laboratory measurements, in the calculation of the seismic energy.Explosives are the primary source of energy for rock breaking in the mining, quarrying and construction industries. The work into which the energy is converted transforms rock into a distribution of fragments and displaces them so that they can be conveniently loaded and hauled for further comminution and processing. Although the energetic qualification of explosives is not particularly high (any fuel/oxygen mixture used in the power industry delivers more energy per unit mass than do explosives), they are compact sources, which are able to deliver their energy in an autonomous form at a very fast rate. This results in reaction products at high pressure that can perform mechanical work in deforming and breaking the material in their vicinity. This is what makes explosives useful and in many cases irreplaceable for rock excavation. This fast energy delivery, in the form of a large amount of reaction products at high pressure and high temperature, is inseparable of a number of transformations other than the desired fragmentation and throw, such as the seismic wave into the rock. Any explosive data sheet or commercial brochure quotes some type of energetic description. Explosives energy is rated in a variety of ways, obtained either from calculation or from experimental tests. However, the questions of what amount of that explosive energy is transferred to the rock and what fraction of it is converted into efficient work in the usual civil application of rock blasting remains largely undefined. Although the measurement of some of the effects of the explosive in rock is customary (vibration, fragmentation and, to a minor extent, rock movement), they are usually conducted for blast control purpose and the results are rarely cast in terms of their energy content. The reason for this may be that it is not the energy consumption in this or that phenomenon that matters, but rather the end effects, i.e., degree of fragmentation, throw and vibration levels. Data and estimations on energy components in rock blasting are thus limited to a few researchers. Berta Berta The basic theory and experimental background for the determination of some of the energy components in rock blasting are described first. These are then applied to ten production blasts and one single, confined (without rock movement) blasthole. Eight of the production blasts and the confined shot were conducted in a limestone quarry (El Alto, Spain); two more production blasts were monitored in an amphibolite quarry (Eibenstein, Austria). Seismographs, high-speed video camera and fragmentation monitoring systems were used to measure the seismic field, the initial velocity of the blasted rock face and the fragment size distribution curve, respectively, from which the various energy terms are calculated. Vibrations were measured in the single confined hole. The energy released by the explosive, borne in the detonation products upon completion of the chemical reaction, is converted into heat and work to the surroundings according to the first principle of thermodynamics. Some of these forms become apparent during the blast, namely: (a) the fracture work, that ultimately appears as new surface in the rock fragments; (b) the work transferred as shock wave into the rock, that propagates as plastic and ultimately elastic waves, appearing as seismic wave or ground vibration; and (c) the work to displace the rock and form the muckpile, that appears as kinetic energy imparted to the rock. This energy partition is to some extent arbitrary and is based on the end effects of the blasting. For instance, part of the fracture work is in its first stage intimately connected to the shock wave flow in the vicinity of the hole and, in the later stages, also to the rock movement, which begins as the fractures burst open. Such a partition is, however, convenient inasmuch as the physical magnitudes related with each component can be measured. Other energy transfer takes place, in a less apparent way, as follows: (a) expansion work of the fractures, that is absorbed as elastic and plastic deformation of the rock in the surface of the fractures as they are penetrated by the gases; (b) heat transferred to the rock from the hot detonation products; and (c) heat and work conveyed as enthalpy of the gases venting to the atmosphere through open fractures and stemming. The energy balance of the blast can thus be expressed by A specific amount of energy is required to create a new fracture surface The surface area of the fragments may be estimated from the muckpile size distribution, assuming spherical or cubic particles of diameter or edge length The integrals in Eq. The in situ area of the natural discontinuities of the rock mass, though small compared to the surface area created in the blast, is subtracted from the muckpile fragments area in order to obtain the newly formed surface area The energy transferred to the rock in the form of seismic wave is calculated as the integral of the energy flow past a control surface at a given distance from the blast. The energy flux (the power or rate of work, per unit area) is the scalar product of the stress at the surface and the particle velocity In order to relate the velocities, known from the seismographs readings, with the stresses, some assumptions must be made. If the seismic wave is considered as longitudinal spherical wave in an infinite homogeneous medium, the stress tensor in its principal components is, in spherical coordinates The velocity is measured by vibration monitoring conducted on the ground surface; the radial component may be assumed equal to the usually called longitudinal velocity in seismic measurements. The particle displacements can be calculated by the time integral of the velocity records: The spatial derivative of the displacement can be approximated by the relation: The seismic energy, as calculated by Eqs. Adding Eq. Eq. The measured velocity functions do not belong to spherical waves from a point source, but from a number of line (or cylindrical) sources at varying distances from the measuring point. They are a composition of longitudinal, transverse and surface waves resulting from reflections and refractions at the stratification, joints and the free surfaces—the bench face and the ground surface. As the composed wave comes from different sources, the assumption that each of the three components belongs to separate longitudinal or transversal waves is obviously unrealistic. Even for the direct waves, the radial component of the velocity measured (pointing towards the center of the blast) is not collinear with the directions to the different blastholes. Finally, the domain boundary is a hemisphere closed by a circle; the use of a sphere surface area in Eq. The kinetic energy is calculated from measurements of initial velocity of the rock face at different heights along the highwall, El Alto quarry belongs to Cementos Portland Valderrivas, a cement and aggregate producer located in the province of Madrid, Spain. The quarry produces 2.25 Eibenstein quarry is owned by Hengl Bitustein, an aggregate producer in Austria. The quarry produces 250 A comprehensive rock mass description of both quarries has been reported by Hamdi and du Mouza The main characteristics of the blasts are shown in Blasts in El Alto were carried out in La Concha, one of the two pits of the quarry; blasts numbers 29/02, 37/02, 45/03, 54/03 and 58/03 belonged to the same area while blasts 15/02, 43/03 and 50/03 were in different areas of the pit. In Eibenstein, blasts 420-11 and 440-04 were located in the levels 420 and 440 of the quarry respectively. The blasthole diameter was 142 Gelatine cartridges were used as bottom charge (Goma 2 ECO, abbreviated G2 in The explosive energy can be rated in different ways, either from thermodynamic codes or from experimental measurements such as the underwater test The fragment size distribution was measured in both quarries using digital image analysis software applied to the images recorded by a camera installed at the hopper of the primary crusher. The procedure used to obtain the fragmentation in El Alto is described in In Eibenstein, all photos available per blast were analyzed in an automatic mode and no manual correction was done. Fragmentation was measured with the image analysis code The size distribution curves are plotted in Eq. The contribution to the specific surface area of the undefined fines tail is, using Eq.  The mean fragmentation efficiency in El Alto is 5.5% and 3.5% with respect to useful work and heat of explosion, respectively. In Eibenstein, it is 6.3% and 4.9%. The seismic field was measured with Multiseis Plus seismographs of Vibra-tech. The ranges of velocity and frequency are 254 The distances of the seismographs to the blast (average of distances to each of the holes) were kept, as much as possible, similar from blast to blast. The distances were 51.8  Eq. Seismic energy obtained at each seismograph's location is given in The scatter of energies and efficiencies is in some cases large among sensors in the same blast; such dispersion is not unusual in seismic measurements. Given that the range of distances in each site was very narrow, no significant functional relationship of the seismic energy efficiency and the distance can be drawn (see The efficiencies in the top and floor levels in Eibenstein (mean values of the lognormal distributions 1.1% and 0.7%, respectively) are not different at a 95% confidence level. Taking all values as one distribution, the mean efficiency in Eibenstein is 0.9% with respect to the heat of explosion. A Motion Meter 1000 high-speed digital camera, of Redlake Imaging, was used, with a recording velocity of 250 frames per second. Wooden targets hanging on the bench face were used to determine the rock displacement and four fixed points with known coordinates were used as reference system. The targets were placed approximately in front of the explosive column. In blast 15/02 with two decks, the targets were located in front of the upper deck area. Two targets were used in Eibenstein and in blasts 15/02, 29/02 and 37/02 of El Alto. In the other five blasts monitored in El Alto, the number of targets were increased to four (though not all of them could be tracked in every blast). The positions of the targets (hole in front of which they were located and height from grade) are given in Motion Tracker™ 2D software In our measurements, the velocity as a function of the height is known for a maximum of four values and in many cases for only two. A sound, statistically significant, fitting of a function Burdens, spacings and bench heights in  The uncertainties in the data measured have been estimated and from these, the uncertainties of the calculated energies have been determined by error propagation through the formulae used in the calculations. The uncertainties of the measured variables are described, except where otherwise stated, by the relative standard error (standard deviation of the mean, expressed as a fraction of it). These have been calculated for each blast and the average values in all blasts used as the estimation of the uncertainty. The relative standard error of a variable Fragmentation energy. The basic equations are Seismic energy. The basic equation is Kinetic energy. The basic equation is The uncertainty in the calculated efficiencies should include the uncertainty in the explosive mass and the unit energy. The relative standard error of the explosive mass per hole is 0.03, though for the seismic energy the total mass of explosive has been used and, for the kinetic energy, the mass and the geometrical parameters used were those from the hole behind the rock that was tracked. In both cases, the error in mass should be lower, though we shall retain the 0.03 value in general. The unit energy is the result of a calculation. The error depends on the manufacturing tolerances of the explosives compositions; for a variation of ANFO formulation (approximately 94/6% ammonium nitrate/oil, nominal) from 95/5 to 93/7, the relative change in energy calculated is about 0.04. Different calculation methods may add uncertainty to the explosive energy value. Comparing the energy values for ANFO used in this paper with those in   The energy components can be described by lognormal distributions (the hypothesis of lognormality cannot be rejected to a 95% confidence level). Using lognormal distributions, relative standard errors of the efficiencies have been calculated as the errors of the logarithmic efficiencies The standard errors from Eq. The value of seismic energy measured for the confined hole was 12.9% (useful work) or 8.6% (heat), much higher than the mean value in the production bench blasts and largely out of the confidence interval. The energy not measured (the term These results have been compared with data published in the literature, compiled in Berta's Spathis’ Spathis’ fragmentation efficiency is less than our values. This can be attributed to two main aspects of the calculation: (i) the smaller fragment size of the distribution curves was relatively large, 16 The seismic efficiency reported by Spathis is on average 4.1% of the heat of explosion, more than twice our global mean. Sheahan and Beattie's seismic measurements were all done in the top level, for which the average efficiency in El Alto is 2.5%. One of the reasons for these higher values is the higher compressional wave velocity (5520 Kinetic efficiency has a very ample range, from values similar to ours in the lower limit, to very high values, almost twice our highest value and far from any other reported elsewhere. Nonetheless, the face velocities used by Spathis ranged from 4.3 to 19.1 The energy components from Ouchterlony et al. The seismic efficiency (measured in the upper level) is higher by a factor of more than 4 if all our measured values are considered, and by a factor of 3 when compared to our values in the upper level of the limestone quarry (2.5%). The wave speeds in the rock mass used by Ouchterlony et al. (4338 and 5548 The range of Ouchterlony et al.'s kinetic energy fractions (7.2–12%) is within our range of values (3.3–20.7%), though their average is about 40% higher than ours. In what respects the data by researchers dealing with seismic energy only, More recently, Hinzen The following summary can be drawn from the preceding discussion:  Seismic efficiency. The fraction of energy conveyed as seismic wave in production blasts may range from as low as less than 1% to nearly 15% of the explosive energy. Though the confined shot's seismic efficiency measured in the present work, 8.6%, is clearly higher (by a factor of more than 5) than the corresponding values for our production blasts, higher values than that have also been reported occasionally in production blasts Kinetic efficiency. This usually ranges from about 3% to somewhat in excess of 20% of the heat of explosion, though higher values (up to near 40%) have been reported The average energy lost below 100 The heat transfer is obviously a loss of the process, but the fracture opening is required to break the rock, and it should be put in the useful energy count. It can be that the explosives as work machines are not as inefficient as the low values of measured fragmentation work (accounted as fracture energy only) and kinetic energy spent in rock displacement may, at first instance, indicate. Numerical modeling is required to assess the fracture opening work/heat transfer partition. The basic measurable energy components of the blasting process have been determined from production blasts data. Emphasis has been put on describing in detail the calculations and simplifying assumptions required to derive the energy values from the raw data measured. The following ranges of energetic efficiency (given as the 95% confidence intervals of the means of lognormal distributions) have been obtained for bench production blasts. For each energy component, the first range applies to heat of explosion and the second one to useful work to 100 A seismic efficiency for a confined shothole of 9% and 13% with respect to heat of explosion and useful work respectively, has been obtained. This value is higher by a factor of more than five if compared to ordinary production blasts with rock movement. Fracture in the rock surely exists in the confined shot—obviously not measurable—which would put the total energy efficiency figure at a similar level as in the production blasts. In other words, the sum of seismic plus kinetic efficiencies in production blasts is close to the seismic efficiency in the confined shot. The results of seismic efficiency obtained in the present work, calculated from velocity records measured on the surface, are comparable to other results published from measurements with in-hole embedded gauges, if the effect of the use of in situ p- and s-wave velocities (as opposed to the use of a unique, laboratory P-velocity) is discounted. The variability of the various energy efficiencies is in some cases quite high, though they are not beyond what is typically encountered in usual blast monitoring. Different blasting features, explosives and rock types, their unavoidable variations within a blast in the field practice and the inaccuracies of the measurements, propagate through the calculations resulting in standard uncertainties for the energies and efficiencies in a given blast up to 50% of the calculated value, with a corresponding wider range of values. This is especially the case for the seismic and kinetic efficiencies and is probably one important reason for the dispersion of the values found by the different researchers. Besides, explosive energies from different sources are sometimes difficult to bring to a common base. With these liabilities, it is possible to set the fractions of explosive energy spent in fragmentation, seismic wave and rock displacement as follows: The fracture energy calculation depends largely on the minimum size of fragments considered. In any case, it may not be expected, in usual quarry blasting, to obtain a fracture energy much in excess of 6% of the total explosive energy. Seismic energy determinations are done generally in an oversimplified manner. A more precise calculation is probably out of reach for a field-blasting situation. Accepting a high-variability consubstantial with all field-blasting measurements, the range of seismic efficiency values reported seems especially wide: values from as low as 0.1% up to, perhaps, 15% of the explosive energy could be expected. The kinetic energy fraction has been found to range, according to our results, from about 3% to 21% of the explosive energy, the higher value corresponding to an overcharged hole. These bounds seem to cover most of the values of kinetic efficiency available though, according to some values in the literature, kinetic efficiency could be up to 40%. The total energy measured ranges from 8% to about 26% of the explosive energy. The energy spent in useful effects (fragmentation and throw) accounts for 7–25% of the explosive energy. Some units percent may be in question, but the upper limit is not likely to be much higher in normal blasting practice. It is conceivable, and generally accepted, that explosion gases do not exhaust their energy content in their interaction with the rock, but vent to atmosphere at a relatively high pressure. The amount of energy lost depends on what this pressure is and on the isentropic expansion path, variable from one explosive to another; it has been calculated to be in excess of 30% of the explosive energy for the explosives used in the present work. Adding up this energy to the measured fractions, there remains unaccounted about 40–60% of the energy, in order to balance the energy delivered by the explosive. This energy must have been indeed transferred from the gases to the rock, in the form of rock deformation work and heat transfer. The energetic analysis provides a good insight of the explosive/rock interaction and a better understanding of the blasting process, encompassing a broad range of scientifically challenging subjects. However, the central issues in rock blasting in the engineering practice (i.e., steer fragmentation towards coarser or finer distributions, reduce vibrations, etc.) comprise a limited fraction of the total explosive energy, with a variance of the same order of their magnitude. An analysis of such variance in relation with blast design parameters and explosive and rock properties is required before energetic arguments may be implemented into engineering design methods for rock blasting. No such analysis has been attempted with the data presented in this work, or with the other (relatively scarce) data existing in the literature; for that analysis to bear statistical significance, the amount of data needed is much larger than what is currently available. The experimental work has been partially funded by the European Union under contract no. G1RD-CT-2000-00438, “Less Fines Production in Aggregate and Industrial Minerals Industry”. We would like to thank our colleagues in the project for the fruitful research cooperation; especial recognition is due to the technical staff at the quarries of El Alto and Eibenstein for their enthusiastic involvement and valuable assistance in the measurements. Finally, we are indebted to Finn Ouchterlony, of Swebrec at Luleå University of Technology, for many helpful discussions in the preparation of this work and for his scientific advice during the last years.