Little is known about residential electricity demand in developing countries. In order to shed some light on this topic, this study combines data from South Africa's recent Income and Expenditure Survey with data from the National Energy Regulator of South Africa to estimate the determinants of residential energy demand. Combining electricity tariff data from the regulator with expenditure survey data from households provides an opportunity to explore the determinants of the demand for electricity. Due to the large number of zeroes in the dataset, a two-part model is employed. The results indicate that household income and electricity price are major demand determinants, and for the full two-part model, electricity demand is normal, as well as downward sloping, although inelastic in both cases; as expected, substitute fuel use impacts these elasticities. We also find that access to free basic electricity, a policy designed to improve access to electricity does what is expected. It is associated with increases in the probability that households purchase electricity and reduces total expenditure on electricity. Household demand is also higher for appliance-rich households in urban areas, especially if there are more household members and they live in larger dwellings.With increasing economic development, energy consumption in South Africa has risen. This rise has been driven by two separate components. Firstly, following the end of apartheid, the government committed to electrification. To mitigate that energy crisis, Eskom, the state utility, planned in 2005 to expand its generation capacity by 17,120 MW (megawatts). Compared to other sectors, energy consumption patterns in the residential sector are more complicated. Households are decentralised decision-making units, and come in all shapes and sizes. Energy consumption patterns differ from one household to another, potentially affected by economic, socio-demographic, geographic and physical characteristics. Furthermore, uncertainties associated with human behaviour naturally pose challenges, when considering programmes and policies that might be implemented in the residential sector. It is clear from the preceding discussion that prices and income are not the only determinants of electricity usage. Therefore, we accessed tariff data from the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) and merged it with the 2010/2011 South African Income and Expenditure Survey (SA IES, We are not the first to use expenditure data, although most examples in the literature come from developed countries. For example, Using the SA IES data, unfortunately, comes with additional issues. One advantage is the availability of household-level income, expenditure and demographic information; however, it rarely includes price information; thus, as noted, a secondary source of price variation is needed, which we access from NERSA, albeit at a regional level. Furthermore, expenditure data in a country like South Africa, where some households access FBE and some grid-connected households do not actually report using electricity, include a fair share of zero observations. Thus, for the analysis, a two-part model (2PM) is applied to take account of two separate features: the probability that a connected household actually reports electricity consumption and the consumption of electricity, conditional on purchase. Although economic theory argues that consumer behaviour is affected at the margin, and, therefore, consumers should respond to marginal changes in the price, households receive their electricity bills The South African literature on electricity consumption – see The exceptions to the time series focus are The results of the analysis are supportive of price and income inelasticity, as was expected. Our estimated income elasticity is 0.128, while the estimated price elasticity is −0.305. Furthermore, a number of socio-demographic, geographic and physical factors also influence household electricity consumption, as well as the estimated elasticities. These factors include various dimensions of wealth and potential energy need. The significant impacts of these determinants offer implications for energy policies. First of all, increasing the price may not be the most effective reduction strategy, due to inelastic demand. Second, it is necessary to consider other relevant factors, when designing energy efficiency programmes/policies. For example, energy efficiency programmes could be tailored for different population groups in different areas. In addition, energy efficiency improvement could be incorporated into poverty alleviation targets. South Africa (a newly industrialised country according to the World Bank) is energy-intensive, because its main industry, minerals extraction and processing, along with historically low energy prices, have likely provided little incentive to save energy. Eskom's average residential electricity tariff was ZAR 0.40/kWh (kWh: kilowatt hour; ZAR 0.40 ≈0.06 USD; USD 1 = ZAR 6.35) in 2005/2006 ( According to our survey data, approximately 71.5% of households consume electricity, but only 1.1% use gas (including gas supplied through either a public network or purchased in cylinders); 11.7% and 11.6% use liquid and solid fuels, respectively. The percentage of households that use electricity for cooking increased from 57.9% in 2002 to 73.1% in 2011 ( In an effort to alleviate constraints on electricity availability, a series of EEDSM projects have been promoted by the South African government and Eskom. For instance, a large-scale solar water heating rebate programme was initiated in 2009 to encourage households to switch to solar water heating. Despite these improvements, South Africa was back in electricity crisis mode in 2014. Rolling scheduled blackouts occurred from early November 2014 through mid-February 2015. Electricity generation capacity is and has been constrained in South Africa for a number of years, and, although there are programmes in place to try to reduce demand through improvements in energy efficiency, primarily within the residential sector, it is also true that electricity prices are going to rise over the next few years. Therefore, to provide additional information that could help in both policy formulation and in designing additional EEDSM programmes (or redesigning current ones), an improved understanding of the determinants of household electricity consumption is necessary. Even though improving energy efficiency is an urgent need, South Africa's history also affects electricity demand. Too many poor households have no access to basic services, such as water, sanitation and electricity; a recent study ( A total of 870 GWh (Gigawatt hour) of FBE was consumed in the 2014/2015 financial year ( This study uses data from the SA IES 2010/2011 conducted by Statistics South Africa from September 2010 to August 2011 ( For the present analysis, only households connected to the electricity grid are considered — out of the 25,015 households, 22,106 are grid-connected (88.37%) and 2861 are not connected (11.44%), while 48 (0.19%) are unspecified. Unfortunately, in a number of cases, it was also not possible to separate electricity cost from water cost; a number of municipalities present customers with a consolidated bill. In a number of additional cases, survey respondents are not responsible for their own electricity accounts, and, thus, they did not report separate electricity expenditures. These households were also removed from the analysis. Missing data on important variables, such as education, access to piped water and flush toilets, dwelling type, receipt of FBE, ownership of property and appliances etc., resulted in a final effective sample of 16,851; 8164 households out of 25,015 have been dropped. To see if dropping appears to be selective, and, thus might affect the empirical analysis, we compare the means across the retained and dropped samples, as shown in Although the number of household controls available is an advantage, the SA IES 2010/2011 does not include information on electricity prices. To accommodate this limitation, NERSA approved municipal tariffs for 2010/2011 have been used in this study. According to the NERSA tariff database, the municipal electricity tariff for 2010/2011 is regulated for indigent, prepaid and conventional metering households, separately. The indigent tariff is applied for poor households, who have been registered in the National Indigent Policy programme; the prepaid tariff is applied for prepaid meter households, while the rest are subject to conventional tariffs. The SA IES dataset includes a unique identification (ID) number for each household, and the first three digits of the ID indicate the municipality in which the household resides, In the SA IES 2010/2011, electricity expenditure for each household is captured in four separate columns: “water and electricity”, “electricity”, “prepaid” and “free basic electricity”. “water and electricity” is for households with consolidated water and electricity bills. Since it is not possible to split electricity out of the bill, these households are dropped. “electricity” (Elec): for households with conventional meters. “prepaid” (Prepaid): for households with prepaid meters. “free basic electricity” (FBE): for households whose utility bill reports the value of FBE. This information underscores the description in In addition to the different tariff groups, there are three types of tariff structures according to the NERSA approved tariff list for 2010/2011: the single rate, the single rate with a basic charge and the incline block tariff (IBT) ( The SA IES does not capture electricity consumption in kWh. Rather, the survey captures expenses on electricity for each household. Therefore, we take electricity expenditure as our dependent variable and calculate the price and income elasticities of demand accordingly. Since only expenditures for substitute fuels are recorded in the data, it is not possible to estimate cross-price elasticities. The variables used in the analysis are listed in As implied from our preceding discussions, a number of household-level variables are also included. For example, we include socio-demographic characteristics (like age, gender, race and the highest level of education level completed by the household head). Other controls relate to the dwelling, such as the total number of rooms in the dwelling, dwelling type, settlement type, access to piped water and a flush toilet, as well as ownership of the dwelling. Additional variables included relate to concepts of energy need, as well as wealth. For example, we consider the ownership of electrical appliances listed in the survey: radio, stereo/HiFi, television set, DVD (digital video disc) player, refrigerator/freezer, stove, The demand for a good or service is determined by the price of the good or service, consumer's income and preferences. Thus, electricity price and household income are indispensable factors to be considered. In terms of household electricity consumption, a consumer's preference can be represented by variables related to household electricity consumption behaviours. Household electricity demand is modeled as The econometric model used in this analysis considers the presence of zero electricity consumption expenditure households in the data, but only considers households connected to the grid and able to access electricity. Roughly 5.6% of the electrified households have zero expenditure on electricity. Zero expenditure may arise for the following reasons: the household is connected but cannot afford electricity; the household has received FBE, does not want/need to consume more electricity, and we record their expenditure as zero. Out of the 948 households with zero electricity consumption expenditure, 23.4% have received FBE; these zero values are observed and represent actual outcomes, rather than representing missing values or potential outcomes. According to The 2PM separates the dependent variable into two parts: “ The second part is specified as an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of the logged dependent variable ln( Our primary interest is in the price and income elasticities of electricity demand; thus, we focus on those results for the 2PM, which are available in Despite these general results, households in South Africa are more likely to buy electricity in areas with higher prices, as shown in Columns (1) –(2) of Previous research in South Africa – see The marginal effects from the 2PM related to non-price and non-income controls are presented in In addition to expecting own prices and freely available electricity to matter, substitute energy options should also determine electricity demand. Although it would be preferable to incorporate the prices of alternatives, we were not able to do so, as described above. Therefore, we incorporated actual expenditure and indicators of positive expenditure, focusing on solid fuels (primarily candle and firewood), (natural) gas and liquid fuels (primarily paraffin). With respect to these substitutes, the correlation between expenditure and the probability of purchase, conditional demand and full demand was economically small, but suggestive of energy-mixing at the household level. Specifically, total electricity expenditure is higher for households spending more on either liquid or solid fuels (Columns (5) –(6) of The alternative energy source results are quite suggestive. Firstly, recall that our price elasticity estimates point to a reduction, compared to previous studies. Secondly, as outlined above, we find evidence of both energy-mixing – more spending on any type of energy raises expenditure on other sources – and energy substitution — using any type of alternative source reduces electricity expenditure. In combination, these features suggest that households are attempting to use alternative sources of energy to limit their dependence on electricity. Although some of the reduction in price elasticity can be tied to FBE, it can also be related to a desire to limit dependence. We expect households to replace electricity with additional energy sources, when that can be easily accomplished. Thus, there will be less flexibility in the remaining electricity needs, and, therefore, a reduced price response. Both of these empirically supported observations are understandable, given South African household experiences with previous energy crises and rolling blackouts. Further, our results suggest that larger households living in larger urban homes, especially if owned, are more likely to purchase electricity. We also find evidence that appliance ownership, especially radio, TV, refrigerator/freezer and stove ownership are associated with an increased probability of purchasing electricity. With respect to total consumption on electricity, which we see in Columns (5) –(6) of The results related to education were not entirely expected. Each of the estimated marginal effects on the probability of purchase, which are relative to a non-educated head, is negative, while some – secondary and matric plus – are statistically significantly so. We expected education to correlate with wealth and income, and, therefore, be associated with an increased purchase probability. However, it is important to recall that we have incorporated income and various measures of wealth, measured by number of rooms and ownership of appliances. Therefore, once we control for income and appliance-based electricity need, education no longer matters in the probability of purchase. Furthermore, we see that education is not an important determinant of total expenditure (or conditional expenditure), once controlling for other factors. In general, the results across both parts of the 2PM work in opposite directions, see Columns (1) –(4) of Unfortunately, South Africa's apartheid past can be observed in these results. Non-black households consume more electricity, and that difference is made worse by appliance differences (not reported, but extensive across race groups). In terms of policy, FBE was designed to partly alleviate inequality in the access to electricity, and, to some degree, appears to have made at least some difference: increasing access and alleviating the burdens associated with purchase. However, since the FBE policy does not aim to reduce electricity consumption (rather, it aims to increase it), and the lack of clarity in the data regarding which households may have received FBE, one should be careful, when interpreting the relationship between FBE and electricity use we found. The racial differences, unfortunately, are underscored by South Africa's historical legacy, and they present big challenges. Because electricity is an important input for the economic growth needed to potentially reverse apartheid's racial differences, and, given the supply limitations discussed previously, there remains a need to reign-in residential demand. Doing so will expand availability for the primary and secondary production sectors of the economy, and, according to our results, this might be achieved by (a) focusing attention on efficient electrical appliances, (b) increasing prices and/or extending access to prepaid meters and (c) increasing the transparency and focus of the FBE policy. Electrical appliances were found to increase the demand for electricity, and, therefore, higher efficiency appliances are expected to reduce demand; as noted above, With respect to price, electricity demand is price inelastic, once the full set of household controls are incorporated, while nonlinear tariffs further reduce price responsiveness. Thus, an alternative that focuses consumer attention on the price they pay – requiring prepaid meters, for example – is likely to have a larger impact. However, the price inelastic nature of electricity demand implies that increased prices will increase household expenditure on electricity, at least for those who purchase, eroding household purchasing power. Given the legacy of apartheid, which led to wide racial disparities in welfare, electricity price increases could further exacerbate those differences. However, the post-apartheid government has developed the FBE programme to offset some of those problems. Available data suggest that this programme is not applied in the same manner in all places, and, more concerning, may not even be applied directly to relatively poorer households. Thus, it is necessary to make FBE more transparent, since it is applied to the benefit of poor households. If the electricity price keeps increasing, then the FBE will be able to offset that rise in price. This study investigates the determinants of South African residential electricity consumption in order to shed some light on the demand for electricity in developing countries. The study is based on data from the SA IES 2010/2011. The results uncover a wide range of determinants, whose contribution to the probability of buying electricity and consumption conditional on purchase are often opposite each other. The result that determinants might affect the probability of purchase in a different direction than conditional purchases supports our use of the two-part model in this analysis. Economically, expectations associated with demand were upheld. In terms of South Africa's energy problems and need for economic growth, the results present challenges. Increased growth means increased income, and, therefore, increased electricity demand at a time when new power generation facilities are not yet online. Meanwhile, increased prices are expected to yield consumption reductions with all else equal; yet, price increases may negatively impact household welfare. Thus, a delicate balance will need to be struck and maintained. We find that the electricity price and household income are major economic factors, and, for the most part, accord with economic expectations. A higher electricity price contributes to reduced consumption, while electricity is a normal good. Both price and income elasticities are inelastic, once the full range of additional determinants is incorporated in the model, and are within the range of estimates available in the developing country literature. Furthermore, our results point to a reduction in the price elasticity of demand, compared to previous studies. With regard to alternative energy sources, we also find evidence of both energy-mixing – more spending on any type of energy raises expenditure on other sources – and energy substitution – using any type of alternative source reduces electricity expenditure. In combination, these features suggest that these households are attempting to use alternative energy sources to limit their dependence on electricity, which is a reasonable response to previous energy crises. Unfortunately, racial differences that can be tied to South Africa's historical legacy remain a feature. In addition to this set of expected results, we find that our measures of electricity need and wealth are importantdeterminants of electricity consumption. Households with more persons, a larger number of rooms and more appliances (of nearly any kind) are found to spend more on electricity. Similarly, households residing in urban areas consume more electricity than households living elsewhere. Although a large number of determinants were uncovered, and the economic expectations associated with demand were upheld by the research, further research is needed. The preceding analysis was limited to those connected to the grid, partly because households not connected would not generally be in a position to use electricity; they would be unlikely to own appliances, for example. However, as the grid is extended, more households will have access. At this stage, we are not in a position to say anything about the potential effect of grid extension on overall residential electricity consumption. Therefore, further research into the effect of rolling out the national electricity grid on household electricity use, and even other forms of energy, is needed. The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. This research received funding from the   Supplementary data to this article can be found online at