For upcoming nuclear fusion energy reactors, like the China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR) and EU-DEMO, the superconducting Cable-In-Conduit Conductors (CICC) are in the design phase, and the operating conditions like electromagnetic forces can be higher than in previous devices like ITER. The prototype conductors for the Central Solenoid (CS) coils in the CFETR, for example, are designed to produce a peak field of 19.9 T and are expected to be made of high current density Nb3Sn strands. Investigations are also ongoing on the application of bismuth strontium calcium copper oxide (BSCCO) and MgB2 strands for CICCs in fusion reactors. The latter material, MgB2, could be applied for superconductors subjected to lower magnetic fields, such as Poloidal Field coils, Correction Coils, and Feeders. The performance of all these strands is sensitive to strain, and the mechanical strength of the brittle filaments is relatively weak. This requires a thorough analysis of the cable pattern in terms of the mechanical support of the strands along their length in combination with the minimization of the interstrand coupling currents and strand indentation. As an initial step to finding the most appropriate cable pattern for CICCs, three prototype CICCs made of ITER type Nb3Sn strands with significantly different cable twist patterns are tested experimentally for AC coupling loss, interstrand contact resistance, and strand indentation. The three cabling patterns referred to as the Twente, CWS (copper wound superconducting strand), and CFETR-CSMC (CFETR Central Solenoid Model Coil) design. The numerical code JackPot ACDC developed at the University of Twente is used to analyze the interstrand coupling loss and contact resistance. The new ASIPP (Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences) triplet modified CWS design is aimed at reducing strand pinching during cabling, which causes degradation of transport properties during compaction and cyclic loading. The Twente design has the same objective but also aims at reducing the coupling loss while maximizing the mechanical lateral support for the strands by making the twist pitch ratio of the sequential cabling stages close to one. The CFETR-CSMC, taken as a reference for comparison, has cable a pattern mostly similar to the ITER CS cable design.Superconducting cables play a vital role in achieving stable high magnetic fields required in nuclear fusion power plants. The CFETR, which stands for “China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor,” is a new tokamak device to be built in China as a complementary to ITER (International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor), presently being built in Europe. Also, in Europe, the design activities are ongoing for ITER's successor, DEMO, a DEMOnstration fusion power plant [ CICCs consist of a certain number of superconducting and copper strands transposed and twisted together in a rope-like pattern and inserted into a steel jacket. A typical void fraction (VF) of around 30 % is maintained for forced flow helium circulation to have adequate cooling. A central hole or helium flow pressure relief channel is mostly also provided. Since the advent of the CICC concept [ Most of the research work on CICC cable concepts have occurred in the field of magnets for nuclear fusion reactors [ The usual strand coating for Nb In order to understand the effects of cabling variations, three cabling patterns with different twist pitches have been studied for AC loss and interstrand contact resistance. The CICC samples were manufactured from Nb The AC loss of the prototype cables was measured with a sinusoidal magnetic field applied perpendicular to the long axis of the conductor in the AC dipole facility at the University of Twente [ Gas flow calorimetry measures the power dissipation in the conductor utilizing a calibrated gas flow of boil-off helium. A heater inside the sample chamber is used for calibrating the calorimetric measurements. The calorimeter is inserted in the bore of a superconducting dipole magnet. The measurements are done with and without an offset magnetic field and carried out at 4.2 K in a liquid helium bath at atmospheric pressure. The pick-up coil magnetization method uses two pick-up coils, one around the sample (PU) and one empty correction coil (CC). Both signals are subtracted and integrated over time to construct the magnetization loops representing the total loss per cycle. Three different cabling patterns were examined. The first one is the copper-wound superconducting strand (CWS) design, which is proposed to reduce the strand indentation in STP cabling as observed in the tightly compacted ITER CS type conductors. The STP design possesses higher stiffness and better performance for cyclic loading, although the small crossover angles result in deep strand indentations. In the CWS type, a soft copper strand is wound around the two superconducting strands (SC) in the first stage to reduce the indentation in the SC strands. The twist pitch of the Cu strands in the first stage is four (CWS-I) to five (CWS-II) times smaller than that of the SC strands in the same triplet. The CWS concept essentially should maintain the stiffness of the ITER CS type cable but with reduced strand indentations [ The second cable type is a shorter twist pitch version of the Twente cable design with the subsequent twist pitch ratio close to one. The earlier proposed and tested Twente design concept for the ITER CS type follows a twist pitch ratio slightly above one with a first stage twist pitch of 110 mm (110 × 118 × 126 × 140 × 352) [ The third cable design used for the CFETR CSMC conductor is serving as a baseline for comparison. The CFETR CSMC has the same cable pattern as the ITER CS STP conductor except for the final stage. The so-called initial slope coupling loss time constant is found from the initial and steep slope of the experimentally determined AC loss versus frequency curve for a sinusoidal applied magnetic field. For ITER CS conductors, this is generally in the range of 300−700 ms [ The three CICC conductors tested here have a round-in-square geometrical configuration in which Nb Each conductor sample was mounted with a pick-up coil (PU, coil area perpendicular to the magnetic field) and a compensation coil (CC, parallel to and in-plane with the pick-up coil and near the sample) to measure the sample magnetization simultaneously with the calorimetric data [ The measured AC loss was normalized per total volume of Nb The contact resistance is an essential factor in determining the coupling loss in the cable. Predicting the The All the tested cables had five stages of cabling with six petals in the last stage, although the selected strands were tagged as within a petal (intra-petal) or between petals (inter-petal). A total of 14 strands were chosen from the outer petal perimeter, such that two to three random strands are from each petal, as shown in One of the prepared samples and the schematic diagram of the current and voltage tap connections are shown in The slope of the For the evaluation of the cable design, the numerical model JackPot ACDC was used. JackPot-ACDC considers the trajectories of all superconducting and copper strands of the cable for building the electrical network model [ The intra-petal The results in The average inter-petal resistance measured between Cu strands in the CWS-I conductors was 12.2 nΩm, which is relatively low. Chromium coating on the surface of the strands is to avoid strand sintering during the heat treatment process, and this coating increases The low inter-petal The reduced petal wrap coverage implies more direct contact between strands of neighboring petals and thus lowers Interstrand Average values of all experimental data were taken compared to the JackPot  A third-order polynomial function fits the loss-frequency dependencies obtained by magnetization for the CWS conductor and a second-order for both the Twente and the CFETR CSMC cables. Irrespective of the degree of the fitting polynomial (not shown in The coupling loss time constant Coupling loss simulations with JackPot were conducted at 4.2 K without transport current. For comparison with the experimental data, only the case without the background field is simulated. The results of both the AC loss experiments and the simulations are shown in The hysteresis loss ( The hysteresis loss of both the Twente and the CFETR CSMC cables is in the same range, while the CWS-I shows a slightly higher value. This difference might be due to the inaccuracy related to the steep initial slope of the loss versus frequency curve for the CWS-I sample. The presence of the background field Transverse resistivity between petals depends on petal wrap coverage, petal diameter, relative arrangement of wraps in neighboring petals, and cable compaction. When the inter-petal to intra-petal The coupling loss increase for lower The local inter-petal A broader petal wrap coverage also reduces local buckling of strands on the petal surface [ Cable compaction or reducing the VF decreases both inter-petal and intra-petal Even though the petal wrap coverage of the CWS-I cable is 45 %, the combined experimental and computed results ( The Twente cable follows a design strategy of cable stage twist pitch ratio close to 1 (TPR1). For the TPR1 type of cables, the strands are mostly parallel to each other forming line contacts, which is efficient for the optimized filling of voids inside the jacket and creating lateral strand support. So even at a VF of 23 %, the cable did not reach the threshold VF value for inter-petal coupling loss, but the reduction in VF certainly affects coupling loss. The coupling loss analysis of ITER TF and CS model coil conductors for different VF’s at 4.2 K, with 150 m T amplitude and 350 m T background stationary field shows that the coupling loss increases almost linearly with the reduction of the VF in the range of interest [ The reduction in petal wrap coverage (70 to 45 % in Twente cable and CWS-I) and VF (27 % to 23 % in Twente cable) together contributed to the observed high coupling loss. In order to assess the reduction of the inter to intra-petal  In contrast to both CWS-I and CFETR CSMC conductor designs, no visible strand indentations are found on the extracted strands from the Twente design sample despite the exceptionally small void fraction, as shown in It is confirmed that the cable pattern, petal wraps, and void fraction significantly affect the coupling loss. The primary purpose of this work is to address the influence of the cable pattern on the coupling loss and strand indentation. It is demonstrated that the Twente cable pattern with twist pitch ratio close to one, has the lowest coupling loss and the least strand deformation, even with a first stage triplet twist pitch which is twice that of the CSMC and also larger than that of the CWS-I. The AC loss and interstrand contact resistance have been measured on three prototype Nb The experiments and simulations of AC loss and contact resistance conducted in this study confirm previous research from others that a critical threshold value of void fraction exists, which makes the presence of petal wraps ineffective in reducing coupling loss (from the CWS-I cable results). For the copper wound superconducting strand short twist pitches design, this threshold is already reached at or above 33 %, while for the Twente design, the limit was still not reached at 23 % void fraction. The JackPot simulations with derived corrections for inter-petal contact resistance representing 70 % petal wrap coverage show that the Twente cable design has the lowest coupling loss. Internal post-mortem examination of the conductors revealed no visible strand indentation for the Twente design, even at a void fraction of 23 %, opposite to both other designs, with a most severe indentation for the CWS-I type even damaging the Cr plating. So far, the Twente cable design seems a suitable candidate for CFETR or DEMO conductors, made of strain-sensitive strands such as Nb  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: