Flame vine (Pyrostegia venusta) (FV), ice-cream-bean (Inga edulis) (IC), dog’s knot (Heteropterys aphrodisiaca) (DK), and common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) (BE) extracts were obtained by supercritical and subcritical fluid extraction (SFE) at 323K and 35MPa using pure carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon dioxide with ethanol (CO2
                     +EtOH) and carbon dioxide with water (CO2
                     +H2O). The extraction efficiency was evaluated by factoring in the solvent system and plant matrix influence in extraction yield (EY), antioxidant activity (AA), total phenolic content (TPC) and total flavonoid content (TFC). The manufacturing costs of crude extracts (COMEY) and phenolic-rich fractions (COMTPC) were also evaluated. The highest EY was achieved using CO2
                     +H2O, except for IC extracts. The BE extracts showed the highest TPC (338mg GAE/g extract, dw), and the highest TFC was obtained for IC extracts using CO2 (260mg CE/g extract, dw). AA achieved higher values for FV extracts using CO2
                     +EtOH (0.096mL/mg). The lowest COMEY and COMTPC were obtained for FV and BE extracts using CO2
                     +H2O in a 0.5m3 extraction column.Some natural antioxidants are composed of phenolic compounds commonly found in plant materials; these substances provide a primary defense to the human body by eliminating free radicals. Antioxidants interfere with or deter the formation of free radical chain reactions, thus preventing the formation of hydroperoxides and protecting the cells of the human body from the attack of free radicals, which undergo oxidation with natural oxygen (   A root infusion of Another raw material that is rich in antioxidants is Conventional extraction methods of phenolic compounds can be found in the scientific literature. These techniques have limitations in obtaining solvent-free extracts ( In spite of the well-known advantages of the process, such as high-quality products, SFE has economic constraints due to the high investment cost inherent to high pressure processes ( In this context, the use of simulators allows estimating the manufacturing cost of a product, in addition to facilitating the design and transfer of process technology. Therefore, the use of simulators as an alternative to setting up a process and maintaining operating conditions allows a reduction of the costs and time consumed in laboratory and pilot plant efforts ( This work was based on a preliminary study published by All chemicals used to prepare the reagent solutions were of analytical reagent grade. Dry carbon dioxide (99.9%) was purchased from Gama Gases (Campinas, Brazil). Sodium nitrite (99.5%), aluminum chloride (99.9%), sodium hydroxide (99.5%), glacial acetic acid (99.7%), ethanol (99.5%) and anhydrous sodium carbonate (99.5%) were obtained from Ecibra (Santo Amaro, Brazil). Trolox (6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchromane-2-carboxylic acid), rutin (⩾95.0%), quercetin dehydrate (⩾98.0%), catequin (⩾99.0%), β-sitosterol (99.0%) and gallic acid (⩾95.0%) were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Folin-Ciocalteu reagent was obtained from Dinamica (São Paulo, Brazil). DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) radical was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany). Thin layer chromatography (TLC) 20 The raw materials FV, IC, and DK were purchased from Superextra (São Paulo, Brazil). The BE (BRS graphite genotype) used in this work were donated by Embrapa Arroz e Feijão (Santo Antônio de Goiás, Brazil). All raw materials were ground in a knife mill (Marconi, model MA 340, Piracicaba, Brazil) for 10 The moisture was determined by the xylol distillation method ( SFE assays were conducted using two units: (i) The Spe-ed system (Applied Separations, model 7071, Allentown, USA) was used for extraction with pure CO Identification of flavonoids, terpenoids and antioxidant compounds was performed according to the methodology presented by Total phenolic content was determined by the Folin–Ciocalteu method described by Flavonoid content was determined using the colorimetric method developed by The antioxidant activity was determined by the free radical-scavenging activity of the extracts using DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) radical solution (60 Scavenging ability (SA) expresses the percentage of inhibition of DPPH radical, as shown in Eq.  DPPH values were calculated using a linear regression equation in the range of 50–400 The inverse half maximal effective concentration ( The process, scale-up and economic simulation was carried out using the commercial software SuperPro Designer® version 6.0 (Intelligen Inc., Scotch Plains, NJ, USA). Process simulations of CO The economic data fed to the simulator are presented in A series of factors influence the COM and can be divided into the following categories: direct costs, fixed costs, and general expenses. The direct costs take into account factors that depend directly on the production rate, such as the raw material, the utilities, and the operation costs. The fixed costs do not directly depend on the production rates and are considered even when the operation is interrupted; some examples are taxes, insurance, and depreciation. General expenses are those deemed necessary to keep the business in operation, and these include administration and marketing costs, and selling, as well as research and development expenses ( The process was designed to run 7920 The data are presented as the mean The results of moisture content, real particle density, porosity and apparent bed density of all raw materials, as well as the extraction parameters used in all SFE assays, are presented in    The profile composition of the extracts using CO The phenolic content of the extracts obtained using CO TPC recovery from beans using CO  The antioxidant activity of extracts obtained using CO The process economic evaluation largely depends on the identification of the appropriate process scheme and process parameters for the possible alternative extraction protocols. Several alternative combinations of extraction and separation conditions can be selected to design an SFE process; these combinations are normally focused on the pressure and temperature conditions of the extractor and separators (  The high apparent bed density of the BE provided a higher demand for raw materials; however, due to its low cost, US$ 2.20/kg ( In this context, it can be observed that the price of raw material has a great influence on the final COM The estimated COM The increase in the extraction yield and phenolic content has a detrimental effect on the cost of manufacturing, decreasing COM Additional economic parameters are presented in The extract selling prices found in the market were around US$ 21.00/kg ( PCA was applied to the whole data set of the three solvents and four raw materials. The loadings, eigenvalues and percentages of cumulative variance are shown in The score plot ( Supercritical and subcritical fluid extraction of all raw materials yielded superior polyphenolic and flavonoid contents than those reported in the literature data using conventional extraction methods, suggesting that all plant matrices studied are good sources of phenolic compounds. The highest antioxidant activities were obtained using ethanol and/or water as a modifier for BE Priscilla C. Veggi thanks FAPESP (2008/10986-2), and Rodrigo N. Cavalcanti thanks CNPq (140290/2009-5) for the PhD assistantships. M.A.A. Meireles thanks CNPq for a productivity Grant (301301/2010-7). The authors also thank EMBRAPA for the sample of common beans used in this work.