A hydrometallurgical approach to recover palladium from a spent industrial hydrogenating catalyst is described. The work aimed to enhance palladium and minimize aluminum recoveries. The efficiency of chloride leaching has been evaluated by varying the most determinant parameters affecting the leaching process. HCl solutions and mixtures of HCl and two chloride salts (MgCl2 and NH4Cl) were assessed. The use of H2O2 as oxidant was found essential to improve the Pd leaching to over 90%, together with low levels of chloride ion concentration (2.0M) and temperature (25°C). The use of the chloride salts enhanced the selectivity of Pd leaching over Al, but nevertheless Al is always present in the leachates. Aqueous phases composed by HCl+H2O2 and the respective salts, with optimized concentrations, were selected to be applied in liquid-liquid extraction using N-methyl-N-cyclohexyloctanthioamide (MCHTA) and N,N′-dimethyl-N,N′-dicyclohexylthiodiglycolamide (DMDCHTDGA). The results obtained from equilibrium Pd(II) extraction isotherms and reutilization experiments, using toluene as diluent and 0.1M thiourea in 1.0M HCl as stripping phase, show that MCHTA and DMDCHTDGA have similar loading capacities, with molar [extractant]:[Pd(II)] ratios of 3.5, but DMDCHTDGA exhibits a more reproducible extraction performance in the reutilization experiments. The liquid-liquid extraction efficiency of DMDCHTDGA for Pd(II) recovery from HCl+MgCl2
                     +H2O2 and HCl+NH4Cl+H2O2 media was also evaluated. Molar [extractant]:[Pd(II)] ratios of 3.8 for the former and 3.5 for the latter medium were achieved; accordingly, the overall results obtained for the three leaching phases are similarly encouraging. The reutilization experiments depict the recyclability robustness of the solvent to recover Pd(II). The whole data reported are promising regarding Pd recovery, but simultaneously evidence the deleterious effect Al has on the solvents, since it progressively accumulates in the organic phases.The recycling of anthropogenic end-of-life supplies is increasingly considered as a means to suppress the worldwide necessities of a given material, particularly in situations where its technological applications justify a demanding consumption. This is the case of the platinum-group metals (PGMs), whose criticality is both related with the scarcity and specific locations of their primary resources in the Earth's surface, and mainly to their multiple and growing technological functions ( The reprocessing of the spent automobile catalysts by dedicated industrial units provides about 50% of the worldwide PGMs consumption, although a ~ It is well known that PGMs recycling involve both pyro and hydrometallurgical methods ( The subsequent concentration and/or purification of the leachates is frequently carried out by liquid-liquid extraction (or solvent extraction, SX). In this stage, efficient and selective extractant(s) is(are) the key component(s) of the organic solvent, promoting the successful separation of the desired PGMs from other contaminant metals, or even between each PGM itself ( Intensive research is currently being conducted on the development of new molecules to suitably recover PGMs from leachates of spent materials, for example, thiacalixarene ( The aim of the present work is to test The spent industrial catalyst tested in this work was provided by The as-received catalyst was composed by spheres of about 20 Several batches of the catalyst were used, and Pd contents were determined in each batch to serve as reference for determining the respective leaching yields. The solid samples were digested with acid mixtures (HNO The preparation of the leaching solutions was made from dilution or dissolution of the appropriate reagents (of analytical purity) in demineralized water. The leaching tests were carried out in 250 The syntheses and characterization of MCHTA ( The compositions of the pregnant leach solutions used in the liquid-liquid extraction experiments are summarized in The solution arising from leaching by 2.0 0.02 The determination of the metal contents in the aqueous solutions, before and after extraction, was accomplished by ICP-AES (Horiba Jobin–Yvon, Ultima). Metal ion concentrations in the organic phases were calculated by mass balance. Generally two extraction replicates were considered for all the experiments. The analysis of the aqueous solutions before and after extraction was thoroughly made in triplicate, and the coefficient of variation for the extraction and stripping results is about ± The estimated Al content of the spent catalyst was determined to be The leaching process applied to the spent catalyst envisaged to attain the maximum yield of Pd dissolution with a minimal contamination of Al. Two different approaches were attempted. Firstly, HCl leaching media were tested using different combinations of parameters, the addition of oxidizing agents being also tried to improve the leaching efficiency. The second option involved mixtures of HCl and chloride salts (MgCl The first leaching experiments were conducted at several temperatures, maintaining all the other parameters constant (6.0 Pd recovery is generally high, and no substantial differences in the yields were found for temperatures above 80 It is worthwhile to mention that Cr dissolution was always very low (0.2–0.8 The influence of the L/S ratio on the efficiency of Pd dissolution is depicted in Pd yields stabilized above 80%, not being significantly affected by the L/S ratios; therefore, its concentration proportionally increased for lower L/S ratios (up to near 60 The effect of the HCl concentration was also studied ( The Pd leaching at the lower acid concentration is significantly slower, increasing continuously and approaching a maximum of 85% after 4 The additional use of oxidizing agents was also tested. When considering the expected form of Pd in the catalyst, PdO, one would expect that leaching could occur through an acid-base type reaction. However, during the lifetime of the catalyst, the metals speciation can eventually change. The reducing conditions in which the catalyst was subjected (the hydrogenation operation) can convert Pd to the metallic state, at least partially. This is why the possibility of using an oxidant, namely hydrogen peroxide, was envisaged. For this investigation, the temperature effect was initially evaluated, for a leachant composition of 2.0 The use of H An attempt to reduce even more the HCl concentration was found ineffective, as The use of salts as a chloride source was considered, to partially replace HCl, aiming to achieve the best conditions for the selective Pd leaching. From several possible candidates, two salts were finally chosen for the experiments. Ammonium chloride is a common chloride source proposed in hydrometallurgy, for both mineral raw materials as well as for waste recycling ( According to previous results, several conditions were fixed, namely the temperature (25 The influence of the salts concentration was evaluated in a series of tests where the total chloride ion concentration was maintained constant (2.0 The replacement of HCl by the chloride salts does not affect the Pd leaching efficiency (95–100%), except when the acid content drops to very low levels (below 1.0 Regarding Al, a continuous decrease in its concentration as the HCl content decreased was observed, demonstrating that the use of HCl/salt mixtures can effectively improve the selectivity for Pd leaching. Considering the best combinations of the leaching agents HCl/choride salt, the effect of the oxidant concentration was also investigated. The reaction time influence was simultaneously evaluated as well, since samples were taken from the leach liquor at several reaction times ( Comparing the two salts considered, the reaction is faster when using NH The equilibrium Pd(II) extraction isotherms obtained for the 2.0 MCHTA shows an excellent capacity to load Pd(II). In fact, the data related with MCHTA denote that saturation with Pd(II) has not been reached, since a plateau is not observed. The loading of ~ The equilibrium Pd(II) extraction isotherm achieved for DMDCHTDGA ( The stability of the extractants was evaluated in extraction-stripping cycles - It can be observed that the high Pd(II) extraction ability shown by both MCHTA and DMDCHTDGA is maintained throughout the cycles. DMDCHTDGA reveals a more constant extraction performance, but the small differences in the % E of Pd(II) shown by MCHTA fall within the experimental error. Additionally, the Pd(II) stripping percentages obtained after 30 In summary, MCHTA presents a global better liquid-liquid extraction performance toward Pd(II) recovery from the 2.0 An additional effort has been carried out to test DMDCHTDGA in Pd(II) recovery from alternative leaching solutions, since this thiodiglycolamide derivative is much easier to synthesize than MCHTA ( The equilibrium Pd(II) isotherm profiles obtained for DMDCHTDGA when these two alternative leaching media are involved – Concerning the reutilization data, the extraction percentages of Pd(II) attained for the extraction step by DMDCHTDGA in each cycle are presented in  The collected data for the equilibrium Pd(II) extraction isotherms involving the three leaching media denote that DMDCHTDGA:Pd(II) ratios lower than 3.5 at saturation are unlikely to be achieved, whereas the reutilization profiles for the 2.0 A hydrometallurgical approach has been investigated for the recycling of Pd from a spent industrial alumina catalyst. The main parameters affecting the Pd chloride leaching were systematically assessed, aiming to achieve the best compromise between a good Pd recovery and a minimal Al contamination. The presence of hydrogen peroxide was found determinant for the improvement of the Pd leaching by HCl to above 90%, the best conditions being 2.0 Liquid-liquid extraction experiments applied to the best liquors were subsequently carried out with thioamide (MCHTA) and thiodiglycolamide (DMDCHTDGA) derivatives, previously investigated in the group, in an attempt to effectively separate Pd(II) from Al(III). The revealed SX performances, evaluated through the correspondent Pd(II) equilibrium extraction isotherms and reutilization experiments with thiourea as stripping agent, demonstrate the recyclability robustness of both organic solvents to recover Pd(II). However, Al(III) shows a harmful effect on the solvents, as it progressively accumulates in the organic phases. Although not directly affecting their performance toward Pd(II) recovery for a low number of extraction-stripping cycles, the Al(III) presence seems to reduce the Pd(II) stripping efficiency by thiourea when the solvents are almost saturated with Pd(II). Hence, a way to remove Al(III) from the solvents has to be found. Accordingly, research efforts are currently being conducted to find a suitable scrubbing agent for Al(III) in order to relaunch the promising behavior these sulfur-containing extractants exhibit toward Pd(II) recovery from secondary sources leach solutions. The authors acknowledge the financial support kindly provided by “FCT -