In the iron ore industry, the recovery of fine particles is an important concern in terms of process performance and production costs and perennial efforts are devoted to increase the efficiency in handling these fines. The Reflux Classifier (RC) is a relatively new technology that is mainly used in the coal and minerals industries. The operating principle of this system is based on three mechanisms: hindered settling, autogenous dense medium and lamella settling.
                  This paper summarizes the experimental work undertaken to assess the RC for the beneficiation of iron ore fines. Tests performed with a spiral tailings and a screened spiral feed showed that products meeting commercial iron oxide concentrate specifications with very high recovery could be obtained in only one step with the RC at the pilot scale. An attempt has also been made at benchmarking the RC tests (pilot scale) against sink-float tests (laboratory scale).Inefficient fine particle recovery by physical separation methods is a well known problem ( Attempts to improve fine particle recovery at the laboratory, pilot and industrial scales adopting different strategies with traditional equipment or assessing new promising devices such as MGS (multi-gravity separator), Kelsey jig, and Yang jig ( The RC is an innovative device, a hybrid between a fluidized bed separator (vertical part) and a lamella settler (inclined part). The separation within the vertical part is mainly governed by the hindered settling mechanisms and thus by the terminal velocities of the particles (which are closely related to their size). The relative inefficiency of this part for fine heavier particles and coarse lighter particles that have the same terminal velocity is compensated for by the inclined part. The role of this part is firstly to increase the sedimentation surface area of separation. Additionally, The purpose of this paper is to report the results of RC tests carried out on iron ore at the pilot scale within COREM’s pre-competitive research program. The focus is put on the performance of the RC in this new field of application and a comparison is made with sink-float lab-scale tests. Two samples were tested with the RC: sample A was a spiral tailings whereas sample B was a spiral feed. About 4 The main characteristics of the RC feeds (samples A and B) are presented in The major gangue mineral in both samples was quartz, quantified by the silica analyses obtained by XRF although some silica could also be found in the composition of other trace minerals present in the samples. The minor or trace gangue minerals in sample A were micas, phosphates, amphiboles and aluminosilicates; they accounted for less than 5% of the whole sample. In addition to the previous, sample B contained between 6% and 9% of various carbonates (also containing iron, calcium, magnesium and manganese in their composition). For the sake of simplicity in this paper, the XRF assays of total iron (Fe During the RC tests, sub-samples of feed, underflow (U/F) and overflow (O/F) products were collected and submitted to size-by-size chemical analyses. The following sieves were used: 150, 106, 75, 53 and 45 All samples were subjected to sink-float tests using diiodomethane, a heavy liquid with a specific gravity of 3.3 Between 50 The aim of the sink-float tests was to establish reference cumulative grade-recovery curves for each sample. Such curves provide information that allows predicting the ability of a sample to be concentrated ( This paper describes the first pilot scale trial of the Reflux Classifier (RC) to separate iron oxide and silica particles less than 106 The U/F product (the iron ore concentrate) was collected in a wheel barrow; the O/F product (the tailings) was collected in a thickener. Timed samples were collected under steady-state conditions (sampling time of about 20 Three tests were carried out with sample A and five tests with sample B. The RC tests were performed at a dry feed rate of 750 The characteristics of samples A and B in terms of grades throughout the size fractions for total iron and silica are presented in As illustrated in the Sample B showed the same grade tendencies for the size fractions under 75 The distributions of total iron and silica as a function of particle size in the feed samples are shown in   Selectivity indexes were calculated for total iron in the U/F (Sv Plotting the test results at the U/F against the bed density for sample A ( The mass recovery loss observed upon increasing the bed density set point from 1500 For sample B, Graphs showing the total iron and silica grades in the size fractions of the U/F products are presented in For the best tests performed, the total iron grades in the fine fractions under 106 With reference to The same observations generally hold for sample B ( As for the silica grades (Figs. The partition curves for total iron and silica (recoveries to the U/F as a function of size) have been constructed from the RC test results and size-by-size chemical data of feeds and products ( These curves show that the separation operated by the RC was based on the density of particles. Thus, it is seen that the fractions between 150 It seems that the silica recoveries at the U/F by size were more affected by the experimental conditions. Indeed, when the bed density set point was low (tests 1 of samples A and B) or the fluidization rate was not adequate (tests 1, 2 and 5 of sample B), more silica was recovered in the U/F. It is also apparent that, from the selectivity point of view, the fluidization rate was the most important parameter. This can be explained by the fact that even at a high bed density (1900 The best performances obtained with the RC during the testing of sample A (test 2) and sample B (test 3) were compared with the sink-float results via the cumulative grade-recovery curves for total iron. It is readily seen that, for sample A ( In From the data presented in A preliminary evaluation of the Reflux Classifier (RC) for the recovery of fine iron oxide particles in the range −150 These are probably the first trials reporting successful separation of iron ore fines with the RC at the pilot scale. Furthermore, the findings suggest that the limits for the beneficiation of iron oxide fines by gravity separation could be pushed further. The results reported in this work support potential scale up to the industrial level according to the particular needs of the iron ore industry. Also, several other potential applications can be considered for this equipment. Firstly, it is well known ( The Reflux Classifier (RC) is a relatively new technology for the coal industry. The potential of this equipment for the treatment of iron ore was demonstrated in this paper, especially for the size range between 150 Successfully treating particles smaller than 45 The authors wish to thank COREM colleagues (Mrs. Sylvie Lévesque, Mr. Michel Garant and Mr. Philippe Gagnon) for fruitful discussions and for the revision of the paper. The authors also wish to thank all COREM members for supporting this project.