A series of hydrazinecarbothioamide derivatives incorporating ethyl, phenyl, tolyl, benzyl, and allyl moieties were prepared and tested as possible inhibitors of three members of the pH regulatory enzyme family, carbonic anhydrase (CA; EC 4.2.1.1). The inhibitory and activatory potencies of the compounds against the cytosolic human isoforms hCA I and hCA II and the transmembrane, tumor-associated hCA IX were analyzed by a hydrase assay with CO2 as substrate, and the inhibition constants (K
                     I) were calculated. Most compounds investigated here exhibited nanomolar or low micromolar inhibition constants against the three isoenzymes. K
                     I values were in the range of 34.1–871nM for hCA I and compounds 5–10 showed interesting activation of the hCA II with K
                     A value of 0.81–12.5μM. Compounds 11–16 exhibited moderate inhibition effects on hCA IX in the range of 0.317–1.245μM but they were less effective for hCA II. Tested compounds were also investigated using in silico applications at the binding pockets of these three targets. The different mechanisms of inhibition by these tested compounds as compared to sulfonamides, and their diverse inhibition profile for these mammalian isozymes, makes this class of derivatives of great interest for the design of novel CA inhibitors.Carbonic anhydrase (EC 4.2.1.1, CA) is a family of metalloenzymes that catalyzes the rapid conversion of CO The pyridine structure is found in natural compounds like nicotinic acid (vitamin B3) ( We have also investigated the interaction of 12 mammalian CA isozymes with several types of phenolic compounds, such as catechol ( Sulfonamide CA inhibitors are clinically used drugs as diuretics, antiglaucoma, or anticonvulsant agents, Some years ago, Supuran et al. investigated the interaction of a small series of 1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thione derivatives with isozymes CA I, II, and IX. It has been shown earlier by Supuran et al. that thiol carrying heterocycles can lead to the development of novel types of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. Recently, our groups investigated the interactions of some simple phenols, salicylic acid derivatives, some antioxidant phenolic compounds, some natural product polyphenols and phenolic acids with all mammalian isozymes, CA I–XV, We report here the first study on the inhibitory effects of compounds Against the slow cytosolic isozyme hCA I, compounds Data of Against the tumor-associated isozyme hCA IX, our target compounds In a recent study it was reported that catechol ( Compounds This study was financed by TUBITAK (The