Quantitative analysis of collectors adsorbed onto mineral surfaces using headspace analysis gas-phase infrared spectroscopy (HAGIS) is explored for the galena/xanthate system. Four possible standards have been evaluated: sodium isopropyl xanthate, Pb-isopropyl xanthate, galena (PbS) conditioned with sodium isopropyl xanthate, and a Pb-sulphide ore conditioned with sodium isopropyl xanthate. All gave linear calibrations. For practical use, ores as standards are suggested.Collector interactions with mineral surfaces have been the focus of many studies. Little work, however, has been done on direct quantification of the amount of collector adsorbed, especially in the industrial process. The use of time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) has shown good characterization of individual particle coverage ( Studies using thermal decomposition of adsorbed collector as part of the analytical procedure, such as differential thermal analysis ( The technique we are using takes advantage of thermal decomposition and uses infrared spectroscopy to identify and quantify the decomposition products. For instance, amines and xanthates produce distinctive peaks ( As the first test system for the proposed technique, xanthate adsorption onto Pb sulphides was selected. This system is relatively simple in terms of interaction products (e.g., no dixanthogen formation) ( The xanthate tested is sodium isopropyl xanthate. Four possible standards are explored: Sodium isopropyl xanthate (the simplest possibility). A synthetic Pb-isopropyl xanthate (the likely interaction product). Galena (PbS) conditioned with sodium isopropyl xanthate in aqueous solutions (i.e., making no assumptions on surface species). A Pb-sulphide ore conditioned with sodium isopropyl xanthate as in batch flotation (i.e., closest to eventual use). Sodium isopropyl xanthate (NaIPX, Charles Tenant Co. Ltd.) was dissolved in acetone and precipitated into petroleum ether for purification. The sample was dried and kept in a sealed container. Pb(IPX) A galena sample (Ward’s Natural Science) was pulverized, screened to obtain a 53–75 The galena samples (5 The samples were filtered to near dryness on a Bchner funnel with a fritted glass disk of medium or fine porosity. The filtrates were analyzed by UV–Vis for indirect determination of IPX adsorption. The mg IPX adsorbed per gram mineral was calculated as the difference between the initial and final solution concentrations. After filtration, each sample was removed from the funnel and placed between two filter papers. The samples were left to air dry for approximately 30 A 500 After aeration, the pH was re-adjusted to 9.2, a known mass of xanthate and 3 drops MIBC were added and the slurry conditioned for 7 The HAGIS spectrum for each sample was collected as follows: A sample was placed in the cell and the cell was purged with nitrogen (3 A background spectrum of the loaded cell was acquired (500 scans). The sample boat was heated to 190 The sample spectrum was acquired (500 scans). The peak areas were integrated according to Once completely cooled, the sample masses were recorded. A Milton Roy Spectronic 1201 UV–Visible spectrometer was used to determine the residual xanthate in the filtrates. Standard sodium isopropyl xanthate concentration was plotted versus the area under the characteristic xanthate peak (301 The same conditioning protocol described in 3.1(d) was employed, except concentrate was collected for 7 The HAGIS spectra for the four systems are presented in The lack of CO In order to obtain calibration curves, the mass of xanthate contained in the sample (weighed or measured indirectly by UV–Visible) was plotted against the COS peak area. Linear calibration curves were obtained for all cases, sodium isopropyl xanthate ( In the case of sodium isopropyl xanthate, the mass of adsorbed xanthate calculated using the linear regression is lower than that estimated indirectly. This may be a result of desorption kinetics. The chemical bond that needs to be broken is much stronger in the case of the adsorbed xanthate (S–Pb rather than S–Na). For the Pb(IPX) Using the Brunswick Mine ore calibration curve resulted in an excellent mass balance ( The matrix effect likely to be encountered is the relative ease of thermal desorption of the adsorbed xanthate. Comparing the ore to galena, the ore contains several other minerals with which xanthate may interact. In these cases, the rate of thermal desorption might not be the same for all components. This might suggest a discrepancy between the concentrate and tail samples, that the same calibration would not apply to both. There was no evidence of this with the Brunswick Mine ore. In some cases calibration may have to be specific for the product, concentrate vs. tail. The technique gives us information about the distribution of collector between the products, not readily available by other methods. Comparing the two batch flotation tests, we can see that when xanthate dosage is increased, there is a significant increase (250%) in xanthate reporting to tails and no increase in the xanthate on the concentrate (the mg/g column in The results obtained point to the fact that the protocol needs to be followed strictly. The effects of heating time and temperature on the COS peak area obtained for a metal xanthate are shown in Although linear calibration curves were observed for all systems, the use of ore as standard was the only one to give an accurate result for the mass balance. The initial hope was for a “universal” standard based on xanthate or some simple derivatives (metal xanthate, mineral/xanthate interaction products). This is not the situation, as a mass balance was not achieved using any of these standards. In the case of Pb-xanthate, the low results are attributed to the different rate of desorption/decomposition. The Pb-xanthate adsorbed at the mineral surface has a slower desorption rate than the pure Pb-xanthate compound due to the strong surface bond. There is also a question of heat transfer. In the case of Pb-xanthate, heat is directly applied to the compound; when adsorbed on a mineral surface, much of the heat is transferred to the mineral. In the case of galena, the HAGIS spectra were obtained after little or no drying of the mineral, a conveniently simple routine. Drying of the samples appears to have an impact on the level of desorption. This implies that either some xanthate is lost to the atmosphere (evaporation from exposure to light) or that adsorption of atmospheric CO The successful mass balance introduces the use of the HAGIS technique as a quantitative analysis tool for adsorbed collectors in mineral processing. With modifications to the current cell, such as increasing the size of the sample boat, it may be used to monitor any organic reagent adsorbed on ores and processing products that desorbs/decomposes under reasonable temperatures (<300  HAGIS is introduced as a tool to quantify adsorbed collector under flotation conditions. Linear calibrations were obtained for xanthate, metal-xanthate and adsorbed products on galena and ores. Mass balancing the amount of adsorbed xanthate on batch flotation samples indicated the ore/xanthate system was the best choice for calibration. HAGIS shows promise for a variety of adsorbed organic compounds encountered in mineral processing (and elsewhere). The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) under a NSERC Collaborative Research and Development program sponsored by Inco, Falconbridge, Noranda, Teck Cominco, COREM, and SGS Lakefield Research; and Brunswick Mine for provision of samples.