Background
                  Little is known about the screw design as a factor for stability of the bone-implant interface in locking plate fixation of proximal humeral fractures. Aim of the present study was to analyze if locking screws with a large core diameter and a low thread pitch provide increased stability when compared to conventional locking screws.
               
                  Methods
                  3-Part proximal humeral fractures were created in ten pairs of osteoporotic human cadaveric humeri and fixed with a locking plate. Head fixation was performed with screws with a large core diameter (soft bone screws) in one humerus and with conventional cancellous locking screws in the other humerus of each donor. Specimens were loaded in the varus bending position. Stiffness, failure loads, plate bending and motion at the bone-implant interface were evaluated using mechanical sensors and an optical motion capture system.
               
                  Findings
                  The stiffness of the construct for the soft bone screws was 299.8 N/mm (IR, 72.1 N/mm) and 203.9 N/mm (IR, 37.3 N/mm) for the conventional locking screws (p = 0.005). Plate bending did not differ between the two groups. Motion at the bone-implant interface was significantly reduced in the soft bone screw group (p < 0.05). The median load-to-failure was significantly higher in the soft bone screw group (358 N vs. 313 N; p = 0.012).
               
                  Interpretation
                  The use of soft bone screws is associated with less motion at the bone-implant interface and therefore greater fixation strength when compared to fixation with conventional locking screws. Clinical studies are needed to prove these biomechanical findings in the in vivo situation.
                  Level of evidence: Controlled laboratory study.Osteoporotic proximal humeral fracture fixation is associated with high complication rates ( Aim of the present study was therefore to assess, if different screw designs (conventional cancellous locking screws (CLS) vs. soft bone screws (SBS) with a larger core diameter and a lower thread pitch) influence the stability of the bone-implant interface in locking plate fixation of osteoporotic 3-part proximal humeral fractures. We hypothesized that, under varus bending, the use of SBS would reduce motion at the bone implant interface measured by optical motion tracking and is therefore may be associated with increased failure loads when compared to fixation with CLS. 10 pairs (7 females and 3 males) of fresh-frozen human cadaveric humeri were used for the study. The mean age of the donors was 80 years (range, 70–94 years). In life, all of the donors provided written consent of their own free will for the use of their bodies for research purposes. Institutional review board approval was obtained prior to the study (IRB No. 2014–421-f-N). BMD of the left and right humerus of every pair was assessed by quantitative computed tomography. The median bone mineral density at the center of the humeral head was 52.4 mgHA/mL for right humeri and 54.3 mgHA/ml for left humeri, indicating osteoporotic bone quality with no significant side differences ( Humeri were stored in double vacuum-sealed plastic bags at −20 °C. Prior to testing, the specimens were thawed at room temperature for 12 h. Prior to testing, the native stiffness of all intact non-fractured humeri was defined. Because it closely simulates the clinical situation in osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures, a standard unstable 3-part fracture model was created by performing an osteotomy at the greater tuberosity and a 10-mm gap osteotomy 10 mm below the anatomical neck of the humerus. All fractures were fixed with a locking plate (humeral PEEK PowerPlate, Arthrex, Naples, Florida, USA). At the humeral shaft, the plate was fixed with a 3.5 mm cortical non-locking screw and two 3.5 mm locking screws. In a randomized manner, either 4.0 mm cancellous locking screws (CLS) or 4.0 mm soft bone screws (SBS) were used for humeral head fixation. Differences in screw design and the resulting cross-section area are illustrated in All fixations were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. An aiming device was used in all specimens to ensure a similar screw position in both groups. The maximum screw length was determined using a measurement tool provided by the manufacturer. Screw lengths were equal in each pair of humeri. A transverse osteotomy was performed 110 mm below the end of each plate, and the humerus was then fixed to a custom-made jig and embedded with polymethylmetacrylate (PMMA; Technovit 3040, Kulzer GmbH, Hanau, Germany) to a depth of 8 cm. Specimens were fixed to the base plate of a biaxial servohydraulic testing machine (Instron model 8874, Instron, Pfungstadt, Germany) with a 25° lateral angulation according to a previously validated testing setup and the in vivo loading angle of the proximal humerus measured by Bergmann et al. ( As previously described, an optical motion capture system (Optotrak-Certus, NDI, Waterloo, Canada) with active infrared rigid body markers was used ( A cyclic sinusoidal loading protocol consisting of 20 load steps was applied at 1 Hz for 10,000 cycles with a base load of 50 N and a continuous load increase of 0.035 N/cycle, resulting in a maximum load of 400 N after 10,000 cycles, while the valley load was constantly kept at 15 N. In addition, X-rays in the a.p. direction were taken before and after the loading protocol to visualize interfragmentary motion ( Failure was defined as ( After testing, the humeral heads were dissected in order to macroscopically evaluate the appearance of the screw holes. Mathematical analyses were performed with custom-made Matlab scripts (Matlab-R2017a, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA/USA). Medians and interquartile ranges (IR) were used for data description. Non-parametric testing methods for matched samples (Wilcoxon signed-rank test) were applied to determine statistically significant differences in stiffness, plate bending, motion at the bone-implant interface and failure loads between the two groups. The level of significance was set to The median native stiffness of all humeri prior to fracturing was 906 N/mm (IR 380.8 N/mm). After SBS fixation, the median initial stiffness was 299.8 N/mm (IR 72.1 N/mm) compared to 203.9 N/mm (IR 37.3 N/mm) for CLS fixation ( In contrast, motion at the bone-implant interface differed significantly between the two groups from load step 6 to 20 ( In contrast, motion at the bone-implant interface differed significantly between the two groups from load step 6 to 20 (  Descriptively, dissection of the humeral heads showed enlarged and worn out screw holes in all specimens of the CLS group ( The most important finding of the present study is that fixation of an osteoporotic proximal humeral head fracture with SBS characterized by a larger core diameter and a low thread pitch is associated with less motion at the bone-implant interface in comparison to fixation with CLS. This is the result of a larger cross-section area of the SBS, which increases the stiffness and the contact surface between the implant and the osteoporotic bone of the humeral head ( Loss of reduction is a frequently observed complication ( The impact of the screw design itself is not thoroughly understood and evaluated. Katthagen et al. could not demonstrate significant differences regarding stiffness and failure loads after fracture fixation with locking plates and either cancellous screws or locking bolts ( The use of dynamic locking screws (DLS) is another concept to reduce the rate of secondary screw perforations. There is evidence from biomechanical and animal studies, that DLS fixation of osteoporotic fractures may be associated with increased fixation strength and a more homogenous callus formation. For the proximal humerus, biomechanical data revealed no significant increase in failure loads in comparison to conventional screws ( Apart from the screw design, plate material may also have an influence on fixation strength in osteoporotic proximal humerus fracture. A PEEK plate was used in the present study. PEEK plates are supposed to be less rigid compared with titanium plates. In the clinical setting, this feature should allow more micromotion at the fracture site, therefore reducing the strain at the bone-implant interface. As in the present study, a stable bone-implant interface in combination with a PEEK plate would allow enough micromotion to promote fracture healing while the risk of a loss of reduction could be minimized. Yet, in a previous biomechanical study, PEEK plate fixation of osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures was associated with increased motion at the bone implant interface, increased plate bending and, subsequently, less fixation strength ( Some limitations apply to the present study that are inherent to biomechanical studies on proximal humerus fracture fixation. First, the number of specimens is small due to the availability of specimens. However, with 10 pairs of humeri, it is comparable with similar studies ( The strength of the study is that different screw types could be tested with the same type of plate. Furthermore, BMD was homogenously distributed in both groups. Therefore, differences in the outcome parameter are likely to be attributed to the different screw types. In addition, the use of dynamic optical motion tracking with four makers allows for a very comprehensive analysis that includes tracking of motion at the fracture site, the bone-implant interface and plate bending. The use of SBS with a high core diameter and a low thread pitch in locking plate fixation of osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures is associated with less motion at the bone-implant interface and therefore higher failure loads when compared to fixation with CLS. Clinical studies are required to prove these biomechanical findings in the in vivo situation. The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This work was supported by Arthex Inc. (Naples, Florida, USA). However, the funding source did not play a role in the study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of the data and in the preparation and editing process of the manuscript. The authors have received nothing of value. Ethical Committee approval was obtained by the Ethical Committee of the University of Münster Medical School (2014-421-f-N). This work was supported by A native speaker edited the manuscript prior to submission.