Industrial copper converter slag was subjected to reduction roasting to produce Cu–Co–Fe–Pb alloys. Cu70–Co4–Fe14–Pb7 alloy was dissolved anodically in ammonia–ammonium chloride solutions. It resulted in the distribution of the metals, wherein iron remained in the slime, while copper and cobalt were components of slime, electrolyte and cathodic deposit. The multiphase alloy did not dissolve uniformly. A mechanism of the alloy dissolution was developed. A series of secondary processes took place in the system: precipitation of iron compounds, cementation of copper ions with iron and cobalt, as well as adsorption of copper and cobalt ions on iron precipitates. Recovery of copper and cobalt from the slime was carried out.Depletion of high-grade ores and an increasing demand for non-ferrous metals have stimulated the development of methods for the recovery of valuable elements from low-grade metallurgical wastes. Significant amounts of copper, cobalt and nickel can be obtained from copper slags, which are produced in the thousands of tons per year in copper smelters. Various studies on the extraction of valuable metals from the copper converter slags have been conducted. There were some hydrometallurgical methods for the direct treatment of the slag, including leaching in sulphuric acid ( The copper converter slag from one of KGHM's copper smelters (Poland) contains, besides for a considerable amount of copper, up to 1.5% of cobalt. At present, in the production route, the slag is returned to a shaft furnace in order to recover most of copper, but it does not attempt to recover cobalt. To develop a method for the recovery of both of the metals from the Polish industrial slags, cooperation between the Faculty of Non-Ferrous Metals of the AGH University of Science and Technology in Cracow and the Institute of Non-Ferrous Preliminary studies with synthetic Cu–Co–Fe alloys ( The copper converter slags subjected to this experimental study were obtained from the copper smelter in Legnica (Poland). The chemical composition of the slags was (in wt.%): Cu (1.70–5.60); Co (0.90–1.45); Pb (3.42–7.61); Fe (30.40–38.00); As (0.05–0.12); Zn (3.10–6.40); Ag (0.005–0.014); S (0.17–0.78); Ni (0.045–0.095); SiO A cuboid alloy anode (with a total area of 30 cm Copper and cobalt were recovered from the slimes obtained during the anodic dissolution of the Cu70–Co4–Fe14–Pb7 alloy. The slime was leached three times in ammonia–ammonium chloride solutions of pH 10.1. The slime depleted in copper and cobalt, was dissolved in 2.5 M HCl. Iron was removed from this solution using concentrated ammonia. Filtered Fe(III) compounds were dissolved in 2.5 M HCl and the iron compounds were precipitated again using concentrated ammonia. This operation was repeated threefold. Electrolytes from all of the stages were mixed together. The pH of this solution was circa 10. To obtain pure copper deposits, the electrolyte was acidified with HCl to pH 0. However, this operation was accompanied by precipitation of some cobalt salts. The solution was filtered to separate the cobalt salts and then the electrowinning of copper was carried out. After the copper removal, the electrolyte was alkalised (to pH 9) and the electrowinning of cobalt was conducted. Small amounts of cobalt salt precipitated also in the electrolytic processes. Precipitates of cobalt (from acidification and electrolysis stages) were collected and dissolved in water. The solution was alkalised (pH 9) and the electrowinning of cobalt was carried out. The product of the reduction roasting was a copper base alloy with a general composition of Cu70–Co4–Fe14–Pb7. Since the slag was an industrial material, the alloy also contained a few other elements (e.g. As, Ni, Si, Sn). Microstructures of the alloy are shown in During the anodic dissolution of the Cu70–Co4–Fe14–Pb7 alloy in the ammonia–ammonium chloride solution, the metals were transferred into the electrolyte, the cathodic deposit and the slime. It was found experimentally that the electrolyte contained mainly ammine complexes of copper (38–52% i.e. 75–80 mg/dm The cathodic deposits were high-copper alloys. They contained: 70–96% Cu, 0.3–24% Co, 1–3% Ni, and 0.2–2.7% Fe. Small amounts of iron in the cathodic deposits resulted from the incorporation of the slime particles into the growing metal layer. The slime consisted of two fractions: anodic slime compactly adhered to the alloy electrode and precipitates forming the suspension in the electrolyte. Both types of the slime were enriched in iron compounds, since iron that dissolved from the anode immediately precipitated as hydrated oxide: The anodic slimes were dissolved in a hot HCl Identification of the insoluble residues shows that not all of the alloy phases were able to dissolve from the anode during the electrolysis. It seems that the phases with high contents of sulphur (as sulphides in the phase II) and lead (as sulphides in the phase V) could not dissolve electrochemically from the alloy, while the remaining phases (I, III, and IV) dissolved under the current, in turn resulting in the transfer of copper, cobalt, iron, nickel and zinc into the electrolyte. Moreover, a number of secondary reactions were also possible in the system. Therefore, an attempt was made to describe the mechanism of the anodic dissolution of the Cu70–Co4–Fe14–Pb7 alloy. The details were gradually developed on a few models that were derived from the comparison of some theoretical suppositions with the experimental results. In order to develop subsequent models, some preliminary calculations were made. It was accepted that the decrement of the anode mass (Δ The masses of the constituent metals in each phase (( Detailed calculations were made individually for all the elements and for eight runs of the electrolysis. A set of results for the main components (Cu, Co and Fe) are shown in The theoretical data from Model I, which was the simplest, assumed that all copper and cobalt from phases I, III, and IV were dissolved into the electrolyte (and then deposited on the cathode), while iron together with the insoluble phases II and V was transferred into the slime. In that case, the slime should consist of iron with some amounts of copper. The theoretical composition of the slime (only metals were taken into account) was calculated and is shown in Model I was further extended by the assumption that the copper ions from the electrolyte are cemented on the anode surface in the following reaction: This supposition was confirmed experimentally. After finishing each run of the electrolysis, the presence of cemented copper on the anode surface was observed. Model II assumed that cemented copper did not transfer into the slime. In consequence, the slime should be Cu-depleted and Fe-enriched compared to the slime predicted by the previous model. The difference between the masses of iron: found experimentally (Fe in the anodic and floating slimes as well as in the cathodic deposits) and calculated based on model I, corresponds to the stoichiometric mass of Cu participating in reaction Both of the models that were described above did not take into account the presence of cobalt in the slime. This was in clear contradiction with the experimental data. Therefore, Model III assumed, furthermore, that cobalt ions were a product of the reaction Model IV was derived based on the mass balance for copper. In this case, it was assumed moreover that a part of the copper ions could adsorb on the iron precipitates. The adsorption was calculated as the difference between the total mass of the copper dissolved from phases I, III, IV, and the amount of copper in the electrolyte, the cathodic deposits and copper participating in reactions According to the behaviour of the system proposed in Model IV, the composition of the anode surface should vary with the dissolution time. The copper dissolution occurs in the consecutive electrolyses because the anode surface is enriched with copper (cemented) and reactions The comparison of the theoretical and experimental data showed that the composition of the slime was mainly influenced by the secondary reactions, which occurred at and in the vicinity of the anode surface. These were: the precipitation of the iron compounds, which were the main components of the slime; the cementation of the copper ions with iron and cobalt; the adsorption of copper and cobalt ions on the iron precipitates. The following are known: secondary reactions and processes occurring in the system, the mass of the copper participating in those processes and the masses of elements dissolved from phases I, III, and IV. Therefore, it is possible to predict theoretically the mass of those individual metals that participated in the process. These calculations are consistent with the experimental data ( Recovery of copper and cobalt from secondary materials (e.g. slimes) using ammonia leaching followed by iron precipitation stage is accompanied by substantial losses of valuable metals. For example, the total recoveries of copper and cobalt from slime produced during the spontaneous dissolution of the Cu90–Co5–Fe5 alloy, were 40% and 55%, respectively ( In the present study, to increase copper and cobalt recovery an additional stage was introduced. The slime was leached threefold in the ammonia–ammonium chloride solution of the pH 10 to deplete gradually the slime of copper and cobalt. It was found that 89.5% Cu and 30.9% Co were leached from the slime. Therefore, it should be expected that the adsorption of copper and cobalt ions on iron (III) compounds would be significantly reduced. Electrolytes from leaching and filtrates from iron removal stages were mixed together. The solution of 5 dm The sediment of iron compounds consisted of: 0.05% Cu, 1.93% Co, 0.04% Ni, 0.09% Zn, 7.00% Pb, and 90.89% Fe. The masses of residual copper and cobalt in the slime amounted to 0.11% and 10.3%, respectively, compared to the initial mass of those metals in the slime. Electrowinning of copper was carried out from the electrolyte at 1 dm The electrolyte after copper removal was alkalised with NaOH to pH 9 and the cobalt electrowinning was carried out.  A schematic flow diagram of the slime treatment proposed in this paper is presented in The Cu70–Co4–Fe14–Pb7 alloy was dissolved anodically in the ammonia–ammonium chloride solutions. It resulted in the distribution of metals with iron remaining in the slime, while copper and cobalt were components of the slime, the electrolyte and the cathodic deposit. The correlation between the alloy structure and the dissolution results was found. The mechanism of the process was also proposed. It was found that the alloy did not dissolve uniformly. A series of the secondary processes took place in the system: the precipitation of the iron compounds, which were the main components of the slime; the cementation of the copper ions with iron and cobalt; the adsorption of the copper and cobalt ions on the iron precipitates. The NH Copper and cobalt were recovered from the slime. The copper deposits were of high purity (above 99%) and the cathode current efficiencies were 68–3%. The copper recovery from the slime was 99.9%. The purity of the cobalt deposits was 94–62%, since codeposition of nickel also occurred. The cathode current efficiencies were low and varied from 15.3 to 0.2%. The cobalt recovery reached 89.7%. This research work was supported by the Polish Committee for Scientific Research under grant No. 3 T08B 040 26.