Thermodynamic affinities, activation energies and diffusion coefficients for oxygen mobility on the graphene surface are calculated using density functional theory (DFT). We report and discuss the effects of geometry, charge distribution and heteroatom substitution on the migration of epoxy oxygen on the basal plane: both the driving force and the ease of surface hopping are very sensitive to their variations. A significant decrease in the hopping energy barrier is observed when graphene contains free edge sites and oxygen functionalities, as well as upon an increase in electron density; conversely, the barrier increases as a consequence of electron removal, and the propensity for graphene ‘unzipping’ also increases. There is a correlation between the hopping barrier and the C–O bond strength of the leaving epoxide group. Under the most favorable conditions investigated, oxygen mobility is quite high, of the same order as that of gas-phase O2 in micropores (ca. 10−9
                     m2/s). This is consistent with the increasingly acknowledged role of basal-plane oxygen as a protagonist (e.g., reaction intermediate), instead of a spectator, in the wide variety of adsorption and reaction processes involving sp2-hybridized carbon materials.Since graphene’s discovery The literature on this issue, especially in terms of comparisons between theory and experiment, is quite limited. Indeed, the key details of surface diffusion of oxygen have not been thoroughly analyzed for either graphene or the wide variety of sp Among the most important issues of relevance here is the role of epoxide-type surface oxygen in the formation of CO This elementary process is similar to the ‘unzipping’ of graphene or of carbon nanotubes Another issue of practical interest is the phenomenon of spillover Periodic graphene calculations were carried out using the VASP plane-wave density functional theory (DFT) code. The projector augmented wave (PAW) method For graphene clusters (or “model compounds”) we used DFT at the B3LYP/6–31G(d) level, widely acknowledged to represent a judicious compromise between physical reality and computational expediency and as implemented in the commercially available Gaussian 03 software How exactly oxygen atoms arrive at the graphene basal plane – in the absence of gas-phase The distribution of electronic charge in the presence and absence of epoxy oxygen is illustrated in For hydrogen adatoms, the transition state for ‘hopping’ from one carbon atom to the next is a completely desorbed state (results not shown). This was confirmed using both finite graphene molecules and periodic boundary conditions; thus, for example, the equilibrated H The effects of graphene size on the diffusion barrier are illustrated in The influences of surface chemistry and charge distribution on the unzipping of graphene and the oxygen diffusion barrier are illustrated in The potential energy surface around the intuitively appealing transition state shown in Analysis of charge and spin density distributions (  A straightforward means of altering the electron density distribution is functionalization, e.g., by introducing electron-withdrawing or electron-donating functionalities at graphene edges. In Heteroatom substitution in the graphene basal plane is another means of influencing the charge densities. The effects of B and N were thus analyzed and the results are summarized in In This analysis provides further evidence for the important role that the mobile (but non-desorbable) epoxy oxygen plays in the indirect path for CO Use of density functional theory to analyze both prototypical clusters (molecules) and periodic structures has provided unique insight into the mechanism of diffusion (hopping) of oxygen on the graphene surface. Upon spillover of atomic oxygen from the graphene edge, subsequent to chemisorption of molecular oxygen on carbene-type zigzag sites, epoxy-type oxygen migrates from one bridge site to another with remarkably variable activation energy. A correlation exists between the strength of the leaving epoxide group and the epoxy oxygen hopping barrier. Both geometric and electronic properties of graphene affect this energy barrier, which can result in diffusivities that are as low as that of gas-phase O  This work was supported by CONICYT-Chile (projects #1080334 and PFB-27 CCTE-UDT), the US–Israel Binational Science Foundation (grant #2006238), the CarbonEARTH program (NSF grant #DGE-0947962) and the Donors of the ACS Petroleum Research Fund. Supercomputing facilities used were funded in part by the Materials Simulation Center, a Penn-State MRSEC/MRI facility, and through instrumentation funded by the National Science Foundation (grant OCI-0821527). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 