Rock failure results from the propagation of one or more cracks and thus can be considered as a fracture mechanics problem. It follows that the fracture toughness of rock is important in theoretical studies and engineering applications related to rock failure. Three methods for measuring rock fracture toughness have been suggested by the ISRM so far According to Whittaker et al. One might expect that the Mode I fracture toughness, i.e., the opening mode, would be related to the tensile strength, in which the rock is separated by a tensile stress. According to Whittaker et al. According to In addition to the rock related to the above studies, some kinds of weak rock and soil have also been subject to similar study. For example, Haberfield and Johnston Furthermore, Harison et al. All of the above results show that Mode I fracture toughness and the tensile strength of the various types of rock and soil in question can be empirically related. However, is there any generality of these relations for all types of rock, or at least for most types of rock? This Technical Note considers all experimental data available with both rock fracture toughness and rock tensile strength values to explore a general relation between the Mode I fracture toughness and tensile strength of rock. There are three sources for the experimental data: Whittaker et al. Zhang et al. the data from other Refs. All of the experimental data, except for the four groups of data annotated *(1) and *(2) in the right-hand column of From The corresponding experimental data can be seen in Even though different test methods were used, various types of rock including some kinds of coal were tested, and different loading rates were tried, a general relation between Mode I fracture toughness and tensile strength of the rock was obtained, based on test data from literature sources. Thus, using One of the sources of the scattering in The empirical relation obtained is in line with other rock mechanics observations. Jaeger and Cook Studies under dynamic loading showed that the Mode I dynamic fracture toughness of rock and the loading rate can be described as Previous studies As for the relation between the tensile strength and Mode I fracture toughness of rock which is the subject of this Note, experimental observations (1) The specimens in both tests usually form only two fractured surfaces under static (quasi-static) or low-speed impact loading, which indicates that the failure of each specimen is due to the extension of a single crack (or the coalescence of a few microcracks in the same plane). From this point, the formation of the fractured surface of a tensile strength specimen is similar to that of a fracture toughness specimen. (2) The meso-fracture characteristics of the fractured surfaces of the specimens in both tests are similar to each other, i.e., on both kinds of fractured surfaces there are micro- and meso-cracks induced by loading. In addition, on most fractured surfaces of dynamically broken strength and fracture specimens there are some clear branching macrocracks Furthermore, according to previous studies Mode I fracture toughness and tensile strength of rock can be empirically related to each other by the equation, The author is most grateful to Prof. John A. Hudson for his valuable corrections to the manuscript. The detailed test data for