The treatment of Zone 1 fractures of the 5th metatarsal base with >2mm of displacement remains controversial. We prospectively analyzed 29 patients with 5th metatarsal base fractures (Zone 1) during 2009–2014. Radiography was performed to assess the degree of fracture gap and metatarsal length. Patients with gaps of 2mm or less were treated conservatively using a short leg cast or splint (Group A), while patients with fracture gap >2mm were randomly assigned to one of two groups. Group B patients were managed with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), and Group C patients were placed in a short leg cast only. Visual analog scale (VAS) score and American orthopedic foot and ankle society (AOFAS) score were obtained at the initial consult and at the last follow-up after treatment; change of the 5th metatarsal length was also measured at the initial consult and after complete bony union. Our study demonstrated that radiographic union of all cases was observed with a significant decrease in VAS and AOFAS scores, regardless of the initial fracture gap and type of management. Additionally, there was no difference seen in final VAS scores for patients with longer metatarsals when compared to those in whom the metatarsals were unchanged or shortened.Fractures of the base of the 5th metatarsal are one of the most common forefoot injuries seen in orthopedics and sports medicine Conservative management has yielded good results for non-displaced Zone 1 fractures. Up to 99% of the fractures healed radiologically with a regimen of elastic wrapping and weight bearing as tolerated in one series Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine the clinical and radiologic outcomes of conservatively and operatively treated 5th metatarsal base Zone 1 fractures with >2 After obtaining Institutional Review Board approval, we prospectively enrolled 29 patients with 5th metatarsal base fractures (Zone 1) who came to our foot and ankle clinic from July 2009 to December 2014. Patients with open fractures and Zone 2 or 3 fractures of the 5th metatarsal base were excluded from our study. All patients were treated according to our study standard treatment protocol ( The casts were removed after 4 weeks and ankle motion was allowed. To measure clinical outcomes, we used the visual analog scale (VAS) pain score and American orthopedic foot and ankle society (AOFAS) score. VAS and AOFAS scores were obtained at the initial consult and at last follow-up after treatment. The patient’s last follow-up foot oblique radiograph was used to assess for signs of bony union and to measure the 5th metatarsal length on the injured side; all measurements were made by the same two investigators. To assess for change in the length of the 5th metatarsal, we checked the difference between the initial entire 5th metatarsal length on the uninjured side and compared this with the final 5th metatarsal length of the injured side after complete bony union; this was done under the basic assumption that the 5th metatarsal lengths of both feet were the same. Means were compared using an independent A total of 29 patients were enrolled for the study. The average age was 41.66 years (range, 14–73 years). There were 13 male and 16 female patients. Mean follow-up duration was 8.52 weeks. All fractures with measured gaps <2 The mean initial fracture gap of Groups A, B, and C were 1.04 The effect of metatarsal length on the VAS scores at final follow-up was measured using a linear regression model. An R score of 0.04 with 27 Zone 1 fractures of the 5th metatarsal base are managed depending on the degree of displacement. Fractures with <2 Although we found that the union time of group C (conservative treatment with gap >2 In our study, 12 patients had increased metatarsal length compared to pre-injury radiographs. However, there was no difference seen in the final VAS scores between patients with longer metatarsals and those in whom the metatarsal length was unchanged or shortened. A linear association was not obtained when a regression model was used to quantify the effect of metatarsal length on VAS scores, indicating that metatarsal length had no predictable effect on outcomes as measured by VAS scores. However, longer follow-ups and more specific outcome measures should be done to further characterize the effect of metatarsal length. Our main limitation is the relatively short length of follow-up for our patients. Because Zone 1 fractures tend to heal without complication, patients may not feel the need for continued consultations at our facility. Additionally, the limited sample size may have affected the power of detecting statistical significance. We recommend that further large-scale prospective randomized studies be done to enhance the power. The VAS and AOFAS scores, although a widely recognized scoring system for pain and function, may not be representative of the overall outcome of the patients. In continuing this study, more specific and accurate tools for measuring outcomes may be used. Our study demonstrated that Zone 1 fractures of the 5th metatarsal base may be managed conservatively regardless of the initial fracture gap. Union is expected within 8 weeks with good results in VAS and AOFAS scores. The change in metatarsal length, which may affect the long-term functional outcomes of these kinds of fractures, was found to have no clinical correlation with early VAS score. Although our study did not show a significant effect of metatarsal length on VAS scores, further studies with more patients and more specific outcome measures are warranted to fully characterize its effect. None of the author of this paper has a financial or personal relationship with other people or organization that could inappropriately influence or bias the content of the paper.