In this paper, the purification of acid mine water and the treatment of electric arc furnace dust (EAFD) are integrated into one process with the aim of recovering the Zn content of both effluent and waste. Zinc recovery can reduce the cost of their environmental management: purified acid mine water is discharged after removing all metals; EAFD ceases to be hazardous waste; and Zn is valorised.
                  The process consists of the recovery of Zn as zinc oxide and its purification into commercial products. First, EAFD is leached with acid water and the dissolved metals are selectively precipitated as hydroxides. After EADF leaching, ferrous iron is bio-oxidized and Fe and Al are then precipitated; in the following stage, Cu, Ni, Co and Cd are cemented and finally Zn is precipitated as ZnO. In order to purify water that finally is discharged to a river, lime is used as the neutralizing agent, which results in a precipitate of mainly gypsum, MnO, and ZnO. From the impure zinc oxide produced, various alternatives for the attainment of commercial products, such as basic zinc carbonate and electrolytic zinc, are studied in this work.The aim of this paper is to study the integration into a single process of two operations of cleanup and reclamation: the purification of acid mine water and the valorisation of electric arc furnace dust (EAFD). Acid mine drainage (AMD) from mining operations is one of the most difficult environmental problems faced by the sulphide mining industry. Acid mine drainage is a contaminated effluent that results from the oxidation of iron-sulphide minerals exposed to air, water and extremophile microorganisms naturally present in the area ( After the closure of Aznalcollar Mines (Spain), the Administration has managed and controlled the effluents generated as a consequence of former mining activity. The treatment consists of pumping wastewater to a plant for oxidation and neutralization, which results in an effluent suitable for discharge into a public waterway and in a thick pulp that contains, in the form of hydroxides, all the heavy metals initially present in the water. Some 7200 m Electric arc furnace dust is a waste from the steel-making industry, from iron scrap in an electric arc furnace. The management EAFD constitutes another major problem from an environmental point of view. During the scrap-fusing process in an electric arc furnace (EAF), many components of the charge, including iron, zinc, cadmium and lead, are volatised and enter to the vapour phase. When the vapour is cooled and collected, a large quantity of dust is generated. When galvanized scrap is used in the EAF, most of the zinc from the steel scrap ends up in the dust and fumes due to its low solubility in molten steel and slag (  Two major technological processes are used for the extraction of zinc from EAFD; pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical methods. Pyrometallurgical methods require certain reducing agents and relatively high temperatures to produce raw zinc oxide of low commercial value ( In this paper, EAFD has been leached with acid mine water from Aznalcollar Mine, and thereby incorporated into the water treatment process with the following advantages: The capacity of Zn production increases, which may include some 4500 t/a. A synergistic effect on the environmental management of AMD and EAFD is triggered, which enables an economic recovery in both cases and therefore a reduction in management costs. The integrated treatment significantly improves the quality of environmental management in both cases. The criteria for integrating both treatments are the following: The final water quality and the minimization of purification costs. The final solid residue composition. Possibility of non-hazardous waste and minimization of waste management costs. Maximization of zinc production. The process consists of two essential stages: the concentration of Zn as zinc oxide and its purification as commercial products. In the first stage, EAFD is leached with acid water and the dissolved metals are selectively precipitated as hydroxides. In order to enable the selective precipitation, ferrous iron in solution must be oxidized to ferric iron; to this end a bio-oxidation stage is included. After bio-oxidation, Fe and Al are precipitated; Cu, Ni, Co and Cd are then cemented, and finally Zn is precipitated as impure ZnO. Since one of the objectives of this work is the purification of water to be discharged into the river, neutralization is performed with lime, thus resulting in a precipitate containing gypsum and a decrease in sulphate concentration. From the zinc oxide obtained through this sequence of operations, various alternative methods to attain commercial products, such as basic zinc carbonate and electrolytic zinc, are also studied in this work. The overall capacity of treatment is determined by the data included in Electric arc furnace dust is washed with water in the range of pH 7–12 in order to remove undesirable soluble compounds. The discontinuous washing tests are performed in 1-L stirred-tank reactors at room temperature for 2 h. Given the lime content of EAFD, in each test the pH of pulp is kept constant by controlling the dosage of sulphuric acid 1:1. The pulp density is 20%. The leaching of EAFD with mine water (acidified with sulphuric acid) is studied in stirred-tank reactors of 1-L and 7-L capacities. The leaching time is 1 h because longer times do not significantly improve the extraction. To study the influence of the acidity, a pH electrode and a dosage pump are connected to a data acquisition system. The pH is kept constant by the automatically controlled addition of acid. Temperature, pH and pulp density are the variables studied. The leaching residue is characterized in order to ascertain its hazardousness. Leaching tests for evaluating risk in solid-waste management decision-making, UNE-EN ITR-M-015, Daphnia magna immobilisation test (ISO 6341-2012), and Luminescent bacteria test (ISO 11348-3-2007) were performed. Ferrous iron bio-oxidation of solutions obtained by mixing leaching liquors of EAFD and AMW in the ratio 1:45 is carried out in a continuous flooded packed-bed bio-reactor ( The bioreactor is a column filled with 7-mm siliceous stone particles. The column has a height of 1200 mm and a diameter of 43 mm and has inlets for liquid medium and for air at the bottom. It has three holes at different heights labelled 1, 2 and 3 at 350, 770 and 1200 mm from the base, respectively. These can be used to test different bed heights or to obtain samples of fluid at intermediate positions. Precipitation by alkalinisation with lime in stirred-tank reactors of 7-L capacity is studied. Lime is dosed in a controlled manner to prevent coprecipitation phenomena and the formation of colloidal precipitates. Cementation of Cu Selective precipitation of ZnO is carried out by controlled alkalinisation with lime in stirred-tank reactors of 7-L capacity. The attainment of basic zinc carbonate beginning with impure ZnO has been tested. The procedure takes place in two stages: The impure precipitate of ZnO is redissolved by controlled addition of sulphuric acid up to pH 3 in a stirred-tank reactor. Operation time is 30 min and temperature is 20 °C. Liquor alkalinisation is performed by addition of 1 M CaCO The attainment of metallic Zn from the impure ZnO precipitate is studied. The procedure is comprised of two steps: Dissolution of impure ZnO precipitate in strong alkaline medium (NaOH 300 g/L). Electrolysis of liquor. Electrolysis is conducted in a 250 mL electrolytic cell, equipped with a magnetic stirring and heating system, in which three electrodes of stainless steel grade 316 are inserted. Electrodes are 4 mm thick; two of these act as anodes and the other as a cathode. The sunken area has a width of 59 mm and a height of 47 mm, giving a total cathode area of 61.6 cm The anodes and cathode are connected to a regulated power supply (maximum current 10 A, variable voltage). An ammeter is connected in series to measure the electric current in the circuit. Samples of electrolyte are periodically taken in order to determine Zn content and to calculate the current efficiency, the energy consumption and the net cathodic current density. Temperature is 20 °C. Fe Chlorides present in EAFD may cause disturbances in the equilibrium of the different stages of the process and, finally, appear in the effluent. A previous wash step can avoid them entering into the circuit. Three variables have been studied for the leaching of EAFD: pulp density, temperature, and acid concentration. It was found that pulp density and temperature do not significantly affect the extraction of zinc from EAFD, on the condition that the availability of acid is not limiting.  The consumption of acid also depends on the level of acidity due to the significant removal of iron and manganese. Moreover, an excess of acidity generates silicic acid, which becomes silica gel and significantly disrupts the operations of solid/liquid separation. The residue resulting from leaching contains significant proportions of heavy metals: especially Zn (11.34%) due to refractoriness of zinc ferrites, and Pb (2.58%), as lead sulphate. Both substances are very insoluble, but low solubility does not prevent development of small quantities of the order of parts per million in the case of Zn and two orders of magnitude lower for Pb, as is revealed by the standard leaching test. The chemical composition of residue resulting from the acid leaching at pH 1.3 of EAFD and the results of normalized leaching tests are included as supplementary material. The Luminescent bacteria test performed on the leaching residue gives EC The objective of this stage is to achieve complete oxidation of Fe (II) present in the liquor that results from mixing the acid leach liquor with AMW. The typical concentration of Fe (II) in this mixture is 600 ppm. The hydraulic loading (liquid flow per unit transverse area of empty reactor) in all cases is less than 0.5 m With the aim of minimizing the size of the bioreactor, and given the low concentration of Fe (II) in the liquor, it has been decided to increase the aforementioned hydraulic loading and test the increase of flow until incomplete conversion of Fe (II) is reached. The mean residence time (T Ferrous iron concentration at outputs 1, 2 and 3 is controlled during reactor operation; and, from these concentrations, the conversion of ferrous to ferric iron at each height of bed (X For inflows less than 1500 mL/h, the conversion is complete at output 1. Inflows less than 2700 mL/h ensure a complete conversion at output 2. The reactor reaches the objective of complete conversion at 3700 mL/h (2.552 m From the graph of the equilibrium concentrations in the precipitation of metals as hydroxides versus pH (see The selective separation of Fe, Al, and Cu seems possible before Zn precipitation. Ni must be separated before Zn because their curves coincide in the final stretch. If Zn concentration in water is set at 0.1 ppm, Cd partially precipitates together with Zn. Mn precipitates at a higher pH than Zn, thereby allowing their selective separation. The precipitation of Mg is relatively close to that of Mn, although at a higher pH. From these considerations, the following treatment strategy arises: Selective precipitation of Fe and Al as hydroxides at controlled pH. Cementation of Cu, Cd, and Ni with metallic zinc. Selective precipitation of Zn as oxide. For selective precipitation of Fe and Al, it is necessary reach a pH = 5 in order to ensure the complete removal of Al. The precipitate obtained mainly consists of gypsum and hydroxides of iron and aluminium. Both Cu The cementation is tested in a column packed with a bed of Zn particles (0.3–1.5 mm in size). In all cases, the kinetics is too slow, especially in the case of cadmium, which imposes large column sizes that are not currently operating. Cementation in pulp, using metallic zinc powder, gives much better results. Once Fe, Al, Cu, Ni, and Cd are separated, the objective becomes the selective separation of Zn from Mn in the form of ZnO. As can be seen, the precipitation of Mn takes place at a pH lower than that predicted by equilibrium data; it should begin at pH 8.8 and it actually performs for the entire range, although more significantly at pH 6. The explanation for this phenomenon lies in the conditions of precipitation and in an oxidation reaction, which changes the nature of the manganese precipitate. During precipitation, every drop of alkali causes a local and sharp increase of pH in the neighbourhood, and metal hydroxides indiscriminately precipitate. When the agitation establishes the actual pH of solution again, soluble hydroxides are redissolved. The Mn is also redissolved, but not completely, as it reacts with the oxygen dissolved in water, according the following reaction: The MnO Several precipitation tests in presence of air, oxygen and hydrogen peroxide have been performed with the aim of oxidising Mn(OH) The redissolution of zinc hydroxide precipitate obtained in oxidizing conditions is not entirely selective, since 30% of Mn is also dissolved. The results obtained in an inert atmosphere have not been successful due to the difficulties in completely preventing the presence of oxygen in the precipitation reactor. Therefore, the need to purify ZnO arises.  With a final pH = 8.2, the precipitation gives a high-grade Zn product with minority components as gypsum and other metallic hydroxides. This facilitates the subsequent purification stages, but the liquor cannot be considered purified water due to the presence of approximately 5 ppm of Zn. The attainment of purified water requires a new precipitation stage with lime at pH = 10.5 in the supernatant liquor. One commercial product considered is basic zinc carbonate (ZnCO The proposed procedure starts with a step of dissolution of the zinc oxide precipitate with sulphuric acid. The residue of this stage, mainly consisting of gypsum and hydroxides of manganese, is sent to the iron precipitation step for the purge and recovery of the remaining zinc. The pregnant liquor is treated with a sodium carbonate solution at 70 °C to promote the selective precipitation of basic zinc carbonate. The residual liquor, which still contains some amount of zinc, is sent to the stage of ZnO precipitation for its recovery.  In This difference in the precipitation of the two metals is useful to define conditions for obtaining a product with a very low Mn content. According to the results and in order to reach this goal, the level of Zn precipitation should not exceed 90%. The pH must be the control variable, with a final setpoint of pH = 6. Zinc remaining in the solution should be recovered by returning to the stage of Zn precipitation. ZnO precipitate is dissolved when there is an excess of NaOH (about 300 g/L), according to the following reaction: An insoluble residue mainly consisting of gypsum, lime and manganese hydroxide is generated and it is returned to the Fe–Al precipitation stage for purging and for incorporation of the residual Zn to the circuit. The fertile liquor, consisting of 20–30 g/L of Zn Cathodic reaction: Anodic reaction: Overall reaction If this reaction is added to the alkaline redissolution of ZnO (reaction That is, the theoretical consumption of NaOH is zero since the need of this reagent for the dissolution of ZnO is covered with its production in electrolysis. The main secondary electrolytic reaction is the formation of hydrogen at the cathode. The anodic reaction is that of the oxygen generation: The sum of these two, In this reaction, alkali is not consumed; however it does cause a decrease in current efficiency because, in theory, it takes place at a potential lower than the potential of the main reaction. The cell potential necessary for the electrolytic discharge of hydrogen depends greatly on the nature of the cathode used; materials such as Pt, Au, and Pd have overpotentials below −0.1 V, while Pb and Hg have values above −0.9 V. In the present case, regardless of the material to use as a cathode, zinc has a cathodic overpotential of −0.8 V, which overrides the initial advantage that the equilibrium potentials give to water decomposition. Alkaline redissolution of ZnO gives Zn extractions between 70 and 90%, without Mn in solution. Assays, which simulate the return of alkaline leaching residue to the Fe precipitation stage, have been carried out. This residue has been treated with the liquor coming from bio-oxidation. In all cases, Zn extraction has been higher than 99.5%; this ensures the recovery of the entire content of Zn.   In test conditions, a voltage of 2.4 V is necessary in order to operate with a current efficiency higher than 90%. For higher values of potential, the efficiency decreases significantly. At 2.4 V, the current density is around 300 A/m  As a summary, In this way, not only is inertization waste prevented and costs of water purification are reduced, but better use of natural resources is also made. This work is supported by The initial project has been founded from Egmasa and Siderurgica Sevillana Companies. Text proofread by Lesley Burridge. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at