Binary powder mixtures with variable segregation tendencies were “mixed” in a tumbling batch blender and in a continuous convective tubular blender. The degree of homogeneity of the final blend obtained from the continuous blender was found to be much higher than that from the batch V-blender, for mixtures and blender process parameters examined in this study. A direct relationship was observed between the segregation index of mixtures and a new material property metric defined as the ratio of the median particle size and bulk density of the ingredients that constitute the mixture. Moreover, for freely flowing materials, the extent of non-homogeneity at the end of a batch blending process was found to be proportional to the segregation index of the mixture and thus consequently in relation to the material property metric. Results demonstrate the superior capability of continuous blenders compared to batch blenders in their ability to homogenize segregating mixtures.Mixing and segregation (de-mixing) of granular materials has been the subject of intense academic and industrial investigation for several decades The phenomenon of granular mixing and segregation is relevant to all industries that deal with granular materials, such as pharmaceuticals, foods, chemicals, specialty products, agricultural goods, consumer goods, minerals, catalysts, construction materials, solid explosives and propellants, and a myriad others. The tendency of a granular mixture to promptly demix in some cases can be leveraged to an advantage, i.e., in situations where separation of ingredients is desired. A more common challenge in industry is to homogenize ingredients with disparate properties. Due to the high degree of awareness of the phenomenon, acute attention is paid to this disparity in properties, sometimes inappropriately – segregation is not the only reason why a blend might be inhomogeneous at the end of a “blending” process. Unfortunately, other reasons for inhomogeneity, such as in-process agglomeration and poor operation of equipment, are often not considered by the practitioner. A common approach to prevent or minimize segregation in pharmaceutical formulations is to avoid large particles and to attempt to match properties of different ingredients. Pharmaceutical solid oral dose products, namely, tablets and capsules, contain a mixture of several granular ingredients, broadly classified as excipients and active ingredients. Often, the difference in properties of the active ingredient and the excipients is large and this poses a mixing challenge. While perfect homogeneity is usually an idealization, i.e., some degree of inhomogeneity is always present, poorly homogenized mixtures create a product that can be excessively non-uniform. Regulation, in the interest of patient safety, dictates a high level of blend homogeneity to ensure uniformity in the content of active ingredients in the final product. Non-homogenous product fails this quality criterion, which leads to the entire batch of material being discarded. Unfortunately, because the regulations are silent regarding the homogeneity of other excipients, such materials are rarely tested, even in situations where variability in functional excipients can lead to important variations in other product performance indicators, such as hardness and dissolution. To circumvent segregation, pharmaceutical mixtures are often granulated However, the type of process also has a large effect on blending outcomes. The main point of this paper is to demonstrate that the inability, real or perceived, to reliably achieve a sufficiently homogeneous mixture during blending of excipients and active ingredients with large differences in particle properties can be attributed to the batch mode of processing. In this type of process, powder ingredients are loaded in a large vessel and the vessel is tumbled for several hundred revolutions before the material is discharged and further processed. It is well documented that ingredients with large disparities in their properties are near impossible to mix in batch systems; in fact, they can segregate MAXIMALLY in such situations. Alexander and co-workers Finally, a fourth mode of segregation is often observed for such systems – fluidization segregation: As the granular material fills a vessel or a chute, displacing air, the counter flow of air and granular materials creates a dragging effect on the smaller particles, lifting them. As a result, when a granular material is discharged into a pipe or a chute, it is common to observe that the bottom of the pipe is largely depleted of fine particles It is thus clear that batch processing in general, and batch blending in particular, is likely to be disadvantageous for homogenizing materials with largely different properties. The alternative to batch processing is Continuous processing is widely prevalent in solids manufacturing, especially for processing large volumes, such as minerals, food, detergents, and construction materials. Several works have been published on continuous solids mixing over the past decades In recent years, with increased interest in continuous pharmaceutical solid oral dose manufacturing, continuous powder mixing has begun to receive a significantly higher level of attention. A thorough summary of the state of continuous powder mixing can be found in Pernenkil and Cooney The objective of the study presented in this article was to examine the ability of continuous blenders to mix materials with large differences in particle size and density and with a high tendency to segregate. The performance of continuous blenders was compared to batch blenders for the same materials. Surprisingly, a simple quadratic relationship was found between a metric defined by the ratio of material properties and the blend's segregation potential. Strong relationships were also found between the segregation potential of mixtures and their mixing performance in batch systems. No such relationships (a linear relationship with a small slope) were found in the case of continuous systems, largely due to the fact that segregation was largely arrested in continuous systems, at least for the mixtures and blender process parameters examined in this study. Five binary mixture pairs combining four different materials were studied. Mixtures were ranked by their potential to de-mix by evaluating their segregation index in a segregation tester. Each pair was blended in both batch and continuous blenders at five different concentrations and their performance was compared. Details about the materials employed in the study and the experimental and analytical methods are provided in the next section. The results obtained have been discussed in Mustard seeds were purchased from Subzi Mandi (Edison, NJ). Avicel PH-101, which is microcrystalline cellulose, was provided by FMC Biopolymer (Newark, DE). Granulated sugar was purchased from Target Corporation (Minneapolis, MN), while copper sulphate (CuSO A total of 5 mixtures, at 5 different concentrations each, were blended in batch and continuous blenders. The mixtures and their compositions have been detailed in The segregation index of eight mixtures was evaluated, namely, the five mixtures listed in the Particle size distribution of the ingredients was measured using a laser diffraction method (Beckman Coulter LS 13 320). Laser diffraction correlates the pattern of scattered light, as measured by intensity at many different angles, to the particle size distribution of a sample. The measurement results in a volume percent as a function of the particle size, a data series from which the particle distribution parameters such as d10, d50 and d90 can be computed. In this case, they were readily computed by the equipment software. Each measurement was performed in triplicate and the average value has been reported in Bulk density of the ingredients was measured by gently pouring a known mass of material in a graduated cylinder. The volume occupied by the unperturbed mass of material was measured and the bulk density was computed by dividing the mass of the sample by its volume. Each measurement was performed in triplicate and the average value has been reported in Segregation potential of a powder mixture was measured by quantifying the extent of de-mixing of a powder mixture when subjected to repeated mass flow in a “Jenike segregation tester,” originally developed at Rutgers University Ingredients were blended in a continuous blender. The blender exit was sampled and evaluated for its content. The entire process consisted of feeding the material through loss-in-weight feeders into a Comil, where they were de-lumped and fed into the continuous blender. The setup is a part of a continuous direct compaction line situated at Rutgers University in Piscataway, NJ. The setup of the line used in this study, which is illustrated in For the current study, two K-Tron twin-screw, loss-in-weight feeders were employed; a KT-35 and a KT-20. The numbers 35 and 20 indicate the diameter of a screw in millimeters. A larger diameter results in larger feeding capacity. Thus, the minor ingredient of the mixture was always loaded in the KT-20 while the major ingredient was loaded in the KT-35. The total mass-rate was 15 The feeders, which were previously tared, were calibrated with the actual material before the start of each run. The objective of each run was to perform mixing experiments for all compositions of the ingredient pair. The run was started with the smallest loading of the minor ingredient. The system was allowed to reach steady state by allowing the process to run unperturbed for 5 Once sampling was complete, the feeders were adjusted to feed the next composition and the process was repeated. This was continued until all compositions were processed for that material pair, following which, the line was disassembled, cleaned, reassembled and loaded with the next material pair. To compare the performance of a continuous blending process to a batch process, mixtures using the same ingredients and in the same ratios were prepared in an 8-qt V-blender using a typical mixing “time” of 300 revolutions, and the quality of mixing was assessed using a typical “thief sampling” method. Ingredients were loaded top to bottom, with the minor ingredient sandwiched between two layers of the major ingredient. The batch size was 3 The quality of mixing was quantified by computing the relative standard deviation (RSD) of the 10 samples, for samples obtained from both batch and continuous processes. The RSD is the ratio of the standard deviation of the samples to their mean. The objective of each analytical method was to accurately evaluate the content of the samples. Techniques to evaluate the composition of each of the five mixtures were developed. These techniques could be classified into two categories, colorimetry and sieve analysis. Mixtures of CuSO The intense blue color of the copper sulphate powder was used to evaluate its concentration in its mixtures with sugar and Avicel PH-101, both of which are white in color. A color spectrophotometer (X-rite VS-450) was used to measure the reflectance from a sample containing unknown quantities of copper sulphate and sugar/Avicel PH-101. A sampling spoon was used for presenting the powder sample to the light source. The spoon has a fill volume of 21.5 The calibration curves developed for mixtures of copper sulphate in Avicel PH-101 and copper sulphate in sugar are provided in Samples containing mustard seeds or poppy seeds were analyzed for their composition by using the difference in particle size between the large seeds and the sub-millimeter sized ingredients, namely, Avicel PH-101, sugar and CuSO The total weight of a sample was measured and the sample was then loaded on an appropriately sized sieve. A 500 For the sake of lucid narrative, this section has been divided in three parts. The first part describes relationships between segregation indices of material pairs and their bulk material properties. The second part compares mixing performance between batch and continuous processes, while the third part presents relationships between the degree of homogeneity of mixtures obtained from batch and continuous systems and their segregation indices. A relationship was observed between the segregation index, SI of a mixture ( The relationship for free flowing mixtures is illustrated in The material in the hopper is subjected to sustained mass flow. A large cone angle of 75° ensures that the material follows a first in, first out profile as it exits the hopper. However, as the material exits under the influence of gravity, spaces begin to form between the larger particles. The smaller particles percolate through these gaps and find their way to the bottom of the heap. Although not identical, the phenomenon bears resemblance to classic percolation segregation in which fine particles migrate to the bottom of a vertical powder bed upon vibration. After each successive discharge, the amount of smaller particles found at the bottom increases, until an asymptotic material distribution profile is reached, similar to the finding of Alexander and co-workers Unexpectedly, as shown in Poorly flowing mixtures were found to rat-hole as they emptied the hopper during the segregation testing. Thus, these mixtures cannot be considered to have been subjected to sustained mass flow during testing, unlike the free-flowing mixtures. Nevertheless, such poorly flowing mixtures also show a relationship between the segregation index and the property metric M, illustrated in It is also useful to note the quadratic nature of the relationship exhibited in  It can be observed that for four of the mixtures (all five, except CuSO It is well known that for non-ideal mixtures, the measure of homogeneity of a blend is a function of the scale of the scrutiny of the analysis However, this analysis could only be performed for mixtures containing mustard seeds. The mustard seeds are large and discrete, and can thus be individually counted. A calibration curve ( During sample analysis, the weight of each sample was measured and the average of 10 samples constituting a run or a batch was computed. The number of mustard seeds that constitute a sample of that weight was calculated assuming the entire sample only contains mustard. This number was used as Analysis performed for mixtures containing mustard cannot be easily extended for mixtures of CuSO It is clear from On the other hand, in a continuous blender, operating at steady state, the rate of input equals the rate of output. Moreover, in a properly designed system, there is no place where particles of a given type can accumulate. The materials enter the blender as an unmixed stream. They powder stream is lifted by the rotating blades of the impeller, folded, stretched and pushed backward or forward. The material itself has very little freedom to traverse its own path. Its path is dictated by the processing condition. Thus, except for minor fluctuations, the ratio in which the ingredients enter the system is equal to the ratio in which they exit. This is largely responsible for the arrested segregation. The challenge, as the material traverses the blender tube, is to ensure sufficient dispersion of the ingredients while the material is within the blender. Dispersion of materials is brought about by the rotating blades. The total amount of dispersion is proportional to the total number of blade passes that the material experiences within the blender. The total number of blade passes is a function of the residence time and the impeller speed. In most tubular blenders, including the Glatt GCG-70, the orientation of the blades can also be adjusted. A forward oriented blade pushes the material forward, while a blade oriented backward will push the material opposite to the direction of the overall material flow, thereby increasing the holdup and residence time of the material in the blender. Thus, the number of blades, their orientation, impeller speed and the mass flow-rate all have a significant effect on the mixing performance. The choice of the blade configuration and the impeller speed for this study was decided based on previous experience with the Glatt GCG-70. The blender has 24 blades in total, of which, the middle 1/3rd were alternated backward and forward. The blade configuration provides sufficient dispersion under the set conditions of the impeller speed and mass-flow rate to ensure homogeneity of the exiting material. The blender configuration (impeller and blade arrangement) is perhaps not optimum for all material pairs but it can be observed that even with a non-optimized configuration, the continuous blender significantly outperforms the batch device, at least for the mixtures examined in this study. There is sufficient dispersion to ensure mixedness of the exiting material. In the case of the mixture of CuSO It should also be pointed out that the mean of the mixtures that were obtained from both batch and continuous processes were comparable to the expected theoretical means, except for the case of CuSO The relationship between RSD of 50:50 mixtures from batch and continuous processes and their segregation indices is illustrated in This is further highlighted by The smaller slope of the trend line in The study highlights the superior ability of continuous blenders over batch blenders to homogenize highly diverse ingredients. Rigorously speaking, these results may or may not extrapolate beyond the range of segregation indices of mixtures and blender process parameters examined in this study. However the study allows for the possibility of highly segregating mixtures to be attempted to be mixed by continuous processing. Furthermore it increases confidence in continuously processing largely dissimilar ingredients, without modifying their properties, for example, enabling continuous direct compaction (dry mixing of ingredients as is, followed by compaction) of pharmaceutical formulations that are currently granulated due to segregation concerns in batch processing. Ingredients with a substantial tendency to segregate were attempted to be homogenized by batch and continuous blending processes. It was observed that mixtures obtained from a continuous process exhibited a much higher degree of homogeneity compared to those obtained from batch-based operations. It was also observed that the ratio of the product of median particle size and the bulk density of one ingredient to the other in a binary mixture bears a quadratic correlation to their segregation index. Moreover, it was observed that the final state of homogeneity achieved by the mixture in a batch blending process bears a relation with the segregation index, and thus to the ratio