Background
                  Techniques such as varying screw insertion angles and the use of locked plating have been shown to improve the strength of fixation in bone. The effects of these methods is less clearly understood in bone of exceedingly poor quality.
               
                  Methods
                  Forty plate-bone constructs were assembled and divided into four groups of ten. Perpendicularly placed screws were placed in one group, convergently placed crossing screws were placed in a second group, an oblique end screw was placed in a third group, and a fourth group utilized perpendicularly placed locking screws in a locking plate. All test subjects were mounted and loaded in cantilever bending to the point of failure. Stiffness, initial load to failure, and maximal load tolerated were all analyzed.
               
                  Findings
                  All four groups demonstrated evidence of failure at similar loads (21.8–26.1N). The locked group was able to tolerate significantly higher loads overall (37.3N, P
                     =.044). All three non-locked groups demonstrated similar failure patterns and load to failure. Locking constructs demonstrated a distinctly different failure pattern. No significant differences were detected with regard to screw orientation and load to failure. The group with an oblique end screw was significantly less stiff than the other three constructs (P
                     =.017).
               
                  Interpretation
                  In a severely osteoporotic model, failure in cantilever bending at low forces will take place regardless of fixation methods used. The mechanism of failure is different in locked constructs compared to traditional constructs. The added benefit of oblique screw placement observed in healthy bone is not observed in osteoporotic bone.Fracture fixation with plate and screw constructs has been the trademark of orthopaedic surgeons for decades. Prior to the introduction of locked plating in the 1990s, conventional plating was used almost exclusively as the method of choice for open fracture fixation. Since its advent, locked plating has significantly aided in the treatment of many fracture patterns, particularly those involving the long bone metaphysis. Improved construct stability and fracture healing potential with locked plating has been suggested ( Variables improving strength of fixation with conventional plates in normal bone has been extensively studied as well. Factors shown to improve fixation strength include greater spacing of screws ( In this study we propose to explore two factors affecting plate and screw construct stability in a severely osteoporotic bone model: screw orientation and use of locking screws. We investigate the belief that locked plating affords superior strength, regardless of the degree of osteoporosis. We also explore the enhancing effect of varying screw insertion angles in bone of exceptionally poor quality. We hypothesize that locked plating will offer superior strength of fixation to conventional screws even in minimally dense bone. We also believe that varying the insertion angles of screws will show a greater stability enhancing effect in bone of exceedingly poor quality. We believe that the added stability of varying screw insertion angles will rival the fixation strength of locking screws. Forty synthetic plate-bone models were constructed and divided into four groups of ten. The synthetic bone medium used was a very low density open cell polyurethane model (Sawbones, Pacific Research Laboratories, Vashon Island, WA, USA, model 1522-505) designed to mimic severely osteoporotic bone (5.5 pounds per cubic foot). The bone samples were cut from five commercially available blocks from a single lot into 40 smaller blocks 40 All plates and screws used were 3.5 All constructs were then mounted onto a MTS 858 Mini Bionix servo-hydraulic test system (MTS Systems Corp, Eden Prairie, MN, USA) by using a specially designed mount as demonstrated in Due to small sample size, non-parametric statistical methods were used which included the Kruskall Wallace test for significant differences among all four groups. Statistical methods exploring relationships between two specific groups utilized a Mann Whitney U test. Significance was defined as Results are displayed in Stiffness of the constructs was calculated from the force–displacement curves and was found to be highest in the perpendicular screw group and lowest in the oblique end screw group ( The mean maximal load tolerated in all constructs was found to be greatest in the locked screw group and least in the perpendicular group. This difference was found to be significant (  The advantage of rigid internal fixation lies in its goal of precise restoration of anatomy. This method is generally preferred in articular and periarticular fractures and in fractures in which anatomical restoration is necessary, such as preserving radial bow in fractures of the forearm. Situations in which bending of plates may be necessary and simple fracture patterns in which locked fixation does not provide any additional improvement in healing outcome are generally more amenable to conventional plating rather than locked plating. For some fracture patterns, however, locking plates have replaced conventional plates as the preferred method of fixation. This is especially seen in comminuted fractures involving metaphyseal bone such as those of the proximal humerus and distal femur. Depending on the degree of comminution, some fractures may be repaired by either method or even both methods in tandem as seen with newly employed hybrid techniques. Fracture fixation in osteoporotic bone is a clinical setting in which locking plates are believed to offer superior fixation ( An advantage of traditional plates lies in the ability of the surgeon to orient screws in any direction he or she prefers. No previous study, however, has explored the relationship of screw orientation in osteoporotic bone. In our model we find no significant improvement in strength of fixation with varying the angle of screw insertion. An explanation for this is that angled screws rely on healthy bone’s ability to resist compressive forces in addition to shear forces at the screw bone interface. As speculated previously, diminished bone density results in an inability of the bone to resist compressive failure. Therefore, we conclude that the enhanced fixation strength achieved by altering screw insertion angles either convergently or divergently may not be seen in excessively osteoporotic bone. This study does have several limitations. A synthetic medium may not posess the same elastic modulus in compression and shear as cancellous bone. As our goal was simply to examine failure patterns with varying screw insertion techniques rather than represent a clinical scenario, further studies in vivo are warranted. Cyclic loading more closely resembles forces typically seen in vivo and we examined static loading. Therefore, we were unable to account for fatigue failure, a finding more applicable to clinical settings such as ambulation. Additionally the typical biological response seen with plate fixation involving bone resorption and loosening in vivo is not accounted for in a synthetic model. Furthermore, manufacturing differences such as plate mass, screw mass, thread pitch and inner core diameter between the commercially available 3.5 Our conclusions lead us to believe that in severely osteoporotic bone models, a significant advantage is offered by locked plating in situations where bending forces are anticipated, although evidence of some degree of failure exists in both plating techniques. Furthermore, the increased stability offered by placing screws obliquely is not appreciated in severely osteoporotic bone. From this, one may conclude that additional studies are needed in bone varying density to determine to what degree this benefit is lost. Selection of implants is crucial given the increased costs of locked plating systems; they should clearly be reserved for situations in which locked plating offers a significant advantage to traditional plating. With this in mind, conventional plating methods still play a significant role in fracture fixation, including in severely osteoporotic patients. None of the authors of this manuscript have any personal conflicts of interests to disclose. No outside funding was received from any organizations that may potentially bias this study. Materials discussed are FDA approved and were received as a donation from Synthes (West Chester, Pennsylvania, USA). Synthes was not involved in data analysis or manuscript preparation. Acknowledgements go to Heidi Israel for her assistance with statistical calculations, Don Larabell for his assistance with the construction of the jig used in this study, Synthes for their gracious donation of the plates and screws used for this study, and department chair Berton R. Moed for general support including supplying funds for additional materials and also for manuscript preparation assistance.