The performance of a novel hybrid flotation–gravity concentration circuit was evaluated in which a Knelson Continuous Variable Discharge (CVD) separator was used as a scavenger for flotation tailings. Flotation tailings from the Eskay Creek Gold Mine were used for the study. Batch and pilot scale laboratory tests and plant trials were performed. Results of the batch and pilot tests showed that a product with a small yield (<5%), a high upgrade ratio and significant Au (sulphide mineral) recovery could be achieved. Plant trials confirmed the laboratory test results and hybrid flotation–gravity circuit in which CVD scavenging was followed by a regrinding-flotation process, could increase overall plant gold recoveries. In view of the results, there is also potential for improvements in metal recoveries for other sulphide mineral flotation systems. The paper describes how the results influence the selection of the target grind size and thereby impact grinding energy requirements, plant processing rate and could lead to further improvements in metal recovery by reducing flotation losses at the ultrafine particle size range.Since the late 1980s a number of continuous centrifugal gravity concentrators have been developed for the mineral industry including the Kelsey Jig, the Falcon C and the Knelson Continuous Variable Discharge (CVD) concentrator. In these units, density separation is achieved at high centrifugal acceleration, which lowers the particle size limit compared to technologies that operate at unit gravity. The Knelson CVD proved to be successful in the concentration of several relatively difficult-to-process ores ( A study was conducted to evaluate the Knelson CVD in a hybrid flotation–gravity concentration circuit in which the CVD was used as a scavenger for coarse middling particles from flotation tailings. It is well known that froth flotation is not very effective for recovering the particles at relatively coarse (+ The main objective of this study was to demonstrate that the CVD was effective at recovering coarse liberated and middling particles from flotation tailings. A secondary goal was to recover a product of suitable grade and metal recovery for recycling to the grinding circuit. Laboratory and plant test programs were carried out on flotation tailings from Barrick's Eskay Creek Gold Silver Mine located in British Columbia, Canada. The now closed Eskay Creek flotation plant recovered a gold-silver bearing bulk sulphide concentrate that was sold directly to smelters. Most of the gold occurred in solid solution with sulphide minerals. Laboratory studies were conducted on a sample of flotation tailings from the Eskay Creek Mine, referred to as low-grade tailings (LGT). Testing included three phases; Batch amenability tests, pilot scale tests and plant trials. The batch amenability tests were conducted in a 3-inch laboratory Knelson concentrator (LKC) and pilot scale tests were performed using a Knelson CVD 6. Plant trials were conducted at the Eskay Creek plant using a CVD 6. Gravity testing was supported by mineralogical analysis and flotation testing to assess improvements to overall gold recovery. The LGT sample was received in slurry form and was divided into representative sub-samples of 40 Batch amenability tests were performed on 2 The smallest Knelson CVD (Continuous Variable Discharge) concentrator (CVD 6) used in this study is a pilot scale concentrator and hence before initiating pilot scale and plant trials with a CVD 6, the batch amenability test was performed as the preliminary proof of the concept. Based on sample characterization and batch amenability test results, six pilot scale tests were conducted. The pilot test facility consisted of an agitated feed tank, a Knelson CVD6 concentrator, a Sala pump for pumping feed and a product tank. The operating variables for the CVD are fluidization water pressure, bowl speed and pinch valve open and closed times ( For the plant trials, the Knelson CVD 6 was connected to a bleed stream from the flotation tailings. A total of 26 tests were conducted and products were subjected to regrinding and flotation tests. For the plant trials, the fluidization water flowrate was set at 30 Based on the size-assay analyses ( The results of the batch amenability tests using the 3-inch laboratory Knelson concentrator (LKC) are summarized in The pilot scale tests were conducted over a range of pinch valve closed times and bowl speeds ( The concentrate and tailing products of test 3 were subjected to size-assay analysis for Au and S and the results are presented in Based on pilot test results, operating conditions for the best metallurgical results were determined. The relationships between pinch closed time, concentrate yield, Au recovery and grade are seen in Size partition analyses were performed to investigate the weight percentages and the mass flow rates for each size fraction of the concentrate, tailings and feed. Partition Numbers (PN While metal recoveries show that the CVD was an effective separator, the size partition curves for Tests 3 and 6 (  The objective of the plant trials was to verify the laboratory and pilot scale tests and to evaluate the benefit of a hybrid flotation-CVD circuit. A further upgrading of gold was achieved by a regrinding-flotation process following CVD scavenging. The metallurgical response of an integrated CVD6 and regrinding-flotation process ( The results of the tests also indicate potential increase in recoveries by recirculating the CVD concentrate. The particles that were recovered by the CVD were middling particles containing gold bearing sulphides, free and liberated gold particles and siliceous gangue particles. Recirculating would allow to achieve two objectives; Firstly to create the opportunity to recover liberated particles that for some reason were not recovered during their first pass through the flotation circuit, and secondly to regrind middling particles and thereby liberate additional gold and gold bearing sulphides for recovery in subsequent flotation. Size assay results of the CVD concentrate and tailings ( The highest grade (56.7 A test program was conducted to evaluate a hybrid flotation–gravity concentration process in which a Knelson CVD concentrator would be used to scavenge coarse gold bearing sulphide middling particles. In the proposed process, CVD concentrate would be recycled to the grinding circuit to reduce particle size and improve liberation prior to flotation. Batch and pilot scale testing as well as plant trials indicated that the CVD unit was effective at recovering gold from flotation tailings. The recovered gold was mainly in the coarse size fractions and occurred in gold bearing sulphide middling particles. Size partition curves showed that the CVD operates as a size classifier as well as a density separator — i.e. a size enhanced density separator that is effective at recovering coarse middling particles. On the basis of the plant trials CVD scavenging and flotation of the reground CVD concentrate provides significant upgrading and additional Au recovery. At around 92% recovery a flotation concentrate of 60 The results of the test work proposed significant opportunity to recover a recyclable product from the flotation tailings using a hybrid CVD-flotation circuit. Potential benefits include increasing overall gold recoveries, increasing the grinding size and minimizing over grinding and related gold losses as well as reducing grinding energy requirements. Studies on a nickel sulphide ore produced similar results (