The effect of a thermal pretreatment on the kinetic parameters and rate-controlling step for nickel leaching dissolution in hydrochloric acid‑sodium chloride solutions from a low – grade Colombian nickel laterite (1.15% Ni, 0.12% Co and 41.1% Fe), was evaluated. The mineralogical analysis showed that nickel is associated with iron in the form of hematite (Fe2O3) and goethite (FeOOH) within the calcined and uncalcined ore, respectively. The hydrochloric acid and total chloride ions concentrations, as well as the leaching temperature, were shown to have a direct effect on nickel extraction. The experiments showed that ~92% of nickel can be dissolved after only 25 min in a 3 M HCl and 2 M NaCl solution when the leaching temperature was increased to 60 °C, after the sample had been previously calcined at 430 °C for 1 h. Nickel dissolution can be described by the chemical reaction-controlled shrinking particle model for both the calcined and uncalcined sample with apparent activation energies of 98 kJ/mol and 103 kJ/mol, respectively. This result suggests that a thermal pretreatment stage does not affect the nickel reaction mechanism, although it may liberate the nickel within the laterite structure.Approximately 60% of the global nickel resources correspond to laterites (U.S. Laterites are the result of soil degradation generated by climatic changes, water filtration and other factors ( Saprolites are characterized by a high nickel content (more than 1.8%), low percentages of iron (up to 25%), but with elevated magnesium content. On the other hand, limonites denote laterites with high iron contents (at least 40% by weight) and low magnesium grades (0.5–5.0%); in these minerals, nickel is mainly contained in hydrated iron oxides, with grades up to 1.5% ( Based on the above considerations, an increasing number of studies have explored novel methods to exploit laterite resources, including sulfuric acid technologies, chloride and bio-technologies ( During last decades, atmospheric acid leaching has been considered a relevant research topic since pyrometallurgical processes and high pressure leaching have become economically marginal due to the elevated energy consumptions required for the processing of minerals with low nickel content (0.95% to 1.00%) ( Process variables, such as particle size, acid concentration and leaching time, play an important role in nickel extraction ( Different publications ( Fundamental studies have shown that hydrochloric acid is more effective for metal extraction from nickel laterite ores under atmospheric conditions ( The positive effect of employing chloride solutions for nickel dissolution from lateritic ores can be explained by their physicochemical properties, mainly the increase in proton activity, the formation of stable complexes and greater nickel solubility ( It is important to note that chloride ions are not only generated with hydrochloric acid; they may be provided by the addition of chloride salts to an acid solution or by the direct use of ferric chloride as a leaching agent ( Considering the above, in this research, the leaching conditions of uncalcined and calcined limonitic laterite using hydrochloric acid at atmospheric pressure was investigated. A kinetic analysis was performed, based on the shrinking core model in order to evaluate the effect of a thermal pretreatment on the kinetic parameters and rate-controlling step for nickel leaching dissolution. The effect of important parameters, including acid and total chloride ion concentrations, as well as temperature, was determined. In this study a low-grade Colombian nickel laterite ore was used for all experiments. The ore sample was screened at 37 μm (400 mesh) and part was calcined at 430 °C for 1 h ( An elemental analysis of the sample was performed with Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS, Varian SpectrAA 220 fs), giving the elemental composition as is shown in The XRD patterns of the raw ore and calcined sample are displayed in X-ray diffraction shows that the transformation of goethite into hematite occurs with increasing calcination temperature. On heating at 250 °C for 2 h, goethite started to alter to hematite, the peaks of goethite totally disappear when the sample is calcined at 430 °C ( The leaching experiments were carried out in a jacketed reactor, connected to a thermostatted bath with recirculation of a mixture of ethylene glycol (30% The effect of hydrochloric acid at three different concentrations (1, 2 and 3 M HCl) was evaluated, as well as the addition of sodium chloride (NaCl) as an enhancer for nickel extraction (1 and 2 M NaCl). The solid/liquid ratio was fixed at 10 g sample per liter of solution. For the study of dissolution kinetics, the best combination of acid and salt (3 M HCl and 2 M NaCl) was used in order to evaluate three different leaching temperatures (25, 40 and 60 °C). Successive aliquots of the suspension were withdrawn at set times using a 3 mL plastic syringe and filtered through a 0.20 μm Millipore® filter. Dissolved nickel in leaching solutions was analyzed by AAS. At the end of each leaching test, the leached residue was filtered, rinsed with water and air-dried to be weighed. For nickel extractions calculations, the following equation was used ( Where In a previous publication, ( The high density of structural defects in the newly transformed and poorly ordered hematite, make the resulting solid more amenable to leaching, even from the initial moments ( Considering these findings, a low-grade limonitic nickel laterite ore, calcined at 430 °C for 1 h was used to evaluate the effect of hydrochloric acid and total chloride ion concentration and leaching temperature. The effect of the acid concentration on nickel dissolution was studied from 1 to 3 M at 25 °C. According to the results shown in From In a previous publication, The leaching of iron oxides (hematite and goethite) from laterite by hydrochloric acid occurs according to the reaction eqs. (2) and (3), respectively ( Considering the above, the presence of protons (H When iron oxides are leached in the presence of chloride ions, ( With these results it is possible to conclude then, that less leaching time is required to extract the nickel when a salt is added to the HCl solution. For this reason, the best leaching solution tested corresponded to 3 M HCl with addition of 2 M NaCl; this solution composition will be used for further studies. Different researchers have concluded that temperature is one of the most important factors affecting the nickel leaching process ( The results show that by elevating the temperature, nickel extraction significantly increases. While, the extraction of Ni was 9% at 25 °C after 1 h of treatment, it increased to 55% and 91% at 40 and 60 °C, respectively. To reach the maximum extraction of Ni (~ 92%) at 25 °C, it would take more than 12 h, whereas, at 60 °C, only 25 min. On the other hand, the asymptotic shape nearing the maximum extraction of 92% implies that the leaching reagent directly attacks the metal that has been exposed by the pretreatment; consequently, the nickel leaching rate is initially high, but does not reach 100% probably because the undissolved nickel is encapsulated or in a phase that is insoluble at the working conditions. This effect is more evident at 40 and 60 °C. The substitution of nickel for iron in the crystalline structure of iron oxides, suggests that the decomposition of the latter is necessary for the recovery of nickel. Furthermore, it implies that the nickel dissolution mechanism is similar to the mechanism of dissolution of the iron oxide, since a total dissolution of the iron oxides is required to achieve high nickel extraction. The kinetics of nickel dissolution can be represented by the shrinking core model and its derivation ( If the reaction is controlled by diffusion of the fluid reactant, in this case, the proton (H But, if the reaction is controlled by the surface chemical reaction kinetics, then the following equation can be used: Where α refers to the nickel fraction reacted, t is the time in minutes, In order to determine the effect of a thermal pretreatment on the kinetic parameters and rate-controlling step for the leaching of the limonitic nickel laterite ore in hydrochloric acid solutions, the experimental data were fitted using the above equations of shrinking core model. The correlation coefficients for each temperature were calculated and presented in According to the calculated regression correlation coefficients ( As was mentioned above, for comparison purposes, the nickel dissolution kinetics from the uncalcined sample was also modeled.  The apparent rate constants ( These results demonstrate that the new phase formed (hematite) after the thermal pretreatment, dissolves much more rapidly than the original goethite. Furthermore, the K-values show that at higher leaching temperatures, the dissolution rates considerably increase. This significant effect of leaching temperature on rate dissolution also, corroborates that the reaction rate is controlled by chemical reaction on the iron oxides surface. In general, a process controlled by diffusion is only slightly dependent on temperature, while chemically-controlled processes are very sensitive to temperature change ( On the other hand, activation energy for the reaction was calculated to clarify the rate-determining step. The Arrhenius equation (Eq. 6) was used to estimate the activation energy for the nickel dissolution from the calcined and uncalcined samples. Where By plotting the apparent rate constants for each experiment in an Arrhenius plot ( These high activation energy values confirm, once again, that, under these experiments conditions, the dissolution rate of nickel is controlled by the chemical reaction. This is in accordance with the values of 90 kJ/mol, 96 kJ/mol, 87.5 kJ mol and 94 kJ/mol, obtained by ( Finally, scanning electron microscopy analysis was performed on the solid residues at different leaching times, in order to observe the product layer formation and/or the modification in particle size. SEM micrographs for solid residues after leaching for 2 and 6 h are presented in A drastic decrease in particle size is evident, which agrees well with the mass loss detected in solid leach residue. Losses of up to 70% were attained when the highest amount of nickel was extracted. The shrinking core model (SCM) with no product layer formation is equivalent to the shrinking particle model ( The dissolution kinetics of a limonitic nickel laterite ore in chloride media was studied in this work. Variables, such as acid concentration, addition of chloride ions to the system and the leaching temperature, were shown to have a significant effect on the nickel extraction. Therefore, increasing hydrochloric acid and the total chloride ion concentrations, as well as the leaching temperature, noticeably increased the metal extraction rate. The presence of protons (H The nickel dissolution kinetics from a low-grade limonitic laterite was found to adjust well to the shrinking particle model with chemical reaction as the rate controlling step. The apparent rate constants for nickel from the calcined sample were an order of magnitude greater than those for the uncalcined material at 25 °C and their magnitudes considerably increased by elevating the leaching temperature up to 60 °C. The activation energies observed in a 3 M HCl and 2 M NaCl solution were similar (98 kJ/mol and 103 kJ/mol, respectively) for the calcined and uncalcined sample, which agrees with a chemical reaction control for the nickel dissolution. This result suggests that a thermal pretreatment stage does not affect the reaction mechanism. None. A. Garces-Granda is grateful to the Administrative Department of Science, Technology and Innovation (COLCIENCIAS) for the postgraduate scholarship received. The authors are grateful to the Hydrometallurgy laboratory at the The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.