Ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching of refractory oxide gold ore was investigated. According to X-ray fluorescence and fire assay analyses, the ore contained about 33.01wt% Si, 8.53wt% Al, 7.26wt% K, 3.00wt% Fe, and 2.80ppm Au. Moreover, X-ray diffraction analysis and mineralogical studies using polished thin sections showed that the ore was composed of quartz, epidote, muscovite, and orthoclase as major minerals and goethite and jarosite as minor minerals. The effects of temperature, leaching time, and the concentrations of thiosulfate, copper ion, and ammonia on the gold extraction were studied. Maximum gold extraction of 55% was obtained using thiosulfate, ammonia, and copper sulfate concentrations of 0.1M, 3M, and 0.0125M, respectively. This extraction value was achieved after room temperature leaching of a pulp with a density of 20% for 16h. Stirring speed and the pH of the aqueous solution were 400rpm and 10, respectively. Leaching rate using the preceding optimum conditions showed a transition after a leaching time of 2h indicating a change in the process mechanism.Sarigunay is an epithermal gold deposit in Iran with an estimated source of 52 million metric tons of oxide ore at an average grade of 1.77 For more than one hundred years, cyanidation has been used as the predominant process for gold extraction from mineral sources. The major reason for adopting cyanide rather than other lixiviants is its higher chemical stability and lower cost ( One of the main reagents for the thiosulfate leaching of gold is copper (II) ion. The major positive role of cupric ion during thiosulfate leaching is to catalyze the gold dissolution. Nevertheless, copper ion act as oxidant, accelerates the degradation of the thiosulfate, and increases its consumption during the process. This makes it necessary to introduce additives to stabilize copper in thisulfate solutions. Ammonia has been used as an additive to stabilize copper ion in thisulfate solutions ( To the best knowledge of the authors, the ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching of Sarigunay refractory gold ore has not been studied yet. In this study, the effects of thiosulfate, ammonia, and copper ion concentrations as well as leaching parameters such as temperature and time on the extraction are studied. The gold-bearing ore sample was obtained from the Sarigunay mine. The ore was crushed to − Cyanide leaching test ( For the thiosulfate leaching tests, a weighed amount of sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate (≥   Cyanide leaching test was performed to determine the leachable portion or the refractory nature of the ore. The result showed that 74% of gold could be readily leached by cyanidation. Therefore, it was concluded that the ore is refractory because the gold extraction by cyanidation process is < The effect of thiosulfate concentration on gold extraction is shown in The effect of copper ion concentration on the gold extraction was investigated. The results are depicted in With increase in the copper ion concentration from 0.0125 to 0.05 The effect of ammonia concentration on gold extraction is shown in With increase in the ammonia concentration from 3 to 4 Effect of temperature on gold extraction is shown in Also, higher temperature causes to increasing the ammonia volatilization and loss. According to some research works ( The ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching of the ore was investigated as a function of time. The results are given in According to the results of the present work, the following conclusions were obtained: Gold extraction was increased with increase in thiosulfate concentration up to 0.1 Gold extraction was increased with increase in copper ion concentration up to 0.0125 Gold extraction was increased with increase in ammonia concentration from 0 to 3 Gold extraction increased with increase in temperature up to 40 Leaching rate using the optimum conditions showed a transition after a leaching time of 2 Maximum gold extraction of 55% was obtained after 16 The authors would like to thank A. Nasri, the late F. Anvari Farah, and H. Noor Baghayi for kindly helping in experimental works. This research was supported by research grant (No.