In present study, a significant improvement of molybdenum recovery was obtained through improving foam performance using Pluronics (L-61 and L-65), which were used as foam conditioner. The solution properties of L-61 and L-65, such as foamability, bulk rheology, and foam stabilities, on the flotation, were investigated through surface tension and rheological measurements. Results showed that the foam performance of fusel/L-65 composite system was better than those of fusel and fusel/L-61. Moreover, it was forever confirmed by bench-scale flotation that the recovery was increased by 5%, indicating that the foam performance could be improved with addition of L-65.Foam properties play a very important role in many industrial processes, such as in flotation processes, pulp and paper, paint and coatings, textile, leather, adhesive, food processing (sugar, yeast, potato), and metal processing, etc. Jinduicheng Molybdenum Co., Ltd., located in Shanxi Province, is currently holding a largest molybdenum mine in china. This company is using flotation technique for ore processing where diesel is used as a collector, and fusel is used as a frother. However, there are many problems in the industrial production of the mine including slow bubbling, small froth quantity in the rough flotation and the large viscosity of foam. Therefore, the froth is not easy to burst and accumulated in the froth tank, so that the concentrate in the froth surface easily fall off, which make the recovery every low. Many traditional methods have been applied to improve the flotation recovery by changing the frother, collector, and even the depressant, but the experiments were innovative by adding additives that are poor in catchability and foaming to achieve the desired results, and this method was barely mentioned in the published literatures. Literatures reported that the low-molecular polymers can be adsorbed on the surface of foam to improve its performance by changing the surface viscosity of foam film, and thus this can affect the drainage dynamics and gas permeability Polyoxyethylene–polyoxypropylene–polyoxyethylene triblock copolymers (POE/POP/POE copolymers, Pluronics) are widely used as antifoams and wetting agents in paper industry, water treatment, fermentation or as a component of machine dish washing mixtures and spray cleaners Therefore, in current study the frothing speed of frother, rate of bubble attenuation, surface tension, liquid film viscosity and so on were studied in the presence and absence of Pluronic which is used as a conditioner. The encouraging results were obtained from the study which suggest that the recovery can be enhanced by improving the frothing performance in order to reduce the ability to entrain mineral particles and increase the possibility of mineral collision. During the bench-scale flotation tests, the rough flotation recovery of molybdenite was significantly improved, and this excellent performance was further confirmed in the closed-circuit test. This innovative method could be applied efficiently in other flotation systems to improve the comprehensive utilizations of resources. Samples of molybdenum ore were collected from Jinduicheng Molybdenum Industry Co., Ltd., China. Particle size of as received samples were less than 5 Chemical reagents, L-61 and L-65, were received from the Jiangsu Hai’an petrochemical plant, and the molecular structure and specific parameters of these two reagents are shown in The surface tension of deionized water was measured as 73.4–73.6 The foam was produced by placing the foaming solution (40 The surface tension of the aqueous solution of fusel, mixed aqueous solution of fusel and Pluronic was measured by the BZY-2 automatic table/interfacial tension meter produced by the Shanghai Hengping Instrument Factory. The test temperature was set to 25 The rheological characteristics of fusel and fusel/Pluronic aqueous solution were tested on the MCR 102 rheometer with a standard concentric cylinder (CC27) at 25 The bench-scale flotation tests were conducted in a laboratory single cell flotation machine (XFD-1.0 The flotation tests were carried out in the XFD flotation cell with a volume capacity of 1 The effect of pure Pluronic L-61 and L-65 on the maximum foam volume is shown in   Half-life (t The effect of pure Pluronic L-61 and L-65 on surface tension is shown in The surface tension measurements are plotted in L-65 at a smaller concentration can greatly increase the surface tension of the fusel/L-65 composite system. At 2.0 Foam drainage (also known as foam seepage) refers to the transmission of liquid within the foam under the combined action of gravity, capillary force and viscous force, which results in the separation of gas and liquid phases. When gravity is external force, capillary force and viscous force are internal forces. The effluent equation in the Plateau boundary is described in Eq. The rheology of the foaming agent aqueous is an important factor that influences dynamic foam stability The storage modulus G′ and loss modulus G″ are plotted in  From the results of one-stage tests, it is quite clear that the Pluronic is better for the recovery of Molybdenum flotation. However unlocked-cycle tests were further carried out to prove influence of Pluronic on the whole test process. Results shown in It is clear from the unlocked-cycle tests that the L-65 has a great impact on molybdenum flotation. Therefore, locked-cycle tests were further conducted to demonstrate the effect of L-65 on the grade and recovery of the molybdenum concentrate during flotation process if they continued to cycle through the beneficiation flow sheet. The effect of L-65 on the molybdenum recovery is shown in The foam properties reveal that the foaming ability, surface tension and rheological properties of the fusel/L-65 composite system are both better than that of pure fusel in flotation, indicating that a synergy effect occurs through the combination of both. In addition, it is important to control the concentration of L-65. The maximum foam volume isotherms show foam quantity sharply increases at C The research was supported by