In this study, the removal of uranium from aqueous solution is studied using emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) system. The ELM is made up of 2-Thenoyltrifluoroacetone (HTTA) as a carrier, kerosene as an organic diluent, HCl as a stripping solution and sorbitan monooleate (Span-80) as a surfactant for stabilizing the emulsion phase. Initially, the important parameters affecting the removal of uranium, were screened out using a fractional factorial design. Then the effect of the selected factors were studied to obtain the optimal conditions. Under the assessed conditions (pH of donor phase=5; HTTA concentration in the membrane phase=0.02mol/L; emulsion/donor phase volume ratio=0.2; uranium concentration in the donor phase <150mg/L), the removal percentage of uranium was obtained 99.8% in less than five minutes.Liquid membrane technique involves a liquid which is immiscible with the donor and receiving phases and provides a semipermeable barrier between these two liquid or gas phases ELM is a multiple water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) emulsion system which is prepared using three main phases of membrane, internal (receiving) phase, and external (donor) phase. The primary water-in-oil (W/O) emulsion was formed by homogenizing the internal phase into the membrane phase. The membrane phase contains carrier and surfactant, dissolved in a diluent and the internal phase contains stripping agent. The existence of surfactant as an emulsifying agent is important to have a stable emulsion Various waste streams containing heavy metals are produced during nuclear industries, hydrometallurgy, painting, etc. Uranium(VI), due to the radioactivity, long half-life, and chemical toxicity, is an important element in the radioactive wastes, that must be removed 2-Thenoyltrifluoroacetone (HTTA) (Merck) and kerosene (Alfa Aesar) were used as received. Sorbitan monooleate (Span-80) was procured from Kimiyagaran Emrooz Co. (Iran). Uranyl nitrate (UO A pH meter (Sartorius), calibrated daily with standard buffer solutions, was used for measuring pH values of aqueous phases. Inductivity Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES, Optima 7300 A high speed mixer (20–15000 The emulsion was broken using an AC high voltage equipment (Honar Mohandesi Rasana Co. 0–20 For preparing emulsion liquid membrane, organic phase containing kerosene, 3 The stock solution of U(VI) was prepared by adding the uranium nitrate to a volumetric flask and then adding water to obtain the desired concentration of uranium. For preparing feed solution at pH The specific volume of the prepared ELM was added into 100 The demulsification equipment, shown in In the ELM system, any breakage of emulsion globules will lead to loss of acceptor phase (internal phase) and lowering of extraction efficiencies. The ELM stability was studied by measuring the concentration of protons leaked from the internal phase to the external phase. 20 To study the removal of uranium in the emulsion liquid membrane system, six factors were considered. The selection of statistically important factors was done using fractional factorial design (FFD), developed by “Minitab Statistical Software 17”. Based on the results in In the experiments for the optimizing of the selected factors, the HCl concentration in the stripping phase was chosen to be 0.1 The external phase pH affects the removing of uranium. In order to explore the role of external phase pH on the transport of U(VI) in the ELM system, experiments were carried out with various pH ranging from 2 to 6. The obtained results in In order to optimize the carrier concentration in the ELM, various concentrations of HTTA were used in the emulsion phase. The obtained results in Emulsion/external phase volume ratio (V Depending on the different industry conditions, uranium could be present in various concentrations in wastewater. To investigate the influence of U(VI) concentration on the removal efficiency, the concentration ranging from 23.8 to 300 The removal of uranium efficiency was studied for the time interval of 1–30 Removal of uranium from aqueous solution was carried out using an ELM system containing HTTA as a carrier. The results of the fractional factorial design showed that the most important factors were as follow: pH of donor phase, carrier concentration in the membrane phase, emulsion/donor phase volume ratio and uranium concentration in the donor phase. The effect of these factors were investigated to obtain optimal operation conditions. The results showed that, after 1 According to the ELM high efficiency within a short time and also very low inventory of carrier in the prepared emulsion, it is environmentally friendly, simpler and cheaper for removing of uranium from wastewaters.