The recovery and purification of vanadium (V) and tungsten (W) from honeycomb-type spent selective catalytic reduction (SCR) catalyst was investigated using an autoclave through a pressure leaching process. Spent SCR catalyst mainly consists of TiO2 and other oxides (7.73% WO3, 1.23% V2O5, etc.). The reaction temperature, NaOH concentration, time, additive concentration, and liquid–solid (L/S) ratio were varied during the leaching process. The optimal reaction conditions were identified for recovery of V and W. The addition of NaOH to Na2CO3 improved the amount of V and W recovered because of the enhancing effect of NaOH in Na2CO3. As the concentration of CaCl2 was increased during the precipitation process in order to separate the recovered V and W, the precipitation percentages of V and W increased, respectively. However, the use of Ca(OH)2 as the additive reduced the precipitation percentage of W. Therefore, despite full precipitation of V (98.6%), only 7.73% of W was precipitated when 3 equivalents of Ca(OH)2 was reacted with spent SCR catalyst for 30min. The remaining W in the leaching solution was reacted with NH4OH to form ammonium tungstate, which was converted to ammonium paratungstate through evaporation. Consequently, V and W could be recovered and separated successfully through the process in this study.Due to environmental regulations throughout the whole industry, NO The SCR catalyst is mainly composed of TiO In soda roasting, NaOH, Na Chen A hydrometallurgy process is used for leaching low-grade ore for when the mineral dressing is difficult or not economical, or the TiO Therefore, we investigated leaching V and W selectively from honeycomb-type spent SCR catalysts via a pressure leaching process. Considering that the pyrometallurgy process requires water treatment after a high reaction temperature over 900 Under a 1000 The calcium precipitation process was used to separate V and W in the leaching solution. Sonicated calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH) In order to recover V and W selectively from the spent SCR catalyst, the pressure leaching reaction was conducted with the soda digestion process as shown in The leaching process was performed with NaOH as the leaching agent. To determine the optimal temperature for maximizing the recovery of the rare metals, the reaction was conducted at 200, 250, 300, and 350 However, as the temperature became higher, Na High temperature was needed in order to maximize the recovery of W because its reactivity was relatively lower than that of V at low temperatures. For high recoveries of W at low temperatures, W was digested based on NaOH concentration as the variable. In the case of NaOH, it reacted with V and Mo in pH 7–9 range. However, it reacted with low reactive metals such as Al at a pH over 9 Compared with NaOH, Na The reaction was conducted for 2 As shown in The effects of leaching time are shown in The effect of the L/S ratio was investigated at ratios of 5, 10, and 20 ( By adding calcium compounds, the precipitation reactions proceeded according to Eqs. The precipitation reaction was conducted for various concentrations of CaCl This study was conducted to optimize the recovery of the rare metals V and W from spent SCR catalyst containing 1.23% V The present research has been conducted by the R&D Center for Valuable Recycling (Global-Top Environmental Technology Development Program) funded by the