Most common crustal rock types display friction coefficients of 0.6 or higher, but some faults must be frictionally weak as they slip when the stress state is unfavourably-oriented (i.e. the resolved shear stress is low for a given normal stress across the fault surface). A role for low-friction minerals and high pore fluid pressures, either separately or in combination, is frequently invoked to explain such slip, but volume fractions of dispersed weak phases often seem to be present in fault gouge in amounts too small to produce significant mechanical weakening. By means of mechanical tests on synthetic fault gouge and microstructural study of run products, we show that the effective area of an embedded weak phase (graphite) on a slip plane can be substantially increased by mechanical smearing, and that the enlarged area of the weak phase on the slip plane follows a linear mixing law. This allows a relatively small volume fraction of the initially dispersed weak phase to have a disproportionately large effect, provided the smearing is concentrated into a narrow planar slip zone or into an interconnected network of them. Some experimental studies (e.g. The above studies show that a wide range of processes can contribute to friction on faults becoming lower than would be expected from the Byerlee generalization. Here we show by means of mechanical tests on synthetic fault gouge coupled with microstructural study of the fault surface, how the effective shear stress-supporting area of an embedded weak phase can be substantially increased by mechanical smearing on the slip plane. This can produce a dramatic reduction in frictional strength, provided the smearing is concentrated into a narrow planar fault or into an interconnected network of them. Synthetic fault gouges were prepared by mixing kaolinite of mean particle size 5 μm and quartz powder of mean particle size 50 μm in the ratio by weight 1:2. This mixture can be considered comparable to some common clay-bearing fault gouges (e.g. Most samples were sheared as thin (1 mm before pre-shearing compaction by approximately 30%) layers sandwiched between rigid forcing blocks fabricated either from a granite or a low-porosity sandstone. The uniaxially-symmetric compaction behaviour of the initial quartz/clay mixture was determined under distilled water-saturated conditions of no lateral expansion by progressive loading up to 10 MPa axial load ( Shear tests at low normal stress (up to 3 MPa) were carried out using an ELE type 26-2111 direct shear machine on gouge samples 60 mm long and 30 mm wide. Shear displacements up to 7 mm were applied under constant normal loads up to 505 kg at a sliding rate of 17 μm s Higher normal stress tests, between 20 and 300 MPa, were run in a standard triaxial machine with the gouge material in sawcuts oriented at 45° to the cylinder axis of 20 mm diameter forcing blocks of Pennant sandstone (from South Wales coalfield, 4% porosity). 1 mm thick layers of the wet paste were applied to the sawcut surface. This sequence of samples was compacted and tested after oven drying at 60 °C, to minimise risk of development of elevated pore pressures at high normal stresses, although the graphite-free quartz/kaolinite gouge was also tested wet. Tests on each sample were run at constant confining pressures of 50, 100 and 150 MPa at room temperature using both compressional ( Additionally, in the direct shear machine, cakes of wet, compacted gouge material of areal dimensions 60 × 60 mm and thickness 20 mm were pre-compacted to a porosity of 30 ± 1% and then sheared at a displacement rate of 17 μm s Amorphous carbon and kerogen can also form a weak component of organic shales, from which unconventional gas is increasingly being recovered. This can impact on the frictional properties of such rocks, and might be an important influence on borehole stability. We therefore also measured the friction coefficient for 45° sawcut planar surfaces (wet, ground to 16 μm SiC) in samples of Barnett Shale (Texas) recovered from a borehole at a depth of approximately 2.5 km. Tests were carried out in extension and compression at constant normal stresses up to 140 MPa and at a constant shear displacement rate of 2.3 μm s A total of 30 experiments were run, all at room temperature (20 °C), both wet and dry. Experimental conditions and results are listed in    Large variations in strain rate do not affect systematically the steady sliding shear stress. The low and high normal stress tests were carried out at slip rates that differed by one order of magnitude, and in both cases no significant (no more than 1% of load supported) stress relaxation was observed when slip was halted whilst under stress. This corresponds to the effect of a strain rate reduction by several orders of magnitude. In both the high and low pressure tests on pure graphite, a well-defined coefficient of friction of 0.095 ± 0.015 was found. The low friction of graphite has long been known (e.g. Tests on Barnett shale were carried out at constant normal stress, achieved through servo-control of the confining pressure. These experiments showed steady, stable sliding at constant shear stress under all normal stress conditions, in both extensional and compressive loading geometries, with friction coefficient ranging between 0.40 and 0.42.  In all cases the two halves of the sheared samples separated along a dominant, very planar principal slip surface, about half-way through the thickness of the gouge layer, upon which a striated covering of black graphite was seen. Optical microstructural observations were made of the slip surfaces ( Cross-section views of the gouge layers were obtained after impregnation with epoxy resin and examined both optically and with the scanning electron microscope (SEM).  These 45° oriented gouge layers have been subjected to smearing in both senses as a result of extensional and compressional loading, and systematic development of asymmetric Riedel shear arrays was either not seen or could alternatively be present in both senses. All discrete slip surfaces appear to have developed and remained active near-parallel to the general orientation of the gouge layer. The degree of comminution of gouge in discrete layers is surprising in view of the fact that most slip is accommodated on the graphite smeared layers. It is suspected that most of the quartz and other phase comminution developed early in the shearing before the graphite-smeared surfaces that control the frictional stress had developed, as the shear and normal stresses were rapidly rising. For the shear strains applied, based on porosity vs shear strain measurements of this gouge composition by The simplest mixing model relating friction coefficient of the mixture to the volume fraction of the weak phase assumes that the latter affects friction  We postulate that the smear factor depends on the horizontal (volume fraction of weak phase) separation of the Voigt ( An expression for   Without the addition of a very weak phase such as graphite, mixed quartz + clay gouges show a variation in frictional strength between end member compositions typically from From the behaviour of the graphite-bearing samples in this study and that of mixtures such as quartz-talc and serpentine-talc ( Qualitative explanations for strain-dependent weakening of rocks in terms of developing contiguity of slip surfaces between weak-phase grains have been proposed in many previous studies of naturally and experimentally deformed rocks. Weak-phase smearing is already well-known in the materials sciences for reducing friction between planar sliding surfaces. In the fabrication of metal-matrix composites, a few percent of graphite is added to alloy melts or powders before hot-pressing. Friction between machined sliding surfaces is reduced by graphite smearing over the bearing surfaces to form lubricating layers only a few tens of nm thick ( Smearing of low permeability, clay-bearing rock over fault surfaces in proportion to the fraction of such rocks intersecting fault planes has previously been used as a basis for evaluating the sealing effects of faults in shale-bearing sequences, in terms of the parameter called the shale-gouge ratio, as opposed to considering effects of such smears on frictional resistance to slip ( Fault friction reduction by weak-phase smearing was only seen in our experiments when slip is constrained to occur on smooth, planar fault surfaces, such that the formation of lithic rip-up clasts does not roughen the surface, and platy minerals are forced to develop a strongly aligned fabric. In our experiments on shearing of thick cakes of synthetic gouge material no significant frictional strength reduction was observed up to 18 vol% graphite ( In addition to purely mechanical smearing of a weak-phase, natural faults often show focused mineral growth of frictionally weak phases, such as talc ( In nature, it has long been recognized that fault creep accommodated by pressure solution may become important, especially as particle sizes are reduced ( We performed frictional sliding experiments on thin, synthetic fault gouge layers of mixed quartz and kaolinite ( Whilst this effect can be a significant contributor to the weakening of certain fault zones, it does not represent a complete solution to the problem of slip on relatively unfavourably oriented faults, and other complementary weakening processes may still be required to play a significant role. These include pressure solution, growth of oriented weak phases by local mineral reaction or hydrothermal precipitation, and elevation of pore fluid pressure. In the deformation of gas-bearing organic-rich mudstones (shales), weak-phase smearing may promote macroscopically ductile behaviour, leading to problems with borehole stability and resistance to hydraulic fracture. For donation of sample materials we thank: English China Clays (kaolinite) and Sibelco Benelux (quartz ‘flour’). Chesapeake Energy Corp., Oklahoma City, OK, USA, kindly provided the Barnett shale samples, but the exact geographic location was not revealed to us. AJH acknowledges