The effects of sinomenine (SIN, an alkaloid extracted from the Chinese medicinal plant Sinomenium acutum used for centuries to treat rheumatic disease, including rheumatoid arthritis) on apatitic nucleation and matrix vesicle (MV)-induced mineral formation were compared with those of cysteine, levamisole, and theophylline. We found that SIN was not an inhibitor of tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), a marker of biological mineralization, but confirmed that cysteine, levamisole, and theophylline were. Further, none of these four molecules directly affected the nucleation of hydroxyapatite (HA) formation, in contrast to pyrophosphate (PPi) which did. Incubation of 0.25–1.0mM cysteine, theophylline, or levamisole with MVs in synthetic cartilage lymph (SCL) containing AMP and Ca2+, but not inorganic phosphate (Pi), prolonged the induction time of mineral formation, apparently by inhibiting TNAP activity. SIN at the same levels neither inhibited TNAP activity nor affected the induction time of MV mineral formation. However, SIN did markedly delay MV-induced mineral formation in SCL containing Pi (instead of AMP) in a manner similar to theophylline, but to a lesser extent than levamisole. Cysteine did not delay, in fact it slightly accelerated MV-induced mineral formation in Pi-containing SCL. These findings suggest that levamisole, SIN and theophylline may directly affect Ca2+ and/or Pi accretion during mineral formation; however, TNAP was not directly involved. The possible roles of annexins and other ion transporters, such as proteins of the solute carrier family implicated in Ca2+ and Pi influx are discussed.Sinomenine (SIN; 7,8-didehydro-4-hydroxy-3,7-dimethoxy-17-methylmorphinan-6-one) is an alkaloid belonging to the morphinan family, and extracted from the Chinese medicinal plant Cysteine, levamisole, and AMP were purchased from Sigma. Theophylline was purchased from China National Pharmaceutical Group Corporation. SIN was obtained from Chengdu Mansite Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (China). The purity of theophylline and SIN was further confirmed by Standard synthetic cartilage lymph (SCL) was prepared as a stock solution and frozen at −20 Collagenase-released MVs were isolated from bone and epiphyseal cartilage slices from 17-day-old chicken embryos according to Balcerzak et al. To detect the differential effects of the soluble tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) inhibitors cysteine, levamisole, theophylline, and SIN, the TNAP activity of MVs was determined under both alkaline and physiological conditions using a pH 10.4 buffer containing 25 The light scattering method The DMSO-induced HA assay was prepared as previously described The MVs isolated from the femurs of 17-day-old chick embryos were observed by transmission electron microscopy to be round-shaped organelles having diameters of 100–200 SIN did not inhibit MVs were incubated in the presence of SIN, theophylline, cysteine or levamisole at 37 Replacing 3.42 To simultaneously evaluate the effect of available P The regulation of physiological mineralization is a complex and multifactorial process The proteome of MVs has been recently identified Small molecules (phosphatidylserine calcium phosphate complexes or HA) can be powerful nucleators of mineral formation In mineralization medium containing 2  hydroxyapatite interleukin 1β matrix vesicles  inorganic phosphate inorganic pyrophosphate rheumatoid arthritis synthetic cartilage lymph sinomenine (7,8-didehydro-4-hydroxy-3,7-dimethoxy-17-methylmorphinan-6-one)  Th1-type cytokine Th2-type cytokine tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase tumor necrosis factor α voltage-dependent anion channel We thank Dr. Carew for the English correction. L. Li was a recipient of a scholarship awarded by the China–France Doctoral College. Y. Wu was supported by the