The extraction of sulphuric acid from the actual solutions generated during the process of pickling of steel from a local tube company dealing with the processing of iron and steel tubes using Alamine 336 has been studied in detail. Various parameters were optimised for the maximum extraction of acid such as concentration of organic extractant, time for equilibration, O/A ratio, acid concentration in the feed, temperature for extraction was varied from 30 to 60 °C. Stripping of loaded acid was done with distilled water at 60 °C. Stripping parameters studied were, temperature and time effect on equilibration, O/A ratio, multiple contact of the same strippant with fresh loaded organic. The effects of the numbers of extraction and stripping stages on the extraction and stripping of sulphuric acid recovery are discussed. After the extraction of acid from WPL, iron values in the raffinate were extracted with a binary solvent mixture consisting of MIBK and D2EHPA which shows a synergistic effect on iron extraction.Pickle liquors from the primary metal and metal finishing industries comprise a major source of toxic industrial wastes. Pickling is a method used in sheet and wire mills or metal fabricating plants to remove oxide and scale from the surface of the metal sheet, strip, wire, or parts before another operation, such as galvanizing, electroplating, or painting, by passing the metal products through an acid bath. Steels are usually pickled in 15–20% HCL or H 10 L of sulphate waste pickle liquor was collected from Tata Tubes Ltd, Jamshedpur. The chemical analysis of this waste is given in The organic reagent used for the recovery of acid and iron in this study was Alamine 336, D2EHPA, MIBK. Alamine 336 (R Chemical analysis of the WPL, acid after extraction, iron and zinc in the solutions were done volumetrically by standard methods as mentioned in Acid extraction from waste pickle liquor (WPL) of the steel tubes industry was done with 35% Alamine 336 (0.723 M) in kerosene. 10% of isodecanol was used as phase modifier. The loading capacity of the solvent for WPL containing 91.9 g/L was performed at 30 °C, 45 °C and 60 °C by multiple contact method at O/A ratio of 1:1. The organic and aqueous solutions were contacted for a period of 5 min to ensure complete extraction in a separatory funnel. The mixture was then allowed to separate into organic and aqueous layers and the acid loaded organic was separated from the aqueous phase with residual acid. The same organic was shaken again with the fresh aqueous feed till the organic is completely loaded with the acid, which is indicated by the chemical analysis of the aqueous phase after each shaking. Various other parameters such as mixing time, O/A ratio, mixing temperature, aqueous and organic concentration etc. were studied to optimise the amicable for acid extraction. After the extraction of acid by the organic phase stripping of the loaded acid was performed to recover the pure and concentrated acid and iron solution which could be recycled to the pickling bath and iron could be used to prepare pure iron oxide. Sulphuric acid extraction from waste sulphate pickle liquor containing 91.9 g/L acid and 78.1 g/L Fe(T) along with traces of other metals was performed with different concentrations of Alamine 336. A few preliminary experiments were done with different phase modifiers to examine their effect on acid extraction keeping all other parameters constant. It was observed that though percentage acid extraction remains the same with tri- In order to observe kinetics of acid extraction, both aqueous and organic phases were contacted for different time intervals ( The result on extraction of acid with different Alamine concentrations is shown in Saturation loading capacity of different concentrations of Alamine was determined by using multiple contacts ( The effect of initial sulphuric acid concentration in the waste pickle liquor for the loading of acid on to 35% Alamine 336 is represented in Variation in organic to aqueous phase ratios shows that the percentage acid extraction increases from 11 to 88% with the increase in O/A ratio from 0.2 to 5. Thus at O/A of 5 the organic phase contains 81.1 g/L of acid leaving about 10.8 g/L in the aqueous phase ( Saturation loading of 35% Alamine was done by a multiple contact of the waste pickle liquor with acid concentration of 91.9 g/L. The concentration of acid in the loaded solvent (35% Alamine 336) was found to be 82 g/L. Stripping of acid from the above loaded solvent was performed with hot distilled water at 60 °C so that it could be recycled back to the system Since the concentration of acid obtained after stripping was not suitable for recycling, the same aqueous feed was contacted with the fresh loaded organic and the final strip solution obtained after 5 contacts contained 65.9% concentrated acid ( Thus, O/A variation was tried to get a concentrated acid in the strip solution. Effect of time on stripping of loaded acid by hot distilled water was also studied.  Analysis of iron content shows that its extraction was negligible, probably ferrous iron as sulphate has very less affinity for Alamine 336. Thus iron extraction was tried with a mixed solvent system comprising of D2EHPA and MIBK. The acid free ferrous sulphate was oxidised to ferric form by treating it with the required amount of nitric acid and during oxidation the concentration falls from 78.2 g/L of Fe(total) to 60.9 g/L of Fe(total). However it is always possible to maintain almost similar iron concentration. Studies were conducted with the oxidised solution for the extraction of iron by the aforesaid mixed solvent system. Effect of D2EHPA and MIBK concentration individually on the distribution coefficient of Fe(III) extraction from the sulphate waste pickle liquor containing Fe: 60.9 g/L was studied at O/A 2:1, T 30 °C with a mixing time of 5 min. The raffinate was analysed for the remaining iron by volumetric titration with potassium dichromate in the presence of BDS as indicator.  Similarly, by varying the D2EHPA concentration from 20 to 40% the Thus after the extraction of iron in a mixture of 40% D2EHPA and 40% MIBK the stripping was tried with different concentrations of HCl and the percentage of iron(III) stripped from loaded D2EHPA40% Solvent extraction of sulfuric acid from the actual waste pickle liquor from Tata tubes company Jamshedpur was carried out using Alamine 336. The extraction of H Although Alamine 336 is a good extractant for sulphuric acid, the acid could not be stripped completely from the loaded organic with water. After the extraction of acid the raffinate was oxidised and Fe(III) in the solution was then extracted with the appropriate mixture of D2EHPA and MIBK behaving as a binary extractant. MIBK was found to enhance the The authors wish to thank the Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur for their kind permission to publish this paper. Authors are also thankful to DST for sponsoring the project.