The hot ductility of severe plastic deformed AA6061 was studied at different temperatures and strain rates. The large processed by ECAP specimens with the dimensions of about 100mm×100mm×14mm were then subjected to cold rolling (CR) in order to fabricate the long Ultra-fine grained sheets. According to microscopic observations and hot tensile tests, the combination of two severe plastic deformations (i.e. ECAP+CR) can affect significantly the refinement of grain/subgrain and the ductility of the studied alloy. The results were then compared with those of as-received and CRed cases. In case of ECAP followed by the cold rolling process, the effect of temperature on the ductility, strain rate sensitivity, activation energy and Zener–Hollomon parameter was higher than strain rate. It can be suggested that the possible mechanism dominated the hot tensile deformation during tensile testing is dynamic recovery and dislocation creep. Although the maximum hot ductility was obtained at 500°C, an increase in the volume fraction of cavities and their distribution led to a decrease in hot ductility and superplasticity of AA6061 alloy processed by SPD .Generally speaking, superplastic flow refers to the ability of a polycrystalline material to extend to a very high tensile elongation prior to failure The composition of studied alloy is summarized in  X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique can be used to characterize the microstructural evolutions in terms of studying the maximum peak intensity/changes, broadening and the shifting in peaks as well as the variation in lattice parameters. These are necessary to study the effect of two SPDs methods on the deformed structure. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the non-deformed and deformed samples are shown in Hot formability is often limited by cavitation during forming, making cavity formation, growth and coalescence  The hot ductility and strain rate sensitivity of the undeformed and deformed samples are compared in The strain rate sensitivity ( In order to investigate the hot-tensile behavior of processed by SPD AA6061 alloy, it is necessary to study its deformation characteristics using constitutive equations. The data obtained from the true stress–true strain curves of hot tensile tests are used to determine the material׳s constants, activation energy and Zener–Hollomon parameter. These are needed to investigate the effects of different parameters (strain, strain rate and temperature) on the hot-tensile behavior of the studied alloy. The Arrhenius type equation is widely used to describe the hot deformation behavior of alloys during hot shear Then, the flow stress, Considering the definition of hyperbolic functions, one can write Combining Eqs. Combining Eqs. Taking the logarithm of Eq. Combining Eqs. To obtain the value of The values of For the given strain rates, differentiating Eq. Then, the value of Considering both true stress–strain and engineering stress–strain curves, the amounts obtained for  The experimental results along with the microscopic studies (TEM, XRD and OM) indicate that the hot ductility of the Ultra-fine grained AA6061 alloy can be controlled by different parameters. In other words, the hot ductility of the studied alloy can be influenced by (i) strain rate, (ii) temperature, and (iii) grain refinement. The variations in microstructural evolutions, flow stress, elongation to failure, strain rate sensitivity and activation energy can be used as criteria for the formability of processed by hot SPD AA6061 alloy. The results show that the ultra-fine grained materials although exhibit superior hot ductility but do not show superplastic behavior. The reasons for this claim can be expressed by the following mechanisms: First, according to Second, the mean value of activation energy for the deformed AA6061 (196 Third, referring to As discussed above, it can be suggested that the possible mechanism dominated the tensile deformation of processed by hot SPD AA6061 is dynamic recovery and dislocation creep. The effects of temperature and strain rate on the hot tensile behavior of severely plastic deformed AA6061 were studied. The combination of ECAP plus cold rolling resulted in the ultra-fine grained structure in AA6061 alloy. According to the tensile-testing results and microscopic observations, severe plastic deformation can lead to more microstructural refinement and higher elongation to failure than the as-received case. Referring to results of flow stress and Zener–Hollomon parameter, the effect of temperature on the ductility of the processed by hot SPD AA6061 alloy is higher than the strain rate. The samples severely deformed by ECAP plus cold rolling exhibited optimum hot ductility at highest temperature. However, the formation of cavities led to a decrease in elongation restricting the superplasticity behavior. The microstructural evolution, ductility, strain rate sensitivity, activation energy of the processed by hot SPD alloy indicates that the recovery of dislocations can be the dominant deformation mechanism. The authors would like to acknowledge the help of Professor Reza Mahmudi and the staff of formability laboratory for their contribution to this work. The authors also thank to Mr. S.A. Motaei and Mr. Haghani for running the ECAP and Rolling system.