This paper presents a constitutive relation for modelling the inelastic response of sedimentary rocks. The inherent anisotropy of this class of materials is described by employing a second-order microstructure tensor, whose eigenvectors define the principal material triad. Higher-order dyadic products of this tensor are incorporated in the distribution function, which specifies the directional dependence of strength parameters. The mathematical formulation is applied to model the mechanical characteristics of Tournemire shale. Several triaxial tests are simulated, at various initial confining pressures, for samples tested at different orientation relative to the loading direction. The results are compared with the available experimental data.Among sedimentary rocks, the most widespread are shale, siltstone and claystone. These rocks, which are formed by deposits of clay and silt sediment, exhibit strong inherent anisotropy, manifesting itself in a directional dependence of deformation characteristics. The anisotropy is strongly related to the microstructure, in particular the existence of bedding planes which mark the limits of strata and can be easily identified by a visual examination. The study of the mechanical behaviour of sedimentary rocks, especially shale and mudstone, is of particular interest to the oil exploration industry as well as to civil and mining engineering. These materials are often unavoidable in foundations of a broad range of civil structures, in underground excavations as well as tunnelling. Over the last few decades, an extensive research effort has been devoted to study the mechanical behaviour of anisotropic rocks. Comprehensive references on this topic can be found in a number of review papers (see e.g., In parallel with experimental studies, extensive research has been carried out on formulation of appropriate general failure criteria. An extensive review on this topic, examining different approaches, is provided in the article by The objective of this paper is to propose an approach which retains the mathematical rigour and, at the same time, is pragmatic, i.e. simple enough to be applied to solve some practical engineering problems. The formulation incorporates a scalar anisotropy parameter which is expressed in terms of mixed invariants of the stress and structure-orientation tensors. Such a parameter has recently been introduced by Consider first the specification of the conditions at failure. Following the framework developed in The generalized loading vector It can be shown (see Another way of expressing the definition (5) is to employ the deviatoric part A specific formulation can be obtained by a suitable generalization of classical isotropic criteria. Consider, for this purpose, the plasticity framework for brittle-plastic materials as outlined in the article by For further analysis, it is convenient to express The plastic multiplier d The final aspect of the formulation of the problem is the specification of the plastic potential function. The experimental evidence indicates that in the ductile regime a significant dilation takes place prior to failure. In order to account for this effect, the plastic potential may be assumed in the form Given the gradients of both the yield and plastic potential functions, the constitutive relation can be evaluated by employing a standard plasticity procedure. Assuming the additivity of elastic and plastic strain rates, and employing the definition (16), one obtains Finally, it should be emphasized that the formulation presented here is restricted to ductile regime. This is implied by the form of the hardening law (15). In general, the inception of localized deformation may be considered as a bifurcation problem ( The formulation outlined in the previous section has been applied to model the mechanical characteristics of a shale taken from the Tournemire site in the Massif Central, France. A comprehensive experimental program has been carried out at Laboratoire de Mécanique de Lille, and the results have been reported by In general, the implementation of the constitutive relation (28) requires the specification of material functions and parameters involved, especially those associated with the distribution function (12), as well as the failure criterion (11). Consider first the function (12), which describes the variation of uniaxial compressive strength In order to approximate the data by the distribution function (12), let us note that for the considered loading process The next issue is that of identification of the constants appearing in the failure criterion (11). For this purpose, the results of triaxial tests at different initial confining pressures, as reported by  The elastic constants for Tournemire shale have been identified by Finally, based on the same set of experimental results, the transition from compaction to dilatancy, In order to illustrate the performance of the model, a number of triaxial tests, as reported by   Comparing the results in The effects of anisotropy are discussed further in In this work, a mathematical formulation has been put forth for the description of deformation characteristics of anisotropic sedimentary rocks. The primary focus was to propose an approach which is rigorous, but at the same time is simple enough to be implemented for the solution of practical engineering problems. The framework has been illustrated by numerical examples simulating a series of triaxial tests carried out on Tournemire shale. It appears that the basic trends in mechanical characteristics, i.e. sensitivity of the axial strength, axial deformation and volume change to the orientation of the sample, have been predicted quite reasonably. Also, the quantitative predictions are fairly consistent with the experimental evidence, especially given the uncertainty associated with inhomogeneity of the material. For materials displaying a strong inherent anisotropy, the principal material directions are known a priori. Thus, the problem does not require any specific measure of fabric. This is not the case, however, in the context of induced anisotropy. The latter requires, in addition to an explicit definition of fabric, an appropriate evolution law for the fabric tensor. This issue is relevant to a broad class of rocks, including sandstone, porous chalk, etc., and will be addressed separately.