This paper focuses on the microstructural design of the 7050 and 7150 aluminum alloys for the control of recrystallization, grain and subgrain morphologies, fracture toughness, fatigue crack initiation and fatigue crack growth of these alloys. An investigation of the evolution of the microstructure during primary, secondary and intermediate thermo-mechanical processing has been carried out. The study of the recrystallization behavior, the grain morphology and the sub-grain morphology has been carried out. Other microstructural features such as the morphology of the constituent particles, as the formation of primary hydrogen porosity and its evolution during intermediate thermo-mechanical processing have also been studied. The paper discusses the effect of these microstructural parameters on the fracture and fatigue behavior of these alloys.The high strength aluminum-zinc-magnesium-copper alloys gain strength by solution heat treatment, quenching and artificial aging through the formation of a complex sequence of intermediate microstructures, such as the Mg (Zn, Cu, Al)  In order to meet the demands of the aerospace industry, Alcoa in cooperation with Boeing developed a new aluminum alloy 7150 having improved combinations of strength and corrosion resistance. This alloy is a modified composition, modified processing, high purity version of the 7050 alloy, which was developed by J.T. Staley and co-workers at Alcoa (1, 2). In the T6 temper 7150 plates and extrusions developed high strength and adequate fracture toughness and fatigue resistance. However, in this temper the enhanced strength resulted in the degradation of the resistance to exfoliation corrosion, especially in the short transverse direction. In order to improve the resistance to exfoliation corrosion in the short transverse direction, without sacrificing strength, Alcoa developed a new temper, T77. This led to the incorporation of the 7150-T7751 in both plate and extrusions in the upper wing structures of the C-17 military transport plane and the 7150-T6151 in the upper wing structures of the European Airbus A310, McDonnell Douglas MD-11 and Boeing 757 and 767, as shown in The major portion of commercial 7×50 alloys are produced through conventional ingot casts typically 200″−190″ × 60″−50″ × 20″−16″, which are subsequently processed into plates typically 2″ to 12″ thick, and then machined or formed into structural components. These components are subjected in service to multidirectional stresses and must possess the best combination of strength, ductility, fracture toughness, and resistance to fatigue and stress corrosion cracking. For most The objective of this investigation was to evaluate the relative magnitude of various parameters such as design, microstructure, manufacturing, that significantly influence the above mechanical properties. Typical chemical compositions of the materials used in this investigation are presented in The design of sampling of specimens for fracture toughness (K In addition and in order to investigate the effect of strain on the degree of static and dynamic recrystallization and grain morphology, three deformation processes (1 to 3), each with five or six In order to investigate and fully characterize typical microstructures Analytical Electron Microscopy (AEM), quantitative x-ray microanalysis using Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) techniques, electron and x-ray diffraction techniques were used. Techniques of conventional electron diffraction with Selected Area Diffraction Patterns (SADPs) and Convergent Beam Electron Diffraction Patterns (CBEDPs) were used. In analytical electron microscopy the probe size was controlled by the standard objective apertures and by the use of convergent beams of appropriate size for the characterization of very fine coherent precipitate particles. Quantitative optical, transmission, and scanning electron metallography with elemental x-ray mapping were carried out directly or through camera scanning of direct micrographs on a Quantitative Image Analysis System. In this investigation, various parameters were observed to influence significantly the fracture toughness, fatigue crack initiation and fatigue crack propagation of these materials, as shown in Typical plane strain fracture toughness results, in the T-L orientation, are shown in The results of this microstructural analysis agree with very recent work (8, 9, 10) and are discussed in detail elsewhere (11). The large number of fine subgrains and the high density of dislocations acted as sites for the precipitation of fine η′ phase (6), as shown in The low fracture toughness of process A (completely recrystallized microstructure) is attributed mostly to the large proportion of intergranular fracture due to strain concentrations in the grain boundaries caused by alterations in the dislocations, precipitates and grain boundary structures. The high angle grain boundaries were observed to be preferred sites for the formation of coarse intergranular precipitates and hydrogen gas porosity (  The very fine recrystallized microstructures with low volume fracture of porosity and low volume fraction of large particles exhibited the highest resistance. This is attributed to the randomly oriented fine grains and the effectiveness of their high angle grain boundaries in preventing the transfer of plasticity to the adjacent grains. This inhibits the formation of long-range persistent slip bands. This resistance dropped considerably when either the porosity and or the particle volume fractions were increased. All other factors being equal, the increment in either the volume fraction or size of the Hydrogen porosity was observed to have the most deleterious effect. Primary hydrogen induced porosity was observed to play the most deleterious role in providing nucleation sites ( The very fine intermediate semicoherent dispersoids of the type ZrAl  In low purity materials recrystallized microstructures exhibited the lowest fracture toughness and intergranular fracture mode. In high purity materials, without intergranular porosity or intergranular coarse second phase particles, recrystallized microstructures, exhibited improved resistance to fatigue crack initiation. Unrecrystallized microstructures exhibited the highest fracture toughness and transgranular fracture mode. Subgrain structures developed during advanced processing containing fine dispersions of coherent and semicoherent precipitates, developed during double aging, showed with fracture. These microstructures exhibited improved fracture toughness and resistance to fatigue crack propagation. Hydrogen induced porosity was observed to play a considerable role in providing nucleation sites and propagation paths for cracks. In the manufacturing of thick structural plates through the casting of large ingots, special procedures must be implemented in order to decrease the size and volume fraction of hydrogen related porosity (both primary and secondary) and/or to change its morphology into a less deleterious one. In order to minimize the extent of recrystallization and to increase the resistance to fatigue crack initiation and fatigue crack propagation the following recommendations are made: (a) the amount of reduction per pass should not be higher than 24%, (b) the amount of reduction of the final pass should not be higher than 16%, (c) the hot rolling temperature should be adjusted in order to develop a very fine unrecrystallized microstructure. The author wants to acknowledge funding from the Institute for Mechanics and Materials at University of California-San Diego, the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, and the Alcoa Foundation. In addition the author wants to thank Drs. J. Staley, D. Chakrabarti, and D. Granger for rewarding discussions.