In a sample of relatively low speed frontal collisions (mean collision speed change of 40.7 kph) the only major injury suffered by the partly or fully restrained occupant was a femur fracture. However, femur load measurements from standardized barrier crash tests for similar vehicles at a greater speed change (mean of 56.3 kph) showed that in almost all the cases, the occupant's femur would not have fractured because the loads were below fracture threshold. In order to address this discrepancy, the load in the femurs of the occupants in the crash sample were estimated and compared with the femur fracture threshold. Femur load was estimated by inspecting the scene and measuring deformations in each vehicle, defining occupant points of contact and interior surface intrusion, and calculating crash change in velocity and deceleration. From this data, the measured femoral loads from standardized crash test data in a comparable vehicle were scaled to the actual crash by considering crash deceleration, occupant weight, and restraint use. All the occupants (7 males, average age 26.7 years, 13 females, average age 36 years) sustained at least a transverse midshaft fracture of the femur with comminution, which is characteristic of axial compressive impact, causing bending and impaction of the femur. However, the estimated average maximum axial load was 8187 N (S.D.=4343N), and the average probability for fracture was only 19% (based on the femur fracture risk criteria). In 13 crashes the fracture probability was less than 10%. Two factors were considered to explain the discrepancy. The occupant's femur was out of position (typically the driver's right front leg on the brake) and did not impact the knee bolster, instead hitting stiffer regions of the dashboard. Also, since most victims were drivers with their foot on the brake to avoid the collision, additional compressive force on the femur probably resulted from muscle contraction due to bracing for impact. Adding the estimated muscle load on the femur to the estimated external load increased the femur loads beyond threshold, explaining the fracture in all but one case. Since crash tests using dummies cannot simulate out of position occupants or muscle contraction loading, they may underestimate the total load acting on the femur during actual impacts where the driver is bracing for the crash. These results may have implications for altering knee bolster design to accommodate out of position occupants and the additional load caused by muscle forces during bracing.Fractures of the femur due to motor vehicle impacts can result in extensive medical care, and if they have an intra-articular component, may result in permanent disability ( Extensive biomechanical studies of the cadaveric femur fracture mechanisms and forces in frontal impacts have been performed. A summary of the findings are given in In an ongoing study of motor vehicle crashes, we have noticed that a significant proportion of relatively low speed change and deceleration frontal crashes resulted in isolated fracture of the occupant's femur. The mechanism in each case, based on appearance of the fracture (a transverse fracture line indicating failure by bending combined with comminution indicating compression), was axial compressive loading by impact with the dashboard. The goal of the study was to compare the best estimate of the external force acting in the femur during impact in these crashes with two published criteria defining femur fracture tolerance, since by the first estimates the accelerations were low and the resulting femur loads below those which would produce this fracture. If the femur loads were below thresholds, the explanation for the fracture might lie in the additional load generated by internal muscle contractions, not normally simulated in dummy or cadaveric crash testing and out of position contact with the dashboard. The hypothesis to be tested in this study was that for front seated, partly or totally restrained occupants in a sample of frontal crashes, who sustained an isolated femur fracture, the external force generated in the crash which acted on the occupant's femur reached at least the threshold for fracture. The motor vehicle crash information included in this study was collected from CIREN (Crash Injury Research and Engineering Network, National Highway Transportation Safety Administration) Centers. Crashes in the CIREN database are sampled based on the fulfillment of several criteria. Among these are that the occupant must have been restrained and that an injury of AIS 3 or greater must have occurred. Each case was reviewed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of a crash investigator, a bioengineer, a research nurse, and the treating physicians. Each center employs a crash investigator who has been certified in vehicle crash reconstruction and data collection through the training program given by the Transportation Safety Institute's National Automotive Sampling System (NASS). Each crash scene and vehicle investigation conducted by CIREN centers follow the data collection format established by NASS. Once the crash information was analyzed, and the injuries and hospital course documentation were obtained, the crash was reviewed by the multidisciplinary team to establish a probable mechanism. Of the cases reviewed, a subset of 20, involving a frontal collision and a femur fracture as the predominant injury, were selected for this study. The crashes selected all involved frontal or nearly frontal collisions (+20° to −10°). These included vehicles, which were impacted by other vehicles but also included about 1/3 that impacted trees, poles, barriers, or other stationary objects. The major resulting injury was limited to an isolated femur fracture, usually involving the midshaft but in some cases, including additional injuries about the knee or hip. Each crash site had scaled documentation of the roadway, traffic controls, road surface type, conditions, and road grade at both pre- and post- impact locations. Physical evidence such as tire skid marks were located and referenced to establish the heading angle and post impact trajectory of the colliding vehicles. A scaled drawing with impact and final rest positions was completed to assist in calculation of the speed and force at impact. Exterior inspections of the vehicle were performed, which included detailed measurements of the direct and induced damage. For this study, all the crash damage involved the front of the vehicle. With a contour gauge, a damage crush profile was collected from the front bumper and a specific Classification Deformation Code (CDC), which includes the principal direction of force (PDOF) was assigned. These measurements were entered into crash analysis software (Win SMASH, U.S. Dept of Transportation) to calculate the change in velocity (Delta V) of the vehicle during impact and the energy dissipated during the crash event. An inspection of the interior of the vehicle from which the injured person had been removed was performed to determine points of contact and restraint system use. This inspection also included assessing the integrity of the passenger compartment, status of glazing, and intruding components. The exact locations and all evidence of contact by the occupant who had sustained the femur fracture with the interior surfaces were documented. The lower extremity contact evidence consisted of dents in the padding, fabric transfers, and minor cracking of instrument panels or knee bolsters. The dash panel was however not disassembled to identify deformation to the knee bolster. An examination of the restraint system was performed, including lap and shoulder belts and the air bag, if available, to confirm use by the injured occupant. We used data from the same vehicle as that involved in the actual crash, reported by the New Car Assessment Program (NCAP, US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration) testing in 56 kph frontal collisions with two front seat fully restrained instrumented anthropometric dummies. A set of data was produced for the specific vehicles of our collision sample, including change of velocity of the vehicle at impact, crush deformation of the vehicle, average deceleration during impact, and load on the femurs, lap belt, and shoulder belt, all measured parameters in these tests. The data set used, derived from the NCAP tests, is shown in The average deceleration of the vehicle in the actual crash is: The force acting on the occupant's femur in the actual crash is scaled for weight and deceleration compared to the test crash conditions The force in the occupant's femur (Fd) depends on the type of restraints used. Considering a worst case, if the occupant was partly restrained, for example shoulder belt only, all the force normally taken by the lap belt was added to the femur force. The following conditions were considered. For a lap and shoulder belt restrained occupant with two femur contact, the mean femur load is the average of the loads recorded in each femur of both dummies for that test vehicle. For a lap and shoulder belt restrained occupant with single femur contact. For a lap belt only restrained occupant with single femur contact, (add load from shoulder belt to femur): For a shoulder belt or airbag only restrained occupant with single femur contact, (add load from lap belt to femur): Where, Fll, Flr, Frl, Frr, are the measured femur loads from crash test for that vehicle; ll, the left dummy-left femur; lr, the left dummy–right femur; rl, the right dummy-left femur; rr, the right dummy-right femur; Fsl, Fsr, the measured shoulder belt load from crash test; sl, the shoulder belt left dummy; sr, the shoulder belt right dummy; Fpl, Fpr, the measured lap (pelvic) belt load from crash test; pl, the lap (pelvic) belt left dummy; pr, lap belt right dummy. In order to assess the potential for femoral axial impact forces to have reached levels consistent with femur fracture, we employed two criteria. The probability of femur fracture, based on Based on the criteria given in the literature, for impact durations greater than 20 ms, the threshold force for fracture is ( A total of 20 crashes were studied, shown in The principal direction of force ranged from +20° to −10°, with 11 crashes having an estimated direction of 0° (directly frontal). The average delta V of the collisions was 25.3 mph (40.7 kph), (S.D.=8.5 mph (13.7 kph)), with an average deceleration of 13.7 g (S.D.=6.4 g), Eighteen of the 20 occupants were drivers and of these, 13 fractured their right femur, In this study, femur, lap belt, and shoulder belt forces measured during standardized frontal collisions performed as part of the New Car Assessment Program were used to develop relationships between vehicle closing velocity, crush distance, and the probable axial compressive load from direct femur contact with the dashboard, for different conditions of occupant restraint. These relationships were used in assessing the estimated probability of femur fracture by axial compressive loading in a series of frontal crashes in which the major injury to the occupant was an isolated femur fracture. We found the mean probability for femur fracture by axial loading in these crashes to be 19%. Thirteen of the 19 in the group had a probability under 10%, based on the femur load-fracture risk curve published by NHTSA, and 14 of the 19 were below the 8900 N threshold. Although the estimated probability was low, all the fractures appeared to be transverse with comminution, which would be expected to result from axial impact. Therefore, despite the relatively low external forces, direct axial contact was the probable mechanism for these injuries. In the majority of cases the criterion for femur fracture force that we estimated was below accepted thresholds, and yet the femur fractures were characteristic of those due to axial compressive impact, therefore other axial forces must have been present. Muscle loading was not accounted for in estimating the compressive loads acting on the occupants’ femurs in this study. In a frontal crash when the driver forcefully presses on the brake and braces for the impact, the knee flexors and extensors are tensed. Estimates based on muscle crossectional area and muscle power demonstrate that these muscles can generate significant compressive loads on the femur. Quasistatic measurements of maximum voluntary flexor and extensor muscle torques ( This observation, if correct, has significant implications for the design of dashboards and knee bolsters. If internal muscle loads add considerably to the external loads experienced by the occupant's femur in the crash, then the dashboard or knee bolster, if designed for an external load criterion of 8900 N, and tested using in position crash dummies, may be too stiff to prevent femur injury in some crashes involving human occupants, especially those at relatively low speeds. Considering also that many of the occupants’ knees did not strike the relatively less stiff part of the knee bolster, consideration should be given to (a) extending the contact surface of the lower dashboard to include the junction with the steering column, and (b) reducing the crush load of the knee bolster to accommodate the internal component of the total force acting on the femur due to muscle loading. The assumptions upon which this study is based require discussion. The values provided for the femur forces experienced by occupants in the collisions we studied represent our best estimates, working from the quantitative data of the NCAP test results and considering the weight of the occupant, average deceleration in the frontal collisions, the contact points of the occupant with the interior of the vehicle, and the variable use of occupant restraints. The crash is a dynamic event with loads in the shoulder and lap belts and femur contact loads reaching peak values at slightly different times during the crash. In this case, we made the simplifying assumption that all restraint and femur loads reached their peak values together and that the forces acting on the occupant were all essentially horizontal, preventing forward movement, and therefore, acting in the same direction. Inspection of individual time histories from NCAP tests showed that peak loads occurred close together in time, so this assumption is probably reasonable. A second assumption in the analysis was to add the loads normally carried by components of the restraint system, if not used, to the load acting on the femur. In fact, this component of the total load was probably distributed to the other parts of the restraint system. A very important question relates to how well the hybrid III dummy represents the human femur in terms of its ability to predict femur loading during impact. The hybrid III dummy femur load measurement is used as a criterion for determining the potential for femur fracture during NCAP 35 mph frontal collisions. Donnelly and Davis (1987) used load cells implanted into cadaveric femora and compared both the maximum force and force impulse. They found that the hybrid III dummy measured force was much higher at the same impact velocity, than that measured in the cadaver femur. For example, at a typical impact velocity of 30 ft/s), the hybrid III dummy femur measured a force of 12115 lbs compared with 4213 lbs for the femur, or a difference of 288%. However, A number of studies, including those referred to in It appears that four factors led to axial impact fractures of the femora in the cases studied at relatively low speeds in which femoral fracture would have been considered unlikely from test crash predictions. First was single knee contact, second at least in most of the group, lack of complete restraint use, third was contact outside the central part of the knee bolster, and fourth muscle loading contributing to the total axial force on the femur due to bracing or braking. This study was funded through the NHTSA Crash Injury Research and Engineering Network and General Motors Inc. Cases supplied by the Universities of Washington, Michigan, Miami, California-San Diego and Scripps Institute are gratefully acknowledged.