The dynamic fragmentation of planetary materials during impact into finite targets has been examined. A particle tracking algorithm was implemented to estimate the size and velocity of fragments ejected from the rear of the target. A total of 76 experiments were performed for four materials, target thicknesses of 7 mm–55 mm, and impact energies of 10 J–6810 J. Semi-empirical models were developed from non-dimensional groups to predict key experimental results. This includes the transformation of incoming projectile kinetic energy to the ejecta kinetic energy. The amount of impact energy converted to kinetic energy of ejecta was found to increase from 2% to 18% over the range of test conditions. Energy dissipated into expanding the field laterally was found to be small in comparison to the streamwise direction (∑KE
                        y
                     /∑KE
                        x
                      = 4%).
                  Percentiles of the distribution of mass, momentum and kinetic energy with respect to ejecta lengths were also examined. Percentile ejecta lengths decrease for increasing normalized impact energy. Fits of the non-dimensional ejecta lengths provide reasonable collapse for the percentile values. Lastly, the cumulative distributions of mass, momentum and kinetic energy among normalized 50% length values were quantified. Exponential function forms were found to fit all of the data over the range over normalized length scales of 0.3–4. When integrated, this predicts the probability density distribution of mass, momentum, and kinetic energy among ejecta lengths for the range of experimental conditions in this study. This data is important in the development and validation of numerical models.The complex dynamic response of planetary materials (e.g., rocks) subject to impact arises from the interactions of material properties and resulting fracture behaviours under multi-axial stress states. During dynamic fragmentation, fracture initiates at pre-existing flaws and propagates in response to local tensile stresses acting perpendicular to the fracture plane Planetary materials are commonly brittle and the strain rate of loading is influential during their dynamic fragmentation. At low to moderate strain rates (250 s The partitioning of impact energy into fragmentation (or fracture) energy, kinetic energy, heat, acoustic emissions, and elastic strain energy remains difficult to assess. Efficiencies In a detailed study on energy partitioning in rock blasting, Sanchidrian et al. There have been numerous analytical models predicting average ejecta (i.e., fragment) size during the dynamic fragmentation of brittle materials. In one class of theories, geometric statistical considerations are used to predict the distribution of fragment sizes This paper examines ejecta lengths during the dynamic fragmentation of planetary materials. It is a part of a broader study by Hogan et al. Semi-empirical non-dimensional scaling relationships are developed to collapse results for the 76 data sets. The development of fitted non-dimensional groups allows results to be viewed in a broader context by incorporating varying and important experimental conditions (e.g., target thickness, material type, and impact energy). These models can be extrapolated to predict the distribution of mass, momentum and kinetic energy among length scales for other brittle materials across a range of impact energies. It also provides reference for those numerically simulating these complex multi-scale events. The impact tests were performed at the French-German Research Institute of Saint-Louis (ISL), France, using an electromagnetic railgun. Materials, target thickness, and impact velocities and energies are given in A tracking algorithm written in Matlab Correlation coefficients are computed between frames based on these features and probable fragments are identified. Note, fragments are assumed to remain ordered in space and time (i.e., fragments with smaller Particle tracking methods applied here have been used previously in Hogan et al. Limitations of the tracking algorithm and experimental measurements are discussed in brief. The total number of fragments, especially the sub-mm fragments, in this type of measurement is limited by camera resolution and the two-dimensional projection of the field in the high-speed video image. For example, fragments may be hidden in the image. These limitations are expected when performing ejecta measurements in highly cluttered debris fields. The ability to track a representable amount of mass is important. For all cases, over 90% of the mass (i.e., the collected mass of ejecta weighed after experimentation) is tracked by the algorithm. The effect of sub-mm fragments is also briefly considered. Recent particle size measurements of collected ejecta from these experiments by Hogan et al. Dimensionless groups are formed using Buckingham Pi theorem The input energy (i.e., impact kinetic energy KE) is also considered important during fragmentation and ejection processes in these experiments. Kinetic energy incorporates projectile dimensions (e.g., length, density, and velocity), and is used here as a simplification to reduce the total number of non-dimensional groups. At higher impact velocities, projectile density may be considered more important as target-projectile density mismatches affect shock wave generation at impact. Shown in Target properties, such as density ( Housen and Holsapple According to the Buckingham Pi Theorem and The resulting form of the non-dimensional fit is thus: Shown in Shown in Lastly, shown in Percentile values (i.e., 10th, 50th and 90th) of the distributions of mass, momentum and kinetic energy among ejecta length, Cumulative distributions of mass, momentum and kinetic energy among ejecta lengths are examined in Again, bounds for all The dynamic fragmentation of planetary materials during impact has been examined for 76 data sets (four materials, target thicknesses: 7 mm–55 mm, and impact energies of 10 J–6350 J). A particle tracking algorithm was developed to measure ejecta size and velocity and the distribution of mass, momentum, and kinetic energy among ejecta lengths were characterized. Two non-dimensional groups in the form: KE* = (KE/ The amount of ejecta kinetic energy/momentum to change in projectile kinetic energy/momentum was found to increase for increasing KE*, ranging from 2% to 25% for momentum conversion and 2%–18% for kinetic energy conversion. These represent a notable conversion of energy/momentum in the total energy partitioning and, based on work by Sanchidrian et al. Rotational energy has been shown to be two orders of magnitude smaller than translational kinetic energy The conversion of impactor energy to ejecta kinetic energy is further explored by considering how much ejecta kinetic energy is spent in expanding the debris field in the lateral (∑KE Length scales during the dynamic fragmentation of geological materials were also examined. Fitting coefficients to non-dimensional terms provided reasonable collapse of the percentile data for the contribution of mass, momentum and kinetic energy among ejecta lengths. Length scales were found to decrease for increasing KE* as a result of increased crushing (note the negative exponent for KE*). These correlations enable prediction of required ejecta lengths to capture of 10%, 50% and 90% of the mass, momentum and kinetic energy. These can be used to estimate appropriate finite element sizes to simulate energy dissipation processes during the impact of brittle materials. For example, mass is proportional to fragmentation energy A functional form of the probability density distribution describing the distribution of mass, momentum and kinetic energy among ejecta lengths was determined (equation Median values of the distribution of mass among ejecta lengths are compared with the models of Grady Grady's model to calculate average fragment size assumes that local kinetic energy is converted to energy required to create new surfaces. The average fragment size, Glenn and Chudnovksy and Zhou et al. Levy and Molinari Shown in Shown in The dynamic fragmentation of planetary materials has been examined for four target materials, target thicknesses of 7 mm–55 mm and impact energies of 10 J to 6810 J. Non-dimensional groups were formed and semi-empirical models developed to collapse data for % excavated mass, % ejecta momentum, and % ejecta kinetic energy. The amount of impact energy converted to kinetic energy of ejecta was found to increase from 2% to 18% for increasing non-dimensional impact energy. This represents a notable conversion during total energy partitioning. Energy dissipated into expanding the field laterally was found to be small in comparison to the streamwise direction (∑KE Substantial progress has been made in the theoretical and numerical treatment of the dynamic fragmentation of brittle materials in recent years. Future developments will require detailed experimental observations through quantification of important scales and energy partitioning. Improvements to experimental setups and methods will facilitate improvements in experimental analysis. Combined, functional forms, fitted non-dimensional groups and the extensive data set obtained in the current investigation provide a framework and predictive capabilities for future experimental studies. This type of work will accommodate the next level of validation of numerical codes. This work was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) PGS-D scholarship to JDH and funding from