As the utilization of the natural gas all over the world has been increased, it has become more important to increase the gas production worldwide. Accordingly, many efforts have been expended to improve the production techniques such as using multi-lateral well techniques, which are capable to accomplish higher production rates. The utilization of the multi-lateral well techniques increases the cumulative fluid recovery, decreases the environmental impacts and decreases the drilling and completion costs.
                  The objective of this work is to generate artificial neural network tools that are capable of providing the necessary knowledge to evaluate the utilization of dual horizontal well technique in tight gas reservoirs. The predicted data include flow rate profile, gas recovery profile, dual horizontal well configuration and pattern size. Two artificial neural networks, forward and inverse, were developed to achieve the main objective. The forward ANN was developed to predict the flow rate and the gas recovery profiles for the chosen dual horizontal well configuration and pattern size over a specified production period of 50 years. The inverse ANN was developed to predict the dual horizontal well configuration and pattern size that can be used to achieve a desired gas recovery over a specified production period of 50 years. The Monte Carlo simulation has been implemented to quantify the probability of meeting the desired recovery.
                  The ANNs were trained, validated and tested using the training data generated by a commercial simulator. The developed forward tool was tested and gave a mean square error of 7.5%, while the inverse tool was tested yielding a mean square error of 9.8%. The developed tools are capable of comparing thousands of different input combinations in a much more rapid manner as compared to commercial simulator.A multi-lateral well can be described as two or more wellbore branches connected to a single surface main borehole. The multilateral well technique is one of the most important applications for the directional drilling technology. Drilling a multilateral well consists of two major steps. The first step is drilling vertically to the desired depth cross the reservoir bedding plane. The second step is drilling the horizontal branches by drilling horizontally parallel to the reservoir bedding plane. The second step can be repeated depending on the selected multilateral well design. There are different designs for the multilateral wells such as multi-branched, forked, laterals into horizontal hole, laterals into vertical hole, stacked laterals and dual-opposing laterals ( The selected multilateral well design for this study is the dual horizontal well, which consists of two horizontal holes connected to a single surface borehole. The two laterals may have different phase angles and vertical separation distances. The artificial neural network is a mathematical model which mimics the structure and the function of the biological neural networks. In addition, the artificial neural network is a nonlinear statistical data modeling system which is used to identify the existing complex input/output relationships. The artificial neural network is an adaptive system which consists of interconnected artificial neurons. Those neurons connect in different ways to generate the best description for the desired relationship. The process to find the best network is called the training process where the artificial neurons are weighted mathematically to improve the representation of the studied problem by the network. Artificial neural network is a very useful tool for the petroleum engineering applications because its ability to solve the complex problems that cannot be solved with the conventional methods ( There are two different training algorithms for the neural network, supervised algorithms and unsupervised algorithms. The supervised training algorithms are the most commonly used ones in the oil and gas industry because of their accuracy in solving many challenging and complex problems ( The first step to design an artificial neural network is to generate a trusted database within the selected study property ranges. The CMG Three sets of reservoir properties combinations have been developed to follow the 80%, 10% and 10% rule, correspond consecutively to three sets of 1000, 125 and 125 reservoir combinations. The three sets were named as training set of data, validation set of data and testing set of data consecutively. Each set was separately generated to cover the reservoir properties limits using a Matlab code that generates random combinations within the study limits. The simulator has been used to predict the cumulative production profile and the gas flow rate profile for every single reservoir properties combination. In this study a three dimensional Cartesian grid system with 1331 blocks (11×11×11) has been used. The two horizontal branches start at the center of the reservoir at different depths from the top of the reservoir as displayed in The parameters that significantly impact the gas recovery profile are the reservoir characteristics and the well design parameters. The reservoir characteristics that impact the recovery profile consist of reservoir fluid characteristics and reservoir rock characteristics ( Random selection for the reservoir properties combinations is a very powerful method to generate trusted combinations that represent the study limits. However, the relation between the depth of the reservoir and the reservoir pressure and temperature has to be stated to avoid any outstanding reservoir characteristics. For that purpose two reservoir pressure and temperature sub-ranges have been identified. The sub-ranges were selected according to the depth of the reservoir. If the reservoir depth ranges from 2000 to 4000 As the change in the bottomhole pressure affects the reservoir production profile and depletion time, the bottomhole pressure has been specified to maintain the focus on the effect of different well configurations on the production profile. Bottomhole pressure has been specified at 500 The well design parameters are lateral depths, lateral lengths and phase angle between the two laterals. The lateral length is calculated as a percentage of half the length of the edge of the pattern, while the depth of each lateral from the top of the reservoir is calculated as a percentage of the reservoir thickness. The percentage ranges for the lateral lengths and vertical depths are the same which is 10–90%. There are a number of design parameters that have to be considered in designing a neural network such as the neural network architecture, number of hidden layers, transfer function, training function, learning rule and error calculation. The neural network architecture determines the method of connecting the weights in the network and defines the used learning rule in the network. The multilayer There are a number of networks which support the feed-forward like feed-forward back-propagation and cascade-forward back-propagation. In this study feed-forward back-propagation and cascade-forward back-propagation has been trained. Feed-forward back-propagation protocol has been selected as it provided better fitting for the studied problem. The learning algorithm adjusts the weights through the training process to decrease the errors rapidly. After training different back-propagation learning algorithms, conjugate gradient algorithm generated the lowest comparable error output. Back-propagation is a nonlinear differential transfer function. Input vector and related output vector prepared to be trained by back-propagation algorithm in order to achieve the function which gives the best description for the relation between the inputs and the outputs (  The transfer function is the function which is responsible for generating the output from the weighted inputs. The weights are determined by the learning algorithm, before the input vectors are connected to generate the network weighted input. The transfer function uses this network weighted input to generate the output. There are many transfer functions while the most commonly used one is the The mean square error (MSE) is the selected error calculation function for this study. Mean square error is calculating the average of the error between the network׳s output and the target output over all studied pairs ( The forward network has been generated to predict the flow rate and the recovery profiles for a selected dual horizontal well configuration for selected reservoir over a time period of 50 years. The bottomhole pressure is specified at 500 The reservoir properties and the well design parameters of all the generated sets were used as an input to generate the network, and the recovery profile used as an output for the same purpose. The training set is used to generate the network by connecting the neurons and weigh them to satisfy the output. The validation set is used to validate the generated network by comparing the output of the simulator to the output of the network of the validating set and readjust the weights until the output of the network satisfies the output of the simulator. When the output of the network satisfies the output of the simulator of the validating set, the network will be tested by the testing set and the error between the output of the simulator and the output of the network of the testing set will be calculated. When the calculated error of the testing set achieves the satisfaction level, the network will be approved. The last step is testing the approved neural network using a new database. In order to achieve the best performance of the network and minimize the network error, many training processes have been conducted to choose the best architecture, number of hidden layers, number of neurons in each layer, transfer function, learning function and training function. Three hidden layer feed forward To approve the network for the studied limits, the generated network was tested with three different methods. The first testing method is the mean square error for the trained data set. The second testing method is comparing the recovery profiles generated by the network and the simulator. The third step is to test the network with new reservoir property combinations within the study limits. The mean square error (MSE) of a network is the average of the square errors of the trained cases. The square errors were calculated as the difference between the network output and the simulator output. After training many networks, the mean square error decreased from 65% to 7.5%. Comparing the output plots of the output of the network versus the output of the simulator is an important step in the network evaluation process as it shows if the recovery profiles of the network and the simulator still match quite closely. Four randomly selected cases from four different error categories are presented in Three new data sets consist of 50, 250 and 500 reservoir properties combinations have been trained by the forward network to evaluate its performance. Each set covers the studied properties limits. The forward network was used to generate the cumulative recovery profile for each set. The mean square error was calculated for every case and a plot of the simulator output versus the network output was generated to approve the forward tool accuracy. Analysis of the mean square errors was generated to show the variety range of errors encountered for the four error ranges identified previously. The calculated mean square error for all the cases is 6.09%. The calculated mean square error of the 250-case study is 6.09%. The calculated mean square error of the 500-case study is 8.83%. The studied cases which resulted in a mean square error higher than 15% fall within the range presented in The inverse ANN was developed to predict the dual horizontal well configuration parameters that can be used to fulfill a desired gas recovery over a specified production period of 50 years. The well bottomhole pressure is specified at 500 In order to achieve the best performance many training processes have been studied to choose the best architecture, number of hidden layers, number of neurons in each layer, transfer function, learning function and training function. While the error between the output of the simulator and the output of the network is 40.01%, the error between the desired recovery profile and the recovery profile of the predicted well configuration is only 8.34%. The desired recovery profile and the recovery profile of the predicted well configuration have been compared to fulfill the main goal of the inverse network which is obtaining the desired recovery profile. Three methods which have been used to test and validate the network are the mean square error, plotting the desired recovery profile versus the recovery profile of the predicted well configuration and testing a new set of data. Mean square error has been calculated for each single training process. Mean square error of the desired well configuration and the well configuration predicted by the network has been calculated as the first step in selecting the network. After training many networks, the mean square error for the well design decreased from 95% to 40.01%. The mean square error for the well design is high, but the mean square error between the desired recovery profile and the recovery profile of the predicted well design is 8.34%. The simulator was used to generate the recovery profile for the predicted well design. In order to verify the network goal, the recovery profile for the predicted well configuration has been generated by the simulator. The mean square error between the desired recovery and the simulation recovery for the network predicted well configuration is 8.34%. The three data sets that were generated to test the forward network were used to test the inverse network. The reservoir properties combination and the recovery profile were used as input for the inverse network to predict the well configuration parameters. The predicted well configuration and the reservoir properties were used as an input for the simulator to generate the recovery. Then, the recovery profile of the generated well configuration was plotted with the desired recovery profile to evaluate the profile matching. The calculated mean square error of the first set is 10.25%. The calculated mean square error of the 250-cases study is 12.69%. The calculated mean square error of the 500-cases study is 14.65%. The studied cases which resulted in a mean square error higher than 15% fall within the range presented in Monte Carlo simulation is generating a probabilistic analysis on different variables in the system by generating a random combination of the independent variables within certain pre-established limits and comparing the distribution of the results. In this study Monte Carlo simulation was utilized to evaluate the quantification of probability of achievement of desired recovery. The Monte Carlo simulation compares thousands of different dual horizontal well configurations for the selected reservoir and categorizes the ultimate recovery. The input for the Monte Carlo simulation study is generated by the forward ANN. This is the critical slope where we harness the power of the expert system. A plot for the ultimate recovery versus frequency is generated to evaluate the desired recovery. The results from the Monte Carlo simulation can be used to optimize the input for the inverse tool. The following table contains a randomly selected reservoir and rock properties combination within the limit of the study ( In this example 10,000 random combinations of the well configuration parameters have been generated to be trained by the forward network. Probabilistic analysis for the well recovery is generated as shown in The results generated by the Monte Carlo simulation will provide the user with the needed information to optimize the input for the inverse tool. In the previous example, 800 cases out of a 10,000 studied configurations gave output between 70% and 75%. If the user is running the same case in the inverse tool with ultimate recovery of 85%, the network will give unreliable results as this target is not applicable for the reservoir under consideration. The provided tool is able to evaluate the utilization of the dual horizontal well in a tight gas reservoir in a rapid manner; it can also provide the user with the maximum reachable recovery using that technique, which is really important in reservoir planning technically and economically. The provided tool has only one factor that affects the production for the same reservoir, which is the well design to satisfy the objective of the tool and the goal of the sub-tools. The provided tool was built to be simple in order to cover most of the gas reservoirs and leave an opportunity to the user to adjust it to the studied reservoir. The developed forward network provides a reliable gas recovery and flow rate profiles for the dual horizontal well techniques in a rapid manner compared to commercial simulators. The provided knowledge helps in planning a reservoir and helps in selecting the best well design. Monte Carlo simulation implemented in the tool to guide the user when selecting a production target for a reservoir. Monte Carlo simulation calculates the probabilities of the gas recovery using a number of random well parameters configuration for the reservoir under consideration. Monte Carlo simulation provides the maximum amount of gas that can be recovered from the considered reservoir and the number of well designs that are able to produce that amount within 30 The inverse network was generated to guide the user in selecting the best well configuration that fulfills a desired production from a tight gas reservoir. Before using the inverse network, the user is recommended to use the Monte Carlo simulation tool to evaluate the selected production goal. The inverse network compares a large number of configurations in a rapid manner in order to predict the well configuration parameters that will achieve the desired recovery comparing to the commercial reservoir simulators. The bottomhole pressure selected for this study is 500 As shown in This paper presented an artificial neural network tool that is able to evaluate the using of the dual horizontal well in a tight gas reservoir. Two networks were developed to fulfill that main objective, forward tool and inverse tool. Monte Carlo simulation was implemented in the produced tool to guide the user while specifying the reservoir ultimate goal as it shows the user how applicable is the desired recovery for the inverse tool. A total of 1250 random combinations of the reservoir properties and dual horizontal well configuration parameters, within the selected limits, have been generated to predict the gas recovery profiles using a commercial reservoir simulator. The forward ANN was developed to predict the flow rate and gas recovery profiles for chosen dual horizontal well configuration and pattern size over specified production period (50 years). The inverse ANN was developed to predict the dual horizontal well configuration and pattern size that can be used to fulfill desired gas recovery over specified production period (50 years).