This paper aims to report the results of some investigations carried out in Iranian steel industries to reuse the spent magnesia graphite refractory bricks in the forms of the new shaped and unshaped magnesia refractories. Economical aspects of recycling and minimizing the environmental effects of spent refractories landfills were the basic goals of this research. The spent MgO–C refractory bricks from electric arc (EAF) and ladle (LF) furnaces were analyzed in terms of microstructural and chemical properties. Different samples were prepared from natural sintered magnesia and 10–30wt.% of recycled aggregates in the forms of magnesia refractory brick and ramming mix and their physical and mechanical properties were evaluated. Also the slag corrosion behavior and microstructural properties of corroded samples were investigated. The results showed that the addition of up to 30wt.% of recycled aggregates had no negative effects on the properties of magnesia refractories.Refractories are ceramic materials that are designed to withstand the variety of severe service conditions, high temperatures, corrosive liquids and gases, abrasion, mechanical and thermal induced stresses ( This paper aims to report the results of investigations carried out in Iranian Khuzestan Steel Complex (KSCo.) by refractory research division of Iran University of Science and Technology (IUST) to reuse the spent magnesia graphite refractory bricks. The goals of this research were characterizing spent refractories, establishing new way for minimizing wastes and spent refractories recycling, developing an applicable recycling technique and comparing the properties of the recycled products with those made from virgin material.  At first the penetrated layers (3–5 In order to evaluate the using of the recycled aggregates for the production of magnesia refractory bricks, the recycled aggregates were added in various percents into a magnesia brick composition as additive.  In order to compare the corrosion resistance of natural sintered and recycled magnesia aggregates, MBM and MBR30 samples were selected for corrosion test study. The samples were placed in alumina crucibles and the slag powder poured around them. Chemical analysis of slag is shown in   Generally magnesia graphite bricks made for steel industries contain high quality sintered and fused magnesia. Especially fused magnesia has high slag corrosion resistance due to its large crystal sizes and no grain boundaries ( The quantity of spent refractories produced from Iranian steelmaking industry is estimated about 75,000 Tons annually and developing new refractories recycling techniques will minimize significantly the spent refractories land filling in Iran. However the using of spent refractories as a portion of composition in the production of new shaped or monolithic refractories will minimize significantly the amounts of refractories landfilling. The physical and mechanical tests results of refractory brick and ramming mix samples containing recycled aggregates showed that the addition of up to 30 The authors wish to express their appreciation for the helpful financial and technical supporting of this work by