Objective
                  We sought to evaluate the feasibility of temporary bridge occipitocervical fixation temporary bridge occipitocervical fixation (T-BOCF) for comminuted atlantoaxial fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A 57-year-old man presented with multiple trauma including a comminuted, undisplaced atlantoaxial fracture; subdural hemorrhage; skull base fracture; scalp laceration; right second finger tendon injury; and right distal femur open fracture. T-BOCF was performed to preserve neck motion while providing rigid stability to atlantoaxial fracture. Occipital plate and bilateral lateral mass screws were inserted at C3, C4, and C5, avoiding the fracture site; this was followed by rod connection without fusion. The screw-rod construct was removed after confirmation of bone union in the fracture site 12 months after the initial operation.
               
                  Results
                  Computed tomography performed at 12 months after the operation demonstrated solid bone union. Dynamic radiographs taken 12 months after implant removal demonstrated a flexion-extension range of motion of 16 degrees at C0‒C2 and 19.8 degrees at C2‒C7. The total flexion-extension range of motion was 35.8 degrees.
               
                  Conclusions
                  T-BOCF is a viable option for treatment of comminuted, undisplaced atlantoaxial fractures. The technique is easier than direct C1‒C2 fusion and can avoid complications associated with occipitocervical fusion or C1‒C2 screw fixation. The blood supply to the fracture site is preserved by avoiding subperiosteal stripping, and semispinalis cervicis insertion at the C2 spinous process is also circumvented. Furthermore, neck motion is preserved after implant removal.Atlas fractures account for 2%‒13% of acute injuries of the cervical spine and 1%‒2% of all spinal injuries. For stable, undisplaced fractures that do not correspond to the previously mentioned indications, fracture healing can be achieved by other conservative measures, such as using a rigid collar or a halo vest. Temporary bridge occipitocervical fixation (T-BOCF) is used in circumstances not amenable to use of the halo vest or where its use is not desired due to discomfort caused by external fixation in comminuted, undisplaced atlantoaxial fracture. The technique does not require direct screw fixation of C1 and C2 and minimizes soft tissue injury, including injury to the periosteum and posterior muscles inserted at C1‒C2. Furthermore, by later removing the screw-rod construct, neck motion is preserved, unlike in fusion operations. In this technical note, we discuss the indications, operative procedures, and advantages and pitfalls of using T-BOCF for the treatment of atlantoaxial fractures. T-BOCF is indicated for 1) comminuted, undisplaced atlantoaxial fracture and 2) when a halo vest is not desired or is contraindicated due to accompanying injury, such as severe skull fracture or multiple trauma. Preoperative imaging involved the use of plain radiography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Plain radiographs allowed a basic overall assessment of the cervical anatomy and alignment. Bony architecture, fracture pattern, course of the vertebral artery, and screw trajectory were confirmed using CT. MRI was used for detecting cord compromise by fracture displacement, and injuries to ligamentous structures. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a prone position. The head was positioned on horseshoe-shaped headrest with slight neck flexion, and skeletal traction was applied using Gardner-Wells tongs. Under fluoroscopic guidance, the patient’s position was adjusted to ensure occipitocervical alignment in the neutral position in order to avoid position-related complications, such as dysphagia. Care was taken not to hyperextend or flex the craniocervical alignment. The patient underwent spinal cord monitoring throughout the procedure. The level of planned instrumentation was marked under C-arm guidance. The skin was incised from 2 fingerbreadths above the external occipital protuberance caudally to the desired level. After identifying the nuchal ligament, dissection was carried down along the avascular plane along the nuchal ligament. The occiput was exposed using cautery, and the ligamentous attachments of the bone were moved laterally while retraction was performed with a periosteal elevator. The semispinalis cervicis muscle inserted at the C2 spinous process and muscles lying posterior to the C1 lamina were preserved since they are not the targeted level for instrumentation. The spinous processes of the planned subaxial regions were palpated, and dissection was continued until the lateral mass was exposed. Meticulous dissection was performed while taking care to avoid injury to the facet joint capsules. The selected occipital plate was contoured to match the curvature of the occipital bone. The occipital bone was then drilled with the plate in place in order to place the occipital screws. After probing and tapping the drilled holes, screws were inserted for fixation. The lengths of screws were chosen on the basis of intraoperative measurements, in the usual manner. Bilateral lateral mass screws were inserted at planned subaxial levels. The neck was extended to the desired lordosis, and rods were then contoured. For connection of the rods to the occipital plate and subaxial lateral mass screws, the rods were passed under the preserved posterior muscles inserted at C1‒C2. The rods were then secured with locking screws. Decortications and posterior fusion were not performed, to facilitate later removal of the implant and to preserve neck ROM. A drain was inserted, and the wound was closed layer by layer. A suction drain was removed 1–2 days after the operation. The patient wore a hard collar neck brace for 3 months after the operation. Implant removal was preliminarily planned for 9–12 months after the operation. The decision to remove the implants was based on postoperative CT findings demonstrating solid fracture healing according to the following protocol: 1) The first postoperative CT was taken 9 months after the operation. 2) If solid fracture healing was not achieved by that timepoint, follow-up CT scans were performed 12 months postoperatively. 3) Retaining implants for more than 12 months was considered undesirable since arthrosis caused by prolonged fixation would limit neck motion. A 57-year-old male presented with severe neck pain, headache, and right knee pain after a 5-m fall while working in a construction terrain. Neurologic examination demonstrated no neurologic deficits. A cervical CT demonstrated a Jefferson fracture of C1, a type III dens fracture, comminution of the right axis body and pedicle, and fracture of the C2 left lamina. However, MRI demonstrated an intact transverse ligament and displacement of the fractures was not severe on a CT scan. Furthermore, there were no structures causing cord compression. Skull base fracture, subdural hemorrhage, scalp laceration, right second finger tendon injury, and right distal femur fracture were also identified in further evaluation Because significant displacement of the cervical fracture, cord compression, and neurologic deficit were absent, application of a halo vest was first considered. However, the injury was due to high-energy trauma and was accompanied by many other injuries, which complicates patient care when a halo vest is applied. Furthermore, a staged operation for the open fracture of the right distal femur was needed and an additional external fixation device in the cervical area was judged to be undesirable for patient care. Although C1‒C2 fusion was considered as an option, it was judged to be excessive to perform a fusion operation for a nondisplaced fracture. Therefore T-BOCF was planned. A day after the injury, T-BOCF with occipital plate application and bilateral lateral mass screw insertion at C3, C4, and C5 was performed. We used 3.5-mm diameter screws, with a length of 14 mm, as lateral mass screws. For fixation of the occipital plate, two 10-mm and two 12-mm screws were used Solid union of the cervical fracture was confirmed on CT images obtained 12 months after the surgery A rigid collar, halo vest, and internal fixation techniques including C1‒C2 fusion and occipitocervical fusion are treatment options for atlantoaxial fractures. T-BOCF was first designed to overcome these limits of a fusion operation and halo vest in the treatment of undisplaced atlantoaxial fractures and takes advantage of only the strength of the 2 classical strategies. T-BOCF can avoid technical difficulties, procedure-related morbidity, and neck stiffness that are caused by fusion operation. Although procedures of T-BOCF include occipital plate application and lateral mass screw insertion, these procedures are technically less demanding than C1‒C2 screw fixation. The technique can also preserve the periosteum and posterior muscle insertion at C1‒C2. Since it is an internal fixation, there is no patient discomfort related to external fixation and with T-BOCF, patient care is easier for multiple trauma or disabled patients. The concept of T-BOCF is similar to that of minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO), which is often used in comminuted long bone fractures. MIPO is a fracture fixation technique using the concept of bridge plating and relative stability and applies a plate fixed proximally and distally to the fracture site, using a minimally invasive approach. Involvement of the uninjured subaxial levels in surgery is a limitation of the presented technique. Incidental facet joint capsule injury during exposure could change joint kinetics and could lead to instability or limitation of motion after implant removal. Therefore care must be taken not to injure facet joint capsules during muscle stripping of the subaxial levels. Furthermore, temporary fixation for more than 12 months should be avoided since prolonged fixation, even in the absence of facet joint injury, can cause arthrodesis. Many previous studies have reported favorable results of temporary fixation in C1‒C2 for odontoid process fracture or atlas fracture in terms of fracture healing and motion preservation. However, there has been no previous report on temporary fixation for a fracture of both the atlas and the axis or of a temporary bridge fixation technique skipping the C1‒D2 fracture sites. The results of our illustrative case demonstrate that T-BOCF is a feasible option for an undisplaced atlantoaxial fracture and can achieve solid bone union while preserving neck motion. The strength of this technique is particularly demonstrated for fractures for which direct C1‒C2 fixation and application of a halo vest is contraindicated. T-BOCF is a feasible option for comminuted, undisplaced atlantoaxial fractures to achieve fracture healing while preserving neck motion when a halo vest is contraindicated or undesired. The technique, which applies the concept of MIPO, has several advantages, including 1) it avoids complications associated with C1‒C2 screw fixation; 2) it is technically easier than direct C1‒C2 fusion; 3) it preserves the blood supply to the fracture site, which can aid in fracture union; 4) it avoids detaching the semispinalis cervicis insertion at the C2 spinous process; and 5) it preserves neck motion. We present this technical note to emphasize this as an option for the treatment of atlantoaxial fracture. 