Calcium zirconate (CaZrO3) is a promising refractory material to melt titanium alloys. Therefore the present study investigated refractory castables based on CaZrO3 to allow an upscaling to larger melting crucibles and refractory linings. The study first included the processing optimization of the refractory castable containing calcium aluminate cement using a full factorial experimental design. Then the physical, chemical, mechanical and thermomechanical properties that determine the practical application of the castable were analyzed. The properties were generally similar to the ones of uniaxially pressed refractories based on CaZrO3. Nevertheless, the matrix containing calcium aluminates caused a pronounced sintering shrinkage leading to a smaller apparent porosity and a lower refractoriness compared to uniaxially pressed refractories. Finally, melting crucibles with an inner volume of 900 ml were successfully manufactured. Thus, this study provides an effective framework for the further development of large CaZrO3 refractories.Calcium zirconate (CaZrO Recently, electro fusion of coarse grained calcium zirconate qualities for refractory applications was reported. This refractory raw material was then used for melting crucibles for titanium metallurgy However, some calcium evaporated during the electro fusion production process, which caused the formation of cubic ZrO All melting crucibles in these previous studies were produced by cold isostatic pressing (CIP). Yet, CIP is time consuming, needs a special press and is labor intensive. Moreover, large components are difficult to produce by CIP [ Refractory castables are prepared by mixing an appropriate amount of coarse and fine grained particle fractions together with a binder such as calcium aluminate cements and water as the usual dispersing medium. Furthermore, several additives such as, for example, dispersing agents, defoamers and micro silica are often added to improve the processing of the castables and the properties after firing [ However, although calcium zirconate is a promising refractory material for titanium metallurgy, calcium zirconate castables remain unstudied. Yet, castables of calcium zirconate would allow the much easier preparation and upscaling of melting crucibles. Thus, the aim of the present study is to prepare and evaluate the properties of refractory castables based on calcium zirconate using calcium aluminate cement as a typical refractory binder. The current study first involved the optimized processing of refractory castables based on calcium zirconate (CaZrO In all experiments a recently presented electro fused CaZrO The chemical compositions of the mineral raw materials were determined by semi-quantitative wavelength-dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (WDXRF, OPTIM’X, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). The chemical compositions are given in All batches were designed according to a recently proposed modified Andreasen particle size distribution model In this particle size distribution model CPFT is the cumulative percentage of particles finer than a particle diameter d, d To optimize the processing of the castables, a 2 To prepare the castable samples for further investigations, the same procedure was applied in all experiments. First 3 kg of the dry mass according to Immediately after mixing, the prepared castable was filled into steel molds. Next, the molds were vibrated for 8.5 min using a vibrating table (JMV 800/1000×800, JÖST GmbH & Co. KG, Germany). Prior to filling the molds, the molds were lubricated with a small amount of standard machine oil. The size of the molds depended on the further investigations and is specified below. The specimens were cured for 4 h before they were demolded. The curing time was sufficient because the samples already had a high green strength, which can be explained by a fast hydration of the used calcium aluminate cement in the presence of calcium carbonate The specimen size for the processing optimization using the full factorial experiment design was 40 × 40 × 160 mm As will be shown in the results and discussion section, the combination of 5.6 wt.% water and 0.6 wt.% dispersant addition together with a vibration amplitude of 0.45 mm resulted in the best overall results. Thus, this combination of processing factors was in principle applied in further experiments to determine the chemical, physical, mechanical and thermomechanical properties of the castables. Shortly after demolding, the samples were heated in 8 h to 120 °C. The dwell time was 12 h at this temperature before they were cooled in 2 h. The firing took place in air atmosphere with a first heating to 900 °C (heating rate: 1 K/min However, as will be discussed in detail in the results and discussion section, the samples from the composition which was used to optimize the processing of the castables provided in After firing, a cylinder sample was crushed to analyze the phase and chemical composition. Furthermore, some of the crushed parts were embedded, polished and further analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, XL30FEG, FEI Company, The Netherlands). Other crushed parts were milled in a vibratory disc mill with tungsten carbide grinding tools (RS 200, RETSCH GmbH, Germany). The resulting powder was then analyzed by XRD (PW 1820, Cu-K- Later on, five bar shaped samples were used to determine the apparent porosity and apparent density according to the standard DIN EN 993-1 with toluene as the immersion fluid. In addition, the cold modulus of rupture (CMOR) was determined on five different samples according to the standard DIN EN 993-6 (TIRAtest 28100, TIRA GmbH, Germany). To evaluate the thermal shock resistance, the Young's modulus was measured similar to the standard DIN EN 843-2 using the impulse excitation method (HTVP1600, IMCE, Belgium) before thermal shock and after one, three and five thermal shock cycles. Similarly to the standard DIN EN 993-11 five samples were heated for 30 min at 950 °C before they were thermally shocked by pressurized air with an overpressure of 1 bar for 5 min. After the fifth thermal shock cycle, the residual CMOR was determined. To determine the high temperature properties, the refractoriness under load (RUL) and thermal expansion were measured according to the standards DIN EN ISO 1893 and DIN EN 993-19, respectively, using a hood-type furnace (RUL/CIC 421, Netzsch-Gerätebau GmbH, Germany). The hot modulus of rupture (HMOR) was determined at 1200 °C on three samples based on the standard DIN EN 993-7 (HMOR 422 D/3, Netzsch-Gerätebau GmbH, Germany). Finally, a crucible with a diameter of 13 cm and a height of 15 cm was cast. For that purpose a mixture of 4.2 kg was prepared using the procedure described above. The crucible was especially evaluated regarding the presence of macroscopic pores, cracks or shape distortions after firing. The present study involved the optimization and characterization of a refractory castable based on CaZrO  Moreover, although run 2 had slightly better overall properties, a lower added dispersant amount (X The chemical compositions of the mineral raw materials are summarized in  The chemical analysis of the castable by WDXRF mainly identified zirconium, calcium and aluminum as their respective oxides. Iron, silicon and magnesium were detected only in much smaller amounts. On the other hand, the XRD analysis given in  The matrix consisted mainly of phases containing calcia and alumina, which will be henceforth referred to as the calcium aluminate matrix phase. Surprisingly, high amounts of silica and magnesia were also found in the calcium aluminate matrix phase (points A and C). In addition, the calcia/alumina proportion was higher than for the used calcium aluminate cement, cf. The quite high silica content of the calcium aluminate matrix phase can be explained by several factors. First, the raw materials did not contain a large amount of silica in bulk, see also Furthermore, taking the CaO−Al However, it has to be noted that EDS point analyses have a high degree of uncertainty due to a large volume, which is affected by the electron beam. Yet, even repeating the whole experiment with new raw materials led to in principle identical results regarding the EDS analysis, which was performed on several samples. Consequently, it seems that a large amount of the silicon impurities from all of the used raw materials were concentrated in the calcium aluminate matrix phase. Thus, it can be concluded that the impurity elements and especially silicon are preferably dissolved by the calcium aluminate matrix phase. The original chemical and mineralogical composition of the calcium aluminate cement corresponded mainly to CaAl The low concentration of calcium aluminate cement in the crucible batch, the liquid phase formation during firing together with the dissolution of calcium zirconate, silica and magnesia by the calcium aluminate matrix phase eventually explain the absence of calcium aluminate phases in the XRD analysis. From the SEM images in As given in The pore size distribution is given in Comparing the Young's modulus before thermal shock with uniaxially pressed refractories of CaZrO Nevertheless, the Young's modulus dropped significantly by 68.84% with the first thermal shock, which was about 5.94 percentage points more than for comparable uniaxially pressed CaZrO Similarly, the CMOR before thermal shock was 16.45 MPa and thus much higher compared to the CMOR of 8.32 MPa of uniaxially pressed refractories. As for the Young's modulus, the relative decrease of the CMOR after the fifth thermal shock was also moderately higher compared to pressed CaZrO A higher drop of the Young's modulus after the first thermal shock generally expresses a lower thermal shock resistance under comparable testing conditions Thus, although the calcium aluminate matrix phase had detrimentally affected the thermal shock resistance under the present testing conditions, it should be further evaluated how such a partially liquid matrix affects the thermal shock resistance at higher application temperatures. Regarding the high temperature properties it has to be noted that the hot modulus of rupture (HMOR) was comparable to uniaxially pressed refractories. The thermal expansion given in On the other hand, the refractoriness under load (RUL) was significantly worse compared to CaZrO However, a pressure of 0.2 MPa would be equivalent to a height of a refractory construction of about 5.3 m at the given apparent density. Hence, in order to evaluate the refractoriness and thus the dimensional stability of medium-sized crucibles, the RUL measurement was repeated with a load of 0.05 MPa. This load would be equivalent to the pressure by a refractory lining with a height of about 1.33 m. Accordingly, the deformation during the RUL measurement changed, as indicated in To further evaluate the application of the CaZrO However, for larger crucibles or even complete monolithic linings, a further development of CaZrO Calcium zirconate (CaZrO The study comprised the optimization of the castable regarding its processing and its subsequent characterization. A refractory castable with a high processability including a low amount of macroscopic pores and cavities was achieved. That allowed an easy handling and successful processing of medium-sized crucibles. The chemical, physical, mechanical and thermomechanical properties were similar to comparable pressed refractories. Surprisingly, it was found that although the used raw materials contained only a small amount of silica in bulk, a large amount was concentrated in the calcium aluminate matrix. This indicates that the matrix acted as a sink for the silicon oxide impurities of all raw materials. In summary, the present study provides a framework for the further development of refractory castables based on CaZrO The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. The authors would like to thank the