Oil agglomeration technique is one of the several major physicochemical separation processes in fine particle processing. In this study, the oil agglomeration behaviour of Tuncbilek clean coal was investigated and studied to find operating parameters that would decrease the ash content of the clean coal. The optimum conditions for agglomeration time, kerosene concentration and stirring speed were determined to be 20min, 31.6wt.%, and 1500rpm, respectively. Also, the ash content of the coal could be decreased by the addition of methanol.
                  The separation of various artificial mixtures of coal–clay samples was also investigated under the determined optimum conditions. The coal could be agglomerated with above 80% of combustible recovery. The ash content was nearly the same for all conditions and determined to be approximately 6%. The coal was separated from clay minerals with high combustible recovery and low ash content using selective oil agglomeration technique.Oil agglomeration, which is based on a physicochemical separation technique, is a method of cleaning fine coal from inorganic impurities. In the oil agglomeration process, the immiscible bridging liquid such as oil is added to an aqueous suspension. The suspension is agitated so as to contact the oil droplets and particles. The oil wets hydrophobic particles and brings them together to form agglomerates. The agglomerates are separated from the other particles by screening. Successful reduction of the mineral matter in coal using the oil agglomeration technique requires hydrophobic coal surfaces and hydrophilic mineral matter surfaces. This process is only possible when the treated particles are sufficiently hydrophobic so that they are selectively wetted in water by oil droplets In this study, the beneficiation of coal using oil agglomeration was investigated. The combustible recovery and ash content were considered to imply agglomeration success. First, the oil agglomeration behaviour of a clean coal sample was investigated in detail because of its high calorific value. Oil type and dosage, stirring speed, agglomeration time, solid content, surfactant addition, hydrophobicity, and contact angle are known as operating parameters for the selective oil agglomeration of coals The oil agglomeration experiments were conducted using a clean coal sample taken from the Tuncbilek coal preparation plant and a clay sample taken from the Tuncbilek underground coal mine. The clean coal sample provided coal preparation plant (+ Kerosene was used as the bridging liquid to collect hydrophobic coal particles and distilled water was employed for all oil agglomeration tests. The methanol (> The oil agglomeration experiments were carried out in a 400  ash content of clean coal, ash content of feed, mass of clean coal, mass of feed. The effects of agglomeration time on the combustible recovery and ash content of the coal were investigated and the obtained results are presented in The effects of kerosene concentration on the combustible recovery and the ash content of coal were investigated and the results are given in On the other hand, the ash content decreased with increasing kerosene concentration and reached a minimum value of 5.75% at the concentration of 15.8%. Thereafter, further kerosene addition caused increases in the ash content of coal. The increase of the ash content was based on the filling of the agglomerate pores with the dispersed material. Similar results are reported in the literature  The contact angle implies the hydrophobicity or wettability degree of minerals very dependent on the surface tension After determination of the optimum conditions for the oil agglomeration of the clean coal, selective oil agglomeration experiments were carried out for various artificial mixtures of clean coal and clay. These artificial clean coal and clay mixtures were prepared and tested under the optimum conditions determined from the previous tests. The aim of this part of study is to achieve and reveal the successful separation by using oil agglomeration technique for coal including various percentage of clay mineral. The selective oil agglomeration tests were performed using a 20 The combustible recovery of clean coal increased with increasing kerosene concentration, and the ash content of coal decreased. When kerosene concentrations were higher than the optimum value, the ash content of the agglomerates showed a small increase. Thus, the optimum kerosene concentration for the clean coal was determined to be 31.6 Similar behaviours were observed in the agglomeration time and stirring speed experiments. The combustible recovery of coal was increased with both increasing agglomeration time and stirring speed. The ash content did not change much for any agglomeration times or stirring speeds. Consequently, the optimum agglomeration time was determined to be 20 Methanol did not enhance the combustible recovery of the coal. However, the ash content of the agglomerates was decreased with methanol addition. The coal could be agglomerated with above 80% of combustible recovery from the artificial mixture of coal and clay minerals using selective oil agglomeration under the determined optimum conditions. The ash content remained almost the same, approximately 6%, for all percentages of clay. The financial support given by the