Detection of neutrons is possible if suitable converters such as Li, LiF or 10B in the form of thin films are used along with the semiconductor device. The use of boron (10B) in some host matrix as a neutron detector is attractive due to its large neutron capture cross-section. Boron carbide (BC) films are deposited on silicon substrates by HWCVD technique using solid ortho-carborane (o-C2B10H12) precursor with argon as carrier gas. The films contain 10B required for neutron detection as confirmed by the Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy. Variations in its structure as well as the chemical bonding configurations using Fourier Transform Infra-Red, Raman and X-ray diffraction spectroscopy have been studied.Boron carbide is attractive as a non-metallic material with useful physical and chemical properties. It is an extremely hard and wear-resistant material with a high melting point, low density and good thermal and electrical properties. The large resistance to chemical agents and very high neutron absorption/capture cross-section makes boron carbide (BC) a strong candidate for high technology industries, fast-breeders and light weight armours application It is very important that the process of depositing the BC layer does not in any way affect the electrical characteristics of the underlying device. Of the different types of CVD processes, Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapour Deposition (PECVD) has been considered as the powerhouse of semiconductor industry up till now Till today, PECVD has been used to deposit BC thin films using the solid precursor ortho-carborane (o-C The Hot-Wire Chemical Vapor Deposition (HWCVD) is a deposition technique that employs thermal decomposition of a precursor gas at a resistively heated filament (usually tungsten or tantalum) to obtain the required material to be deposited on a substrate. Boron carbide films were deposited on n-type silicon and glass Corning (eagle) substrates by HWCVD using ortho-carborane (o-C The transmission spectra of the boron carbide films deposited at argon flows 5 and 10 The two bands at 3060  Due to the low scattering power of boron and carbon and due the low thickness of the film, the glancing incidence XRD (GIXRD) was performed with Cu Kα (λ The After having deposited films with acceptable properties we fabricated the complete detector where the BC films were deposited on a Si p-i-n diode array. To ensure that the deposition process does not affect the electrical characteristics of the device we measured the I–V characteristics of the diode before and after the BC layer was deposited on the array by the HWCVD ( Boron carbide films have been successfully deposited by HWCVD using ortho-carborane precursor and Argon carrier gas. The FTIR, Raman spectra and XRD clearly show the presence of boron carbide phase in the deposited film. SIMS and FTIR also reveal the existence of This work is funded by the