This paper proposes a new method to improve the reverse flotation performance of magnetite ore using a pulse magnetic field. Flotation tests were performed in a flotation column with six external coils, which created the pulse magnetic field. The preferred parameters of the pulse magnetic field were identified, and the results were compared with those obtained using a steady or no magnetic field. The results showed that the pulse magnetic field increased the recovery and grade of concentrate Fe by 1.12% and 4.22%, respectively, compared to the corresponding values obtained using no magnetic field. The concentrate Fe grade obtained using the pulse magnetic field was better than that obtained using a steady magnetic field, indicating that the presence of the pulse magnetic field caused the selectivity to depress the magnetite particles to be high. The magnetic field intensity, switching frequency, and on/off time ratio were critical parameters affecting the magnetic flotation efficiency, and the settings for these three parameters should be properly selected for improving the magnetic flotation performance.Reverse cationic flotation is an effective process used in the beneficiation of oxidized iron ores ( Magnetic fields have been used in flotation applications to separate useful minerals from gangues; the use of these fields diminishes the floatability of paramagnetic and ferrimagnetic minerals. In this study, a pulse magnetic field was applied to a flotation column through six external coils. The preferred intensity, switching frequency, and on/off time ratio of the pulse magnetic field for magnetite ore flotation were identified, and the flotation performance of magnetite ore under different magnetic fields was compared. A magnetite ore slime sample from Tianye Plant, Lvliang, China was used in this investigation. First, the feed sample was thoroughly mixed and homogenized, and then, a representative sample was selected for chemical analysis and characterization and beneficiation experiments. The sample had a P80 particle size of 40 µm and was graded as 55.59% total Fe, 31.4% SiO Analytical grade dodecyl amine (DDA) with 98% purity was used as the cationic collector. Analytical grade HCl and NaOH were used for pH adjustment. Calcium chloride and unmodified corn starch were used as activators and depressants. Tap water was used throughout the experiment, which was performed at pH 9.0.  The feed was prepared in a 35 L mixing tank at 40% solid concentration. The slurry was treated with starch (300 g/ton) in the mixing tank for 3 min at pH 9.0. Then, the slurry was agitated with calcium chloride (600 g/ton) for an additional 3 min, after which DDA (300 g/ton) was added and further conditioned for 3 min prior to flotation. In the flotation tests, the flotation column was first run with tap water and air. Then, the magnetic field with the desired value was applied. Next, slurry was fed to the column using a peristaltic slurry pump at a specified rate of 3 L/min. The outlet pressure of the circulation pump was kept at 0.20 MPa, and the required air rate of 5 L/min was monitored using a flowmeter. The column was operated in a closed-circuit mode before steady state was achieved (i.e., when the level of the pulp–froth interface was constant, which occurred after approximately three mean residence times) and then operated in an open-circuit mode for 10–15 min with the froth depth maintained at 300–350 mm (    The one-variable-at-a-time tests described above indicated that the magnetic field intensity, switching frequency, and on/off time ratio were critical parameters affecting the efficiency of the magnetic flotation of magnetite ore. The magnetic field intensity affected the magnitude of the magnetic force experienced by the magnetite particles. The effect of the on/off time ratio on the flotation results was analogous to that of the switching frequency because both the switching frequency and on/off time ratio had similar effects on the action time of the magnetic field. The main difference between them was that the switching frequency hindered the electric current change through the inductance of the coil, whereas the on/off time ratio directly affected the duration of the electric current.  The reverse flotation performance of magnetite ore in the flotation column was enhanced by the pulse magnetic field. The possible mechanisms of this enhancement are speculated as follows. In the absence of a magnetic field, no additional magnetic force exists. As shown in An improved performance was achieved using a pulse magnetic field during the reverse flotation of magnetite ore in a flotation column. The pulse magnetic field increased the recovery and grade of concentrate Fe by 1.12% and 4.22%, respectively, compared to the corresponding values obtained using no magnetic field. The advantage of the pulse magnetic field over the steady one was the high selectivity to depress the magnetite particles, which led to the formation of a higher-quality iron concentrate. The high selectivity might be attributed to the magnetite–gangue agglomerate breakage driven by the on-again off-again magnetic force in the presence of the pulse magnetic field. The magnetic field intensity, switching frequency, and on/off time ratio were critical parameters affecting the magnetic flotation efficiency, and the settings for these three parameters should be properly selected for improving the magnetic flotation performance. This work was supported by the