Purpose
                  To assess the effectiveness of a lithotripter (Modularis Vario; Siemens, AG Healthcare, Munich, Germany) in the management of renal and ureteric stones.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  In all, 1146 adult patients with renal or ureteric stones were treated at one urological centre using the latest model of the Modularis Vario lithotripter. The effectiveness of lithotripsy and re-treatment rate were assessed. Data were obtained on stone location, stone size, shock wave usage, success rate, and complications.
               
                  Results
                  Between May 2007 and November 2009, 698 patients with renal stones and 448 with ureteric stones underwent extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL). The mean (SD) renal stone size was 12.8 (3.8) mm; a mean of 1.36 sessions was required, with a mean (SD) number of 3744 (1961) shocks delivered per renal stone. After 3months, the success rate defined as the patient being stone-free or with residual fragments of <4mm; for renal stones the rate was 91.1%, with a 6.9% complication rate in the form of steinstrasse and severe renal colic. The mean (SD) ureteric stone size was 10.4 (2.7) mm. A mean of 1.37 sessions was required, with a mean (SD) of 4551 (2467) shocks delivered for each ureteric stone. The success rate for ureteric stones was 89.5%, with a 5.6% complication rate. The overall efficiency quotient was 0.66.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The Siemens Modularis Vario lithotripter is a safe and effective machine for treating renal and ureteric stones.Since 1980, when Chaussy et al. The ability of anaesthesia-free treatment and easy handling (flat table and coupling bellows) made ESWL treatment an outpatient procedure We report our results on a large series of patients using the Modularis Vario at the Alexandria Lithotripsy Centre. It represents the most recent compact electromagnetic lithotripter from Siemens. At our centre, we assessed its efficiency in the management of renal and ureteric stones, and compared its results with those reported previously using other lithotripter machines. Adult patients with single renal or ureteric radio-opaque stones, treated at the Alexandria Lithotripsy centre using the Modularis Vario lithotripter, were recorded between May 2007 and November 2009. Complete case-notes and X-rays were evaluated, and follow-up noted in these patients. All patients had serum blood urea nitrogen, bleeding profile (prothrombin time and concentration), and complete urine analyses before ESWL. Only patients with single renal stones up to 25 The Modularis Vario is a mobile, fully integrated, newest-generation lithotripter with an electromagnetic shockwave source, and fully integrated fluoroscopic guidance. Energy levels start with E0.1 and gradually increase to a maximum of E8.0 in 38 steps. The average and maximum energy levels, as well as the total energy delivered are automatically shown at the end of each session. Patients were treated while supine, using an un-gated technique; fluoroscopy was used to locate the stone. ESWL therapy is usually started at a low voltage and E0.1 for 100 shocks until the patient becomes accustomed to the shocks, and then raised to E1.0 for the next 250 shocks, and the voltage is then gradually increased up to a maximum of E4.0 for the kidney and E8.0 for the ureter. The shock waves were delivered empirically at a variable rate of 90–120/min. The number and energy of shock waves used were tailored until adequate fragmentation was achieved or the maximum number of shocks was reached. A maximum of 3500 shocks were planned for each session for the kidney stones and 4000 shocks for the ureter. All treatments were administered on an outpatient basis for a maximum of three sessions. No fragmentation or residual fragments of >4 The EQ determines the stone-free rate in relation to repeat lithotripsy, as well the number of auxiliary procedures used to render the patient stone-free, and is calculated as the number of successes divided by the total number of procedures (primary Of 1146 patients who underwent ESWL, 698 (60.9%) had renal stones and 448 (39.1%) had ureteric stones. The mean (SD, range) stone size in this study was 11.5 (3.1, 7–25) Of 698 patients with renal stones, 59.1% had pelvic stones, 13.8% had upper calyceal stones, and 10.6% and 16.6% had middle and lower calyceal stones, respectively. The mean (SD) renal stone size was 12.8 (3.8) After 3 Treatment complications were detected in 48 patients (6.9%); 13 developed distal ureteric steinstrasse, and most of them had renal stones of >20 In this series, 448 patients had a single ureteric stone ( For all ureteric stones the mean (SD, range) power used per session was E3.0 (2.1–3.6), the maximum power was E4.5 (2.8–7.5) and mean delivered energy per session was 148 (56, 84–302) The overall success rate for ureteric stones was 89.5%; for stones of <10 Treatment complications were detected in 25 patients (5.6%); 11 developed distal ureteric steinstrasse, but four of them were completely cleared conservatively, while the other seven required an additional ESWL session for the leading stone. Renal colic was reported by most of the patients and was managed conservatively. Severe renal colic mandating a visit to the emergency room was reported in 14 patients. Of 1146 patients with renal and ureteric stones, 32 (2.8%) required an adjunctive procedure, such as insertion of a JJ stent in 12, or ureteroscopy and retrieval of fragments in 20. Given these data, and using the formula above, the EQ was 0.66. ESWL therapy is noninvasive, anaesthesia-free and can be administered in an outpatient setting. Therefore, ESWL remains the first choice for treating renal and upper and middle ureteric stones. Patients generally favour this procedure. In the era of third-generation lithotripters, the need to evaluate the efficiency of different lithotripters is essential. More than previously, there are now many and various lithotripter machines. The role of the urologist is to provide adequate data on the outcome of each machine. The newer generation of lithotripters use smaller focal zones, allowing higher peak-point pressures The Modularis Vario lithotripter has the advantages of greater comfort for the patient during the procedure, better imaging because of the very high quality of the fluoroscopy, and a great comminution of the stone, achieving a success rate of >90% in our experience, and decreasing the need of auxiliary manoeuvres. The success rate for renal stones was 90.5–93.5%, and for stones in the upper ureter was 93.3%. These results are comparable with and even superior to those reported for most other lithotripters. Many reports on the treatment of renal stones in normal kidneys, using second- and third-generation lithotripters, give success rates of 40–91% The EQ of the Modularis Vario lithotripter was 0.66, and this compares favourably with those for most available lithotripters. There is a gradual increase in EQ with successive machines; although success rates (85–88.8%) have remained constant, the EQ has improved. Most recent studies report an EQ of 0.36–0.67 Renal stones of 21–25 Patients with stones of >10 Patients with ureteric stones had a success rate comparable to those reported previously The larger the stone the more shocks were required to clear the stone, regardless of its composition. Total energy delivered per session is automatically shown by the machine at the end of each session. We think that this is an advantage of the Modularis Vario lithotripter. If this is adopted in the software of every lithotripter, it could be used as the basis of a more standardised method of comparison between different lithotripters. It would also allow us to define the required amount of energy to be delivered instead of depending on the number of shocks. The Modularis Vario electromagnetic shock-wave emitter is capable of delivering up to 2,000,000 shock waves of consistent quality. This makes the machine more cost-effective. By contrast, an electrohydraulic spark-gap electrode requires frequent changes and thus potentially jeopardises the shock wave quality in terms of the pressure and size at F2 The usual limitations of ESWL studies also affect the present study. We failed to examine fragmentation and stone-free rates based exclusively on stone composition. We did not examine the causes of failure. Most patients seen after treatment were evaluated with a KUB, a method with inherent diagnostic limitations. However, the cost associated with the reference standard CT after lithotripsy is a problem and, as such, it is rarely used. We agree that CT would have resulted in a lower success rate. Chaussy and Bergsdorf In conclusion, the Siemens Modularis Vario lithotripter is a safe and effective machine for treating renal and ureteric stones. Our data from this large, single-centre series show a high success rate of 90.5% and an EQ of 0.66. The Modularis Vario seems to be an appropriate and effective tool for treating urinary calculi, especially up to 20