Flotation, which exploits the differences in the surface wettability of minerals to effect separation, has been crucial in rare earth elements (REE) beneficiation. Monazite, a phosphate mineral commonly containing REE (typically lanthanum, cerium, and neodymium), occurs in association with hematite and quartz gangue minerals in some low grade deposits. In this study, the physicochemical properties including contact angle, zeta potential, and floatability of monazite, hematite, and quartz were determined in the presence of oleic acid as a collector. Contact angle measurements indicated adsorption of oleic acid onto the minerals' surfaces. Zeta potential measurements were used to elucidate oleic acid adsorption mechanism onto the mineral particle surfaces. Results from zeta potential measurements indicated that depressants are required to achieve selective flotation recovery of monazite from hematite and quartz. The flotation test results confirmed poor selectivity between monazite; and hematite and quartz, respectively. However, rare earth oxides (REO) in monazite floated better than both hematite and quartz at all the oleic acid dosages investigated. The use of sodium silicate and starch as depressants enhanced the selective flotation recovery of REO from hematite and quartz mixtures.Monazite is a phosphate mineral of light REE including cerium, lanthanum, and neodymium as well as small amount of thorium. On the other hand, there are trace amount of dysprosium, erbium, and holmium present. Typically, monazite has REO grade of about 70%, constituting 20–30% Ce Froth flotation, which exploits the differences in the surface wettability of minerals to effect separation has been crucial in REE minerals beneficiation ( Generally, fatty acids (oleic acid or sodium oleate) and hydroxamates are employed as collectors in the flotation recovery of monazite and other REE-bearing minerals. Furthermore, the available gangue mineral phases associated with monazite principally inform the choice of depressants used during selective flotation recovery of monazite. Sodium silicate, starch, sodium sulphide, sodium fluoride, and sodium lignin sulphate have been been employed as conventional depressants in numerous research works ( In a previous investigation it was demonstrated that monazite and hematite have an almost identical particle-collector interaction. Anionic collectors namely sodium oleate, hydroxamic acid, and sodium dodecyl sulphate were found to chemisorb onto monazite and hematite surfaces, respectively at weak acid to strong alkaline conditions. It is expected that flotation of monazite from deposits enriched with hematite as the major gangue phase will be unselective ( There are a number of challenges that may be encountered in the effort to separate REO from deposits enriched with iron-oxides (predominantly, hematite). Selectivity has been a major challenge as demonstrated by Ore mineralogy and characteristics has also been identified as one major challenge associated with REO upgrade and recovery. Most of REE-bearing deposits often described as low grade are uneconomical to exploit ( Furthermore, the low grade nature of most REE deposits presents the opportunity for additional research into the identification and development of alternative flotation regimes as well as other pre-coconcentration techniques required to reject significant amount of gangue minerals ( Over the past decades significant amount of research have been conducted in the effort to develop efficient flotation systems for REE bearing deposit ( This investigation is one of numerous model minerals studies aimed at identifying suitable units of operation in an attempt to upgrade REO from iron-oxide rich tailings material, in which hematite and quartz are the main gangue phases. In a previous investigation three anionic collectors namely sodium oleate, hydroxamic acid, and sodium dodecyl sulphate were studied as potential collectors for REO flotation. This paper, through a comparative study, seeks to investigate the flotation characteristics of monazite, hematite, and quartz in the presence of oleic acid. The contact angle and zeta potential of the minerals were determined to elucidate oleate-monazite, oleate-hematite and oleate-quartz interactions. Furthermore, the influence of collector dosage, depressant type and dosage on REO recovery from mixed minerals was determined. Three minerals: monazite [d Three mixed minerals systems of different monazite content (0.8, 10, and 33.3 Oleic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, Switzerland) was employed as a collector; while sodium silicate (Coogee Chemicals, Australia) and starch (Grain Processing Corporation, U.S.A.) were employed as depressants. Dilute solutions of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and lime were used to adjust the pulp pH during the flotation tests. Potassium nitrate (ChemSupply, Australia) was used as background electrolyte for zeta potential measurements, while nitric acid (HNO Washburn method was employed in measuring contact angle of the minerals using Dynamic Contact Angle Meter and Tensiometer DCAT 21 (DataPhysics Instruments GmbH, Germany) as described in previous publication ( Zeta potential of the mineral samples was conducted in 1 A microflotation cell [ In a previous investigation by The zeta potential and IEP of monazite, hematite, and quartz used in this investigations in the absence of collectors have been reported in our previous studies ( The zeta potential data of monazite, hematite, and quartz in the absence and presence of oleic acid are shown in Similarly, a vivid interaction between hematite surface and oleic acid is shown in On the other hand, the surface of quartz remained negatively charged at all the pH conditions investigated. In the presence of oleic acid, the zeta potential of quartz is more negative compared to quartz in the absence of oleic acid. Oleic acid adsorbs onto the surface of quartz due to the interaction between impurity metal hydroxyl complexes (predominantly [Fe(OH) A comparison of the results presented in  It can be seen that, the flotation recovery of both monazite and hematite decreased gradually for pH values lower than their respective IEPs, which is consistent with that reported in the literature (  In this section three different feed mixtures were employed to study the selective flotation recovery of monazite from hematite and quartz mixtures. For this investigation, monazite grade in each flotation feed and concentrate is presented as REO grade, which is a sum of Ce A series of experiments aimed at determining the flotation recovery of monazite (REO), hematite (Fe A series of experiments aimed at ascertaining the flotation response of REO, in comparison with Fe Sodium silicate is a known depressant for silicate minerals and iron oxides ( The effect of sodium silicate as a depressant on REO [(Ce Starch has been used as depressant for hematite, silicates and carbonaceous matter by Starch is known to adsorb on mineral surfaces and can cause hydrophilization as a result of their long chains masking the adsorbed collectors (  A comparison of the results presented in The interaction between the gangue minerals (Fe A series of experiments aimed at determining the flotation response of low grade monazite (REO) flotation feed was conducted. Two flotation feed mixtures of differing monazite content were used. The ratio of hematite to quartz in the two flotation feed was maintained as 1:1, while monazite by weight fraction was varied as 10 (mixture 2) and 0.8 (mixture 3) wt%, respectively. Sodium silicate was selected as the suitable depressant because of its better REO selectivity in comparison with starch based on results obtained from section 3.4.2.  The effect of sodium silicate dosage on REO grade in flotation concentrates obtained from feed mixture 2 is shown in A flotation feed of containing 0.8% monazite (mixture 3) was also considered in this study to mimic a typical low grade REE bearing deposit containing Fe The physicochemical characteristics of monazite, hematite, and quartz with oleic acid as a collector have been studied using contact angle, zeta potential, and microflotation tests. Contact angle of monazite, hematite, and quartz increased in the presence of oleic acid, indicating adsorption of oleic acid onto the minerals' surfaces. Zeta potential measurements were conducted to elucidate oleic acid adsorption mechanism onto each mineral's surface. Oleic acid is shown to adsorb chemically onto both monazite and hematite (above the pristine IEP) with corresponding change in zeta potential values and IEP. Quartz is demonstrated to interact with oleic acid as a result of quartz surface activation expedited by metal hydroxyl complexes [Fe(OH) Flotation recovery of monazite from mixed minerals was investigated using different oleic acid dosage in the absence of depressants. The optimum oleic acid dosage for flotation recovery of REO from the selected gangue minerals is 1000 Selective flotation recovery of REO from Fe The results obtained suggest that REO can be separated selectively from rich Fe Financial support from the