Dealkalization is a major limiting factor for the comprehensive utilization of red mud, and acid leaching is considered an effective and promising way to achieve it. Most studies have focused on the recovery of metals in this extreme alkaline waste by strong acid leaching, ignoring the dealkalization and stabilization of red mud with low concentrations of acid. In this study, the leaching behavior of the major elements in red mud was carefully investigated by the treatment with a range of H+ concentrations from 10−6 to 1.8 mol/L. Analysis of both leachate and residue confirmed a stepwise sequential leaching behavior of Na, Al, and Ca, which was important for dealkalization of red mud. Treatment with an acidic solution at pH 1 removed 17.84% of Na, but almost no other metals. Greater than 60% Na was leached by an acidic solution with H+ concentration of 0.5 mol/L, but the dissolution efficiencies of Al, Si, and Ca were less than 10%, resulting in a relatively simple leaching liquid treatment process. And the pH of the leaching residue was 8.5 which slightly alkaline so the residual RM could be used as soil aggregates. When using an acidic solution with an H+ concentration of 1.6 mol/L, the dissolution efficiency of Na reached at 94.70%, leaving only 0.47% Na in the residue, which makes it possible to meet the demand of application for construction materials. From the results of the phase analysis, it was found that the sequential leaching behavior was due to the dissolution, decomposition, and transformation of the particles containing the main elements, and was compatible with the SEM-EDS inspection. Based on these results, a new multi-stage acid leaching dealkalization process has been proposed to provide an effective and economical way to dealkalize red mud.Red mud (RM), also known as bauxite tailings, is a highly alkaline industrial solid waste product arising from the production of bauxite alumina ( However, the high alkalinity of original RM limits its application in soil aggregates and building materials ( Dealkalization methods for RM include water leaching, calcium ion replacement, wet carbonization, and acid leaching ( Acid leaching can be considered an effective dealkalization method. There is general agreement that higher concentrations of acid result in higher dissolution efficiency ( Higher acid concentrations result in higher metal recovery efficiencies. Uzun and Gulfen achieved up to 97.46% iron extraction using 6 mol/L sulfuric acid at 105 °C ( To date, many studies have focused on improving dissolution efficiency and metal recovery through strong acid leaching, while mild acid leaching has received less attention. Sodium dissolution efficiency requirements differ according to the specific RM application. For example, the process of treating the RM for use in soil aggregates is relatively simple, as the free alkali is simply dissolved and the pH is maintained neutral or slightly alkaline. To be used as a building material, structural alkali must be removed from RM, and sodium content must be reduced to <1%. Thus, in theory, RM samples dealkalized to different degrees via acid leaching could have different wide-scale applications. Strong acid leaching can achieve high dissolution efficiency but has low selectivity. Scandium, yttrium, rhenium, titanium, calcium, and aluminum dissolve in acid leaching solutions, leading to complex filtrate composition and creating a contaminated leachate. Their strong acidity complicates the preparation of adsorbents, fillers, and building materials from leaching residues ( The current study investigates the leaching behavior of RM elements using a series of mild sulfuric acid solutions at room temperature. The main factors influencing dealkalization and the mechanism of RM dealkalization by acid leaching are also analyzed. This theoretical study provides insight for the staged dealkalization of RM. The RM samples studied in this research were collected from a Bayer Process alumina plant in Shandong Province, China. The samples were dried, crushed, and screened into a 1 mm size by a mechanical vibration sieve. H The RM sample (30 g) was added to sulfuric acid solution with a certain concentration according to mass/volume (g/L) percent. Then, the RM slurry was stirred at a speed of 300 rpm (except for stirring speed experiment) with a solid-liquid (S/L) ratio of 1/4 g/mL (except for solid-liquid experiment), at 298 K for 10 min by using a KX79–1 magnetic heating mixer (China) in a 500 mL beaker. Subsequently, the acid leaching solution and residue were obtained by filtration with an SHB-IIIA vacuum suction filter (SHB-IIIA, Hangzhou Gengyu Instrument). A Mastersizer 2000 laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Marvin instruments LTD) was used to determine the particle size distribution of the original RM before sieving. The contents of sodium and other elements in the leaching solution were determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, SPECTRO BLUE SOP, and SPECTRO). The dissolution efficiency (X) of ions was calculated using Eq. The leaching residue was dried at 80 °C for 16 h in a drying oven (TE-DO130), and then the composition of the leaching residue was analyzed by X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer (XRF, PANalytical Axios mAX, PANalytical B.V.) ( The main chemical composition of RM after ICP analysis is given in The particle size distributions of the original RM are shown in The main mineral phases of the original RM after XRD analysis are shown in The samples were leached by H The results showed that the Na dissolution efficiency of RM was only 8.02% without using H As the H The increase in Na dissolution efficiency was clear as the H The above results of Na, Al, Si, and Ca leaching behavior confirmed that the RM leaching process by lower concentration acid solution was selective and staged. Na in RM was primarily leached at H The XRF results of leaching residues were consistent with the ICP leachate analysis. The results of acid leaching of RM on the removal of Na are shown in Acid leaching experiments were performed under the conditions of H  Based on the above results, leaching experiments were performed with the H  The XRF results of leaching residues were consistent with the ICP leachate analysis. Most Na could be removed when the stirring speed was 300 rpm. The results are shown in Findings of above experimental results showed that the acid dosage had a significant influence on the leaching behavior of Na, Al, Si and Ca in RM. According to the different purposes of RM, different treatment processes should be adopted for RM to achieve the desired sodium content. For example, if RM was used in soil aggregate, the pH of RM should be neutral or slightly alkaline. In this case, it does not need a high dissolution efficiency, the acid dosage used for RM dealkalization was very small, and Al and Si in RM were almost not leached by acid, resulting in a relatively simple leaching liquid treatment process, as shown in If RM was used as a building material, the content of sodium must be reduced below 1%. In this case, a relatively large acid dose was required and the leaching solution would contain a large amount of Al, thus the recovery of Al could be considered, as shown in The phase identification results of the Na, Al, Si, and Ca leaching behavior in RM filter residue leached by different H The Na dissolution efficiency was only 17.84% at H When H Therefore, the Ca dissolution efficiency in RM increased when H It also could be found that the crystal shape of gibbsite changed with H The characteristic gypsum peak increased in the pattern of neutralized RM with H It was also found that the characteristic peak of sodalite decreased with H Therefore, the Al dissolution efficiency in RM increased when H The results of XRF ( SEM-EDS was used to analyze the morphology and the Na, Al, Si, and Ca elemental distribution of the original RM and leaching residues leached by different H The results of SEM-EDS showed that the content of Na in the leach filtrate gradually decreased as the H The results of XRF analysis shown in RM is a highly alkaline industrial solid waste that causes serious air, land and water pollution. Acid leaching is an effective method to remove alkali from RM. In this research study, the leaching behavior of the four elements (sodium, aluminum, silicon, calcium) in RM was carefully investigated by treating them with a series of low concentration acidic solutions. The following main conclusions can be drawn. The dealkalization process of RM with low concentration acid was staged and selective. Treatment with an acidic solution at pH 1 removed 17.84% Na, but almost no other metals were leached out with Na dissolution efficiency less than 1%. When treated with an acidic solution containing 0.4 mol / L of H The phase analysis results demonstrated that sequential leaching behavior was due to the dissolution, decomposition, and transformation of major element bearing particles. With H A multi-step acid leaching dealkalization process was proposed based on the leaching behavior of elements by treatment with a series of low concentrations of sulfuric acid, which had the following advantages: 1) pure sodium sulfate was obtained from the filtrate, and the filter residue was directly applied to the soil, when the H The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported financially by the