Bioactive glasses (BGs) are considered as a high potential candidate in bone repair and replacement. In the present study, sol–gel derived BGs based on 60% SiO2-(36%-x) CaO-4%P2O5-x SrO (where x = 0, 5 and 10mol%) quaternary system were synthesized and characterized. The effect of Sr substitutions on bioactivity, proliferation, alkaline phosphatase activity of osteoblast cell line MC3T3-E1 and antibacterial activity were investigated. Dried gels were stabilized at 700°C to eliminate the nitrates and prevent the crystallization of bioactive glasses. X-ray diffraction, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and scanning electron microscopy results confirmed the formation of hydroxycarbonate apatite on the BG surfaces. The 3-(4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide and alkaline phosphate activity results showed that 5% SrO increased both differentiation and proliferation of MC3T3-E1 cells, while 10% SrO resulted in a decrease in bioactivity. Live/Dead and DAPI/Actin staining exhibited viable cell and the morphology of actin fibers and nuclei of MC3T3 cells treated with BG-0 and BG-5. The result of antibacterial test showed that strontium substituted 58S BG exhibited antibacterial effect against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteria. Taken together, results suggest that 58S BG with 5mol% SrO is a good candidate for bone tissue engineering with maximum cell proliferation and ALP activity, good bioactivity and high antibacterial efficiency.Bioactive glasses (BGs) are a class of biomaterials, generally based on amorphous silicate compositions, which are developed and used as bone grafts or fillers in the field of bone repair and regeneration The synthesis of the BGs by the sol–gel method provides a flexible low temperature route that provides better compositional control and higher homogeneity and purity in comparison with conventional melt quenching route In recent years several studies have been conducted on the synthesis The osteoconduction and antibacterial properties may be enhanced by incorporation of metallic ions in bioactive glasses Strontium is an alkaline earth metal that plays a similar role as calcium in bone formation The effect of Sr incorporating in BG composition on formation of the apatite layer and in vitro bioactivity has not been elucidated exactly. Some reports show that Sr can enhance the bioactivity by formation of a new bone and reduction of the bone resorption On the other hand, Christi et al. recently reported that substitution of CaO with SrO in strontium-containing phosphate glasses, causes little or no change in the dissolution rate of and that the bioactivity remains constant Another unclear issue is the optimal amount of substituted SrO for CaO in BG composition which has a positive effect on cell proliferation and activity in BGs. Previous reports show a range of SrO substitution for CaO for a variety of bioglasses which caused cell proliferation; e.g., 2.9 Orthopedic implant infections are considerable due to their morbidity and usually involve the removal or replacement of implanted biomaterials The aim of this study was to elucidate the effect of SrO substituting for CaO on the bioactivity, biocompatibility, alkaline phosphatase and antibacterial activity of the sol-gel derived 58S-BG and to suggest the optimal content of SrO in BG-58S composition to achieve the highest cell proliferation and activity as well as antibacterial efficiency against MRSA. For this purpose, we synthesized the sol-gel derived strontium-containing glasses with a composition range of 0–10% SrO. Moreover, the effect of strontium on the reactivity of Sr-BGs was studied in vitro by immersing samples in SBF and observing the change of the morphology and the structure of Sr-BGs due to formation of hydroxycarbonate apatite (HCA) on their surfaces. Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used for characterization of the formed HCA. Also, Live/Dead and DAPI/Actin staining techniques were performed in order to qualitatively assess cell viability and visualize the morphology of actin fibers and nuclei of MC3T3 cells in presence of strontium, respectively. Finally, based on the in vitro bioactivity, cell proliferation, ALP and antibacterial activity results, the optimal SrO content in the bioactive glass composition was reported. Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS: Si(OC A mouse osteoblast-like cell line, MC3T3-E1, was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Poole, UK) for in-vitro biological investigation. Cells cultured at 37 Bioactive glasses in the SiO Distilled water was mixed with 0.1 The final product was ground into a fine powder using a zirconia planetary ball mill (Retsch, Germany) with a final particle size of below 50 The standard SBF solution was prepared according to the procedure described by Kokubo The differential thermal (DTA) and thermogravimetric (TGA) analyses were done for BG-0 and BG-10 to determine the stabilization temperatures for dried gels. DTA/TGA curves were obtained in a Shimadzu TGA-50 apparatus, under a nitrogen atmosphere starting from room temperature up to 1100 The surface of the bioactive glasses were studied before and after immersion in SBF by X-ray diffraction (XRD, INEL-Equinox-3000, France) with a Cu-Kα radiation source (λ = 1.5405 The BG sample surfaces were characterized before and after soaking in SBF by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR, Nicolet Avatar 660 (Nicolet, USA)). For this purpose, 1 For in vitro study, samples were soaked in the SBF at 37 The pH of the SBF was recorded by a calibrated pH meter (Corning pH meter 340, USA) at each time step up to 14 days. After immersion of the samples in the SBF, BGs surfaces were observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, Philips XL30, Netherland) in order to detect the effect of Sr on the size and morphology of the precipitates. The bioactive glasses were coated with a thin layer of gold to avoid charges accumulation at the surface of the samples. The live/dead cell staining technique in presence of BG (as a control), BG-5 and BG-10 was used to qualitatively assess cell viability. In addition, DAPI/Actin staining-fluorescent microscopy was applied for BG, BG-5 and BG-10 in order to visualize the morphology of actin fibers and nuclei of MC3T3 after 1 and 7 days. For live/dead cell staining, MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded at a density of 15000 cells/cm According to the DAPI/Actin staining, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich) solution for 30 MC3T3-E1 mouse osteoblast-like cell line was use to study the effect of Sr on cell proliferation of BG-58S. The cells were seeded in polystyrene plates enriched with α-MEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), (Sigma-Aldrich, UK), 1% antibiotic, 2 The proliferation of the MC3T3-E1 was measured by using 3-{4,5- dimethylthiazol-2yl}-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. For this purpose, cells were seeded on samples into a 96-well plate at a density of 6×10 To investigate the effects of Sr on the osteoblastic differentiation of MC3T3-E1, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was analyzed by measuring the conversion of p-nitrophenyl phosphate to p-nitrophenol To investigate the effect of Sr on antibacterial activities in BG-58S, cultured MRSA in liquid lysogenybroth (LB) medium were diluted approximately to 0.5×10 Bactericidal fraction = 1- (number of survived bacteria/number of total bacteria) Statistical analysis was performed by using GraphPad Prism software package, version 3.0 (GraphPad Prism, USA). The elemental analysis and cell assays were conducted with three samples per group. Quantitative data were expressed as means ± standard deviations (SD). Corresponding P-values were considered significant at *P < 0.05. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001). DTA and TGA curves for BG-0 and BG-10 are presented in Previous reports showed that the substitution of SrO for CaO reduces the glass transition and the crystallization temperature of silicate glasses. Salman et al. Based on DTA/TGA results, the onset crystallization exothermic peak occurred at around 900  Previously, Amjad et al. XRD results suggested that substituting Sr for Ca in BGs composition lowered the in vitro apatite formation ability of the bioactive glass. Although Sr does actually substitute for Ca in the apatite structure The FTIR transmittance spectra of the synthesized BGs before and after immersed in SBF for different time periods of 1, 3, 7 and 14 days are presented in The FTIR spectra of the BGs immersed in SBF for 1  According to So, the possible reason for the lower bioactivity of Sr-BG, despite its higher dissolution rate of Ca and Si, which results in a higher supersaturation degree and driving force for nucleation, was the blocking of the active growth sites of calcium phosphate by the adsorption of Sr on the apatite surface. This effect was pronounced at higher doses of Sr   The SEM images of the BGs immersed for 14 days in the SBF are shown in Our SEM observation suggested the larger size of rods in BG-10 compared with BG-5 may be attributed to a lower rate of nucleation as a result of more Sr in the solution that induced an inhibitory effect on hydroxyapatite crystallization. Fluorescence staining of live and dead cells on BG discs revealed remarkable differences in cell proliferation depending on the Sr content of the BG ( Valerio et al. demonstrated that the ions dissolution from BGs affects the biological response of the cells   Qiu et al. claimed that porous Sr-doped calcium polyphosphate scaffolds could stimulate the proliferation and differentiation of osteoblastic ROS17/2.8 cells while, higher Sr concentration range between 80% and 90% decreased the MTT level in comparison with moderate Sr level range between 1% and 5% Our MTT results suggested that incorporating 5% Sr in the 58S bioglass composition significantly improved the cell proliferation, while 10% Sr had no positive effect. The ALP activity of MC3T3-E1 cells treated with BG-0, BG-5 and BG-10 samples were investigated. Cell differentiation was assessed in terms of ALP activity of MC3T3-E1cells at the end of 1, 3 and 7 days of culture, as shown in From the results of our investigation, it was understood that substituting 5% Sr for Ca in 58S bioglass composition has a significant positive effect on the cell proliferation; i.e., BG-5 showed maximum MC3T3-E1 cell proliferation. The concentration of the Sr in SBF solution for the BG-10 was almost two times higher than BG-5 as shown in Comparative study of antibacterial activity of BG-0, BG-5 and BG-10 against MRSA bacteria presents in These results suggest that strontium increased bactericidal efficiency against MRSA. Although the exact mechanism for the antibacterial effect of BGs remains unknown An attempt has been made to evaluate the influence of Sr substitution for Ca between 0 and 10 Formation of a crystalline apatite phase on the surface of Sr-containing 58S BG after soaking in SBF solution was confirmed by the appearance of C–O stretching and P–O absorption bands in FTIR spectra and the detection characteristic peaks of crystalline apatite phase in XRD pattern. The presence of Sr in BG composition reduced the rate of crystallization of hydroxyapatite for BG-5 and BG-10 with respect to control (BG-0) after immersion in SBF due to blocking of the active growth sites of calcium phosphate. In vitro biological tests with MC3T3-E1 cells revealed that 58S BG incorporating 5 Live-dead and MTT assay results confirmed that BG-5 exhibited cell proliferation with fewer dead cells in comparison to the control (BG-0). Strontium increased the bactericidal efficiency of BGs against MRSA bacteria and BG-5 exhibited a significant bactericidal efficiency against MRSA in comparison with BG-0. BG-5 is suggested as a good candidate for bone tissue engineering with promoted cell proliferation and enhanced osteoblasts differentiation as well as bactericidal efficiency against MRSA bacteria.