The production of sub-micron and near nano-grain sized hardmetals has been the fastest growing segment of the industry over the last 10 years. This growth has been driven by developments in user industries such as electronics, precision engineering, micro-machining, and metal forming that exploit the exceptional properties of these alloys…The constant need for higher productivity and improved financial return across industrial manufacturing has continually spurred the development of tool materials, and cemented carbide is no exception. Deeper study of application conditions, wear mechanisms and failure modes of carbide tools became necessary to find ways of improving their performance. In many studies it was found that reducing tungsten carbide (WC) grain size to sub-micron levels yielded significant gains in performance. Why should this be and would yet finer grain sizes (eg 0.1micron or less) give further advantage? The numerical values of sintered WC grain size used here have been largely derived from WC phase “intercept length” measurements made on FEGSEM microstructural pictures. The “mean” grain size is that value taken at 50 cumulative volume per cent of the total grain size distribution observed. Some of the important hardmetal properties that are influenced by WC grain size, either positively or negatively, and those that are not, are given in  Experience has shown that wear applications demanding durability at high working temperatures (eg high removal rate steel machining, rock cutting, hot forming), or those that require supreme impact fracture resistance remain better suited to hard metals of coarser grain size. From the above it seems that the main interest in developing finer sub-micron hardmetal, perhaps into the nanometre range, is to raise hardness, maximise attrition wear resistance and bend strength (provided material defects are controlled) whilst as far as possible maintaining all other attributes at useful levels. The manufacture of hardmetals having “conventional” grain sizes of between one micron and five microns has essentially remained unchanged since Schröter's early work. Typically, a somewhat agglomerated WC starting powder would have a coarser crystallite size than the sintered grain size. The powder would therefore be milled under pre-determined conditions to de-agglomerate and comminute it to give largely single grains of desired input size for sintering. However, the efficiency of the milling process falls significantly for particle sizes of less than one micron. Very fine WC starting powders of 0.4 micron crystallite size or less are usually agglomerated, and so comminution to one micron particle size will mean that much of the milled powder will remain as polycrystalline aggregates. Tracking the change of particle size distribution within milled powders is difficult, and laser diffractometry is probably the most practical current technique. Its use is demonstrated in The particle size distributions in Retention of WC agglomerates will give variable powder bulk densities and compacting pressures but, more especially, will provide an easy route to grain growth by coalescence. Lay and Loubradou [ This heterogeneous microstructure will affect the mechanical properties of the sintered piece. Thus production of high quality ultra-fine hardmetal requires investigation and control of the morphologies of the original oxide throughout its reduction and carburisation to give the maximum degree of crystallite segregation within the resulting carbide. The mere achievement of a submicron crystallite size does not ensure a satisfactory starting powder. Once the grain size and morphology of the starting powder has been obtained, the next critical step is to mix in both the binder metal and grain growth inhibitors. These constituents should be distributed as uniformly as possible within the WC to achieve as stable a sintering behaviour and as uniform a microstructure as possible. Sub-micron carbides experience most of their sintering shrinkage before the binder melts [ The more conventional way to make sub-micron grade powder is to mix physically binder and inhibitor powders into the WC by a “milling” process. Very fine cobalt powders of less than 400nm are available, but to reduce risks due to dust/inhalation, pyrophoricity, and to improve their flow properties, these are generally agglomerated and passivated by using organic additives. If the method of addition is by milling, it is essential to ensure early dispersion of these agglomerates before the milling process compacts them [ When the 400nm cobalt particles are completely dispersed within the slurry, they are effectively “invisible” to the milling media and the milling becomes a mixing process. Additions of inhibitors are made by adding carbides of comparable fineness into the mill, or by pre-doping the tungsten carbide starting powder. A second, less conventional, way is to mix chemical solutions of binder into the WC powder, followed by the required drying and reduction steps [ Compaction processes may be uniaxial die pressing, wet- or dry-bag isostatic pressing, extrusion or injection moulding. Each places different demands on the properties of the grade powder. Typically for pressing, the use of automatic presses demands free flowing powders with admixed binders and lubricants. Thus spray dried powders with microcrystalline waxes, polyethylene glycols, etc are used. Extrusion and MIM, however, demand larger volume fractions of binder/plasticiser than can normally be handled in a spray drying process, and the pastes needed for these processes are generally compounded in high shear mixers. The high compaction pressures of these very fine powders lead to the use of lower pressed densities (or higher shrinkages), raising the risk of under-compaction and sintering porosity. In the case of extrusion, the situation is made worse by the possibility of inhomogeneously mixed lubricants and binders. Universally, therefore, all of these grades require HIP-sintering, (or subsequent HIP treatment) to achieve full density. One of the significant microstructural aspects of sub-micron hardmetals is how the mean free path (λ) of a uniformly distributed binder decreases with WC grain size down to truly nanometric dimensions. The relationship ( Regarding the WC, the idea that internal crystallographic defects decrease with grain size has been supported by TEM study [ There is still much to learn, even today, about the basic W-C-Co system fundamental to hardmetal production. For example it was not until recently that Kim et al [ The trend of miniaturisation in many fields of technology (eg electronics, bio-medical products, automotive fuel systems, transducers, etc) has strengthened considerably over recent years leading to a general growth in hardmetal usage for micro-cutting tools. The biggest single application is the production of micro-drills and routers for printed circuit board (PCB) manufacture. The forecast demand for PCB micro-tools in 2005 will be more than 500x 106, representing more than 2000 tons of ultra-fine cemented carbide hardmetal. Micro-drill sizes of less than 0.1mm diameter are now commercially available for drilling microvia holes in multi-layer PCB's for mobile phones and micro-computers. Sintered grain size in carbides for this application has fallen from around 0.4 microns in 2000 to approaching 0.2microns in 2005. Routers are used to cut out the fully machined PCB to its final shape. Cutter diameters are typically in the range of 1 – 2.5mm. The high RPM available on PCB manufacturing machines enable them to achieve surface cutting speeds of more than 300m/min with such cutters, lifting operating temperatures to more than 300°C. At this temperature brominated “FR” resins decompose locally, bromine outgasses and chemically attacks the cobalt binder, accelerating attrition wear. Interestingly, substitution of 25wt% of the cobalt binder by ruthenium completely inhibits bromine/binder interaction [ The remarkable growth in sales of solid carbide cutting tools during the last 10 or 15 years means that metal cutting takes the largest share of sub-micron hard metal output. The reason for this sales development was the maturing of three technologies at around the same time; Commercially available, good-quality PVD coating; Volume availability of good-quality sub-micron hard metal; and CNC technology for machine tools. Drills take more than 50 per cent of the sub-micron carbide market for metal cutting. Drilling embodies a complex combination of tool wear processes. There is intense shear and deformation of the work material around the drill centre point, the cutting speed on the main cutting edges increases steeply with radial position, and the outer corners are simultaneously exposed to many wear mechanisms. Modern drills using latest PVD coatings, efficient point geometries and high quality sub-micron hard metal substrates are able to control wear at the centre and on the main cutting edges very well. Therefore the most usual failure pattern is excessive wear of the outer drill corners where it is possible to observe complex combinations of microchipping, attrition, diffusion, oxidation, plastic deformation and abrasion. The advantage in moving to a finer grain size in drilling substrates is mainly realised when corner attrition is the dominant wear process, in which case more cobalt should be added to lower hardness and restore fracture toughness levels. Drilling results with substrates of 0.5 micron tend to confirm that in certain conditions an attrition wear advantage is obtained which may improve tool life by up to 50 per cent. High breakage strength becomes very important as drill diameters fall below 3mm, especially if they contain internal coolant channels. Hardmetals with grain size of below 0.5 microns have recently become available but their share of this market sector is minor as yet. Endmilling is an interrupted cutting operation that often carries the risk of unwanted instability or vibration. Edge toughness is therefore an important demand. The small feed per tooth, short cutting contact and moderate cutting speeds generally used mean that high temperature wear mechanisms such as plastic deformation or diffusion wear are not dominant. Instead, wear properties dependent upon the substrate, such as PVD coating adhesion and edge toughness, tend to be more important. On this basis, endmilling applications may benefit from a substrate grain size smaller than 0.8 micron normally used. Recent results have shown that marked increases in cutter life can be achieved with harder substrate grades of less than 0.5 micron grain size when finishing and semifinishing fully hardened die steels, The volume of sub-micron hard metal used for PVD coated and uncoated indexable inserts continues to grow but it represents only a minor portion of the total used in metal cutting. Submicron substrates are employed when sharper edges and more positive rake angles are required, often in association with accurate profiles and weak edge shapes. Examples are threading inserts, parting-off and fine grooving inserts, inserts for various drilling and milling tools as well as turning inserts in special geometries for more demanding work materials such as aerospace alloys. Grain sizes significantly finer than 0.8 microns have not been widely adopted for inserts yet. The compaction pressure required for carbide grade powders to give target green density rises markedly as WC grain size within the powder falls below one micron. The obvious way forward is to improve the compactibility of very fine powders such that they might be pressed in standard press tools. If this could be satisfactorily achieved, a major barrier to the wider testing of ultra-fine hard metals as indexable inserts would be removed. WC powders of 0.1 microns or less emerged from the laboratory into commercial production during the 1990's. The first ultra-fine cobalt powders of less than 0.5 microns, usually incorporating organic passivators, became available around the same time. When these input materials are used in combination with “best practice” conventional hard metal processing, a sintered grain size of around 0.2microns is achievable and which appears to be a recognised “practical limit” for current production technology. The greatest technical challenge to the successful production of truly “nano-fine” WC-Co alloys is how to achieve full densification of the very fine starting powder with minimal grain growth. Deeper understanding of the densification process than we have at present is required if thermal processes, such as sintering, can be utilised. Meaningful study in at least four key areas is preconditional to major progress along this route. They are: The mechanisms and kinetics of grain growth in both the solid and liquid binder regimes; Grain growth inhibition mechanisms; Themodynamic equilibria of phases in “W-C-Co-Inhibitor” systems to provide basic data for computer modelling and possible “alloy design”; and How WC starting powder morphology may influence local and general grain growth.   With hindsight, production of nano-fine WC starting powders has proved less problematic than expected. At first, hydrometallurgical routes involving reduction of tungsten complexes were thought necessary, but their awkwardness gave way to more favoured direct carbo-thermal treatment of WO As important as being able to produce these fine starting powders is the ability to characterise them in a more complete way than is routinely possible today. What is the effective crystallite size? What is the level of agglomeration? Can we characterise the agglomeration in terms of grain boundary types? What is the agglomerate size distribution? How frequent are internal defects, and what type are they? All these factors may influence sinterability, grain growth and microstructurally dependent sintered properties like limiting strength, fracture toughness and fatigue resistance. New techniques to give answers to these questions will be essential tools for continued and effective microstructural refinement of hardmetals.