In this work, calcium lignosulphonate (CLS) was introduced as a novel flotation depressant for separation of scheelite from calcite. Sodium oleate (NaOl) acted as collector for scheelite. The flotation results showed that CLS had strong depressant effect on calcite flotation while exhibited little influence on scheelite flotation. Scheelite can be separated efficiently from scheelite-calcite mixed binary minerals in pH range of 7–11, when CLS was added prior to NaOl. The selective depressant effect of CLS on calcite was analyzed through interactions between the CLS micelles and mineral particles at water/particle interface.Scheelite is a calcium tungstate mineral and usually associates with calcite in ore deposits. Flotation is the most commonly used technique to recover scheelite from calcite and other gangue minerals. Fatty acid and its derivatives are conventional collectors for scheelite in many flotation plants. The common opinion for the collecting mechanism of these reagents is the chemisorption of the oleate ion onto the mineral surface ( Depressants for calcite in published papers are mainly concentrated on water glass ( In this work, calcium lignosulphonate (CLS), a byproduct from the sulfite pulping process in the production of cellulose, was introduced as a new depressant in flotation separation of scheelite from calcite. Micro-flotation tests on single and mixed binary minerals were conducted. The adsorption behaviours of CLS micelles on mineral surface at water/particle interface were discussed. Scheelite and calcite were obtained from Hunan, China. Big mineral crystals were ground in a ceramic ball mill. The ground products were dry-sieved and the −74 + 38 μm particles were collected for micro-flotation tests. CLS (C Micro-flotation tests were conducted in a XFGC flotation machine at 1800 rpm with a 40 mL cell. Mineral pulp was prepared by adding 2 g single mineral (1.0 g scheelite and 1.0 g calcite for mixed binary minerals) into the cell with distilled water. Pulp pH was adjusted by HCl or NaOH. Conditioning time for each reagent was 3 min and the flotation time was 4 min. After flotation, the concentrate and tailing were collected, filtered, dried and weighed. The recovery was determined based on solid weight distributions between the two products. Each single flotation test was duplicated and the average value and the standard deviation were presented. For mixed binary minerals, W and Ca were assayed and scheelite recovery was calculated based on CaWO In our previous work, the effect of NaOl concentration on the flotation performance of scheelite and calcite has been studied and it was found that the recoveries of the two minerals all increased as NaOl concentration increased ( It is evident that both scheelite and calcite floated well in the whole pH range with NaOl alone. With addition of CLS prior to NaOl, scheelite recovery remained high (>90%) but calcite flotation was almost totally depressed with recovery lower than 10%. However, when CLS was added after NaOl, the selective depressant effect was reduced with calcite recovery around 40%. The results demonstrate that CLS can act as an effective depressant for calcite in wide pH range of 7–11. The preferred reagent scheme for separating scheelite from calcite is CLS then NaOl. Flotation results of mixed binary minerals are shown in Due to the phenolic group (weakly acidic) and sulfonic group (strongly acidic), CLS has highly anionic character and hydrophilicity in dilute and alkaline solutions. CLS can get fully ionized and aggregate into micelles with the acidic groups enriched on surface ( Since both scheelite and calcite expose Ca In mixed binary mineral solutions, Ca Calcium lignosulphonate exhibits selective depressant effect on calcite flotation. Adding calcium lignosulphonate before sodium oleate can enhance the preferential flotation separation of scheelite from calcite in pH range of 7–11. The selective adsorption of calcium lignosulphonate micelles on calcite and scheelite appears to be dominated by the lattice anions on mineral surface and need more investigations. This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 