Although the first production of wollastonite dated back to 1935 in California, USA, there has been very little development testwork especially in flotation done over the years. In a number of operating plants beneficiation is performed using: (1) sorting and (2) magnetic separation. In a few plants reverse flotation of gangue minerals from wollastonite is practiced.Introduction Wollastonite minerals and deposits Beneficiation of wollastonite ore Mechanical sorting Dry or wet magnetic separation Flotation methods research and development New process for beneficiation of complex wollastonite ore Mineralogy of the ore Processing characteristics Major producing countries References Although the first production of wollastonite dated back to 1935 in California, USA, there has been very little development testwork especially in flotation done over the years. In a number of operating plants beneficiation is performed using: (1) sorting and (2) magnetic separation. In a few plants reverse flotation of gangue minerals from wollastonite is practiced. Because gangue minerals present in the wollastonite containing ore have similar flotation properties, the beneficiation of the ore using flotation method is relatively complex and rather difficult. In this chapter, the research and development as well as the beneficiation processes are described. Wollastonite is a mineral form of calcium metasilicate (CaSiO The commonly associated mineral in the ore are: Diopside Tremolite Idocrase Grossulat Garnet Andradite Garnet Wollastonite is found in silicated metalimestone that has been affected by regional metamorphism or local igneous activity. Deposits of sufficient size and purity are rare. In a pure state, wollastonite has the following properties: Hardness (Mohs scale) Specific gravity (g/cc) Moisture content Retroactive index Crystal system Common form Luster Although the mineral is white when being pure, it is often colored, gray, or brown due to impurities and it is the nature of these impurities, which determine whether the mineral is economically exploitable. Because of the complex nature of the ore, the production of wollastonite is limited. There are three main methods by which wollastonite is concentrated, these include: Mechanical sorting; Magnetic separation dry or wet; Flotation—a/u? Combination of physical separation and flotation. In some cases, combinations of magnetic separation and flotation are used. The mechanical sorting of the ore is applicable if in case wollastonite is present in the ore in the form of large crystals. The wollastonite from the host rock is separated by hand cobbing, the product being marketed in lump form. Hand cobbing was practiced in the early 1970s in Finland and some operations in China and Romania. Wet magnetic separation The ore used in this study was of skarn origin containing 55–65% wollastonite. Wollastonite was well crystallized. The gangue minerals were diopside and garnet comprising of a mixture of androdite, grossularite, and salite. Dry magnetic separation is used on the ore that contains mainly garnet. It is also used in combination with gravity. A typical flow sheet used in ore treatment using dry magnetic separation is shown in In this case the ore is crushed using roll crushers to 16 mesh nominal size. The ore is screened into three size fractions, followed by treatment on air tables and high-intensity magnetic separation. Using this method, a high-grade wollastonite concentrate was produced with aspect ratio of up to 15 (aspect ratio Because wollastonite forms needle-like crystals selective flotation of wollastonite from gangue minerals is rather difficult. Reverse gangue flotation or bulk flotation followed by separation of wollastonite from gangue minerals is often practiced. For example, in the ores that contain calcite minerals, calcite is first floated using sulfate soap followed by gangue flotation (i.e., silica, feldspar) using amine flotation. In the Romania Research Institute, development work was carried out on iron containing ore The ore that contains garnet diopside and epidote was treated by using reverse gangue flotation. The ground ore is conditioned with sulfuric acid to pH 6–6.5 and the gangue minerals are floated using sulfate soap collector (i.e., sodium dodecyl sulfate). The ore that contains mostly calcite with some quartz and iron silicate is processed as follows. The ground ore is first conditioned with fatty acid followed by calcite flotation. The calcite tailing was deslimed followed by silicate flotation using a mixture of anionic and cationic collector Some research work was carried out by the Russian Institute SAIGIMS. The ore that contains about 70% wollastonite, 20% mixture of feldspar, and 7% pyroxene with minor amounts of quartz and calcite was treated using reverse gangue flotation. First calcite was floated under alkaline conditions with tallow soap or saponified naphthenic acid collector. The calcite tailing was treated with sulfuric acid and feldspar was floated using collector ANP-14 (amine). In the final stage, pyroxenes were removed using a soap collector together with 600 Research and development work on Canadian ore that contains feldspar, quartz, and diopside was conducted using air classification where a portion of fine gangue was recovered followed by bulk wollastonite–diopside flotation and wollastonite–diopside separation. The flow sheet used in this separation is shown in During several years of extensive studies, a new process has Based on the mineralogical data, the ore is composed of wollastonite (44%) diopside (31%), feldspar (17%), and quartz (6%) as a major mineral. Small quantities of calcite, titanate, and sulfides were also present in the ore. Model abundance and liberation profile is presented in The gangue minerals contained in the ore have similar flotation properties as wollastonite and therefore selective flotation of wollastonite from the gangue minerals is rather difficult. Another problem related to selective flotation of wollastonite is the shape of wollastonite crystals. Wollastonite crystals are needle-like at an aspect ratio above 8, so attachment of wollastonite on the air bubbles is nonselective.  Excellent wollastonite depression during gangue flotation was achieved using acetic acid. Other major parameters that effect production of high-grade wollastonite include (1) type of collector, (2) flotation pH, and flow sheet configuration.  Collector WK1 is a mixture of sodium alkyl sulfate (Flotinor AT), secondary amine (armoflote), and sodium oleate modified with surfactant. This collector is used for diopside and silica flotation. Flotation pH between 6 and 6.2 gave the best wollastonite metallurgical results. This flow sheet and reagent produced high-grade wollastonite at over 80% recovery. Metallurgical results obtained in continuous operation are presented in The final flow sheet developed for beneficiation of wollastonite using reverse flotation involves grinding the ore to 35 mesh nominal size followed by desliming. The sand fraction is subjected to two-stage flotation. Initially feldspar and silica were floated using collector RW9, followed by diopside flotation using collector WK1. The final flow sheet is presented in The chemical analyses of the concentrate obtained on different ore types are shown in A new process was tested on several ores from Finland and USA with good wollastonite grade and recovery.     The wollastonite crystals are typically needle-like, up to 0.5 At present, the plant floats first calcite and dolomite followed by wollastonite flotation using modified secondary amine. Concentrate grade of between 84% and 95% wollastonite grade is produced.  