The influence of ionic strength, pH of the solution and molecular weight of polyacrylic acid (PAA) on its adsorption and the electrical double layer (Al2O3/polyelectrolyte solution) properties have been examined. The measurements show that the adsorption increases with increasing ionic strength and molecular weight of the polymer, whereas the increase in pH reduces the adsorption. The thickness of the PAA adsorption layer onto aluminium oxide and the expansion coefficient were also calculated. The increase in ionic strength, pH of the solution and polymer molecular weight causes an increase in adsorption layer thickness and expansion coefficient of PAA.Behaviour of solids dispersed in polymer solutions is a very important issue. Both practical and theoretical research was carried out The interest in polymer adsorption on the metal oxide/polyelectrolyte solution interface results from the fact that the polymer adsorption is completely different from the adsorption of small particles and ions. Small particles have an invariable defined shape, while polymer chains form lots of different conformations in both a bulk phase and the Al For this reason, the mechanism of the polymer adsorption on the solid surface is a very sophisticated process. It is determined by a few factors like polydispersity of the polymer, ionic strength, pH of the solution, character of interactions between the polymer, and solid surface and presence of inorganic impurities. Those parameters influence not only the adsorption and thickness of the adsorbed polymer layer, but also the electrokinetic properties of the metal oxide/polymer solution interface. Finally, the effect of the influence of the above mentioned factors on the adsorption is a strictly defined conformation of the polymer chain on the interface. The aim of this work was as follows: to characterize the influence of ionic strength, pH of solution and molecular weight of polyacrylic acid (PAA) on its adsorption on the Al to determine the expansion coefficient of PAA in different ionic strength; to characterize the influence of ionic strength, pH of the solution and molecular weight of PAA on the thickness of the adsorption layer; to characterize the influence of ionic strength, pH of the solution and molecular weight of the polyacrylic acid on the surface charge density and the zeta potential of Al Polyacrylic acid used in the measurements was chosen, because it is one of the components of popular flocculants. Aluminium oxide is one of widely used adsorbents due to its small solubility, well-known interface and stability in a broad pH range. In all measurements Al NaCl was used as a background electrolyte. PAA (molecular weights: 2000 and 60,000) produced by Aldrich was used as a polyelectrolyte. All measurements were made at 25 The adsorption amount ( In order to determine the expansion coefficient of PAA ( From the dependence between the reduced viscosity of the polymer solution and its concentration the intrinsic viscosity number of the polymer solution at a given temperature [ The thickness of PAA adsorption layer ( Next, the suspensions were shaken for 24 The surface charge density in the presence and absence of the polymer was determined using the potentiometric titration method. The Al The zeta potential measurements were made using a zetameter (Zetasizer 3000, Malvern Instruments). The samples were prepared by ultrasonification of Al The effect of ionic strength and pH of the solution on the adsorption of PAA 2000 onto Al On the other hand, a decrease in PAA adsorption with increasing NaCl concentration should be observed. In the presence of NaCl, the attractive forces between the positively charged oxide surface and the negatively charged polyelectrolyte macromolecules decrease because of the salt screening effect The data in One of the parameters describing the polymer macromolecules in the solution is the expansion coefficient. A very important conclusion concerning the structure of the adsorbed polymer can be drawn from the thickness of its adsorption layer. The obtained data are given in The increase in adsorption layer with increasing pH can be explained by an increase of the number of the dissociated carboxylic groups in the PAA chain. The [COOH]/[COO In order to estimate the complete characteristics of the adsorption and the electrokinetic properties of the aluminium oxide/PAA solution interface the surface charge density ( The data from the zeta potential measurements show that PAA adsorption influences not only the surface charge density but also the distribution of the polymer charge in the diffusion part of the electrical double layer. The effect of the differences is a shift of the isoelectrical point of Al The ionic strength influences the amount of adsorbed polymer, the expansion coefficient of the polymer, the adsorption layer thickness, the surface charge density and the zeta potential of the system (dispersed aluminium oxide–polyacrylic acid). The PAA adsorption increases with increasing NaCl concentration. This fact results mostly from changes in dissociation degree of the carboxylic groups in the PAA chain and the specific conformation of PAA chains at high salt concentration. The expansion coefficient increases with decreasing ionic strength. It may be explained by the fact that at high NaCl concentration the repulsion between negatively charged PAA segments decreases because of their screening by positively charged salt counterions. The increase in thickness of the adsorption layer with increasing ionic strength is also a result of the screening effect of the polymer segments charge by electrolyte counterions as well as the surface oxide charge and changes in PAA dissociation degree. For the highest ionic strength, a shift of the pH