Fractures and dislocations of the shoulder girdle, humerus and elbow are common occurrences that will be dealt with daily in any orthopaedic practice. The aim of this article is to provide an overview of the most common fractures and dislocations of the shoulder and elbow that the junior trauma surgeon will encounter. The article also covers the treatment options for each injury with an emphasis on the senior author's preferred method of fixation. Most fractures around the shoulder girdle, including clavicle fractures, proximal humeral fractures and humeral shaft fractures, have traditionally been treated conservatively. There is still a role for conservative management; however, shoulder surgeons are becoming more aggressive regarding fracture fixation. This is because the initial fixation with modern prostheses is easier and carries less morbidity than dealing with an un-united or a mal-united fracture.Fractures of the clavicle comprise 4% of all fractures. The integrity of the skin should be inspected and neurovascular status assessed. Two X-ray views of the clavicle should always be taken, an anteroposterior (AP) with 10-degree cephalic tilt and an axillary view. Fractures of the lateral third of the clavicle account for 10–21% of all clavicle fractures but half of all nonunions. It is important to determine the site of the fracture in relation to the insertion of the corococlavicular ligaments. If the fracture is lateral to their insertion, displacement at the fracture is avoided and the fracture usually heals without long-term problems, although the patient may be at risk of developing secondary acromioclavicular joint (ACJ) osteoarthritis. These patients should be treated with simple broad arm sling for comfort. If the fracture is medial to the insertion of the coracoclavicular ligaments, the arm pulls the lateral clavicle down and distracts the fracture. These fractures have a high risk of delayed or nonunion and should be considered for surgical fixation. This may take the form of plate fixation (although these universally need to be removed.) or indirect reduction techniques with reconstruction of the coracoclavicular ligaments. We treat these fractures as ACJ injuries. We use the Storz MINAR ligament reconstruction for acute fractures. The MINAR is a double circlage suture with a fliptac button under the coracoid to pull down the clavicle ( Fractures of the middle third account for 50–82% of all clavicle fractures. There is usually obvious deformity. The medial end is pulled proximally by the action of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The lateral end is pulled down by the weight of the limb. Mid-shaft fractures are in the majority treated conservatively in a simple broad arm sling. Patients can return to light manual work at 6 weeks and contact sports at 3 months. Indications for surgical management are high-energy injuries with shortening greater than 2 cm, an associated scapular fracture leading to a floating shoulder, open fractures or fractures with incipient skin necrosis and fractures associated with vascular injury. These vary from a mild sprain with no radiological findings to complete disruption of the joint. They are generally caused by a fall onto the point of the shoulder in which the scapula is driven downward, medially and forwards. The evidence base for identifying the best treatment of ACJ injuries is limited. Neer grade I and II injuries (normal on X-ray) are generally treated conservatively. Grade III injuries are controversial, although athletes and those who do a lot of overhead work may benefit from surgery. Grades IV to VI should be treated surgically, and can be associated with other injuries around the shoulder such as brachial plexus injuries. Surgical options include: acute direct repair or reinforcement of the torn corococlavicular ligaments, in the chronic setting ligament substituting (The Weaver–Dunn technique) or replacement techniques (artificial ligament constructs). The distal end of the clavicle may simply be excised relieving pain in the chronic setting for lower grade injuries. Dislocations presenting in the first few weeks can be treated with the Storz MINAR. Our technique for late presenting, and chronic instability is a substituting technique using the Surgilig technique as described for lateral third fractures. The incidence of traumatic dislocation of the glenohumeral joint is 1.7% in males aged 18–70. There are many techniques for reducing dislocated shoulders. The senior author recommends a non-rotational traction method. Kocher's method should not be used. If a fracture is present then reduction under general anaesthetic is mandatory otherwise fracture displacement can occur ( For recurrent anterior shoulder dislocation, where the anterior glenoid bony rim becomes deficient then a bone replacing method is needed. We use an arthroscopic Latarjet procedure which transfers the coracoid to the anteroinferior glenoid rim. This can also be performed as an open procedure. Proximal humeral fractures are common, accounting for 4–5% of all fractures. They are principally associated with osteoporosis. The majority are treated conservatively. The decision as to which patients will benefit from surgical fixation is one that many surgeons in training find confusing, and is dependent on patient age, bone density, fracture pattern and the associated risk of avascular necrosis. There are many classification systems that attempt to describe fractures and prognosis based on the relation of these parts, but few are reproducible and reliable. The key to assessing proximal humeral fractures and the likelihood of the humeral head going on to develop avascular necrosis is understanding the blood supply to the humeral head via the anterior circumflex humeral artery. The greater the extent that the medial hinge is displaced, the higher the risk that the blood supply is compromised. The easiest way to think of this type of fracture is how many parts the fracture has. It can be divided into head, greater tuberosity, lesser tuberosity and shaft. Any combination of these fractures can occur. Undisplaced fractures can be treated conservatively with an early rehabilitation program. The commonest mechanism of injury is usually a rotational force. The function of the radial nerve must always be assessed, as it may be compromised in middle and distal third shaft fractures. As with all fractures, distal neurovascular and skin compromise should be noted, and standard orthogonal X-rays should be taken to include the joint proximally and distally. Traditionally, most humeral shaft fractures have been treated conservatively. The humerus will accommodate 10–20 degrees of anterior angulation and 10–30 degrees of varus malunion. The choice of treatment will depend on the position and type of fracture; undisplaced fractures can be observed and braced, if displacement subsequently occurs then fixation may be necessary. Simple transverse mid-shaft fractures are more difficult to treat conservatively than long spiral fractures, and as such are more commonly treated surgically. Hanging casts and U slabs are sometimes used for humeral shaft fractures. However, these tend to be cumbersome and can distract the fracture, increasing the risk of nonunion and in the case of the hanging cast, cause elbow stiffness. Patients should be fitted with total contact brace as soon as it is comfortable to do so. Sarmiento et al reported that 84 out of 85 fractures united at a median of 10 weeks when treated with functional bracing. We use intra-medullary nail fixation (antegrade technique) for displaced off ended surgical neck fractures, but use plate fixation for short oblique or transverse mid-shaft fractures. The displacement of shaft fractures depends on the relationship of the fracture to the deltoid and pectoralis major insertions. If the fracture is proximal to the pectoralis major insertion it is pulled medially, if distal to the deltoid insertion then it is pulled into abduction. The posterior approach is used for mid-shaft and distal fractures. The delto-pectoral approach is used for more proximal fractures and can be extended distally into the anterolateral approach. The benefits of open reduction and internal fixation with plates include anatomical rigid fixation allowing early mobilization and good visualization of the radial nerve. External fixators are reserved for patients with severe open wounds or those with polytrauma in whom early, but rapid fracture control is necessary to facilitate general care. These account for 2% of all fractures and about one-third of all fractures around the elbow. The posterior skin should be inspected for open wounds. The distal neurovascular status should be carefully documented. Standard AP and lateral views of the elbow should be taken. CT is commonly used to determine if reconstruction is feasible. When deciding on treatment, the age, occupation and functional demands of the patient must be taken into account, as must the experience of the surgical team. The majority of intra-articular fractures should be treated surgically as displacement is not well tolerated. The adult elbow stiffens quickly and conservative treatment risks stiffness or pseudarthrosis. The principles of fixation are to reduce the joint surface anatomically and reconstruct the medial and lateral columns of the elbow to the humeral shaft without violating the articular surface or any of the fossae around the elbow. This may be done through a triceps turndown or an olecranon osteotomy, which gives better visualization of the joint surface. Olecranon fractures are common injuries they occur as a result of direct trauma or indirect trauma due to the pull of triceps. The majority of olecranon fractures are intra-articular, except for those at the very tip. Care should be taken to assess the triceps mechanism of the arm. Plain X-rays should include a lateral and an AP in extension if possible. The aim of treatment is to restore the extensor mechanism of the elbow. If the fracture is undisplaced the extensor mechanism will be intact, the elbow should be immobilized for a maximum of 3 weeks followed by controlled mobilization. Transverse intra-articular fractures are fixed using the tension band wire technique. However, the patient should be warned that there is a 20–80% chance that patients will need removal of metalwork for symptomatic hardware. In our unit we use suture anchors to construct a tension band system. This negates the need for further surgery ( These are common fractures accounting for 20% of all elbow trauma. Undisplaced fractures should be treated conservatively with mobilization as soon as possible to avoid stiffness. Non-operative treatment can also be applied to neck fractures of less than 25 degrees of angulation. If the fracture is displaced or highly comminuted, the treatment may be by means of open reduction and internal fixation, radial head excision, or replacement. In acute injuries with damage to the coronoid process and the medial collateral ligament (terrible triad) then excision alone should not be contemplated and therefore they must be reconstructed or replaced. Traumatic elbow dislocation has an incidence of 6 per 100,000. It is most common between the ages of 5 and 25 years. It represents 20% of all dislocations and is third most common behind shoulder and fingers. Distal neurovascular examination is essential and must be documented. In some cases reduction is performed before X-ray, but X-rays will confirm the diagnosis and identify associated fractures. An examination under anaesthetic (EUA) should always be performed at the time of reduction to assess for stability. Check X-rays post-reduction is mandatory. If stable at EUA the elbow may be mobilized early. If unstable, a hinged cast brace should be considered. Josefsson et al found that 50% have no residual symptoms at 15 years and 33% had a mild restriction in ROM. Patients with an associated fracture tended to do worse. This review article covers the most frequently encountered injuries that may present to the emergency department and gives the attending junior an overview of the different treatment options. It should be noted that the opinions are that of the senior author. In general shoulder and elbow surgeons are more aggressive in their decision to treat fractures that have been conventionally treated conservatively. This is based on the evidence in the literature, the availability of specialized anatomical locking plates, and the experience of dealing with early and late complications of fractures treated using more traditional methods.