The presence of clay minerals presents a great challenge to fine coal and mineral flotation due to the well-known phenomena of mechanical coating and water entrainment. In this paper, we study the effect of two different types of clay, kaolinite and montmorillonite, on the floatability of coal in de-ionized water (without flotation reagents) based on induction time and bubble-particle attachment kinetics. The bubble-particle attachment angle (BPAA) as a function of time was used as the kinetics raw data. We demonstrated how the presence of montmorillonite was detrimental to the floatability of coal in de-ionized water. This was not the case with kaolinite. The induction time and BPAA kinetics of coal particles only changed slightly after conditioning together with kaolinite. In contrast, the induction time increased considerably from 8.73 ms to 83.25 ms when montmorillonite was added. In addition, both the maximum BPAA and BPAA kinetics constant decreased, and hydrophilic montmorillonite coating occurred during the conditioning stage. These hydrophilic sites on the coal surface prevent the thinning-rupture of the water film between bubble and coal particles and thus decrease the floatability and recovery.Clay minerals exist extensively in the ground rock stratum. The crystal structures of clay are basically composed of silicon–oxygen tetrahedrals and aluminum or magnesium oxygen octahedrals. In general, clay minerals may be divided into three classes: kaolinite, montmorillonite, and illite, depending on the different proportions of tetrahedral (T) sheets and octahedral (O) sheets [ Numerous studies have been carried out with the aim of understanding the role of clay minerals in flotation and finding effective strategies for mitigating their negative effects [ The flotation behaviors of clay minerals usually depend on their properties. The type of clay plays an important role in slime coating [ The objective of this paper is to directly identify the role of kaolinite and montmorillonite in the floatability of coal in de-ionized water (without flotation reagents) based on induction time and bubble–particle attachment kinetics tests. The main reason without flotation reagents is to exclude the effect of fine clay on the adsorption of flotation reagents and hence changing coal floatability. As a result, the true role of clay in coal floatability could be clearly identified. The bubble-particle attachment angle (BPAA) as a function of time was used as the kinetics raw data. Shorter induction time and faster BPAA kinetics corresponded to better floatability. It should be pointed out that a low clay concentration (<<2 g/L) was adopted during the induction time and attachment kinetics experiments to exclude the viscosity effect [ Ultra-pure coal samples were collected from Taxi coal preparation plant (Ningxia Province, China). The ultimate analysis results of the coal sample (air dried) are: 2.36% ash content, 8.12% volatile content, 3.76% moisture content, and 85.76% e fixed carbon content. A laboratory hammer mill was used to crush the lump coal samples into −0.5 mm size fraction. A wet screening was then carried out to collect 0.5–0.25 mm and 0.25–0.125 mm size fractions, respectively. A riffle was used to divide the sample for the repeatability. Coal with 0.5–0.25 mm size were used for the induction time tests and fractions of 0.25–0.125 mm size were used for the bubble–particle attachment kinetics tests. Milli-Q water, prepared by Milli-Q water system, was used in all experiments in order to exclude the ionic effect. The surface tension and pH of the Milli-Q water was 72.6 N/m and 5.7, respectively. For fine clays, kaolinite and montmorillonite were purchased from Sinopharm (Shanghai, China). Microtrac S3500 laser particle size analyzer (Malvern Instrument Ltd., U.K.) was used to analyze the size distributions of the kaolinite and montmorillonite samples. The size distributions of kaolinite and montmorillonite are shown in An induction timer developed in-house was used for the induction time test [ For preparing the particle bed in the presence of kaolinite/montmorillonite, 2 g of coal (0.5–0.25 mm) was mixed with 200 mL of Milli-Q water together with 0.4 g of clay in a 5×5×10 cm square container. A magnetic stirrer at 1000 rpm was used for conditioning the pulp completely. Another 1 min was required for the sedimentation of the coal particles. The upper turbid pulp containing fine clays was discarded carefully in order to make the pulp clear enough so that the bubble-particle attachment could be visualized. Finally, the conditioned coal particles were transferred to the measuring cell of the induction timer and additional water was added for the induction time measurement. The BPAA kinetics, i.e., BPAA versus time, was used as a complementary approach to investigate the role of clay in coal floatability. A schematic diagram of how BPAA (θ) was measured is shown in Two grams of coal (0.25–0.125 mm) were mixed with 200 mL of Milli-Q water together with 0.4 g of clay in a 5×5×10 cm square container for conditioning for 4 min at 1000 rpm. The upper turbid pulp was discarded after 1 min sedimentation and then fresh water was added. In the BPAA test, the rotor speed of the magnetic stirrer was 250 rpm. The bubble detaches from the syringe if the speed were too high. The bubble images were recorded after 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, 120, 160, and 200 s, respectively. MB-Ruler software was used to measure the BPAA. Compared with those of the induction timer experiment, the experimental conditions in the BPAA test are much closer to practical flotation since more hydrodynamics are involved. The effect of kaolinite and montmorillonite on the induction time of a coal sample is shown in The variations in BPAA with time in different systems are shown in Using flotation kinetics [ Fine coal flotation experiments were carried out using an XFDIII0.5 dm The effect of different types of clay, kaolinite and montmorillonite, on the floatability of coal in de-ionized water was studied based on induction time and BPAA kinetics. In this study, it was found that the presence of montmorillonite had a negative effect on coal floatability in de-ionized water; this was not the case with kaolinite. Both flotation recovery and BPAA kinetics decreased while induction time increased in the presence of montmorillonite. Hydrophilic montmorillonite coating occurred during the conditioning stage. These hydrophilic sites on the coal surface prevent the thinning-rupture of the water film between bubble and coal particles, thus decreasing floatability and recovery. Further investigations are needed to study the role of different types of clay in the floatability of coal in saline water. This work was supported by