Our previous studies have revealed that diamines containing one primary amine group exhibit a superior kinetics while retaining their intrinsic high capacities towards CO2 absorption when compared with monoethanolamine. However, these diamine absorbents typically suffer from high regeneration energy due to the inherent structural stability of the formed carbamate species. In an effort to overcome this challenge, we developed a new CO2 sequestration process that integrates the CO2 absorption by a diamine solvent and the diamine regeneration as well as CO2 mineralization by CaO-rich fly ash. Herein, we found that CO2 rich diamine solutions can be chemically regenerated by fly ash with the stable cyclic performance via the CO2 absorption - mineralization experiments, and the CO2 sequestration capacity of the fly ash used in this process dominated the amine regeneration performance. The FT-IR analysis of species in the solution along with the characterizations of fly ash via SEM, EDX and XRD revealed that fly ash was effective to regenerate a diamine - 1-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-aminopiperidine (C4) by deprotonation of C4H+, meanwhile, the CaO component in fly ash can react with CO2 in the C4 solution to produce the calcium carbonate precipitate. This approach presents a significant energy saving alternative to the traditional CO2 desorption process.Carbon capture and sequestration (CCS), in which CO Recently, the integrated absorption-mineralization (IAM) process which combines amine scrubbing and mineral carbonation is gaining increasing attention for CO Compared to the CO In this work, we sought to confirm the technical feasibility of the diamine based IAM process, and gain further insights into their underlying mechanism. To this end, we firstly performed the chemical regeneration experiments of four different diamines using fly ash with their molecular structures shown in  A series of 2 M diamine solutions with a CO The procedures of the parameter experiments for the fly ash triggered C4 regeneration were the same as those described above. 100 ml of CO The CO FT-IR spectroscopy (VERTEX 70, Bruker Co. Ltd.) was used to analyse the structural changes of speciation in the fly ash based C4 regeneration system. A series of 2 M rich C4 solutions (initial CO Morphological investigations of fresh and carbonated fly-ash samples were performed using SEM (JSM-4500, JEOL). The distributions of elements on the surface of the fresh and carbonated fly ash were determined using EDX spectroscopy equipped to the SEM. XRD (Bruker D8) was employed to analyse the crystalline phases present in fresh and carbonated fly ash samples. Our prior study has demonstrated that the CaO-rich fly ash is able to realize the regeneration of MEA [ Since the IAM process is targeted to practical application, it's necessary to evaluate the process cyclic stability. The C4-based IAM process also presents a high energy-saving technology for CO To gain insights into the reaction mechanism involved in IAM process, FT-IR spectroscopy was employed to identify the major speciation within the fly ash triggered C4 regeneration system. Given that the IAM process for CO The C4 amine regeneration performance was suspected to be dominant by the fly ash used in this IAM process, since the reactive components in fly ash should be responsible for the C4 amine regeneration. As such, the investigation of the fly ash dosage on C4 amine regeneration was important, because it was directly related to the amount of reactive components in fly ash can be involved in the amine regeneration. As shown in Subsequently, the investigation of four different fly ashes for C4 amine regeneration in this IAM process was performed. As shown in To further explore the underlying mechanisms for the fly ash triggered C4 regeneration, SEM analysis was used to study the morphological changes when the fresh fly ash was carbonated. As shown in The changes in the mineral phases of fly ash before and after carbonation were analysed by XRD, and the results are shown in The present work developed a new IAM process which integrated a diamine-based CO None. The authors wish to acknowledge financial assistance provided through