 Obtain adequate imaging to map out the fracture configuration. Carefully trace the location of the neurovascular structures and plan fixation and portals to protect these structures during all steps, adding retractors when necessary. Displaced fragments may be “pinned” with a Kirschner wire under fluoroscopy prior to beginning the arthroscopy, both to better control the fragment as well as minimize swelling. Prior to beginning the surgery, set up the “back table” in the sequence in which you plan to perform the surgery. Placing a list of steps on the wall for all to see, and careful review of these steps with your surgical team prior to initiation of the procedure, is an invaluable way to maintain efficiency. Always maintain a knowledge and protection of the neurovascular structures. If the anatomy becomes distorted, plan to open the elbow to protect these structures. Check all fixations, both arthroscopically and fluoroscopically, at each step. Set a time limit after which you either terminate the procedure or switch to open surgery. As with many joint advances in technology and skills, collaborations have fueled major advancements in elbow arthroscopy indications and techniques. These advances have been noted in multiple case reports and by anecdotal evidence. However, the evidence via randomized control trials of the effectiveness of elbow arthroscopy has been lacking, with most reports detailing level 4 or 5 evidence. Elbow arthroscopy has made great advances since the Andrews and Carson article in 1985. This chapter aims to highlight current advanced arthroscopic techniques in the elbow, as well as possible future procedures on the horizon. As with most orthopedic conditions, the indications for surgery are pain and functional impairment despite appropriate nonoperative treatment. Certain acute injuries will require acute repair. The arthroscopic techniques and postoperative rehabilitation will be presented in each section. Triceps tendon ruptures ( Most patients with this injury will experience pain or a “pop” with press-type activities. This may occur during push-ups, chest presses, or most commonly during the bench press when the weight lifter loses control of the bar. Partial tears may begin with these activities, as well as during dips or overhead triceps extensions. Physical examination begins with observation for swelling and ecchymosis posterior in the elbow. A palpable gap in the extensor mechanism can often be detected in both partial and complete tears. Patients with complete tears may have a complete loss of the ability to extend the elbow against gravity, whereas those with partial or degenerative tears may retain elbow extension in a weakened, painful state. In patients with subtle tears, trying to extend the elbow from a fully flexed position reproduces pain directly over the site of the injury (i.e., during the triceps stress test). Radiographs may show a small avulsion fracture off the tip of the olecranon. Diagnosis can be confirmed with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which may be helpful in cases of partial tears. An arthroscopic triceps repair has previously been described by Savoie et al. The initial posterior portal is a posterior central portal, located approximately 3 cm proximal to the tip of the olecranon. Care must be taken not to stray medial to midline for all posterior portals for risk of damage to the ulnar nerve. Normally a transtendon portal, in most triceps avulsions this portal actually goes through the tear. Next, a posterior lateral portal is established along the lateral border of the triceps tendon. The torn triceps tendon is visualized. The arthroscope is moved to the posterior lateral portal and the shaver is placed in the posterior central portal. The tip of the olecranon is debrided through this portal, as is the torn edge of the tendon. A central olecranon bursa portal is then established and a double-loaded suture anchor is inserted into the tip of the olecranon. The anchor is angled toward the coronoid to avoid inadvertent penetration of the articular surface. A retrograde suture retriever is placed percutaneously though the medial and lateral aspects of the proximal triceps tendon, retrieving the sutures from the anchor. Two mattress sutures are usually required to capture the tendon and complete the proximal part of the repair. After subcutaneous retrieval, they are tied with a sliding knot. This secures the proximal part of the tendon to the tip of the olecranon and seals the joint. The arthroscope is then placed directly into the olecranon bursa portal. The previous sutures can be left long and retrieved through the bursa portal. Crossing the sutures and incorporating them into a second knotless suture anchor more distal down the ulna creates a suture bridge construct that compresses the tendon down to the bone. In a similar fashion, the first sutures can be cut, a second anchor placed more distally in the ulna, and the distal end of the triceps tendon can be tied down with simple sutures through the second anchor. Postoperatively, the patient is placed into an anterior splint with the elbow in full extension. At the first postoperative visit, the patient goes into a hinged elbow brace, locked from full extension to 30 degrees of flexion. The flexion is increased 10 degrees per week until a full range of motion is obtained at 6 to 8 weeks postoperative, at which time the elbow brace is discontinued. Resistive exercises are initiated at 12 weeks postoperative, with return to lifting and sports activities at 4 to 6 months. In a series submitted for publication, Brown et al. reviewed 10 patients with complete tears of the distal triceps (two cases were revision of failed open repair) with the tendon managed arthroscopically. In four patients, the screw-in absorbable anchors were attempted as the initial fixation and all four anchors fractured due to the hardness of the bone in these active patients. We currently use tap-in anchors, but we would suggest nonabsorbable anchors for their increased strength. Fractures about the elbow ( As with most fractures, the history will often include a traumatic injury such as a fall, sporting injury, or motor vehicle accident. The examination begins with close inspection of the involved extremity, looking for open wounds or punctate bleeding. Gentle palpation can localize pain, and crepitus of fracture fragments may be present. Gentle range of motion may reveal a block to forearm rotation or elbow flexion and extension. Pain and apprehension will likely limit the exam. Care must be taken to perform a careful neurologic examination in the case of any fracture or dislocation. The shoulder and wrist should routinely be examined. Routine radiographs of the elbow will diagnose most fractures. A computed tomography (CT) scan may be helpful to identify fracture fragments, to measure the size of the fragments, and to view the residual intact bone in order to predetermine screw size ( Simple fractures such as condylar fractures with one fracture line, capitellar shear fractures, radial head fractures with one or two fragments, and large coronoid fractures can be managed very well arthroscopically. Initially the arthroscope is usually placed in a proximal anterior medial portal to allow visualization of the lateral structures. Upon entrance into the elbow joint, abundant hematoma is encountered. A shaver placed in a proximal anterior lateral portal can be used to evacuate this hematoma and visualize the fracture line. During the initial debridement, limited use of suction is advised as tearing in the capsule and overlying brachialis may place the radial nerve in close proximity. The tip of the shaver may be used like a probe to manipulate the fracture fragments. For radial head fractures (see Rolla et al. reported preliminary results for six patients who underwent arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation for radial head fractures. In the case of condylar fractures of the distal humerus (see There are no available series of unicondylar fractures managed arthroscopically. In our very limited series, all five patients healed the fracture within 4 weeks and recovered full motion and resumed normal activity within 12 weeks. None has required screw removal. Operative intervention for coronoid process fractures is recommended for Regan and Morrey Type III fractures Adams et al. reported their experience with arthroscopically assisted reduction and fixation with four Type II and three Type III coronoid fractures. Tears of the distal biceps brachii tendon usually occur during forceful activity and produce a memorable event. The diagnosis is made clinically with history and physical exam. The tear occurs during eccentric contraction of the biceps muscle, such as lifting a heavy object or moving furniture. The patient will report feeling a “pop,” immediate searing pain in the antecubital fossa and forearm, and developing ecchymosis over the ensuing several days. Typically, the pain markedly improves after several days. Inspection of the involved extremity will reveal ecchymosis in the antecubital fossa. A noticeable defect with proximal migration of the biceps muscle belly may or may not be noticeable, as the torn tendon may still be held in position by the lacertus fibrosus. Palpation of the anterior elbow from lateral to medial may reveal an absence of the distal biceps tendon, producing a positive hook test. Range of motion will often be normal. Strength testing will often reveal deficits in resisted supination when compared to the contralateral extremity. The diagnosis is confirmed on MRI. Placing the arm in the flexed abducted supinated (FABS) position, as described by Giuffre and Moss, Endoscopic investigation of the distal biceps tendon attachment provides dynamic assessment of the partially torn tendon through a range of motion. Viewing of the tendon through the insufflated bicipitoradial bursa provides a clear magnified view of the pathology by means of a minimally invasive procedure. Endoscopy of the bicipitoradial bursa is performed with the patient under general or regional anesthesia with the arm in the extended supinated position. A 2.5-cm longitudinal incision is made over the palpable biceps tendon 2 cm distal to the elbow crease. The lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm is identified and protected. The distal biceps tendon and its bursa are identified with blunt finger dissection. The bursa is insufflated with 7 mL to 10 mL of normal saline. A small entry point for the arthroscope is made on the radial side of the bursa at the apex. The tendons are identifiable in this field of view and can be followed distally to the insertion on the radial tuberosity. The tendons can be viewed dynamically with forearm rotation or with traction applied to the biceps tendon. Careful inspection of the tendon can determine the extent, or percentage, of tendon damage. Tears involving less than 50% of the tendon can be debrided with a motorized shaver through the same portal. A full-radius shaver without suction should be utilized. Tears involving greater than 50% of the tendon can be completely repaired. A hooked electrocautery probe can complete the tear. The incision can then be extended to perform an open repair through a small incision into the radial tuberosity using an Endobutton, interference screw, or suture anchors. Sharma and MacKay described an endoscopic technique for repair of complete tears using an Endobutton technique. Postoperatively, range of motion begins early. For tendon debridement, immediate range of motion is initiated, and full activities with resistive exercises can resume at 3 to 4 weeks. For tendon repair, immediate range of motion is initiated with light activities beginning at 4 to 6 weeks. Strengthening can begin at 12 weeks postoperative. Injury to the lateral collateral ligamentous complex of the elbow can cause severe dysfunction with activities of daily living. Unlike damage to the medial ulnar collateral ligament, with pain and instability only exacerbated by athletic activities, insufficiency of the radial ulnohumeral ligament (RUHL) makes even the most mundane activities difficult. Pushing up from a chair, shaking hands, or opening a door can cause pain and instability. The recognition and treatment of posterolateral rotatory instability (PLRI) of the elbow have grown since the original description by O'Driscoll et al. Patients will complain of lateral-sided elbow pain and popping during activities. They often report feeling a “clunk” or a “pop” when pushing off a surface or arising from a chair. This sensation can be reproduced on physical exam by asking the patient to push up from a chair with the hands fully supinated on the armrests (i.e., “the chair test”). Lateral instability may best be demonstrated clinically with the pivot shift test of the elbow. First described by O'Driscoll et al. Diagnostic imaging begins with routine radiographs. Radiographs may reveal an avulsion off of the posterior humeral lateral epicondyle in acute cases. Stress radiographs or fluoroscopic images while performing a pivot shift test may show the radial head and proximal ulna moving together in a subluxated and posterolaterally rotated position. MRI of the elbow can identify a lesion in the RUHL, especially with the addition of intraarticular contrast. The surgical treatment of posterolateral instability may be divided into distinct subgroups based on cause: acute dislocations, recurrent dislocations, and PLRI. The procedures used may also be divided into subgroups based on available tissue at the time of reconstruction: repair of ligamentous avulsion, plications of the RUHL complex with or without repair to bone, and tendon graft reconstruction. The anatomic injury pattern associated with acute and recurrent dislocations is avulsion of the RUHL, usually off the humeral attachment. Dislocations usually respond to nonoperative management. The most common complication of nonoperative management of acutely dislocated elbows is stiffness, not recurrent instability. However, several subsets of patients may benefit from operative intervention: patients with a humeral avulsion fracture seen on radiographs, patients requiring a high level of function, professional athletes, patients with damage to multiple areas of the joint, and patients with recurrent instability who have failed nonoperative management of an elbow dislocation. These patients may be candidates for an arthroscopic repair of the RUHL ( The procedure begins with the establishment of a proximal anterior medial portal for the arthroscope and diagnostic arthroscopy of the anterior compartment. Abundant hematoma will be encountered in the acute setting and may be removed with a shaver from a proximal anterior lateral portal. Tears in the anterior capsule and brachialis will be identified. Associated fractures of the coronoid, radial head, and distal humerus may also be encountered. The annular ligament should be inspected for laxity as it courses around the radial head. The forearm can be rotated to perform an arthroscopic evaluation of posterolateral rotatory instability as the forearm fully supinates. The arthroscope is placed in the posterior central portal, 3 cm proximal to the tip of the olecranon. Hematoma in the posterior compartment can be evacuated with a shaver placed in the proximal posterolateral portal. The medial gutter is evaluated for tears in the capsule, as well as for loose bodies. The arthroscope is then advanced down the posterolateral gutter. The lateral gutter is debrided and cleared of hematoma, taking care to remain close to the ulna and avoid damage to the torn RUHL. As the arthroscope is advanced down the lateral gutter, the lateral aspect of the capitellum can be seen, along with the site of origin of the anterior part of the RUHL complex. A double-loaded anchor is placed into this site and the sutures retrieved one at a time through the noninjured part of the lateral collateral portion of the RUHL complex. In the situation of a bony avulsion, one set is placed around the fracture fragment and the other set distal to the fracture fragment. A second anchor is placed into the humerus more proximally and the second set of sutures retrieved through the RUHL component. Sutures are retrieved either over or under the anconeus and tied from distal to proximal. As the sutures are tensioned with the arthroscope viewing from the lateral gutter, they should have the effect of pushing the arthroscope proximally up and out of the gutter. The arthroscope is then replaced anteriorly to confirm anatomic restoration of the annular ligament and elimination of the instability. In initial reports, it was recommended that the sutures be tied with the elbow extended, but current fixation techniques are sufficient enough to make the current recommendation to tension the sutures in 60 to 90 degrees of flexion and full pronation. Postoperatively, patients are placed into a posterior splint with the elbow flexed to between 60 and 70 degrees. Fluoroscopic images can confirm reduction in the splint and the elbow can be further flexed as needed to maintain reduction. At the first postoperative visit 5 to 7 days after surgery, the splint is removed and the patient is placed into a hinged elbow brace that allows comfortable movement from 60 to 90 degrees. Motion is increased within the brace to a pain-free range over the next 6 weeks as the ligament heals and matures. The hinged elbow brace is discontinued at 6 to 8 weeks postoperative, at which time full range of motion should be restored and more aggressive exercises and strengthening can progress with physical therapy. Dzugen et al. reported on a series of seven patients managed by this technique, with greater than 90% of patients remaining stable at a minimum of 2 years. Arthritis of the elbow joint can be a very debilitating condition, especially when it occurs in young adults. Arthroscopic debridement and management of the arthritic elbow has its own chapter in this text, as do the various indications for interposition arthroplasty and total elbow replacement (TEA). Total elbow arthroplasty remains the gold standard for pain relief and restoration of function, but it is not without its limitations in young, active patients. In some cases, interposition arthroplasty (discussed elsewhere in this text) may provide an improvement in function without the limitations or revision rate of TEA. Arthroscopic interposition arthroplasty can be performed on the radial side of the joint, allowing reshaping and resurfacing in select cases. In these cases, the capitellum can be reshaped by adding bone plugs and then a biologic graft shuttled to its anterior attachment through an anterior cannula, tying the anterior part into the radial fossa. The posterior aspect of the graft is then retrieved out of the posterior soft spot portal and attached to an anchor in the humerus above the capitellum to secure the graft ( Arthroscopic management of the stiff elbow has progressed to be the treatment of choice in most cases of nonarthritic elbow stiffness. The ankylosed elbow with arthrofibrosis is a difficult, painful situation, often with severe functional impairment. Arthroscopy or arthroscopically assisted techniques in the right hands have been shown to be at least as good, if not better, than similar open procedures. The key in open, arthroscopic, or combined procedures is the identification, protection, and when necessary release or transposition of the affected nerve. Loss of motion producing pain and/or functional impairment is the only indication for surgery. Ulnar nerve exploration is indicated in cases in which the nerve cannot be palpated or is encased in scar. A relative indication for ulnar nerve exploration is an arc of motion of less than 30 degrees and flexion of less than 90 degrees. The remainder of the etiology, anatomic considerations, and indications for treatment are well discussed in other chapters in this text. The patient is set up in the prone or lateral decubitus position. If necessary a small medial incision is made first to locate and protect the ulnar nerve. Proximal anteromedial and proximal anterolateral portals are established first, and the joint is visualized. If the anterior scarring is severe, the two portals may be interconnected above the joint between the brachialis and the humerus. A side effect cautery can be used to resect the scar tissue off the humerus until the articular cartilage is visualized, beginning on the medial side and extending septum to septum. Standard anterolateral and anteromedial portals are utilized for retractors to protect the brachialis and neurovascular structures while the fibrotic anterior capsule is completely excised. The posterior compartment is then entered with standard posterior central and posterior lateral portals. The triceps is completely elevated off the humerus and all scar tissue in the fossa excised. A retractor is used to protect the ulnar nerve if it has not been already exposed, and the tissue in the medial gutter scarring is resected. The lateral gutter, posterolateral plica, and additional adhesions are also resected. Motion is then checked for complete restoration of flexion and extension. Drains are inserted via the anterior and posterior portals and the patient started on continuous passive motion (CPM) in the recovery room. Regional anesthesia, if not done prior to surgery, can be placed after the neurovascular check in the recovery room to facilitate rehabilitation. Cryocompression also starts in the recovery room and continues at least once daily for 3 months. The patient is discharged to home the day after surgery with daily physical and/or occupational therapy, CPM, cryocompression, and analgesic medication. Static bracing to increase the end range of motion is also utilized. Reports by Bionna et al., Injury to the radial nerve, median nerve, and brachial artery, as well as both acute and tardy ulnar nerve lesions, has been reported. The field of elbow arthroscopy has advanced greatly in the past 25 years. Innovative arthroscopists continue to expand indications and develop new surgical techniques, enlarging the boundaries of its use. Procedures such as the fixation of fractures and ligamentous avulsions are now being performed arthroscopically with increasing frequency. It is not difficult to imagine that in the not-so-distant future additional surgeries will be performed with arthroscopic assistance, such as arthroscopic interposition arthroplasty for the ulnohumeral joint, prosthetic arthroplasty, and ligamentous repairs on the medial side of the elbow. The creative and intelligent minds of current arthroscopic surgeons will continue to push the envelope and develop new operative techniques until the elbow arthroscopy of the future becomes reality.