Different epidemiological studies show the relationship between osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, and cardiovascular-related mortality. Previously considered as age-related but independent diseases, this review reports emerging data showing the common mechanism of both conditions. The relationship between bone-related proteins such as osteocalcin and osteoprotegerin and vascular disease is of special interest. In addition, recent data suggest the influence of bone metabolism on energy balance which may be relevant for cardiovascular disease.The relationship between osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, and mortality associated to the latter has previously been reported. The relationship between low bone mass, fractures, and cardiovascular mortality is well documented. Females with a low bone mass have increased cardiovascular mortality ranging from 22% to 40% per each decrease by one standard deviation (SD) in bone mineral density (BMD), Similarly, bone mass is decreased in patients with cardiovascular disease regardless of age, There is also a relationship between atherosclerosis markers and bone disease. Thus, most cross-sectional studies have reported an inverse association between the presence, severity, and progression of calcification at abdominal aorta and bone mass at lumbar and femoral level in both post-menopausal females It has been known for some time that these two conditions share risk factors that could account for the association between them. Such factors include age, estrogen depletion, a sedentary lifestyle, alcohol consumption, smoking, and dietary factors such as calcium intake, consumption of saturated fatty acids, and deficient vitamin C and K levels. There has been in recent years a great interest in research of the common factors and mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of both conditions ( Obesity is a clear risk factor for development of cardiovascular disease. Adipose tissue is currently considered as a metabolically active tissue, and study of the effect of various cytokines secreted by adipose tissue on bone and vascular system has become relevant in recent years. Leptin, an adipokine that is increased in patients with obesity, has a dual effect because it slows bone formation at hypothalamic level by inhibiting osteoblast formation, and also stimulates formation by a direct effect upon bone cells. This is undoubtedly the field where the greatest advances have recently been made in understanding of the common pathophysiological mechanisms shared by vascular pathology and bone remodeling. Different proteins produced by bone cells, such as osteocalcin (OC), osteopontin, osteoprotegerin (OPG), receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-β ligand (RANKL), and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are found in atherosclerotic lesions. Influence of these factors in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease has been demonstrated through studies in animal models. Knockout mice for bone matrix GIa protein (MGP), a protein widely distributed in tissue including bone and vascular wall, experience severe vascular calcification. This protein has therefore been attributed an inhibitory effect of arterial calcification. In humans, the known relationship between low levels of bone remodeling markers and severity of atherosclerosis has recently been extended. Thus, OC secretion is parallel to MGP secretion in both normal vessels and atherosclerotic plaques, Recent studies show the influence exerted by bone cells upon energy metabolism and glucose homeostasis, factors which have both potential impact on the cardiovascular system. In experimental animals, OC increases insulin release and sensitivity, decreases visceral fat, and increases energy expenditure. Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is a protein from the TNF (tumor necrosis factor) family that regulates the osteoclastogenesis process through inhibition of RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa β. The OPG/RANKL system is a critical factor that determines the degree of osteoblast activation and, thus, the degree of bone destruction. OPG is secreted by osteoblasts or bone-forming cells, and also by vascular cells, including endothelial cells and muscle cells in coronary arteries ( In coronary artery disease, elevated plasma OPG levels are associated to disease presence and severity. OPG has also been related to markers of subclinical atherosclerosis such as carotid IMT (intima-media thickness). In post-menopausal women with no cardiovascular disease, high OPG levels are positively related to endothelial dysfunction, arterial rigidity, and IMT. OPG is increased in T2DM patients of both sexes as compared to controls with no diabetes mellitus, and its value as a mortality predictor appears to be even more important in this patient group than in the non-diabetic population. As regards vascular complications in diabetic patients, high OPG levels have been related to an increased risk of silent myocardial ischemia While This pathway consists of 19 soluble glycoproteins having a critical role in regulation of osteoblast development and, thus, of the bone formation process. These proteins bind to two receptors, LRP-5 and LRP-6, starting signaling of nuclear factors involved in bone formation. This signaling pathway is also involved in regulation of vascular calcification and in differentiation of smooth muscle cells into osteoblasts. Cbfa1 (core-binding factor a1) and Runx2 (Runt-related transcriptional factor-2) are two factors that induce differentiation of bone-forming cells, osteoblasts, and participate in the mineralization process. Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF 23) is a 251-amino acid protein secreted by osteocytes (cells immersed in bone matrix) which has a significant role in mineral metabolism. FGF 23 has a particularly significant role in renal physiology. Its levels already increase from the early stages of renal failure, and has therefore been implicated in both normal physiology and changes of phosphorus and calcium metabolism characteristic of renal failure. There is ample evidence for the role of vitamin D in pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. Low vitamin D levels have been shown to be an independent risk factor for development of arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, heart failure, stroke, peripheral artery disease, ischemic heart disease, and mortality associated to these conditions. Several authors have examined the association of plasma lipid levels to BMD and presence of fracture with conflicting results. More consistent results have been found with regard to statin influence on bone metabolism. Statins stimulated bone formation in Although is has not been fully elucidated whether arterial hypertension is a risk factor for low bone mass and/or fractures, the influence of different antihypertensive drugs on bone metabolism has widely been studied. Thus, thiazides decrease urinary calcium excretion and have been shown to prevent bone mass loss in post-menopausal women. Angiotensin II stimulates bone loss by inducing increased RANKL levels, and treatment with ARBs (olmesartan) inhibits this effect. Finally, beta-blockers exert an effect upon bone remodeling through the sympathetic nervous system. A large, prospective population study showed these drugs to decrease risk of fracture, Several studies suggest that bisphosphonates have an antiatherogenic action by a direct mechanism on the vascular wall, and also by their indirect effects upon other cardiovascular risk factors. Significant advances have been made in recent years in the already known epidemiological relationship between osteoporosis, fractures, and cardiovascular disease. Thus, the relationship existing between bone cells and vascular system is increasingly recognized. Advances have also been made in understanding of the influence of proven cardiovascular risk factors, such as obesity and dyslipidemia, on bone metabolism. Finally, different studies have shown the effect of drugs widely used for bone conditions, such as bisphosphonates, on the vascular system, as well as the influence of statins and antihypertensive drugs on bone mass and risk of fractures. An improved understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms common to both conditions may contribute to future development of drugs active upon bone metabolism and cardiovascular disease. The authors state that they have no conflicts of interest.