The disposal of aluminum bearing dust can cause heat and gases, as well as the potential generation of leachate from landfills. In this research, we suggested a two-step process - leaching and precipitation - for recovering gibbsite from secondary aluminum production dust. First, a sodium aluminate solution, containing about 20 g/L of aluminum, was prepared using 1 M of sodium hydroxide leaching. Precipitation of the gibbsite was then conducted for 30 min after a pH adjustment. As the results indicate, the overall aluminum recovery rate was about 87% by weight after leaching and precipitation, and the major component of the precipitate was Al(OH)3 based on an X-ray diffraction(XRD) analysis.The main benefit of secondary aluminum production is its low energy consumption compared to the primary aluminum production ( This study mainly focused on a two-step process for the recovery of aluminum as gibbsite. Based on our preliminary research, a 1 M sodium hydroxide solution can dissolve more than 80% of aluminum after 10 min of leaching at 60 °C ( For the precipitation test, 50 mL of the sodium aluminate solution was transferred to a 100 mL size beaker. Then, 1 M of nitric acid was added in a dropwise manner while monitoring the pH of the solution. Precipitation was applied for 30 min after the pH adjustment to 10.5, and a rotating magnetic stir bar was used to mix the solution at 500 rpm. After 30 min of precipitation, the precipitates were vacuum filtered and rinsed with DI water three times. The filtered precipitates were dried for 12 h in a drying oven at 80 °C. The chemical phases of the dried precipitates were analyzed through X-ray diffraction (XRD). The chemical composition of the solution after precipitation was also analyzed using ICP for the mass balance during precipitation. Chemical equilibrium software, VisualMINTEQ, was utilized to obtain a speciation diagram. As-received secondary aluminum production dust, which had a large number of aluminum metal pieces, was used to prepare a concentrated sodium aluminate solution. The reaction equation between aluminum and the sodium hydroxide solution is as follows: The exothermic reaction between aluminum and sodium hydroxide spontaneously increases the temperature of the leach solution, and thus we obtained approximately 90% of aluminum dissolution within 20 min, as shown in An aluminum speciation diagram was plotted using the chemical equilibrium software, VisualMINTEQ, as shown in For the gibbsite precipitation, the pH of the leach solution was changed from 12.6 to 10.5 by adding 1 M of nitric acid in a dropwise manner. In this research, aluminum in secondary aluminum production dust was recovered as gibbsite using leaching and precipitation methods. Approximately 92% of the aluminum was selectively dissolved using 1 M of sodium hydroxide after 1 h of leaching. An aluminum speciation diagram shows that Al(OH) This work was supported by the Center for Resource Recovery and Recycling (CR