Objective
                  In the treatment of proximal humeral fractures, the decision between open fixation and arthroplasty is often difficult. Applicable radiographic prognostic factors would be useful. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the influence of calcar comminution on the clinical and radiologic outcome after locking plate fixation of these fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  In patients with proximal humeral fractures that were treated by locking plate fixation, fracture morphology and the presence of comminution of the calcar were documented on preoperative radiographs. Follow-up for at least 2 years with radiologic assessment and functional outcome measurements including Constant score, subjective shoulder value (SSV), disabilities of the arm, shoulder and hand score (DASH), visual analogue scale (VAS) and short form (SF)-36 was performed.
               
                  Results
                  Follow-up examination (50.8±20.6 months) was possible in 74 patients (46 female, 28 male, age 63.0±15.9 years). Mean absolute Constant score (CS abs), CS adapted to age and gender (CS adap), DASH, SSV and VAS were 72.4±14.5, 85.2±17.3%, 15.7±17.3, 80.3±19.6% and 2.1±2.2. Nonunion was present in 1.3%, cut-out in 5.4% and implant failure in 1.3%. Avascular necrosis (AVN) was seen in 12.2%, in three cases >24 months after the initial trauma. In the presence of calcar comminution, the clinical outcome (CS abs, CS adap, SSV and several parameters of SF-36) was significantly impaired, the odds ratio for these patients to have an absolute CS<65 was 4.4 (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.4–13.7).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The treatment of proximal humeral fractures with locking plate fixation achieves good clinical mid-term results. Calcar comminution is a relevant and easy-to-detect prognostic factor for the functional and subjective outcome in these fractures.As a reason of demographic changes, the absolute number of fractures of the proximal humerus – especially in women – will be increasing. By combining axial and angular stability, locking plate fixation provides increased osseous anchorage and higher failure loads. However, in fractures with comminution in the area of the medial surgical neck (calcar), these techniques may be technically demanding or even be prone to fail. In selected cases, the use of an intramedullar graft may be an alternative. Thus, restoring the medial support by surgical fixation and thereby achieving indispensable pre-conditions for a good clinical outcome may be difficult in patients with a destroyed calcar. As the decision between conservative and operative or between open fixation and arthroplasty is always difficult in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures, it would be important to know about the influence of calcar comminution on the clinical outcome of these patients. Thus, the purpose of the underlying study was to investigate the clinical and radiologic mid-term outcome of patients with proximal humeral fractures after locking plate fixation with a special focus on the presence of calcar comminution. The study was approved by the institutional review board (Kantonale Ethikkommission Zürich, Ref. No. 871) and written informed consent was received by all patients enrolled. All patients with fractures of the proximal humerus that were treated by Philos (Philos, Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) plate fixation in a trauma centre of maximum care between December 2001 and October 2008 were retrospectively identified. Patients aged 16 or older with a follow-up of at least 24 months and complete pre- and postoperative imaging were included. Exclusion criteria were severe dementia, rheumatoid arthritis, any pretraumatic neurological deficit and the presence of bone metastases. On post-traumatic true antero-posterior (AP) and Neer view radiographs or on rendered computed tomography (CT) scans, fracture morphology was classified in two-, three- and four-part fractures according to Neer. The indication for surgery was evidence of displacement of >1 All patients were followed up for at least 24 months and the occurrence of postoperative complications, neurological deficits or the need for secondary interventions was recorded. Patients were examined for range of motion and tested for clinical signs of a rotator cuff lesion or impingement. The limitations of daily activities and quality of life were evaluated by the Constant score (CS abs), the Constant score adapted to age and gender (CS adap), Strength of lateral elevation in Jobe position for the Constant score was measured using a dynamometer (FORCE GAUGE FB-50K, IMADA, Aichi-ken, Japan) and the mean of three measures determined. Radiologically, nonunion, avascular necrosis (AVN) and implant cut-out or failure were documented on AP and Neer radiographs. AVN was defined as a collapse of the humeral head with unrounding of the articular surface, and cut-out was determined as penetration of the humeral head screws into the joint cavity in the absence of AVN. All data were entered in an Excel database (Microsoft Corp., Washington, DC, USA) and exported to Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) 18.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) for statistical analysis. Data are expressed as mean One hundred and twenty-five patients with proximal humeral fractures were treated by Philos plate fixation and met the inclusion criteria (80 female, 45 male; age at day of surgery 60.2 Therefore, follow-up examination was possible in 74 patients (46 female and 28 male). Age at day of surgery was 58.7 Two patients had persisting paraesthesia of the affected arm that could not be associated to a distinct dermatome or peripheral innervation area. Motor deficits were not observed. Mean flexion was 154 Nonunion was present in one patient (1.3%). Cut-out of the proximal screws occurred in four cases (5.4%), and in one patient (1.3%) the implant broke 7 months after fracture fixation. AVN was seen in nine patients (12.2%), in three cases (4%) this led to revision surgery. Of the remaining six patients with AVN, three had an absolute Constant score Revision surgery was necessary in 14 patients (18.9%; Fracture morphology according to Neer's classification had no influence on the parameters of clinical outcome ( Four patients (5.4%) underwent plate removal due to implant-related impingement. At long-term follow-up, clinical signs of impingement were still seen in 10 patients (13.5%) and impingement was explained by too proximal plate position in only one patient. However, six of these patients had an Acromion Index Impingement was significantly associated with the presence of calcar comminution (calcar comminution: 7/24 patients, calcar intact: 3/50 patients; No significant relationship between calcar comminution and the need for revision surgery ( The purpose of the present study was to investigate the clinical and radiologic mid-term outcome of patients with proximal humeral fractures after locking plate fixation with a special focus on the presence of calcar comminution. Our results indicate that this treatment achieves good functional results after a follow-up of mean more than 4 years, even though complications needing revision were still 18.9%. In particular, it was shown that the presence of calcar comminution has remarkable impact on the clinical outcome. Patients with at least one intermediate fragment in the calcar area had an odds ratio of 4.4 for having an absolute Constant score The observed postoperative and short-term complications were comparable to those in the literature. Cut-out rates between 0% and 25% AVN developed in 12.2% of the patients of the present study. Considering the data available in the literature (1.8–8% This might explain the rather frequent need for revision surgery in our study (18.9%) compared to 3.7–24.7% reported in previous trials. The same accounts for the prevalence of calcar comminution observed. In our study population, functional outcomes as well as quality of life were significantly worse at follow-up more than 4 years postoperatively in those patients who showed calcar comminution on their post-traumatic radiographs. The three commonly described prognostic factors for impaired clinical outcome in proximal humeral fractures are age, bone quality and fracture morphology. Fracture morphology is usually described by either Neer's It was shown that calcar comminution was associated with impingement. One reason for this could be a loss of reduction towards varus deformity with consecutive medialisation of the tubercula due to missing medial support. Eventually, calcar comminution might imply all four: impairment of the local vascularisation, decreased bone quality, higher fracture complexity and loss of reduction due to the absence of medial support. The limitations of our study are mainly related to the combination of a rather long follow-up and a rather elderly patient population. Fixation systems with an anatomical locking plate such as Philos have only been applied in the recent years. Most follow-up trials focus on the complications that occur during the first year. A limitation accompanied with this is the rather low follow-up rate of 59.2%. When comparing age and gender, however, the investigated patients represent a comparable sample of the totally included patients. Proximal humeral fractures for the most part are considered osteoporotic fractures in a population of the elderly. Future research, including prospective trials, may address pathogenesis of the clinical effect of calcar comminution. This may include methods to determine bone quality and assess impairment of the local vascularisation. As calcar comminution is a significant prognostic factor for the clinical outcome in proximal humeral fractures when locking plate fixation is planned, its prognostic value in patients treated with intramedullar implants, additional medial support While the treatment of proximal humeral fractures with locking plate fixation achieves good clinical mid-term results, further studies are required to differentiate the multiple causes of still unsatisfactory complication rates. Calcar comminution is a relevant and easy-to-detect prognostic factor for the functional and subjective outcome in these fractures. Based on our data, patients with calcar comminution should be informed about their potentially inferior clinical results. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.