Chitosan materials that were prepared from different sources of fishery waste were subsequently characterized and the influence of molecular weight (Mw) and degree of deacetylation (DDA) on the chitosan-acetic acid solution viscosity was studied. The Mw of the prepared chitosan was found to influence the viscosity of the solution and, an increase in Mw increases the viscosity of the chitosan acetic acid solution, while the DDA was found not to influence the viscosity of chitosan-acetic solutions. Chitosan solutions with varying concentrations and viscosities, were used to produce chitosan membranes by the phase inversion technique, followed by cross-linking the membranes using glutaraldehyde. The chitosan content of the membranes was found to be only 4–6mol%, and the characterisation results indicated that the membranes could be visualised as consisting of a hydrated polymeric network in which chitosan forms a rigid honeycomb structure. The moisture that was present in the membrane was found to be present as fixed water, integrated with the chitosan that enabled the use of a pressure driving force for the removal of moisture from the membrane. The free water content was subsequently found to be equal to the porosity of the membrane, namely 65% of the total water in the membrane, with 30% of the water being characterised as fixed water. The membrane wet density, pore radius and specific surface area were determined as 1100kgm−3, 40nm, and 1.15×105
                     m2
                     kg−1 respectively. Subsequently, the chitosan membranes were found to be analogous in their transport behaviour to ultrafiltration membranes. The pure water flux of the membranes was found to be in the order of 12Lm−2hr−1bar−1, and the transport of solutes and solvent could be modelled sufficiently at low solute concentrations using a generic membrane model derived from irreversible thermodynamics.Chitosan is a biopolymer material that can be used for the removal heavy metals from wastewater effluents. This aspect makes it an attractive material for water purification applications since it possesses a high affinity for heavy metal species that are present in water and wastewater Several studies of chitosan membranes are mainly focused on the adsorption characteristics of chitosan membranes It has been reported that chitosan from different sources have varying characteristics, and that the viscosity of a chitosan solution is influenced by the chitosan concentration The molecular weight and the DDA of the synthesised chitosan samples were determined using the infrared spectroscopy (IR) method as described by Snyman et at. During preparation of chitosan membranes, the viscosity of the chitosan solutions is of particular importance The process variables for manufacturing chitosan membrane (chitosan-, acetic acid- and sodium hydroxide concentration) were also varied. The membranes were produced using a phase inversion method as described by Kaminski and Modrzejewska To prevent chitosan membrane dissolution in acidic media, the membranes were cross-linked according to the procedure described by Guibal et al. The wet membrane density of the membranes was determined using the method of Kawamura et al. Chitosan membranes are gel-type membranes and are generally classified as being non-porous membranes. However, tiny pores are present on a molecular level in non-porous membranes. The membrane porosity was determined using the method reported by Kawamura et al. The maximum pore radius of the membranes were determined using the Bubble-point method as described by Pellegrin et al. The specific surface area of the dried membrane was determined using the iodine adsorption number as described by Pawlowski Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) analyses were performed according to the description of Osifo and Masala As a result of large amount of water in the specimen, evaporation of water would have caused problems when exposed to the high vacuum of the SEM analysis chamber. Therefore, the sample needed to be dehydrated, which it was done by submerging membrane samples for short periods of time in series of ethanol solutions of which the concentrations were gradually increased. The samples were then further dried in a supercritical CO The samples were then directly mounted onto the sample stub of the SEM instrument using double-sided carbon tape. The specimen was sputter-coated with a gold conductive layer to increase the conductivity. This is necessary to reduce thermal damage, and to increase the electron emission and mechanical stability. The permeability through the membranes was measured for water and solutions with varying heavy metal (Zn(II)) concentrations, prepared from analytical grade ZnSO The pH of the zinc solution was controlled at a pH of 5, using dilute sulphuric acid (from 98% pure supplied by Saarchem Ltd.) and dilute sodium hydroxide (from 97% pure supplied by Saarchem Ltd.) and a Jenway 3310 pH meter. The membrane was clamped in the membrane holder and the zinc solution was allowed to permeate through the membranes at 25 The flux is expressed as the volume flow through the membrane, per unit area and time [Eq. The permeability coefficient related to the transport of molecules can be expressed in various ways, based on the structural properties of the membrane. Chitosan membranes are not exactly similar to “traditional” membranes (membranes in which solutes or particles are rejected due to size exclusion or repulsion), and can be modelled as gel-type membranes Different transport models have been developed to quantify the permeability coefficient ( By disregarding the structural characteristics of the membrane, the transport through the membrane can be described through the laws of irreversible thermodynamics, where the solvent flux, This thermodynamic model therefore contains three model parameters that can be obtained from a fit to the experimental data. For pure water the osmotic pressure, Δπ The transport model equations Eqs. One of the general disadvantages of membrane processes is the occurrence of concentration polarisation. This phenomenon normally results in a significant decline in flux over time, and is more severe for ultra and nano-filtration than in other membrane processes. The process of concentration polarisation can occur when a solution is transported through a membrane and while the solvent freely permeates through the membrane the solute accumulates at the membrane-solution interface. Therefore, the concentration of the solute is larger at the membrane interface than in the bulk solution. This concentration gradient causes a diffusive transport of the solute back to the bulk solution, and under steady state operation this diffusive transport, can in severe cases, equal the convective transport of the solute through the membrane In a case where concentration polarisation completely determines the transport rate, the flux is independent of the pressure difference and is termed the limiting flux (  The DDA and molecular weight results are reported in in The effect of DDA and molecular weight on chitosan solution viscosity is shown in In this work it was further found that in addition to the molecular weight, only changes in the chitosan concentration had a significant influence on the viscosity of the casting solutions, and that the other solution parameters, namely the changes in acetic acid and sodium hydroxide solution concentrations did not affect the viscosity of the casting solutions. The various properties of the resulting membranes are represented as a function of the chitosan concentration used in the 4 It can be seen that the porosity is only a slight function of the chitosan concentration and that its value is between 0.65 and 0.67. It is found that as the chitosan casting solution concentration increases there is a slight decrease in the maximum pore radius (column 5). This could be attributed to the fact that more space is occupied by chitosan macromolecules when the chitosan content increased, resulting in a decreased pore radius. The maximum pore radius was found to be in the range of 40–45 The values of the relationship between the chitosan concentration and the specific surface Milotarea of the membrane on a dry basis is represented column 6, wherein the trend of decreasing specific surface area with increasing chitosan solution concentration correlated with the trend observed with the total porosity (column 4), and the maximum pore radius (column 5). That is, an increase in the chitosan casting solution concentration lead to a lower total porosity and pore radii, which caused the total surface area to also decrease. This effect is somewhat dampened by the increase in the wet membrane density, since the specific surface area changed relatively little between a minimum of 1.175 and a maximum of 1.195 SEM-micrographs of different membranes are shown in From the characterisation results, it was found that the membranes contained a large fraction of water (95–98 A summary of the membrane properties of the chitosan membranes synthesised in this work is given in The pure water permeation ( From the results presented in The solute permeability (ω) and the reflection coefficient (σ) was determined by performing flux measurements at varying pressures using a salt solution. By measuring the solvent flux ( The results presented in Experiments with higher solute concentrations, where the volumetric flow rate of the solvent was determined as a function of the pressure difference, while also varying the solute concentrations, were also performed. The solvent flux was modelled using the thermodynamic model given by in Eqs. It can be deduced from The limiting flux depends on the concentration in the bulk of the feed (c In addition, the solute permeability was measured as a function of the applied transmembrane pressure for varying solute concentrations, of which the results are shown in The effect of membrane thickness on the solvent flux using a 50 As is clear from the results presented in A zinc salt solution, containing 500 At low pH, the osmotic pressure of the solution is relatively high compared to the applied membrane pressure difference (40 A zinc salt solution, containing 500 It was found that the chitosan-acetic acid solution viscosity is an important parameter in the manufacture of mechanically strong chitosan membranes that exhibit desirable transport and adsorption characteristics. The molecular weight of the chitosan specimen was also found to influence the viscosity of the chitosan-acetic acid casting solution, where a higher viscosity of the chitosan-acetic acid solution was obtained at higher molecular weights. The effect of the degree of deacetylation on the viscosity was however found not to be significant. The effect of the membrane production parameters (chitosan- and acetic acid concentration) on the viscosity was found to be determined mainly by the chitosan concentration. It was subsequently found that higher chitosan concentrations lead to a higher membrane density, a decreased pore size, membrane water content, and specific surface area. A transport model, based on irreversible thermodynamics, with incorporation of an experimentally determined water permeability coefficient of 12.4 From both the structural and transport properties, it can be concluded that the synthesised chitosan membranes could be modelled as ultrafiltration (UF) membranes with capillary pores. By modelling the transport of water through the membranes using the Hagen-Poiseuille equation, an average pore radius of 23 The authors wish to thank the Water Research Commission, South Africa for its financial support and