We explore the potentials of three-dimensional (3D) printing to explore hydromechanical processes in laboratory-scale fractures. 3D printing enables replication of designer fractures with quantified and repeatable roughness to examine the interdependencies between mechanical and hydraulic response including, for example, the Barton-Bandis model. The present study successfully probes subtle variations of shear strength and dilation behavior in 3D printed fractures controlled by surface roughness. For constant materials and basic frictional characteristics, shear strength increases with increasing the standard deviation of the surface height with dilation rate principally controlled by the average amplitude of the long period wavelength of the fracture surface and insensitive the secondary (minor amplitude) roughness. Importantly, these sensitivities are manifest in the permeability response. With increasing shear displacement, the fracture permeability first decreases and then increases with oscillations resulting from step changes in fracture-fracture contact architectures. As these distinctive behaviors are consistent with those of real rock fractures, we conclude that 3D printed fractures provide a useful analog to real rock fractures when constraining slip-permeability coupling during shear slip.Coupled interaction between mechanical and hydraulic processes in rock fractures are of significance in various engineering applications, for example, in determining hydraulic stimulation protocols (fracturing versus shearing) in hydrocarbon and geothermal reservoirs. From a scientific perspective, it also contributes to understanding reactivation mechanisms of natural faults. In conducting systematic studies on rock fractures with surface roughness, one significant difficulty is that the role of surface roughness of natural rock fractures/faults in influencing their hydromechanical properties cannot be systematically isolated and controlled. This challenge is due to the fact that surface roughness of natural rock fractures/faults is specified as a consequence of the combination of rock type, crustal stress, and associated tectonic history. 3D printing is being actively applied in the geosciences and in geoengineering This study explores the potentials of 3D printing to probe key hydromechanical processes and feedbacks in laboratory-scale fractures. Numerically designed 3D printed fractures are first prepared with systematically controlled surface roughness. These are then used for direct-shear experiments to evaluate the slip-dependent changes of hydromechanical parameters. Finally, by comparing the experimental results of 3D printed fractures with those of natural rock fractures, we discuss the possibility of using 3D printed fractures as a substitute for real rock fractures. We utilize the methods of By using these surface topography data, the rectangular parallelepiped sample (19 mm width, 38 mm length, and 11 mm height) with a single fracture at the center is subsequently digitally designed in STL (Stereolithography) format. The rectangular parallelepiped sample consists of two separated blocks with identical fracture surface topography. These STL format data are then read by the 3D printer (AGILISTA-3100 (Keyence) at Fukushima Renewable Energy Institute, AIST) to repeatably fabricate solid coupons ( The experimental apparatus ( We first conduct shearing experiments on the 9 fractured samples with defined rough surfaces. In a series of experiments, the confining pressure ( We summarize the experimental results of the relationship between the shear strength (defined by Subsequently, the dependency of representative parameters on Experimental results linking aperture volume change ( Regardless of the The aperture volume change and the associated aperture change increase with an increase in the standard deviation of fracture surface height ( Finally, we explore the permeability evolution of a 3D printed fracture in response to shearing ( As described above, we demonstrate the potential of mated 3D printed fractures to explore hydromechanical coupling processes during shear slip. Since transparent resin can also be selected for the 3D printing material, 3D printing can allow direct in-situ visualization/analysis of the time-dependent deformation and breakage of asperities by coupling with appropriate visualization techniques. This offers the potential to revisit the contributing and controlling physical processes implicated in various deformation models, In contrast, We evaluate mechanisms of hydromechanical coupling between shear strength and permeability for 3D printed fractures with systematically controlled surface roughness. 3D printing is capable of preparing repeatable fractures with a specified surface roughness in both wavelength and amplitude. Our results confirm the possibility of using 3D printed fractures as an analog to real rock fractures to explore hydromechanical coupling in rock fractures. Importantly, the printed fractures can represent the following subtle behavioral trends: (1) Shear strength increases with increasing the standard deviation of the surface height, (2) Compactive-dilative behavior is controlled by the long-wavelength characteristics of surface roughness, and (3) With increasing shear displacement, fracture permeability first decreases and then increases with sharp oscillations controlled by the realignment of fracture-fracture contact architecture. Thus, once guided by an appropriate approach, 3D printing provides an innovative tool for the geo-engineering studies. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank Satoru Ishikawa for his contribution to the data analysis. The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive suggestions. This work was performed in part in a scheme of Reconstruction Support Program in FREA. The present study was supported in part by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at