Background
                  Talar fractures in children are extremely rare. Therefore available publications are only few, usually case reports or short-term follow-ups are available. However, considering the age and the long remaining lifespan of these patients, appropriate data and management guidelines are necessary.
               
                  Methods
                  In this study we have examined the long-term outcome for 15 children (10 male, 5 female) with an average age of 10 (4–16) years, who had been treated at our department during a period of 21 years (1976–1997) following talar neck or body fracture. The test results were classified according to the AOFAS ankle–hind foot scale and our score for the feet [Thermann H, Hufner T, Roehler A, Tscherne H. Screw arthrodesis of the ankle joint. Technique and outcome. Orthopade 1996;25(2):166–76].
               
                  Results
                  Twelve patients (80%) were re-examined again after an average time of 11 (1–22) years. Altogether there were nine talar neck and three talar body fractures. Concomitant injuries were found in three cases. According to the Hawkins classification, three were type-1, seven were type-2 and one each were type-3 and 4. Two injuries were open and 13 closed. Seven children fell from a large height, six were involved in traffic accidents. Seven talar fractures were combined with other lesions of the foot or ankle. Five patients with Hawkins 1 fracture were treated conservatively. In the operative treatment in four cases k-wires were used, five were treated with screw fixation and in two patients external fixation was performed. In one case biodegradable pins were applied. In five cases combination of fixation devices were used. In three cases fragments were removed and in one case a cancellous bone graft was necessary. Three children had to undergo an arthrodesis of the ankle and subtalar joints (Hawkins 1.2 and 4). Wound infection occurred in two cases after open fractures. In AOFAS ankle–hind foot scale a middle result of 85 points was reached. In our valuation system, including results of conventional radiographs (8 patients), an averaged point value of 90 (reachable 100) was seen. Radiographs showed clear signs for arthrosis in two cases with Hawkins 1 and one patient with Hawkins 4 fracture. Avascular necrosis of the talus occurred after one Hawkins 3 injury.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Talar fractures in the pediatric age group are very rare. They have shown terms of mechanism, treatment concepts and outcome pattern comparable to adults. As remodeling potential from further growth is poor, and avascular necrosis and osteoarthritis occur these fractures should be treated according to the standard therapy concepts.The talus is generated via direct ossification from ossified sites which are formed by pleocytosis and vascularization from the mesenchyme. The ossification centre is situated in the neck. In the newborn talus up to 24% of the talus already consists of bony tissue The available literature for therapy and outcome after talar fractures in children is sparse and consist of mainly descriptive series with small numbers The classification system used in talar neck fractures in adults, is also applicable in children We performed a retrospective study of all consecutive pediatric patients with a central talar fracture treated at a level one trauma center between 1976 and 1997. Inclusion criteria were central fractures of the talus and skeletal immaturity at the time of trauma. Fifteen pediatric patients were identified from our trauma database. Charts and radiograms were systematically reviewed. Twelve (80%) of the patients were available for review and reexamination. In eight cases additional X-rays were obtained after their consent. Remaining four patients did not agree for the new roentgenograms. Three patients were not traceable at all and therefore no further information can be obtained on them. The mean follow-up period was 11 (1–22) years. There were ten male and five female patients. The age range was from 4 to 15 years with an average age of 10 years. The right foot was involved in ten patients and the left foot in five. Two of the fractures were open and 13 were closed. The two open fractures were classified as type III according to Tscherne In seven cases the central talar fracture was associated with concomitant lesions of the same extremity. There were two calcaneus fractures, two growth plate injuries of the distal tibia (one each of Aitken type 1 and 2) The neck fractures were classified according to Hawkins Two patients with Hawkins I fracture were treated conservatively. Open reduction and internal fixation was performed with k-wires in four cases, with screws in five cases, with biodegradable pins in one case and with external fixation in two cases. In five of these cases a combination of different methods was performed. In two feet we had to remove small bone fragments and in one case bone graft was used ( These are non-displaced or minimally displaced fractures verified with a CT-scan. Treatment consisted of closed reduction, if necessary, followed by a short leg cast. Full weight bearing was allowed at two to four weeks. In cases of remaining minor displacement in the subtalar joint reduction was obtained via small incisions in a minimally invasive technique ( This fracture type is characterized by posterior displacement of the body and typically has an area of medial comminution. The surfaces of the ankle joint remain in a congruent position. For reduction subtalar joint congruence is most important. Depending on the fracture lines lag screws medially and anterolaterally can provide optimal compression of the entire fracture area ( In these fractures there is a complete posterior dislocation of the body, frequently with 90° of internal rotation and entrapment dorsally the posterior tibial tendon. Anatomic reduction and a stable osteosynthesis is obligatory for revascularization of the talar body. The postoperative treatment consists of a short leg cast with partial weight bearing for at least 4–6 weeks. Full weight bearing in a short leg cast is allowed during week 6–12. With progressive impact, dislocation of the talar neck at the talo–navicular joint occurs. Operative treatment was identical to that described for a Hawkins type III injury. These fractures were treated according the treatment principles for intra-articular fractures of adults. An open reduction and internal fixation was performed. Partial weight bearing in a short leg cast for 4–6 weeks was allowed. At follow-up patient charts were reviewed to identify all complications. Assessment was done for the various parameters like pain static and dynamic function, life quality and patients' satisfaction. Further more radiograms of the ankle in anterior–posterior and lateral position and weight-bearing dorso-plantar and lateral radiograms of the foot were made. The X-rays were reviewed for evidence of fracture union, joint congruency, evidence of avascular necrosis and secondary arthritis. The overall functional outcome was assessed with use of the American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) The average duration of follow-up was 11 years (range 1–22). Due to the two open fractures, two deep infections occurred. One of these infections healed by surgical débridement and antibiotic therapy. The other case could only be salvaged by a pan-talar arthrodesis. Furthermore two patients (Hawkins I and IV) received an arthrodesis of the ankle joints. The average AOFS ankle-hind foot score reached 85 points (range, 56–100 points). The average Hannover foot score was 90 points (range, 48–100 points). In detail all patients with Hawkins 1, Hawkins 2 or body fractures reached an excellent result except the two patients that had to be treated with an arthrodesis. Comparing the results of both scores, we could find a good correlation using Pearson's product moment correlation (correlation coefficient: 0.93, The study goal was first to find a specific pattern in the treatment and in the results, which differ between pediatric and adult talar fracture.   According to these study goals considering our results and the existing literature we draw following conclusions:   