The 2010 ISE Spring Meeting was held on May 2–5, 2010 at The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio, and was entitled “Advances in Corrosion Science for Lifetime Prediction and Sustainability: A Celebration of the 100th Birthday of Mars Fontana.” This was the first ISE spring meeting held in North America and the first spring meeting focused on the topic of corrosion. The meeting was attended by 153 conferees from 29 countries, including 34 students. There were 5 keynote addresses, given by Digby Macdonald, Roger Staehle, Ivan Cole, Martin Stratmann, and Roger Newman. In addition there were 105 contributed talks. The presentations were of very high quality and the discussions following the presentations were lively. The presentations were divided into different topics and the contributed talks were given in three or four parallel sessions. One stream was dedicated to high temperature corrosion and was organized by Bob Rapp. The other session topics included: coatings, iron and nickel alloys, high temperature corrosion, stress corrosion cracking, concrete and atmospheric corrosion, light metals, modeling, oil/gas/pipeline corrosion, and copper. There were two poster sessions, and 43 posters were presented. The poster sessions were well attended and many interesting posters were presented. The meeting was dedicated to the memory and accomplishments of Mars G. Fontana. Mars Fontana was a scientist, an engineer, an educator, a mentor, an administrator, and a leader. With a handful of others, he brought corrosion into the realm of applied science during the 20th century. Mars Fontana was born on April 4, 1910, so the meeting coincided with the 100th anniversary of his birth. Fontana studied chemical engineering at the University of Michigan and then worked for DuPont for 9 years. He then spent 44 years at the Ohio State University, the last 14 as an emeritus professor. At OSU he created a corrosion research center that now bears his name, and was a long-time chairman of the Department of Metallurgical Engineering (now Materials Science and Engineering). In his role as department chairman, he recruited and nurtured young faculty members, he led efforts to obtain funds for new laboratories, and he took an active part in the administration of the College of Engineering and in the faculty governance of the University. Fontana is widely recognized as the The conference banquet, held in the newly renovated OSU Main Library, included several testimonies to the legacy of Mars Fontana. All four of his children and their spouses were in attendance, and the eldest, Martha “Marty” Worth, shared fond memories of her father. All in attendance gained an appreciation of Fontana's charm and personal fortitude. He certainly influenced a generation of corrosion scientists around the world. It was our very great pleasure to organize and host this ISE spring meeting and pass along the legacy of Mars Fontana to a new generation of corrosion scientists.