Statement of purpose
                  Masticatory performance and maximum occlusal force may be different, depending on the occlusal schemes of the complete dentures used.
               
                  Purpose
                  The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of 2 complete denture occlusal schemes on masticatory performance and maximum occlusal force.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Two complete denture occlusal schemes, bilateral balanced occlusion and neutrocentric occlusion, were delivered to 10 participants who were completely edentulous (6 men and 4 women; mean age, 67.3 years). Masticatory performance was evaluated with the multiple sieve method and maximum occlusal force with pressure-sensitive films. The 2 occlusal schemes were interchanged on the participants’ denture bases. Two-way repeated-measures ANOVA was used to examine the differences between the occlusal schemes and chewing strokes and their interactions. The paired t test was used to compare the maximum occlusal force of the 2 occlusal schemes (α=.05).
               
                  Results
                  No difference was found in masticatory performance (P=.07) or maximum occlusal force (P=.31) between the occlusal schemes. For both schemes, a significant difference was found in masticatory performance (P<.001) with increased numbers of chewing strokes.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Complete dentures with bilateral balanced occlusion and neutrocentric occlusion found no significant differences in masticatory performance and maximum occlusal force. However, more chewing strokes resulted in better masticatory performance. Neutrocentric occlusion, advocated for patients with dental arch incompatibility when accurate centric relation records are difficult to obtain, provides the same masticatory performance and maximum occlusal force as bilateral balanced occlusion. Complete denture wearers should be instructed to use more chewing strokes. Chewing ability is defined as the ability to break down foods and can be evaluated by either the subjective or the objective method. Patients who are edentulous experience a decrease in chewing ability compared with individuals with dentate. Several investigators have studied the effect of occlusal schemes on chewing ability, both objectively and subjectively. Some concern has been expressed about the lack of appropriate controls for various participant groups. Some studies compared 2 participant groups independently, with each group using only 1 occlusal scheme. In Thailand, bilateral balanced occlusion and neutrocentric occlusion are often used to fabricate complete dentures. However, the type of occlusal scheme that provides the best chewing ability for complete denture wearers remains unclear. The aim of the present study was to compare the effect of bilateral balanced occlusion and neutrocentric occlusion complete denture occlusal schemes on masticatory performance and maximum occlusal force by using the same denture bases in the same individual. The null hypothesis of this study was that different complete denture occlusal schemes do not affect masticatory performance or maximum occlusal force. Ten participants (6 men and 4 women; mean age, 67.3 years) classified as The American College of Prosthodontics (ACP) classifications I and II completely edentulous Before the test, each denture was evaluated and scored separately by using the Kapur method. Scores for retention and stability ranged from 0 to 5. A score of 0 corresponded to no retention, 1 represented slight resistance to vertical pull, 2 represented moderate resistance to vertical pull, and 3 represented maximum resistance to vertical pull. For stability, a score of 0 corresponded to no stability, 1 represented moderate rocking on the supporting structures under pressure, and 2 represented slight or no rocking on the supporting structures under pressure. The sum score of maxillary and mandibular dentures on both retention and stability of 6 or more was considered as clinically acceptable for this study. When the artificial denture teeth arrangement for the first occlusal scheme was completed, remounting occlusal indices for the maxillary and mandibular teeth were made. The maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth then were removed from the trial bases and collected in the remounting occlusal indices, which left only maxillary and mandibular anterior teeth on the trial bases. The posterior denture teeth for the other occlusal scheme were arranged on the trial bases, processed, and finished conventionally. After evaluations for masticatory performance and maximum occlusal force, the posterior teeth were removed, and the first posterior denture teeth were repositioned by using the remounting occlusal indices. The dentures were then processed and finished conventionally. A number of studies evaluated masticatory performance with multiple sieve method The dried test food was placed on 12 standard progressively smaller sieves (Test sieve; Retcsh Technology GmbH): 5.6, 4.75, 4, 3.55, 3.35, 3.15, 2.8, 2, 1.4, 1, 0.5, and 0.25 mm in diameter. The dried test food on the sieve was shaken with a vibratory sieve shaker (AS 200 digit; Retcsh Technology GmbH) at 70 Hz for 3 minutes. The material that passed through the sieve was collected and used to calculate the cumulative weight percentage: Cumulative weight percentage of each sieve = (1 − [cumulative of mass retained on that sieve and previous sieves]/total sample mass) × 100 The cumulative weight percentages of comminuted food on each sieve were plotted. The median particle size (the sieve size through which 50% of the comminuted food can pass) was calculated by linear regression from the plot. Maximum occlusal force Two-way repeated-measures ANOVA was used to detect the significance of masticatory performance on the 2 measured effects of the different occlusal schemes (bilateral balance occlusion and neutrocentric occlusion), the number of chewing strokes, and intraindividual interactions. One-way repeated-measure ANOVA was used to detect significant differences in the chewing strokes for each occlusal scheme. The Tukey honestly significant difference test was used for post hoc multiple comparisons. The paired The means (standard deviations) for the median particle sizes are shown in No statistically significant differences in masticatory performance were detected between bilateral balanced occlusion and neutrocentric occlusion in this study ( In this study, masticatory performance was selected to evaluate the effectiveness of chewing ability with 2 different occlusal schemes. Roasted peanuts were selected because the comminution of particles was easily done during chewing. The absorbed water could be easily eliminated, and the agglomerate of comminuted particles could be readily separated by sieving. Interesting results were observed when we compared masticatory performance with the different numbers of chewing strokes. Statistically significant differences in masticatory performance were noted with increasing numbers of chewing strokes ( Although other studies that used subjective methods to evaluate chewing ability between different occlusal schemes reported inconsistent results, Within the limitation of this study, the following conclusions were drawn. For ACP classifications I and II completely edentulous with good denture quality (Kapur score ≥6), no significant difference was noted on masticatory performance and maximum occlusal force between bilateral balanced occlusion and neutrocentric occlusion. With either bilateral balanced occlusion or neutrocentric occlusion, 60 chewing strokes provided better masticatory performance than 20 or 40 chewing strokes.