Nkwanyana and Loveday (2017) used batch grinding experiments in a 0.6 m diameter mill to test partial replacement of steel balls (37.5 mm) for secondary grinding, by partly rounded pebbles (19–75 mm) from a SAG mill. At the optimum pebble content of 25% by volume, a 25% saving in steel ball consumption and a 15% saving in energy consumption was achieved, with no change in productivity. These very encouraging results were discussed with operators and designers of SABC circuits.
                  This paper compares the performance of a 25/75 pebble/ball (volume ratio) composite charge to ball-milling, under conditions typical for a ball-mill in SABC circuits, i.e. a large ball top size (75 mm), a high mill speed (75% of critical speed) and a coarse feed top size (19 mm). The volume of pulp in some experiments was increased to mimic pulp filling in an overflow discharge ball-mill. All the experiments in this phase were conducted using a silicate ore. The rate of production of material finer than 75 µm, when using a 25/75 mixture, was virtually identical to that of the corresponding ball-milling experiment. The average saving in energy consumption was about 13% and a saving in ball consumption of 25% applies.
                  It was noted that the replacement of balls by pebbles reduced the rate of grinding of coarse particles. This problem was solved by retaining the original quota of large balls, and replacing only smaller ball sizes. This method had a minimal effect on the rate production of fines (−75 µm) and makes composite secondary milling even more attractive, for reducing the cost of balls.
                  Concerns about accumulation of ‘scats’ (coarse particles) have also been analysed. The effect of scats on ball-mill productivity was tested and it was concluded that scats may not have an adverse effect on productivity in secondary ball-mills and composite mills, if large balls are present. The use of a trommel on the ball-mill is suggested to solve related problems in the classification circuit.Milling is the most expensive process in the mineral processing stage, with energy and grinding media (steel) consumption being the most expensive cost items. It is estimated that grinding media accounts for up to 40% of the milling costs (  Hard, moderately hard and medium hard ores (30 < A * b < 56) are conventionally processed in SAG-Ball mill-Crusher (SABC) circuits. The ball-mills in SABC circuits are operated at a relatively high speed (70–78% of critical speed), with large balls (50 mm to 80 mm), to cope with a coarse feed (a transfer size from the SAG mill typically larger than 10 mm) and to maximize power draw. Overflow ball-mills are often used and a mixture of ball sizes is used to top up the ball charge at regular intervals, e.g. the KCGM Mt Charlotte circuit in Australia used a mixture of 70 mm and 60 mm balls ( Particles larger than the aperture size of the trommel in the SAG circuit are perceived to be ‘undesirable’ in the ball-mill circuit. The ball-mill may lack sufficient impact energy to effect breakage of these particles, which are referred to as ‘scats’. They may find their way into a ball-mill circuit as a result of wear of the trommel or due to a deliberate change of the aperture size, to increase SAG mill throughput. E.g. Geita gold mine in Tanzania reported scats with a P Experiments were carried out using a pilot scale batch mill with a diameter of 0.6 m and a length of 0.5 m. Removable metal lifters (8), approximately 54 mm high, with 90 degrees face angle are fitted inside the mill. The internal surface of the mill is rubber-lined, giving an internal diameter of 0.57 m. The mill is attached to a drive shaft at one end, which is driven by a motor and a variable speed gearbox assembly. The torque driving the rotation of the drum is monitored online and the average value was used to estimate the mill power draw. The experimental procedure has been described in the previous paper ( The authors were given access to plant survey data from a large SABC circuit, which is processing gold ore. This data was used to establish the experimental conditions. The fines which were used to feed the ball-mill were chosen to simulate the hardness of gold ore. Initially crusher fines were obtained from a local quarry. However, the variability of the % −75 µm after preliminary ball-milling tests was unacceptable, and this was attributed to a variable clay content in this ore. It was therefore decided to make up an artificial feed, consisting mainly of high purity bagged silica sand of size less than 4.75 mm, and a relatively small amount of larger particles (−19 + 4.75 mm) from the quarry. The work index of silica sand (about 15 kWh/t) is comparable to that of gold ores from Witwatersrand (15.81 kWh/t) ( The pebbles used for the experiments were mostly gold ore waste rocks, with a few from the local quarry (to make up for the coarsest size fraction). The pebbles were rounded since they have been used in previous autogenous grinding experiments ( The size distribution of steel balls simulated a seasoned load, based on the chosen plant survey data, where a mixture of make-up ball sizes (53 mm, 65 mm and 75 mm) was used to maintain ball level. The size distribution of the seasoned load was calculated, by assuming that the mass distribution of the make-up balls was 50%, 25% and 25%, respectively. The seasoned pebble size distribution was calculated, using the size distribution of pebbles discharged by the plant SAG mill. The conditions common to most tests are summarised in The previous paper demonstrated that the efficiency of grinding (kWh/t new −75 µm) was insensitive to changes in the (static) charge volume, as the results obtained using 30% and 40% charge volumes were similar. It was therefore decided to use a charge volume of 33%, which is within the typical charge volume range of 30% to 35% for large diameter overflow ball-mills ( Large overflow ball-mills allow a slurry pool to develop in the mill up to a total volume filling of 40%, to allow for discharge through the trunnion ( The target grind (% −75 µm) was chosen to match the average grind of the plant ball-mill discharge. The tests simulated an incremental grind within a circulating load and hence the amount of very fine material in the mill was not excessive. The solids concentration in the slurry was set at plant conditions (65 to 68% by mass). Ball-milling was compared to composite milling under conditions typical for a ball-mill in an SABC circuit. In the first set of experiments, the slurry volume was set to fill the voids in a static the charge (i.e. assuming a ratio of ball volume to pulp volume of 60/40). Additional slurry (occupying 7% of the mill volume) was used in the second set of experiments, to simulate an overflow discharge ball-mill. The grinding time was adjusted in proportion to the slurry volume, to maintain the same energy input (kWh/t feed), in an attempt to achieve similar grinds under these two conditions. Two pebble/ball mixtures (25/75 and 50/50 vol ratios) were compared to ball-milling. It is important to note that the static charge volume remained unaltered, and hence the total volume of pebbles added was equivalent to the total volume of balls removed. The mass of fines in the feed was reduced slightly in the composite milling experiments, to accommodate additional fines produced from pebble wear, so that the average amount of fines present in the batch tests was the same. The ‘productivity’ (kg new −75 µm/h) is a direct measure of the performance of the mill, and as expected, the presence of additional pulp reduced productivity in the base case of ball-milling. When a fraction of the volume of balls was replaced by pebbles, proportional amounts of the seasoned load of balls were removed. This is effectively the same as reducing the periodic make-up amounts of 75 mm, 65 mm and 53 mm balls in a plant by the percentage stated. From When 50% of the volume of the ball charge was replaced by pebbles, the power draw was reduced further to 73% relative to ball-milling, however a notable adverse effect on the grind was observed. Consequently an average loss of 16% on productivity (for the given charge volume) was observed. This drastic loss in productivity occurred despite the proportional increase in pebble wear and additional mill volume is required to maintain production. The above results prove that composite secondary milling (using a 25/75 pebble/ball mixture) can also be applied in ball-mills in SABC circuits, without a detrimental effect on productivity. The benefits of reducing energy and ball consumption are similar to those reported in Part 1, where the feed was relatively fine, and the top size (feed) of the balls was 37.5 mm. A reduction of 13% in energy consumption (expressed as kWh/t new −75 µm) was observed. Ball consumption was not measured, but it can be assumed to be directly proportional to ball volume. Hence it is envisaged that the reduction in ball consumption will be proportional to pebble volume expressed as a percent (e.g. 25%). It is worth noting that when a 50/50 pebble/ball mixture was used the reduction in energy consumption was still significant (13% on average), and the inferred 50% reduction in ball consumption will result in a substantial cost reduction. The 16% loss in productivity for the existing mill volume is a significant setback and it implies that additional mills will be required. The net effect is that power utilisation (kWh/t of new −75 µm) will be about the same as the 25% volume replacement. Pebble consumption is larger and this is a potential limitation, considering the variations in the run-of-mine (RoM) feed and the need to store pebbles for maintaining optimal filling of a SAG mill. The results discussed above compare composite milling to ball-milling, using the same operating conditions, and the mill performance indices (power draw, productivity and energy consumption) provide simple quantitative measures. An analysis of the product size distributions is required, to assess the effectiveness of grinding using a pebble/ball mixture, particularly the effect on the rate of grinding of the coarse particles. It was anticipated that the rate of grinding by impact in the toe of the charge would be reduced by replacing some of the balls by pebbles of the same size. Hence, there is a danger that coarse particles may accumulate in a closed milling circuit. The plant data showed that the ball-mill discharge had no particles coarser than 13.2 mm, and this implies that these particles were retained in the mill by sedimentation and eliminated by a combination of surface wear and impact breakage.  For sizes below 4.75 mm, the 25/75 pebble/ball tests had similar size distributions to the corresponding ball-milling tests. Since the mass present in the −13.2 + 4.75 mm size range was small (below 1%), the 25/75 pebble/ball mixture was able to maintain the rate of production of −75 µm. The implication here is that the increase in the mass retained in the size range −13.2 + 4.75 mm could cause an increase in the circulating load. After realising that the breakage of coarse particles was reduced by the removal of large balls, additional tests were conducted, in which the seasoned load for balls simulated a retention of the make-up amount of large balls (75 mm) and the make-up amounts of the smaller balls was reduced, to provide a total ball volume reduction of 25%.  The reader may have noticed that the size distribution of the product (grind) was finer than in previous tables. This was due to the fact that the supplier of the bagged silica sand changed the size distribution at this point. The size distribution was slightly finer in the lower size range (−600 µm), and hence, base case tests had to be redone for precise comparison. The performance indices of the ball-mill (base case) were similar, (i.e. productivity was measured in terms of kg of new fines produced, but the size distribution of the product was finer. The results from the additional experiments imply that the replacement of balls by pebbles to facilitate composite milling is not a straight forward exercise. The feed rates of various ball sizes can be adjusted to ensure that composite milling does not compromise the grinding rate of the coarse particles, and at the same time it should not compromise the rate of production of fines. It is worth noting that the smaller balls have a shorter life, and are more expensive, and it will therefore be beneficial to limit ball replacement by pebbles, to the smaller ball sizes, provided productivity is maintained. To ensure that composite milling does not result in deliberate transfer of scats to a ball-mill, a second stage of screening (e.g. at 30 mm) should be used to separate suitable pebbles (i.e. −75 + 30 mm) for use in composite secondary milling. Contrary to the popular belief that small media are required for fine grinding, All pebbles will inevitably, over time, wear down to produce scats, and this flow will be added to a possible flow of scats entering from the SAG circuit. The larger the pebble size, the smaller the mass fraction which enters the scats size range. It is important to understand the nature of a ‘scats problem’, which is influenced by the charge level and pulp viscosity: In view of the common practice of using overflow ball-mills, it may be assumed that particles coarser than 13 mm would initially be retained in the mill by sedimentation and eventually be eliminated by a combination of abrasion and impact breakage. However, if a layer of scats builds up in the pulp pool, the smaller scats particles will escape and cause an increase in the wear in the classification circuit and an increase the circulating load. This appears to be the main ‘problem’. Therefore, if there is no mechanism to deal with the scats that escape from the ball-mill, an existing scats problem would be made worse by applying composite secondary milling. One way of removing scats from a ball-milling circuit is to use a trommel on the ball-mill discharge. This implies that a build-up of scats has occurred in the ball-mill pool (above the charge) and that the scats escape to maintain equilibrium. A suitable aperture size of the ball-mill trommel (say 10 mm) can be selected, to reduce wear in the classification circuit. The pulp viscosity in the mill can then be optimised at will. Interestingly, many operations have their secondary ball-mills fitted with trommels, with the aperture size typically between 10 mm and 12 mm, for removal of ore and ball scats. E.g. Northparke mine in Australia ( It follows from the above logic that if an overflow ball-mill has been fitted with a trommel, then the additional scats arising from the use of pebbles can be safely accommodated. The composite tests described in this paper used a seasoned load of pebbles, which included pebbles down to 13.2 mm. The use of a trommel on a ball-mill discharge appears to be an attractive option for design of new SABC circuits, to solve problems caused by scats and to facilitate the application of composite secondary milling, which has significant potential. A shaking screen may be required for a retro-fit to existing ball-mills which do not have trommels. The effect of a build-up on the mill performance (particularly productivity) is not well documented in the literature and it is an issue that may be overlooked during pilot testing. Additional experiments were conducted to investigate the effect of a build-up of scats on the performance of a ball-mill. It was assumed that the scats were particles in the size range −19 + 13.2 mm. To simulate a build-up of scats in an overflow ball-mill, 4 kg of partially rounded particles in this size range were added to the mill, in addition to the −19 + 13.2 mm particles present in the feed. It was decided that the superficial volume of the additional scats should occupy 30% of the volume of the slurry pool. Hence the volume of pulp was reduced by the volume scats particles and the mass of solids in the feed was reduced from the usual 30 kg to 28 kg. The grinding time was then adjusted in proportion to the total volume of pulp. These details will give the reader an understanding of how to interpret the data shown in  The tests conducted thus far on composite secondary milling made provision for steady-state transfer of pebbles into sizes down to 13.2 mm by surface wear.  The treatment of ball-mill scats may differ. Some operations return the scats to a SAG mill, others prefer to crush the scats and mill them in a spare ball-mill together with the crushed critical size pebbles from a SAG circuit, while others discard them completely. If the P The large critical size pebbles are useful for maintaining optimal filling in SAG mill at times when there is shortage of competent pebbles ( Some operators discard pebbles from the SAG mill trommel oversize, if the pebbles are a hard component of the ore, with a low metal content ( The control strategy of a composite ball-mill will require review, in particular to maintain the correct charge level and pulp density. The strategy applied in SAG mills to control the charge level can be applied. The pulp density may need to be adjusted to prevent small pebbles floating and being entrained on the exiting slurry.  Batch milling experiments under conditions typical for ball-mills in SABC circuits have proved the benefits of composite milling (using a 25/75 by volume pebble/ball mixture). The benefits in the secondary circuit are a 13% reduction in energy consumption and an inferred 25% reduction in ball consumption. It appears that these benefits would accrue without affecting productivity. The diversion of the critical size pebbles from the SAG circuit will also reduce the cost of pebble crushing significantly. Attention was given to the possibility that composite milling would exacerbate an existing ‘scats problem’. The scats generated from pebbles (i.e. pebble cores) will contribute to the build-up of scats, but when these particles are entrained in the mill discharge, they can be safely removed by screening the ball-mill discharge and recycled to the SAG circuit. The mass flow of recycled scats will be small compared to the flow of pebbles removed from the SAG circuit and hence the SAG circuit will still benefit from the reduced need for product flow. The presence of additional scats in the mill led to an increase in the production of fines. It was interesting to note that there was a significant amount of breakage of scats particles by the larger balls, despite the relatively small diameter of the mill. It is hoped that data from similar tests will compared to full-scale data in due course, to confirm scale-up. It is accepted that an SABC circuit may be an attractive option for a new plant, to use experience to ensure the initial capacity of the plant. However, in view of the significant advantages of composite secondary milling, a new plant could be designed to facilitate gradual conversion to an optimum mixture of balls and pebbles in the secondary milling circuit. The plant data and the pebble wear measured in the experiments was used to calculate the flow of pebbles required to maintain a 25% pebble volume in the ball-mills. The average pebble consumption was calculated to be about 5% of the feed to the ball mill circuit. This will vary with ore hardness and abrasiveness. The implication here is that the flow of solids entering the ball-mill circuit will have to be reduced accordingly, to accommodate additional fines produced from pebble wear. This can be achieved by adjustments in the operation of SAG mill to maintain the feed rate, despite the removal of pebbles, for example by increasing pebble recycle and reducing the rate of SAG ball addition. Most hard rock operations have reported pebble recycles above 10% of SAG mill feed ( One possible limitation to application composite secondary milling could be the capacity of the trommel at the discharge of the ball-mill. The previous work reported in Part 1 demonstrated that composite milling can be applied gradually, starting with say a 10% ball replacement and increasing it progressively. This approach would let the operator test the constraints and pitfalls of this application, such as the classification circuit and the ball-mill trommel capacity. Financial support of this project by