Natural pyrrhotite (NP) shows promising future in activating persulfate (PS) due to its easy availability at a low cost and easy separation. This study discussed the degradation of O-isopropyl-N-ethyl thionocarbamate (IPETC) in NP/PS system. NP-PS system showed the best IPETC mineralization at the initial pH of 6.0 (62.84%). The kinetics study suggested that the IPETC degradation followed the pseudo-first-order equation in the NP-PS system. NP-PS system worked better in bottled water (96.46%) and tap water (85.14%) than river water (31.28%). Combined with Fourier transform–infrared spectroscopy, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and computational calculation, the degradation products, including acetone, formic acid isopropyl ester and ethylamine, were identified and the degradation pathway of IPETC in NP-PS system was proposed. The S, O and N atoms in IPETC are easier to be attacked by. SO4
                     
                        −Ethylamine and reduced S ions coordinately worked to recycle Fe2+ in NP/PS/IPETC system.Mineral processing industries generate considerable amounts of wastewater polluted by collectors every year. O-isopropyl-N-ethyl thionocarbamate (IPETC) is a stable collector that is widely used in sulfide mineral processing due to its excellent selectivity and low cost ( Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have become promising technologies that generate free radicals to degrade refractory organic contaminants ( PS activation occurs by various treatments including microwaves ( Once SR is formed, it can propagate a series of reactions to degrade organic compounds. However, the degradation processes of organics can be deactivated by SRs scavenging with excess Fe Recently, iron-bearing minerals as heterogeneous catalytic have been investigated to overcome the defects of homogeneous Fe In this study, NP was applied to activate PS for IPETC degradation. This work aimed to (1) investigate the effects of NP dose, PS concentration, and initial pH; (2) investigate the kinetics; and (3) identify the transformation products and elucidate the degradation pathway of IPETC by NP-PS system. All chemical reagents and organic solvents were at least analytical grade. IPETC was obtained from Zhuzhou Flotation Reagents Factory. NP was purchased from Guangdong Dabaoshan Mineral Processing Factory. Sodium persulfate (Na Reactions were conducted in a 300 mL batch reactor at room temperature (20 °C). A stock solution of IPETC (0.28 mM) was prepared with distilled water. Two hundred-milliliter reaction solutions were composed of predetermined volumes of substrate, NP and persulfate stock solution, which were shaken at 300 rpm for 10 min. Controlled experiments were conducted with substrate, substrate-NP (without PS), and substrate-PS (without NP)). The initial pH of the reaction solution was adjusted to the desired value with 0.01 M NaOH or H NP was characterized with XRD (Bruker advanced 8), Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM), equipped with Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS) (FEI Electron Optics B.V, Nova NanoSEM 230). The concentration of IPETC in the aqueous phase was measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (LC-20A, Shimadzu, Japan) equipped with a Symmetry C18 column (dimensions 150 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm, Agilent, USA) and a UV detector (Shimadzu SPD-20A VP) set at a wavelength of 241 nm ( All calculations were performed with the Gaussian 09 (version D.01) quantum chemistry package, based on the B3LYP method: A three-parameter hybrid functional by replacing a certain amount of the PW91 generalized gradient approximation (GGA) correlation functional with the LYP GGA correlation functional (  In this work, the addition of Fe The solution pH has a strong influence on the formation of active species, such as SRs and HRs, and their reaction with IPETC and intermediates. Therefore, the effects of initial pH on the degradation of IPETC and the variation of solution pH were investigated in NP-PS system. The initial pH of the IPETC solution was 6.0 without pH adjustment. As can be seen in Fe In many researches, chelating agent was applied to stabilize Fe ions ( The effects of the initial PS concentration on the degradation performance of IPETC was investigated in NP-PS system. The initial NP dose was 0.7 g L In this section, the effects of NP doses on IPETC degradation were investigated at the PS concentration of 1.8 mM and the initial pH of 6.0, as displayed in The iron ions concentration was increased with the increment of NP dose ( Considering the results discussed above, a continuous releasing of Fe Water matrix plays a critical role in SR-AOPs because the naturally occurring organic and inorganic species can scavenge SRs and HRs. In the present study, batch experiments in different water matrices (commercially bottled water (BW), tap water (TW), river water (RW), and distilled water (DW)) were conducted to assess the possibility of applying this technology under real environmental conditions. The compositions of the types of water used in this study are presented in The results mentioned above showed that IPETC was remarkably eliminated in the NP-PS system. However, Incomplete mineralization of IPETC under optimum conditions indicated the formation of non-identified compounds in the reaction. Therefore, the intermediates were explored via GC–MS and FT–IR. FT–IR, a qualitative analysis technique, was used to determine the main functional groups. The FT–IR of the IPETC sample and oxidation products are shown in No significant change was found in the aliphatic profiles after treatment. The bands of C  Molecular analysis of IPETC and intermediates by GC–MS was in accordance with FT–IR findings. The results revealed a reduction from Fe Hence, the multiple methods such as organic radicals and reduced S ions reduction coordinately work to regenerate Fe  Catalyzed hydrogen peroxide shares many similarities with iron-activated PS so the technology can often be applied to help improve understanding of iron-activated PS. SRs are mainly responsible for IPETC oxidation, but HRs, induced by SRs, can also be involved in the IPETC oxidation process, especially under neutral conditions ( Combined with the mechanism of iron-PS-mediated degradation of pollutants and the properties of IPETC and intermediates, the possible degradation pathway was deduced, as shown in Subsequent hydroxylation and oxidation yielded acetic acid (P In this study, we researched the degradation of IPETC in NP-PS system. A greater IPETC mineralization was obtained under acidic and neutral conditions and the best was gained at initial pH of 6.0. A smooth-releasing of Fe This work was purported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at