The anticipated increase in demand for Li, Rb, and Cs raises growing concern due to the expected shortage in alkali metals available for extraction from ores. In this study, two kinds of additives (Na2SO4 and CaCl2) were used to selectively extract alkali metals from lithium porcelain stone. HSC modelling was used to simulate the process of roasting the ore in the presence of these additives, and to predict the temperature effect in addition to the ore/Na2SO4/CaCl2 mass ratio. Under the optimized conditions, the Li, Na, K, Rb, and Cs extraction efficiencies were 98.70, 49.80, 37.90, 97.27, and 98.40%, respectively. The optimal roasting conditions were found to be an ore/Na2SO4/CaCl2 mass ratio of 1/0.2/0.2 with heating at 850 °C for 60 min, while the optimal water leaching conditions were a liquid/solid ratio of 1/1 and a stirring speed of 300 rpm at room temperature for 60 min. Upon analysis of the calcined and leaching residues, the extraction mechanism was demonstrated to involve a highly chemoselective ion-exchange process between the alkali metals present in the ore, the Na+ in Na2SO4, and the Ca2+ in CaCl2. After this process, the concentrations of the alkali metals in lixivium were approximately 3.43 g/L Li, 25.50 g/L Na, 11.00 g/L K, 1.35 g/L Rb, and 0.56 g/L Cs, thereby indicating the feasibility of this process.With the introduction of the international new energy development plan, lithium has become one of the key supporting international energy sources. In this context, lithium sulfate and lithium carbonate are important basic raw materials for the development of lithium as a new energy source, and demand for the latter is projected to increase by ~60% (i.e., from 102,000 to 162,000 tons of lithium carbonate equivalent) in the next 5 years. Indeed, its application in lithium-ion batteries drives a large percentage (~40,000 tons) of this growth ( Two worldwide economic sources of lithium exist, namely brines and hard rock ores. More specifically, lithium-containing brines make up 66% of the world's lithium resources, with pegmatites making up 26% and sedimentary rocks making up 8% of this total ( The exploration of lithium porcelain stone in China is mainly concentrated in the Jiangxi province, with the stones being mainly distributed in the Yifeng, Fengxin, and Shanggao regions. The mineralization process of lithium and rare metals is rather complicated, with magmatism and tectonic activities playing leading roles. As of 2010, estimated resource reserves of 81.6 million tons exist ( It has been reported that salt roasting with Na The lithium porcelain stone employed herein was provided by the Feiyu New Energy Technology Co., Ltd. (Jiangxi, China). Initially, the lithium porcelain stone was crushed in a jaw crusher, then ground in a sampling machine and screened to a particle size of <150 μm. The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) pattern shown in Atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, TAS990, PuXi China) was used to determine the contents of Li, Na, K, Rb, and Cs using standard procedures. Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, IRIS Intrepid II XSP, Thermo Electron Corporation China) was employed to determine the contents of other elements present in the lixivium, and the pH was determined using a pH meter (ST3100, OHAUS America). The various samples, the calcine, and the residue were analyzed by XRD (Empyrean, PANalytical Holland) and scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS, MLA650F, Bruker Germany). The procedure employed for the extraction of alkali metals from the lithium porcelain stone is outlined in Due to the lack of thermodynamic data on lithium porcelain stone, only the reaction free energy changes between simple compounds can be used to investigate the reaction Gibbs free energy changes of Na As shown in The effect of the ore/Na As indicated, the alkali metal leaching rates gradually increased upon increasing the ore/Na The influence of the ore/CaCl As outlined in The effect of the roasting temperature was then examined, while the other parameters were fixed at an ore/Na The effect of the roasting time was then examined with the other parameters fixed at an ore/Na The effects of the leaching time and the L/S ratio on the leaching recovery of the metals were then investigated under initial conditions of 100 g calcine, a leaching temperature of room temperature, and a stirrer speed of 300 rpm. As presented in According to the optimal process conditions obtained in the previous experiments, the water-cum-material balance flowsheet was carried out on the process of leaching alkali metlas from lithium porcelain stone. The result is shown in The roasting and leaching experiments were conducted under the optimum technological conditions of an ore/Na We herein investigated the effects of the Na We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled “Extraction of lithium, rubidium and cesium from lithium porcelain stone”. This work was financially supported by the