India generates about 59% of its electricity from coal (EIA, 2014) [1]. Most of the coal available in India is of low quality, high ash and low calorific value. Fluidized bed combustion is an appropriate technology to utilize these low quality coals. Currently there are no emission regulations for SO2 emissions from power plants. However, SO2 control is becoming a requirement for some projects funded by International agencies to control air emissions. For the first time, five limestone samples from various parts of India that are currently being used in fluidized bed power plants are characterized as sorbents for sulfur capture behavior in a TGA. These limestones were identified as Sorbents A–E, and were characterized for their physical properties (porosity and pore size distribution, surface area), chemical composition analysis, petrographic characteristics, and mineral structural features using XRD. Analytical results indicated that the particle size of the sorbents plays a critical role in the sulfation behavior of the sorbents with some sorbents are more sensitive to particle size than the others. Hot Stage Microscopy observations indicated that this sensitivity was due to the formation of thermally activated fractures (TIFs) at fluidized bed temperatures. BET surface area and BJH pore diameter tests performed on the five sorbents indicated that Sorbent A had the highest surface area of all the limestones and large also the pore diameter. After comparing the BET data with the TGA sulfation data, it appears that Sorbent B might be subjected to the pore-plugging effect due to its small pore diameter. Sorbent C and Sorbent E had low BET surface area and high BJH pore diameter suggesting that although they may not experience much diffusion resistance, due to the low surface area, their sulfur utilization might be limited for coarse particle sizes. The sulfation behavior of these Indian limestones is compared with that of some US limestones with similar physical, chemical and petrographical properties.India has been one of the fastest growing economies in the world for the past two decades. The massive industrialization of the country has come with a huge increase in energy demand. Annual energy consumption of India has gone up from 8.3 quadrillion BTUs in 1991 to 23.6 quadrillion BTUs in 2011 For power generation from poor quality coals, fluidized bed combustion (FBC) is an appropriate technology due to its fuel flexibility, compact boiler design and reduced emissions of sulfur and nitrogen oxides. As much as 95% of the sulfur in coal emitted as sulfur dioxide may be removed using this technology, thus allowing the use of high sulfur fuels. Since most of the bed material is made up of inert ash, an FBC boiler is somewhat insensitive to the type of fuel used for combustion and hence can accommodate a range of fuel compositions Although limestones have been widely used for sulfur capture, the sulfation process is still poorly understood. Several methods have been used to characterize limestones for sulfur capture In an atmospheric fluidized bed boiler, calcium and magnesium carbonates decompose to the corresponding oxides with an increase in porosity. However, sulfation behavior is influenced not only by porosity but also by pore size. Due to the volume increase upon sulfation, pore plugging may occur, most significantly affecting the micropores. Limestones that have a higher percentage of the surface area formed by meso and macro pores are less susceptible to pore-plugging effect and calcium utilization would be the higher. Although sulfation capacities are greater for large pores, they have lower reaction rates The sorbent particle size is altered within the combustor due to attrition of particles−the degree of which may be affected by the type of grains and cementing material between the particles, the rate at which CO Particle size of the ground limestone is inversely related to its specific surface area; decreasing particle size increasing the available surface area thereby improving the reactivity of the limestone. However if the fragments generated from the attrition are too fine, unreacted sorbent would elutriate from the reactor, thus reducing the overall performance of the sorbent Crystallite (grain) size of a limestone is an intrinsic property of the limestone. It was shown by Krishnan et al. Therefore, chemical composition (calcium content), mineralogy, physical properties such as porosity, pore size distribution, surface area (both internal and external), HGI, and petrographic properties such as intrinsic grain size a are all properties that need to be characterized in order to properly assess sulfation behavior of a particular limestone. Information on the sulfation behavior of Indian limestones is scarce, the only study being that of Shekhavat and Prabhulingaiah (2010), who characterized limestone from Rajasthan For this study five samples of Indian limestones were obtained, three from the western part of the country and two from the south east. Each limestone was fully characterized with regard to its physical, chemical, mineralogical and petrographic properties. In this, results on the effects of particle size on sulfation behavior and correlations between the observed properties to the sulfation capacity of the limestones are reported. Particle size measurements were performed using a Malvern 2600 Particle sizer: BET surface analysis and pore size distribution was determined using on a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 Physisorption Analyzer. The physical properties of the five sorbents studied, HGI values, BET surface area and BJH pore diameters are presented in The sulfation capacity of the limestones was determined using a Perkin–Elmer Thermogravimetric Analyzer (TGA). Penn State University conducted a detailed investigation using 20 limestones and dolomites in a 30 HGI values for the limestones ranged between 88 and 121 (see In a study conducted on twenty Pennsylvania (North American) limestones and dolostones Relative sulfation behavior of the limestones was determined by thermogravimetric analysis in a simulated flue gas atmosphere at 875    LOI 32: Mol. Wt. of sulfur 80: Mol. Wt. of SO Since the calcium content of the limestones is not the same, the calcium utilization efficiency was calculated using Eq.    LOI 32: Mol. Wt. of sulfur 80: Mol. Wt. of SO   Sorbent D not only had the highest sulfation behavior under all the test conditions but also was least sensitive to particle size changes in the above mentioned range. These differences are believed to be due to the mineralogical characteristics of these limestones. Sorbent D contains fine grained clays which are likely to make the limestone easily friable Hot stage microscopy was performed on Sorbents C and D to confirm the hypothesis based on petrographic characteristics. It was observed that Sorbent D developed a network of micro-fractures and pits throughout the particles, indicating that they are probably composed of larger grains agglomerated together which decrepitated on heating. The formation of the micro fractures explains the low sensitivity to particle size of the Sorbent D. This suggests that Sorbent D would perform equally as well for larger particle sizes (710–850 Calcium utilization efficiencies of two size fractions (53–75 The data shown in In general, the higher the available surface area, the greater is the sorbent utilization, as long as the diffusion resistance is not too high. The Hot Stage Microscopy experiments explain why Sorbent D was particle size insensitive for sulfation and Sorbent C was particle size sensitive with regards to sulfation. However, it is still not clear why Sorbent D had high sulfur utilization efficiency. The BET surface area (for the −270 mesh size fraction) of the limestone samples, presented in In the case of Sorbent B, the data suggests that because of its low BET surface area and low average pore diameter, it would face greater resistance for diffusion of SO In this study the factors that influenced the sulfation of five Indian limestones were identified. A comparison of performance with North American limestones was also made based on previously published data. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: The particle size of the limestones played a critical role in determining the sulfation behavior. Some sorbents were more sensitive to particle size than others. Hot Stage Microscopy provided strong evidence that this sensitivity was due to the formation of thermally activated fractures (TIFs) at fluidized bed temperatures. The petrographic data indicate that highly recrystallized limestones tend to be more friable and form an extensive network of TIFs in the case of both the Indian and North American limestones. The Indian limestones in general had higher HGI values for similar calcium carbonate content of the North American limestones. For all size fractions examined the calcium utilization efficiency of the Indian limestones was found to be higher than for the North American limestones. The TIFs improved the access to the interior of the particles and increased the surface area of the particles thereby reducing the influence of resistance to diffusion of SO It was shown that Sorbent A had the highest BET surface area of all the limestones and large pore diameter. Since it had low sulfur utilization efficiency, it was concluded that Sorbent A was intrinsically less reactive. Sorbent A was, therefore, less particle size sensitive than Sorbents C, B and E. It was also shown that while Sorbent B had an average BET surface area among the five samples, it had a very low BJH pore diameter. Comparing the BET data with the sulfation data, it was concluded that Sorbent B might be subjected to pore-plugging due to its smaller pore diameter. Sorbents C and E had low BET surface area and high BJH pore diameter suggesting that although they may not experience much diffusion resistance, due to the low surface area, their sulfur utilization might be limited at coarse particle sizes.