A nanoemulsion system was employed to encapsulate the krill oil with different concentration. The combination of whey protein concentrate, maltodextrin and gum arabic with the ratio of 8:2:0.5 was used in nanoemulsion formulation to enhance nanoemulsion stability, as well as to construct the wall part of the encapsulates. Two different drying methods; freeze-drying and spray-drying were applied on krill oil nanoemulsion systems to obtained powder encapsulates. The physical characterization of nanoemulsions and chemical stability of krill oil in terms of oxidative stability and in vitro bioaccessibility (%) were evaluated before and after drying processes to understand the effect of different drying techniques on encapsulation ability of nanoemulsion systems. Dehydration of nanoemulsions with spray-drying caused approximately 7 folds increments on particle size. The sample with 8% (w/v) of krill oil concentration had an optimum encapsulation efficiency that was calculated 72% in spray-dried nanoemulsion and 67% in freeze-dried nanoemulsion. Both spray-dried and freeze-dried krill oil nanoemulsions showed similar oxidative stability in 8% (w/v) concentration during the 15 days storage period. In vitro bioaccessibility of encapsulated krill oil was changed between 32.7 to 72.4% and 20.0–83.0% in freeze-dried and spray-dried nanoemulsions, respectively. Still, the spray-drying process is recommended for the dehydration of krill oil nanoemulsion with 8% (w/v) concentration because a better encapsulation efficiency and the higher in vitro bioaccessibility was obtained compared to freeze-dried nanoemulsion systems at the same concentration of krill oil.A new category of functional food ingredients rich in omega-3 (ω3) fatty acid has gained recently significant market share ( Nanoemulsions are colloidal delivery systems commonly used for encapsulation of lipophilic bioactive compounds such as PUFAs, essential oils, carotenoids, and stilbenes ( The nanoemulsion production methods can be classified into two groups; high energy, and low energy approaches. While intense disruptive force is used in high energy methods, internal chemical energy is used in low energy methods ( In our previous studies, we have been highlighted that the spray-drying of encapsulated hydrophilic bioactive compounds such as phenolics in colloidal solution systems enhances the bioactive stability of encapsulated phenolics in storage periods as well as increase their in vitro bioaccessibility ( Krill oil was purchased from Enzymotec Ltd. (Migdal HaEmeq, Israel). Upon arrival and during the study, krill oil was kept and cold stored (−20 °C) in an N MD (10% weight/volume (w/v)) and GA (10% w/v) were dissolved in distilled water at 50-60 °C for 30 min. WPC was dissolved in distilled water at 60-80 °C for 30 min to open active moieties of protein. The laboratory spray-dryer (Mini spray dryer B-290, BÜCHI Labortechnik, Switzerland) with a 1.5 mm nozzle diameter and main spray chamber (500 mm height X 215 mm wide) was used for spray drying of nanoemulsions. A peristaltic pump was used to pump the emulsion to the dryer at a flow rate of 5 cm For freeze-drying of nanoemulsion, the samples were frozen at −20 °C and then dried using a lyophilizer (Christ Alpha 1-2LD plus, Germany). The ice condenser temperature and the vacuum were set to −50 °C and 0.04 Mbar, respectively. The dried product was collected after 48 h freeze-drying process and those collected powders stored in an airtight container at −20 °C for further analysis. Separation of serum from the emulsion was taken as an index of emulsion stability ( The particle size distribution and zeta potential of the emulsion droplets were determined by using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano Z (Worcestershire, UK). Prior to measurements, samples were diluted 100 folds with distilled water to eliminate multiple scattering effects. The count rate selected 100 and 300 Kcps during the measurement. All samples were measured in triplicate. The measurement of viscosity was obtained by determining flow curves using a rheometer (TA Instruments, New Castle, UK). Measurements were done in triplicate, in parallel plate geometry (75 mm diameter), with temperature controlled at 25 °C by a Peltier system and Gap of 0.2 mm. Empirical models were used to evaluate rheograms and apparent viscosity of emulsions was calculated as the ratio between viscosity and shear rate. EE was determined using the method of EE was calculated from the following equation A Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Quanta FEG 250 SEM) (ThermoFisher Scientific, Oregon, USA) was used to obtain the morphology of dried nanoemulsions. Samples were sprinkled onto adhesive coated an aluminum pin stub. Digital images were taken at a magnification of 4000x and 1000x for freeze-dried microencapsulates. The 4000x and 12000x magnifications were used in spray-dried microencapsulates. Dried nanoemulsions with different krill oil concentration (2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, 10% of w/v) were incubated in dark ( Dried nanoemulsions with different krill oil concentration (2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, 10% of w/v) were incubated at 55 °C for 15 days in the dark and sampled every 5 days. Thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS), an index of lipid peroxidation, were measured using the method of The bioaccessibility (%)of encapsulated krill oil under simulated gastrointestinal tract conditions was evaluated according to a previously described method of The volumetric amount of NaOH solution required to neutralize the krill oil released at digestion time is represented by V The results of the experiments were expressed as mean values ± standard deviation for at least three replicates. The statistical analysis of data was performed using Minitab 18 (Minitab Ltd., Coventry, UK). Differences between mean values were determined with Duncan multiple range test at p < 0.05. Nanoemulsion stability and the zeta potential of krill oil nanoemulsions with different krill oil concentrations are shown in Zeta potential measures the magnitude of the charge attraction or repulsion between the particles. The presence of this potential helps to prevent droplets coalescence and results in stability of emulsions (Premi and Sharna). The mean droplet sizes of nanoemulsions containing different krill oil contents (2–10% w/v) were measured by using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano Z, where the results are given in  The EE of freeze-dried and spray-dried nanoemulsions with different krill oil concentrations (2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, 10% (w/v)) were shown in Dehydrated krill oil nanoemulsions formed orange powder, with low moisture content (less than 1%) in both freeze-drying and spray-drying processes. The SEM images of dried nanoemulsiosn with krill oil are illustrated in The spray-dried nanoemulsions had particles were mostly spherical structures with small surface indentations and wrinkles, because particles lost their shell rupture due to thermal dehydration ( Although freeze-drying can effectively dehydrate food matrices by sublimation of the ice fraction from a frozen product, after sublimation of ice crystals irregular and sometimes spongy, porous microstructures occurred ( The oxidative stability of krill oil encapsulates was evaluated by using Peroxide Value (PV) and TBARS methods, throughout storage for at least 12 and 15 days at 55 °C, respectively. The results are shown in The effect of krill oil concentration (2–10% w/v) on bioaccessibility (%) of krill oil from freeze-dried and spray-dried encapsulates during the 2 h in vitro gastro-intestinal digestion was given in The bioaccessibility of krill oil from the formulation with 2% and 4% (w/v) of krill oil concentration was constant for spray-dried samples ( The effect of two different dehydration approaches in respect of encapsulate stability, chemical stability of encapsulated krill oil, and in vitro bioaccessibility of encapsulated krill oil (%) were evaluated. Nanoemulsion system was used to the encapsulation of krill oil, and the combination of three different biopolymers; whey protein concentrate, maltodextrin, and gum arabic were included to the formulation for stabilizing the krill-oil nanoemulsion systems. These polymers were also acted as a wall material in our encapsulate design. Freeze-drying and spray-drying processes were selected for the dehydration process of nanoemulsions. The particle size of the nanoemulsions was increased at least 7 folds after spray-drying. The high process temperature in spray-drying might be led to oxidation of krill oil located in the outer surface of the encapsulates. In addition, this temperature was triggered the formation of Maillard Reaction between the MD and WPC. It has been found that nanoemulsion with 8% (w/v) of krill oil resulted in the optimum EE. Both in the freeze-dried and spray-dried samples of this concentration had better oxidative stability and low PV. Moreover, the bioaccessibility of krill in dehydrated sample with 8% (w/v) of krill oil showed desirable release with linear increment during a 2 h in vitro digestion. Still, the spray drying process was recommended for the dehydration of krill oil nanoemulsion since it provided higher EE and higher bioaccesibility (%) than freeze-dried ones. The findings of the present study may give a new insight into the encapsulation technology to open the door for the advantages of generating nanoemulsions for the encapsulation of valuable oils. This research has not been submitted for publication nor hasit been published in whole or in part elsewhere. We attest to the fact that all Authors listed on the title page have contributed significantly to the work, have read the manuscript, attest to the validity and legitimacy of the data and its interpretation, and agree to its submission to the Food Hydrocolloids. The authors express their gratitude to The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK).