In this paper, we describe a biosolids mineralization process that could address some concerns about biosolids management. Solids retention in a combined anaerobic/aerobic reactor system promotes biosolids mineralization. Solids retained in the reactor were subjected to both anaerobic and aerobic degradation in two different zones in the reactor. After 267d of operation, 75% of the solids that entered the reactors were mineralized, 62% of the total nitrogen (TN) was transformed, 51% of the phosphorus in the reactors was precipitated, and 39% of the solids dissolved and appeared in the effluent. Accumulation of solids in the reactors did not have an adverse effect on reactor performance. Evidence of biosolids degradation included a decrease in the VSS/TSS ratio, an increase in temperature, loss of nitrogen, decrease in COD, and an increase in TDS.Biosolids are the (primarily organic) residual materials generated from wastewater treatment processes. The United States Environmental Protection Agency ( Prior to use or disposal biosolids characteristics are usually modified through stabilization and dewatering processes. Stabilization processes reduce the volatile solids content, odor, and amount of pathogens. Dewatering is an important aspect of traditional management because raw biosolids are typically more than 90% water, which complicates and adds to the expense of biosolids management. Standards for the use or disposal of biosolids are covered in the Code of Federal Regulations Title 40, Part 503, published in the Federal Register in 1993. Biosolids management, however, is controversial. There has been public opposition based on concerns about odors, disease, and contaminants associated with biosolids. For example, in 2001 the National Whistleblower Center expressed concerns to the Office of the Inspector General about USEPA position on biosolids. In response, the inspector general conducted an assessment of their program ( One intriguing option for biosolids management is complete mineralization, an idea that can be traced back at least to the work of Gaudy and co-workers conducted a series of experiments to determine whether accumulation of solids would lead to ultimate failure of a reactor operated with no solids loss. In contrast with the steady-state reported by To test the process performance under the presence of a large quantity of inorganic solids, In this study, we examine a biosolids treatment process based on a bench-scale, Sheaffer modular reclamation and reuse system (SMRRS) for biosolids mineralization. Sheaffer International L.L.C. has experience with over 60 wastewater management projects dealing with municipal, industrial, and agricultural wastewaters ( Do biosolids accumulate in the reactor? What is the fate of inorganic solids? Does solids retention have any adverse effect on reactor performance? What were the fates of nitrogen and phosphorus in the process? All tests were conducted at the 12 Two test reactors were assembled from transparent Plexiglass cylinders, approximately 30 Fresh WAS (well-mixed) was obtained through a sample port connected to the secondary clarifier underflow. To help ensure a representative sample, the first flow from the port was wasted prior to sample collection. On the first day of testing, the reactors were filled with WAS and the top of each reactor was covered lightly with plastic wrap to minimize evaporation. On subsequent days the reactors were operated in a semi-batch mode with a brief combined feeding (2.8 Results reported here cover the first 267 Solids were also occasionally transported from the anaerobic zone into the aerobic zone by upwelling. These events occurred when gases produced during anaerobic degradation coalesced to form bubbles that became trapped in agglomerated particles. Rising bubbles with attached particles could be seen through the sides of the reactors. Sampling and analyses were performed on a daily basis to assess reactor performance. Physical analyses included measurement of total suspended solids (TSS), volatile suspended solids (VSS) and total dissolved solids (TDS), according to standard methods ( Although it was not part of the original study, we began to measure the solids concentration throughout the mixed reactor to provide information for a material balance calculation. For this measurement, we inserted a rigid 1.25 Chemical equilibrium calculations, conducted to assess the potential for phosphorus precipitation in the reactors, were carried out using the equilibrium software package Visual MINTEQ ( The quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) program included blank and replicate measurements to assess the accuracy of the measurements. Results, expressed as relative standard deviations (standard deviation divided by the mean) were typically less than 10%, which is the maximum recommended by Solids retention depends on the operation mode ( Average TDS concentrations in the effluent increase about 20% relative to the influent TDS concentration ( Results for most of the water quality parameters are substantially less relative to their average influent concentrations, but this decrease in concentration could be due to mineralization or due to accumulation within the reactor. To distinguish between these two options, we consider mass balance equations. The mass balance expression is The last term on the right-hand side could describe more than one reaction. For example, fixed solids could increase as a result of precipitation within the reactor or they could decrease as a result of dissolution within the reactor. In general, these reactions could occur in parallel and the magnitudes of these reactions could change over time as conditions within the reactor change. The influent term of the material balance includes the initial loading and the daily feed to the reactor. The effluent term includes mass lost from the system with samples taken from the reactors (effluent or composite samples). We can determine the net effect of mineralization by difference if we can quantify accumulation within the reactor. There are two ways to estimate solids accumulation in the reactor. One method relies on data from the mixed aerated zone. Unfortunately, there are no data for 40⩽ From this range of interpolated values we calculate a constant mean mass accumulation rate ( The resulting material balance for VSS, for example, indicates that the rate of mineralization increases slowly during the first 25 Material balance results for TP indicate that dissolution initially exceeds precipitation ( Data from the mixed aeration zone exhibit substantial noise—probably due to upwelling and settling effects—as can be seen in the TSS results ( Summary results from the material balance calculations ( Other data supporting the idea of mineralization come from the change in VSS and the change in temperature. The VSS/TSS ratio decreases from 0.83 in the feed to around 0.65 in the reactor mixed effluent. The average influent, ambient, and effluent temperatures are 15.9, 16.6, and 22.0 About one-third of that total heat lost from one reactor can be attributed to the effluent flow from that reactor each day: The rest of the heat must be transferred via convection to the surroundings. Adopting a simple heat transfer model, we represent the reactor as a uniform, constant temperature, vertical tube in air, with heat transfer dominated by natural convection. In this model, the reactor walls ( Data obtained through 267 Terms in the numerator and the denominator change over time, but after 267 During the long solids retention times, we believe the solids oscillated between anaerobic and aerobic zones. It is likely that the different degradation pathways in these two zones worked to enhance biosolids mineralization. In addition, we find that: For the duration of this study there was no evidence that solids accumulation had an adverse effect on reactor performance. Based on the material balance calculations, accumulated solids accounted for about 20% of the influent TP, about 35% of the influent TN, and about 30% of the influent fixed suspended solids. Almost half of the influent TP ended up precipitated within the reactor and most of the TN was transformed to the gas phase during mineralization. Approximately 70% of the influent VSS was mineralized. We appreciate all the support from Sheaffer International, L.L.C. We would also like to thank personnel at the Woodridge—Greene Valley wastewater facility for their cooperation with this study.