Background
                  Periprosthetic fracture following total hip arthroplasty is a significant problem faced by hip surgeons, and its management in elderly patients remains a considerable challenge.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed 28 Vancouver B2 and B3 periprosthetic femoral fractures (PFF) treated with revision of the femoral stems by distally locked, hydroxyapatite-coated uncemented stems (Cannulok). Patients were aged 75 years or older at the time of surgery.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up was 44.6 months (range, 24-102). The mean postoperative Oxford hip score was 30.1 (range, 10-46). The rate of fracture union was 95.8%, and the survivorship of the stem was 100% at the end of follow-up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The management of PFF in elderly is associated with increased postoperative morbidity and mortality. The use of a distally locked, hydroxyapatite-coated femoral stem is a valid option for the treatment of PFF to achieve fracture union with a low rate of revision.Periprosthetic femoral fractures (PFF) following total hip arthroplasty (THA) are a significant problem faced by hip surgeons today. It is the sixth commonest cause for revision of THAs according to the National Joint Registry of England and Wales The management of these fractures has evolved with advances in the principles of internal fixation and revision hip surgery. The choice between these 2 methods of treatment is dictated by the pattern of the fracture, the stability of the implant within the femur, and the femoral bone stock. The Vancouver classification Revision implants have included long cemented stems The aim of this study was to review the outcome of management of Vancouver B2 and B3 PFF in patients who were 75 years or older at the time of surgery using the uncemented fully hydroxyapatite-coated, distally locking femoral stem (Cannulok Plus hip system). We retrospectively reviewed the data for patients with PFF treated in our institution during the period of December 2006 to January 2014. There were 91 patients who had surgical management of their PFF with either internal fixation or revision arthroplasty. The inclusion criteria for the study were as follows: (1) patients were 75 years or older at the time of surgery; (2) the femoral stem was considered loose either preoperatively or intraoperatively (Vancouver B2 or B3); (3) the patient has had a revision of the femoral stem using Cannulok Plus stem. Twenty-seven consecutive patients with 28 PFF fulfilled the inclusion criteria and were included in the study. The Cannulok Plus hip system (Orthodynamics Ltd, Gloucestershire, UK) is a fully hydroxyapatite-coated modular femoral stem with variable length option. It has 3 distal locking screw holes which allow the implant to be fixed distally to improve rotational and axial stability. This facilitates load transfer to stronger intact diaphyseal bone and allows early weight bearing. Of the 27 patients with 28 PFF included in this study, 16 patients (59%) were women and 11 patients (41%) were men. The mean age was 83 years ranging from 75 to 92 years. As per the Vancouver Classification, 20 PFF were Vancouver B2 fractures (71.4%) and the remaining 8 were Vancouver B3 fractures (28.6%). The preoperative American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) grading was ASA 2 in 7 patients and ASA ≥3 in 20 patients. The posterior approach was used in 18 hips (64.2%), the lateral approach in 6 hips (21.4%), and 4 hips (14.2%) had an extended trochanteric osteotomy performed. The index procedure was THA in 22 hips (78.5%) and cemented hip hemiarthroplasty in 6 hips (21.5%). Thirteen of the THAs (59%) were cemented and 9 (41%) were uncemented. Of the 22 hip arthroplasties, 10 were revisions (45.4%) at the index operation. The acetabular component was revised in 9 of 22 patients (41%). One hip hemiarthroplasty was converted to a THA due to the presence of cartilage wear in the acetabulum. The surgery was performed in our institution by 5 arthroplasty surgeons with special interest in revision hip surgery. The approach to the hip was dictated by the surgeons' preference. Extended trochanteric osteotomy was performed if required. Exposure of the fracture site was done carefully trying to preserve soft tissue attachment to the fractured bony fragments. After removal of the original femoral stem, the acetabular component (if present) was inspected for loosening or marked wear and the cup was revised if required. A combination of osteotomes, OSCAR (Orthosonics System for Cemented Arthroplasty Revision) ultrasonic generator, and burr were used to remove cement when present in the femur. The fracture was then held reduced by application of either cables or bone-holding clamps. After passing a guide wire, sequential reaming of the femur was performed using cannulated reamers. The proximal femur was reamed with the cannulated proximal rasp appropriate for the size and offset of stem chosen. A cannulated trial stem was inserted in the femoral canal which allowed the hip to be reduced and checked for leg length, soft tissue tension, and stability. After insertion of the definitive implant to the predetermined depth and version, the guide wire was removed and 2 or 3 distal locking screws were applied freehand under fluoroscopic control. All of the stems used in this study had a length of 300 mm which was found appropriate to bypass the fracture site by at least 2 femoral cortical diameters. In the postoperative period, the patients were allowed to touch weight bear for 6 weeks, which was increased to partial weight bearing at 6 weeks if X-rays were satisfactory at follow-up. The patients received postoperative thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin for 28 days. Patients were assessed postoperatively clinically and with Oxford hip scores (OHS). Any intraoperative or postoperative complications were collected from the patients' medical records. Fracture union was assessed through patients' postoperative X-rays at 6 weeks, and 3 and 6 months. Signs of radiologic union were sought in 2 orthogonal views (anteroposterior and lateral radiographs). Failure was defined as revision of the Cannulok implant for any reason, including infection. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS statistics v23 software (IBM, Armonk, NY). Continuous variables were examined with the independent group's Of the 27 patients included in this study, 4 patients died within the 6-month postoperative period before their fracture could unite radiographically. A further 3 patients died 2 years or later following their surgery. The mean follow-up was 44.6 months (range, 24-102). The mean postoperative OHS for the remaining 21 hips (20 patients) was 30.1 (range, 10-46). The median OHS for patients with ASA grade 2 and for those with ASA ≥3 were 40 and 28, respectively. This difference was statistically significant (MU test, Z = 2.764 and Eight patients had postoperative complications (28.5%). There were 3 hip dislocations, 2 of whom were managed with closed reduction and 1 required surgical intervention and the application of a posterior lip augmentation device. Four patients had a subsequent fracture distal to the stem, 3 of whom were managed with open reduction and internal fixation using a distal femoral locking plate and 1 patient was managed nonoperatively with protected weight bearing and leg brace. In 1 patient, the distal locking screws broke ( The mortality risk is high in patients who have a periprosthetic fracture. This is due to patients' preexisting medical comorbidities and the complex nature of the surgery involved. The mortality rate after PFF has been reported to be much higher in comparison to patients having revision for aseptic loosening and similar to the mortality rate found for patients who have had a hip fracture Four patients in our study died within the 6-month postoperative period. Their cause of death was not related to the surgery and none occurred within the immediate postoperative period. Our mortality rate was slightly higher than that described by Bhattacharyya et al One reason for the increased mortality in our group of patients could be attributed to the fact that our patients were older (mean age = 83 years) when compared to other studies ( Reoperation rate following stem revision for PFF has been previously described as high as 24% Immediate full weight bearing after femoral stem revision for PFFs can be a challenge in elderly population with severe osteoporosis. Several authors have suggested restricting full weight bearing for a minimum period of 6-8 weeks Uncemented prostheses with distal fixation have the advantage that the point of fixation lies beyond the zone of injury of the fracture, bridging the fracture, which is then reduced and held with cables around the new prosthesis None of our Cannulok stems needed revision at the end of the follow-up period. This is similar to the series described by Fink et al Despite that this implant is anteriorly curved, we have previously found that the use of stems longer than 300 mm had the risk of breaching distally through the anterior femoral cortex. We did not encounter any breach of the anterior cortex of the distal femur in this series of patients as all of the stems used in this study were 300 mm long. All stems have been osteointegrated except 3. Two patients had stable fibrous fixation and they had no significant symptoms to warrant stem revision. The distal locking screws broke in 1 patient in our series, indicating subsidence of the stem. This is likely due to undersizing of the stem relative to the diameter of the femoral canal which can cause high stresses on the distal locking screws during weight bearing. This femoral stem has displayed no further subsidence since the failure of the distal locking screws and has shown signs of bone ingrowth at follow-up. In this study, the union rate of PFF was 95.8% with 1 fracture not achieving full union. This patient had extensive comminution of the fracture which ended up with resorption of the small bony fragments leaving a gap at the fracture site. This fracture has eventually united after augmentation of the fixation with a cable plate and bone grafting with retention of the Cannulok femoral stem. We also found that the higher the ASA grade, the lower the patient's postoperative OHS. This has been shown in other studies as well Our study has some limitations. First, it is a retrospective series with a relatively small number of patients. As these patients had periprosthetic fractures, we do not have preoperative OHS to compare our postoperative scores with. Our series is, to the best of our knowledge, the largest series of PFF treated using this distally locked implant. This study also has involved an older group of patients in whom the management of periprosthetic fractures poses a considerable challenge. In conclusion, extensively coated distal locking stems achieve strong initial fixation for periprosthetic fractures of the hip, even in cases of severe bone loss with low risk of revision in short to midterm follow-up. Morbidity and mortality risk is high as expected in this elderly group of patients, and those with a lower ASA grade tend to have a better functional outcome. 