We describe a case of a severely comminuted type IIIa open tibial fracture, with distal loss of bone stock (7cm), total involvement of the tibial joint surface, and severe instability of the fibular-talar joint.
                  The treatment performed consisted of thorough cleansing, placing a retrograde reamed calcaneal-talar-tibial nail with proximal and distal blockage, as well as a fibular-talar Kirschner nail. Primary closure of the skin was achieved.
                  After 3 weeks, an autologous iliac crest bone graft was performed to fill the bone defect, and the endomedullary nail, which had protruded distally was reimpacted and dynamized distally. The bone defect was eventually consolidated after 16 weeks.
                  Currently, the patient can walk without pain the tibial-astragal arthrodesis is consolidated.Retrograde implantation of intramedullary nails in the femur and humerus is a common clinical technique. We present a case of grade IIIa tibial open fracture with large distal bone loss that significantly compromised the functionality of the ankle joint, also presenting joint instability with fibular-talar dislocation. This case was treated by retrograde intramedullary nailing of the tibia, with a contribution of posterior autologous bone, achieving consolidation of the fracture and ankle arthrodesis within 16 weeks. We present the case of a 23-year-old patient who was admitted after an aircraft accident (ultralight aircraft) with a diagnosis of grade IIIa open fracture of the distal third of the left tibia with loss of bone substance and fibular-talar dislocation ( The patient was treated at the Emergency Service thorough exhaustive cleaning and prophylactic antibiotic (amoxicillin–clavulanate 2 The patient had a good postoperative evolution and did not present any septic signs. At 3 weeks we carried out a graft of autologous iliac crest bone to fill the bone defect. We also reimpacted the intramedullary nail, which protruded slightly in a distal direction and performed distal dynamization. Consolidation of the bone defect was achieved at 16 weeks. After 3 years of follow-up, the patient was able to walk without pain, with a consolidated tibiotalar arthrodesis and with an arthrodesis of the subtalar joint caused by the nailing ( Fractures of the distal end of the tibia often occur as a result of high energy trauma with great comminution and severe tissue damage. In such lesions, surgical treatment with internal fixation has shown a high rate of infection and pseudoarthrosis. In our case there was a considerable loss of bone substance at the distal end of the tibia, as well as great instability of the rest of the fibular-talar joint, which prevented the function of the ankle joint. We considered a system that would provide sufficient stability of the focus and facilitated the final arthrodesis of the joint as a stabilizing treatment for the lesion. We did not consider external fixation because distal fixation of the talus and/or calcaneus did not guarantee the stability of the focus due to the considerable instability of the fibular-talar joint and it would not represent a definitive treatment. In addition, although this represents an alternative treatment, external fixation also presents a high rate of infection at the level of the pins, deep infections and septic arthritis. Tibial-talar-calcaneous fusion is a widespread procedure for the treatment of rheumatoid and posttraumatic arthritis, avascular necrosis of the talus, Charcot neuropathy and other deformities secondary to neuromuscular diseases. It has also been used as a rescue therapy in ankle arthroplasty failures. Intramedullary tibial-talar-calcaneous fixation can be achieved by antegrade and retrograde nailing of the tibia. The rate of pseudoarthrosis of the arthrodesis using retrograde intramedullary nailing has been reported at between 5% and 15%. Retrograde intramedullary nailing is used as a routine technique in femoral and humeral fractures. In some cases, primary arthrodesis has been described as a good method for the treatment of non-reconstructable fractures of the tibial pilon with metaphyseal defects. In these cases, the arthrodesis was performed at 20 weeks of the lesion, A successful arthrodesis is linked to the stability of the fixation. Although retrograde nailing affects the subtalar joint iatrogenically, it has been reported that the long-term evolution of an isolated tibiotalar arthrodesis also significantly affects the subtalar joint. Based on the outcome of the present case, we consider that, in tibial pilon fractures with severe joint involvement in which the function of the ankle is hardly feasible, intramedullary nailing with retrograde entry reaming can be a technique to consider. Level of evidence The authors declare that this investigation did not require experiments on humans or animals. The authors declare that this work does not reflect any patient data. The authors declare that this work does not reflect any patient data.