Anteromedial fractures of the coronoid occur via varus posteromedial rotation injury with axial loading and are associated with posteromedial rotatory instability (PMRI). We present our experience using a costal osteochondral autograft to reconstruct the coronoid process in a patient with a comminuted anteromedial coronoid fracture. A 36-year-old right hand–dominant male office worker injured his left elbow after a fall. He presented with pain and swelling of his left elbow. He did not show any apparent signs of neurovascular injury. Radiographs showed displaced multifragment fractures of the coronoid process ( Nine days after the injury, the surgical procedure was performed with the patient under general anesthesia in the supine position. After the posterior incision, the skin flap was elevated medially and laterally, exposing the fascia of the flexors and extensors. The anterior and posterior bundles of the medial collateral ligament were detached from the medial epicondyle. The attachment of the pronator teres was elevated from the capsule, and the anterior capsule was excised, providing access to the coronoid. The tip and anteromedial rim of the coronoid process were too comminuted to be fixed ( As a costal osteochondral autograft, the osteochondral junction of the sixth rib was harvested. An upper arm splint was removed at 2 weeks for active mobilization. The patient exhibited transient ulnar nerve palsy. Union was observed on CT at 24 weeks after surgery. At 18 months after surgery, the patient had a range of motion of 0° of extension and 125° of flexion with slight discomfort and requested implant removal. Subsequently, implant removal and subcutaneous translocation of the ulnar nerve were performed. Although slight osteoarthritic changes were observed on radiographs, CT and magnetic resonance imaging showed good congruence of the ulnohumeral joint ( At 30 months, the patient had a range of motion of 0° of extension, 128° of flexion, 80° of pronation, and 90° of supination. The grip strength of his left and right hands was 42 kg and 50 kg, respectively. The joint was stable on stress examination without pain. The Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score was 5.8. There were no restrictions on the patient's activities of daily living, and he felt mild pain only when repeatedly lifting heavy objects. He did not show any symptoms at the rib graft harvest site. He was able to return to full-time work in his previous occupation. O'Driscoll et al Coronoid process reconstructions have also been reported using autologous iliac crest bone grafts, To our knowledge, there have been no publications reporting 1-stage reconstruction of an acutely fractured coronoid process using a costal osteochondral autograft. Silveira et al The patient wanted the implants removed because of slight discomfort around his elbow. We performed implant removal, and simultaneously, the ulnar nerve was subcutaneously translocated to prevent possible recurrence of ulnar nerve palsy. His discomfort was completely resolved after implant removal. Costal osteochondral autografts have been reported in the treatment of osteochondritis dissecans of the capitellum. This case report shows that primary reconstruction using a costal cartilage autograft can be an alternative treatment for comminuted anteromedial coronoid fractures without radial head fractures. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.