The HF+HCl leach liquor generated from the dissolution of silica, alumina and silicate gangue minerals in a low-grade molybdenite concentrate contains H2SiF6 and H3AlF6. Studies were conducted to recover the two valuable fluorides as Na2SiF6 and Na3AlF6 (synthetic cryolite) by precipitation with Na2CO3 from the leach liquor. An initial investigation was carried out to determine the precipitation conditions for Na2SiF6 and Na3AlF6 from their individual acid solutions. Subsequently, the conditions were determined for the selective precipitation of the two fluorides from a synthetic mixed acid solution similar to the leach liquor. When the acid solution was neutralized with 3mol/L Na2CO3, Na2SiF6 precipitated first at pH 1.35 whilst Na3AlF6 required an increase in pH above 2.2 before it precipitated. Maximum recovery of the two fluorides was best achieved at about 50°C. A similar trend was observed for the precipitation of Na2SiF6 and Na3AlF6 from the leach liquor of molybdenite upgrading. Phases of precipitated fluorides were identified by XRD and surface morphology by SEM. The purity of the Na2SiF6 precipitate was 99.5% whereas Na3AlF6 was contaminated with Na3FeF6.Low-grade molybdenite concentrates, such as the one available from Jaduguda (India) as a by-product from Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. containing 41.5% Mo, are not suitable for processing unless they are upgraded/concentrated to ≥ The fluorides such as Na For fluoride recovery as a by-product, In order to devise a procedure for the selective precipitation of Na The conditions applicable for selective precipitation of fluoride chemicals from leach/synthetic solutions can be understood by the theoretical estimation of the solubilities of the fluorides at any pH or fluoride/metal ion concentration. The dissociation of Na Similarly for dissociation of Na The leach liquor generated during the refining of the low-grade Jaduguda molybdenite concentrate was analysed and the composition is given in Standard synthetic solutions of H In these experiments, the precipitate was allowed to settle and then filtered, washed, and dried for over 2 Initially, investigations were carried out to understand the precipitation behavior of Na Similar experiments were conducted with a mixed synthetic (model) solution of 0.32 The precipitation efficiency of Na The solution left after the precipitation of Na The applicability of the above results conducted for the recovery of Na The effect of pH on the recovery of Na The filtrate after the precipitation of Na The scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of selectively precipitated sodium silicofluoride at pH 1.35 from the mixed synthetic solutions of hydrofluo-silicic acid and hydrofluo-aluminic acid is shown in  From individual acid solutions of H From the mixed acid solution, Na The maximum recovery of both fluorides was achieved at about 50 Similar results were obtained for the precipitation of Na The authors are thankful to the Director of the National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur for giving permission to publish this work.