This paper presents and discusses measurements performed to study the interaction mechanism of calcium and sulfate with galena and their effect on xanthate adsorption. The results of collector adsorption show that regardless of the solution pH (5.5, 7.5 and 9.5), the presence of calcium and sulfate during the mineral pre-conditioning, decreases the adsorption of isopropyl xanthate onto galena. Microflotation measurements carried out at pH 9.5 show that at low concentrations of calcium and sulfate (below about 0.005mol/L), the recovery of galena is not affected. However, as the concentration of both ions increases, flotation recovery substantially decreases. Contact angle measurements corroborate this behavior: a relatively large contact angle in the absence of calcium and sulfate (i.e., 64°), and a significant decrease when these species are present (i.e., ca. 45°). The observed behavior suggests that calcium ion probably has a certain chemical affinity for the active sites of the galena, which hinders the occurrence of ion exchange collector-sulfate or collector-hydroxyl to form lead xanthate (PbX2), which is the species responsible for the enhanced hydrophobicity of the mineral. On the other hand, the adverse effect of the sulfate is probably due to the formation of a layer of lead sulfate on the galena surface, which acts as a barrier that hinders the interaction of the collector with the metallic sites of the mineral lattice, thus negatively affecting the chemisorption mechanism. Likewise, the decreasing of lead concentration in solution, in equilibrium with the precipitated PbSO4 and the sulfate, limits the precipitation/coagulation of lead xanthate in the vicinity of the interface. Electrochemical measurements corroborate the proposed mechanism.Process water used in industrial operations of sulfide flotation is generally recycled from tailings dams, thickeners overflow and filtration units ( Calcium (Ca Calcium species are present in the flotation pulps due to several reasons: one of them is the use of recycled water in different parts of the process, another is due to the use of lime (CaO) to regulate the pH of the flotation water, and the dissolution of calcium-bearing species such as calcite and dolomite. In turn, the presence of sulfate at saturation concentrations is due to the natural oxidation of the sulfides by the atmospheric oxygen that absorbs into the pulp throughout the grinding, conditioning, flotation and thickening stages. Under alkaline conditions, sulfide (S Some studies have been carried out on the effect of these ions on the flotation of sphalerite (activated with Cu) and galena floated with xanthate, and it has been shown that they are capable of modifying the mineral surface properties, when they are present either individually, as is the case of Ca In this regard, The experimental methodology consisted in the use of freshly-ground pure galena samples, which were used in four types of studies: collector adsorption, mineral dissolution measurements, micro flotation and electrochemical measurements under the different conditions of interest. As well, fragments of pure galena were used in the contact angle experiments. The chemical composition of the galena sample was determined by elemental analysis of metals with atomic absorption spectroscopy (AA), while the sulfur quantification was carried out by ICP spectrometry. The results of elemental chemical analysis are presented in The experimental methodology employed was intended to measure the evolution of the xanthate absorbance as a function of time at the wavelength of 301 The pulverized galena (−106 Microflotation experiments were carried out in an 80 The contact angle measurements were carried out using very pure fragments of galena, which were mounted on metallographic resin. The specimen was polished using silicon carbide sandpaper (No. 80-800) and deoxygenated-deionized water. The experiments consisted in pre-conditioning the galena sample in 100 The role of pH and presence of sulfate on galena dissolution were experimentally investigated. In these experiments, 200 The effect of calcium and sulfate on the electrochemical response of galena was experimentally investigated. The particle size of the galena sample used in this technique was −25 The behavior of galena oxidation with the atmospheric oxygen in the presence and absence of sulfate (0.02 Prior to the collector adsorption experiments, preliminary measurements were performed in order to detect possible xanthate decomposition products. To accomplish this, during the experiment of xanthate adsorption on the mineral at pH 5.5 and higher, a spectral sweep of the solution was made every minute. Since the characteristic absorption peaks of potential reaction products of xanthate were not observed, it was assumed that the change in collector concentration is solely due to the adsorption of this onto the mineral surface. However, when conducting the measurement at pH 4 and below, other reaction products were detected. These results agree with those published by  With regards to the effect of calcium and sulfate, the results show that the presence of calcium ( In order to define the role of calcium and sulfate concentration on galena flotation, microflotation tests were performed by varying the concentration of these ions from 0 to 2 The presence of sulfate seems to affect the galena recovery at concentrations above 0.01 Contact angle measurements were also performed at pH 9.5, in the presence and absence of calcium and sulfate. The results are presented in In order to test the validity of the hypothesis proposed by The proposed mechanism for the interaction between calcium and the active sites on the galena surface is shown schematically in It is important to mention that in the measurements carried out at pH 9.5 in presence of calcium, in addition to the Ca In order to understand the role of the sulfate during the pre-conditioning of galena, experiments were carried out to measure lead in solution in presence and absence of sulfate. This experiments where aimed at investigating the effect of the presence of the main reaction product (i.e., the sulfate) of galena oxidation. The results obtained are shown in Based on the results discussed above, in the present work it is suggested that the decrease of xanthate adsorption on galena when sulfate is present during the pre-conditioning ( With the aim of corroborating the mechanisms suggested above to explain the interaction between partially oxidized galena and calcium/sulfate, and to investigate whether the presence of calcium and sulfate affect the oxidation and reduction reactions of the mineral, an electrochemical study was carried out at pH5.5.  The behavior of the CPE-galena in the presence of sulfate ions is presented in In presence of sulfate ions ( As mentioned above, the current of process B3 increases with respect to that of peak A3. This increase is due to the oxidation of the lead contained in the PbSO Finally, the process C2 is due to the reduction of the lead species obtained in A1 and A2, as well as the direct reduction of the galena (see The presence of calcium during the pre-conditioning of galena decreases the adsorption of xanthate onto the mineral, probably due to the chemisorption of the Ca The authors thank Cinvestav-IPN personnel for their support and Conacyt, México, for financial funding and scholarships provided to the involved graduate students. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.