Block copolymers (BC) are indeed suitable and versatile templates for the creation of mesostructured and mesoporous materials. Great advances have been achieved in the last 3 years. Nowadays, it is possible to obtain highly controlled large-pore and highly stable mesostructured and mesoporous materials (silica, non-silica oxides, carbons,…) shaped as powders, films, monoliths or aerosols. This paper reviews mainly the synthesis of BC-templated mesostructured oxides, stressing in the physical, chemical and processing parameters, which have to be thoroughly controlled to reproducibly obtain mesoporous materials.The ‘physical chemistry of organized matter’ relies on the successful combination of sol–gel chemistry and self-assembly procedures, to uniquely control the texture of materials at the nanometer scale Since the pioneering work of the Mobil scientists In the last 3 years, the main advances in the texturing of inorganic or hybrid materials by BC can be summarized as follows: The fine structure of these composite materials (i.e. the nature of the inorganic walls, the organic domains, and the hybrid interface) is beginning to be unveiled The porosity and pore structure of these materials are beginning to be understood, in correlation with the synthesis variables Synthesis methods have been extended to non-silica frameworks (particularly single or mixed metal oxides New synthesis methods have been developed, which involve low cost precursors Pore and wall modification has become possible; following the concepts applied to MCM-41-like silica Mesoporous aluminosilicates with partially crystalline walls have been obtained Multiscale textured materials (i.e. macro/mesoporous, or micro/mesoporous, or micro/meso/macroporous) have been designed by combining templating techniques at different scales (integrative synthesis paths) The formation mechanisms of mesosotructured hybrids are on the way to being understood In this paper, we will discuss recent work dealing on BC (diblock and triblock) as templating agents for mesostructured and mesoporous oxides. While we do not aim at giving an exhaustive description, which can be found in recent reviews The first papers related to mesostructured oxides described the use of ionic surfactants such as the cationic alkyltrimethylammonium (C Pinnavaia and coworkers were the first to bring the idea of using nonionic surfactants (alkylamines (C The Stucky group Attard et al. performed silica sol–gel polymerization in lyotropic liquid crystals (LC), creating an alternative to conventional precipitation methods (the true liquid crystal templating, TLCT route While PEO–PPO–PEO or PEO-alkyl copolymers are the most usual templates, Wiesner and coworkers performed pioneering work in organoaluminosilicates templated with high mass (PI- The evaporation-induced self assembly (EISA) denomination was coined by Brinker et al. In all three outlined routes (precipitation, TLCT and EISA), an interplay of physical and chemical factors has to be considered, if aiming to design mesostructured materials in a rational way. A fourth route (nanocasting on already formed mesoporous materials), mainly developed by Ryoo and coworkers, is useful for frameworks that are difficult to form using LC templates (reactive oxides, polymers, carbon, non-oxides,…) Two main processes can be recognized in the formation of these mesophases, which is schematized in The creation of an organized texture, due to the self-assembly properties of the template. This process results in a microphase separation, which divides the space in two domains: hydrophilic and hydrophobic, in the case of the simplest BC surfactants. The formation of an inorganic network. The inorganic components are placed in one of the spatially separated parts of these nanoheterogeneous systems. Condensation reactions will give rise to an extended inorganic network; these reactions can be tuned to take place simultaneously or subsequently as organization proceeds. The simplest analysis will evidence three fundamental interactions that will control the final obtained structure: surfactant–surfactant (S–S), inorganic–inorganic (I–I) and surfactant–inorganic (S–I); these interactions take place in each of the microsegregated phases, or at the inorganic-template hybrid interface (HI). The solvent will also take part in mesophase formation. The most relevant thermodynamic aspects in the formation of a hybrid mesophase (Δ The central points to a well-defined mesophase formation (details discussed elsewhere Obtaining a well-defined templated hybrid is a matter of controlling a delicate thermodynamic and kinetic balance between multiple phenomena. An important advantage of BC compared to ordinary surfactants is that all relevant terms leading to order (i.e. Δ Solvent–template interactions have been thoroughly studied from the thermodynamic point of view. The complexity of PEO–PPO–PEO/water/cosolvent systems has been unveiled by Alexandridis and coworkers, who established correlations between the cosolvent polarity and its location within each block, or the different interfaces A ‘thermodynamic’ analysis can be useful to explain solvent/BC and possibly inorganic/BC interactions. However, the behavior of the inorganic components is more complex, and will depend markedly in kinetic features, mostly related to inorganic polymerization, which can ‘freeze’ a given mesostructure The S–I interaction is particularly important in BC-metal oxide hybrids, especially in PEO–PPO based ones. Different possible interactions taking place at the HI are schematized in A synthesis approach developed by Wiesner and coworkers Recent work in silica and titania mesostructured films A similar role of the interface is observed in TiO In summary, a thermodynamic point of view is extremely useful, but the compatibility between two polymers (the BC and the inorganic part, which is a polymer itself) should be taken into account. Better order is related to an adequate balance of the S–S interactions (Δ From the kinetics point of view, the formation of an organized hybrid mesostructure is the result of the balance between two competitive processes: phase separation/organization of the template vs. inorganic polymerization. In precipitation-based synthesis, it seems that a surfactant-rich precipitate is first formed, which evolves into a more or less organized solid, depending on the synthesis conditions. The first near-neutral pH synthesis conditions introduced by Pinnavaia and coworkers lead to worm-like materials. Silica condensation rates are slower in mild acidic media (pH ≈ pH In these conditions, the precipitation of ordered phases is controlled by the self-assembly involving the HI ( Addition of F These systems present very fast inorganic condensation kinetics. There are several strategies to retard condensation, such as complexation, acidification or controlled hydrolysis Mesoporous thin films and membranes are particularly interesting for optical, membrane or photovoltaic applications. PEO–PPO–PEO and alkyl-PEO templated films showing worm-like, cubic or hexagonal symmetry have been synthesized The successive steps leading to a mesoporous oxide from a mesostructured hybrid are shown in Processing of a mesostructured hybrid prior to calcination is also determinant for pore size, surface area and porosity. These issues affect wall thickness and stability, which is utterly important regarding stability in demanding conditions (catalysis, membranes,…). For SBA-15 materials, aging time and temperature are particularly important The principal issue regarding non-silica mesoporous oxides is high temperature treatment. While silica walls keep their amorphous nature upon thermal treatment, crystalline phases arise in transition metal-based frameworks. Growth of nanocrystals beyond the wall thickness deteriorates the mesostructure. This is one of the advantages of BC templates: walls are thicker than in the case of molecular amphiphiles, and the first works by Yang et al. In the last 3 years, major advances have been performed in this field, after the first successful synthesis of BC-templated silica. In summary, a better knowledge of the nature of the HI (particularly in PEO-based templates) led to improve the synthesis routes, permitting one to generate tuned porosity (from micro-mesoporous to purely mesoporous) robust silica. The possibilities have been extended to non-silica oxides with crystalline walls, which is itself a great advance. Thanks to a variety of procedures, it is possible to process these oxides as powders (with controlled particle size), films, monoliths or membranes. Systematic studies are leading to a better description of the role of synthesis and processing variables. This better understanding with no doubt conveys to reproducible syntheses; applications based on thoroughly characterized materials can be now envisaged. Such an innovative field of research should strongly benefit and become more mature through better system understanding and further developments in areas such as: interfacial chemistry and physical chemistry of nanocomposites, study of ‘pseudo phase diagrams’ of hybrid composites, study of order-disorder transition in hybrid nanosystems, synthesis of new BC with tuned functionalities ( A strong effort is currently devoted to understand and rationalize the formation mechanism of mesostructured oxides in order to be able to control their design for targeted properties. In situ methods are indeed allowing a breakthrough in the understanding of the formation processes of these materials However, the development of this area is still on its infancy: indeed, most of the performed research is based on commercially available macromolecules, spurred by the first successful PEO-based materials. The horizon is broader: BC can be precisely tailored by controlled polymerization techniques Multiscale texturation can be achieved by combining different approaches: controlled phase separation In many senses, Nature can be considered as a model or a ‘school of design for advanced materials’ Regarding applications, BC-templated materials should present improved properties in catalysis (SBA-15 is being intensively studied In this mushrooming field, future approaches should include integrative synthesis pathways: coupling of multiscale templating and morphosynthesis, associated to external stimuli (applied fields, fluxes, mechanical constraints, imprinting,…). This land of research is by essence multidisciplinary and the success of this race to advanced materials will strongly depend on the ability of physicists, chemists, biologists and chemical engineers to collaborate efficiently. The authors are indebted to F. Warmont for the TEM images. GJAASI acknowledges financial support from St Gobain Recherche, SECyT, Fundación Antorchas (RG 14056-18), and Gabbos Re-entry Grant's.