The ball load and pulp load have a significant influence on the ball mill product size and production capacity. To improve the circuit performance at industrial scale these variables must be tweaked to levels where the plant can get grind and capacity benefits. In most grinding circuits the influence of these variables are not quantified because it is difficult to obtain precise measurements of the pulp load for an industrial scale mill and the conventional method of obtaining ball load measurements that involves crash stops is not attractive. A comprehensive investigation was performed on an industrial scale mill to quantify the effects of both ball and pulp load. A wide range of ball and pulp loads were tested and the findings are reported in this paper. The Sensomag, a sensor developed by Magotteaux, was used to obtain ball and pulp load measurements during the experimental work.Ball mills are used for primary and secondary grinding stages in most comminution circuits around the world ( In this project, the ball and pulp load were varied on an industrial scale to see the effects on the ball mill product size and production capacity at Anglo Platinum’s Waterval UG2 Concentrator in Rustenburg, South Africa. The Sensomag®, a sensor developed by Magotteaux, was used to obtain ball and pulp load measurements during the experimental work. Sensors have been used in grinding applications to obtain information for control and optimisation in different types of mills. Sensors based on acoustic emission monitoring techniques ( Waterval UG2 Concentrator was designed to treat 400 The secondary milling circuit is split into two parallel streams using a set of cyclones. The cyclone overflow, containing a less coarse silicate rich fraction, is sent to the IsaMill circuit to undergo mainstream inert grinding (MIG), and the cyclone underflow, containing the coarser chromite rich fraction, is sent to the secondary mill, which was the test subject for this article. The secondary mill discharge is combined with the IsaMill circuit final product stream in the secondary mill discharge sump, which is then pumped to the secondary rougher flotation cells, as illustrated in The IsaMill circuit was a recent modification to the secondary milling circuit. As a result, the amount of material treated in the secondary mill has substantially decreased from the original design. This provides an opportunity for some optimisation to be done around the mill, and the Sensomag unit was used as an investigative tool in this project. The Sensomag has been developed by Magotteaux to continuously measure both ball load and pulp slurry positions inside an operating mill. The Sensomag is installed on the shell of the mill. The main data is provided in terms of toe and shoulder angles for both steel and pulp. Other derived angles can also be computed from this data, as illustrated in The principal element of the Sensomag is a standard beam, made of special wear resistant polyurethane, installed inside the mill, and containing sensors, which perform direct measurements of ball and slurry presence. In an industrial ball mill treating very abrasive ore which is rich in chromite, such as UG2, the maintenance schedule requires the replacement of the resin beam every 3 The main variables for this test work were in-mill % solids and ball filling degree. Test work was carried out over a range of controlled conditions for the % solids and ball filling degree, both of which have been shown to have a significant influence on mill performance ( A total of 15 surveys were performed. For each survey samples were taken for particle sizing as well as % solids analysis in order to try and gauge the performance of the mill at the various operating conditions. The secondary ball mill at Waterval UG2 Concentrator is normally operated at 30% ball filling and between 68% and 72% in-mill solids. In this study ball filling degrees of 25%, 30% and 33% and in-mill % solids of 65%, 68%, 72% and 75% were targeted – which resulted in 12 surveys. The other three surveys were all performed at 30% ball filling, but at 75%, 65% and 68% in-mill % solids targets. Surveys 1 and 2 were performed prior to the relining of the secondary mill shell lifter bars. Survey 15 was carried out as a check after the 33% filling condition surveys. The values for % solids described above are by mass. A solids SG of 3.4 for UG2 ore treated at Waterval UG2 Concentrator was used to estimate the % solids by volume and the pulp density in Residence time distribution (RTD) tests were also performed on seven of the surveys, as shown in Pulp chemistry samples were also taken of the mill feed and discharge. These were analysed for pH, conductivity (mV) and temperature. This was done to evaluate the effect of different mill operating conditions on the pulp chemistry – which has a significant influence on the performance of the flotation separation process downstream.  The design of the secondary mill discharge sump and the circuit configuration, which allows the IsaMill product and the secondary mill discharge to combine in the secondary mill discharge sump, presented a challenge to collect a representative sample of the mill discharge. Space was very limited underneath the trommel screen and conditions were very harsh and aggressive for any conventional sampling method to be employed. As a result, a custom sample cutter, illustrated in Due to the distance of the sampler trough from the beginning of the trommel screen, there were some concerns as to whether the sample collected would be representative and unbiased. A verification survey was performed to check if a representative sample could be taken using the custom made sample cutter. This was done through by-passing the IsaMill circuit and feeding the whole primary rougher tail stream to the secondary mill circuit. In this case the primary rougher tail fed the cyclone and the cyclone underflow reported to the secondary mill. The overflow is sent directly to the discharge sump. For this configuration, a survey around the discharge sump could be performed because the cyclone overflow, as well as the secondary rougher feed, could be sampled, mass balanced and compared to the sample from the secondary ball mill discharge sample cutter. In addition to the % solids and size distributions data collected from each stream, PGMs and Cr Another type of test was performed to measure the consistency of the secondary mill discharge sample cutter. For this test a number of samples were taken in succession over a period of time and for each sample the pulp density measurement was taken. A total of 15 tests were performed at three target ball filling degrees and four different target in-mill % solids. It can be seen that the actual filling degree calculated from the Sensomag angles and model were generally close to the targeted filling degree. Surveys 1 through to 6 were all performed at ball filling degrees of 30%. It must be noted that surveys 1 and 2 were performed when the mill was operated with a worn liner, while surveys 3–6 were under the new liner. For survey 15 the target ball filling was 30%, but the calculated filling from the Sensomag was around 28%, which makes it a separate operational condition. The general cyclone underflow density % solids were around 76% for the tests performed in this project. However, survey 5 was lower than the rest of the surveys due to upstream disturbances. The measured in-mill % solids were also generally quite close to the targeted values. The exception is however survey 9, where the measured was around 75% compared to a target of 68%. This was a result of the majority of the inlet water by-passing the mill feed line due to a leaking manual valve after the flow meter. The effect of the lower than expected cyclone underflow density for survey 5 meant that the measured in-mill density was 65% instead of the targeted 68%. The general stability during the surveys was quite good, as supported by the fairly low relative standard deviations for the measured % solids for the mill feed and discharge streams. The general difficulty in measuring the flow rate of a stream as large as the cyclone underflow is evident in some of the high relative standard deviations observed for the flow measurements in The grind data was initially assessed in terms on reduction ratios and sieve (or screen) efficiencies for selected size classes. The size classes of interest in this investigation were the plus 106 The term %  In order to quantify the effect of liner profile surveys 1 and 2 were compared with surveys 4 and 5, where the latter surveys were performed after a mill shell relining. Both sets of surveys were performed at around 30% ball filling degree. Surveys 1 and 4 and surveys 2 and 5 were performed at around 73% and 65% solids respectively.  With regards to the balls in the charge the following observations were drawn: The balls are lifted 2° higher with the new liner indicating that the liner has an influence on the ball lift. At the toe of the load, there is also a 2° difference in the ball angles. Assessing the total ball angle shows that the ball load is more expanded with the new liner and more compact with the worn liner. The ball load appears to be more expanded as the density increases. The results appear to be consistent but further tests should be performed to assess if these differences are statistically significant and how this impacts on mill performance. With regards to the pulp in the charge the following observations were drawn: At the shoulder (head), the pulp is lifted slightly higher with the worn liner. At the toe, the difference between the old and new liner is larger than 2°. The pulp appears to be more compact with a worn liner. This difference could perhaps be explained by a more compact ball load that captures and drags the pulp with it. In general, the pulp is more compact and slightly more lifted with a worn liner. The pulp tends to be even more compact as the density increases. As the secondary mill is fed by the underflow of a cyclone, the mill feed rate is controlled by the primary rougher. It was not possible to standardise the feed rate to the secondary mill during the test period. During the first survey, performed at high density, the mill feed rate was unusually low. For the purposes of this article the analysis of liner effect on mill performances will not take tonnage into account and only power draw and reduction ratio are considered. The tonnage information will be incorporated after the circuit simulations are completed, which are not a subject of this paper.  A mill equipped with a worn liner absorbs more power. This power draw decreases as the in-mill density increases. A worn liner appeared to produce a higher reduction ratio of the % sub 75 Generally, a worn liner leads to a more compact ball load which improves the quality of ball/pulp mixing contact. This leads to a better grind at a cost of a slightly higher power draw. On the other hand, a new liner appeared to have a more expanded ball load, leading to poorer ball/pulp contacts and reduced power draw.  The ball head angle does not appear to be influenced by the pulp density. Only a slight decrease was observed in the head angle as the density increases. However, the mill filling degree appears to have an influence on the ball head angle. The ball head angle appears to be larger at higher ball filling degrees. Unlike the ball head angle, the ball toe angle appears to be influenced by the in-mill pulp density. It can be seen that when the in-mill density increases the ball foot angle decreases. This could be due to the ball expansion at the toe of the load which was observed with increase in the slurry density. Generally, the increasing density has an expanding effect on the ball load, mainly at the toe. This behaviour occurs at every ball filling degree. The following observations were drawn with regard to the effect of density on the pulp position:  The pulp head angle decreases as the density increases. As the density increases, the pulp becomes more sticky, but also heavier. In this case, the ratio between the forces in presence (adhesion, cohesion and gravity) seems to be in favour of cohesion and gravity. Thus, instead of expanding due to high adhesion forces, the heavy pulp seems to contract due to cohesion and gravitational forces in this instance. At the toe, the pulp angle variations are very small (overflow discharge). There is a slight increase in the pulp foot angle with density, at some ball filling values and some slight compaction of pulp volume. Generally, the pulp volume gets more compact as density increases. The total pulp angle decreases with increasing density. This compaction occurs mainly at the shoulder of the pulp volume. The effect of in-mill density and filling degree on the relative position of ball and pulp head and toe positions is shown in At the shoulder, the pulp appears to be lifted a few degrees higher than the balls. The dry ball head angle is always negative. The difference between pulp and balls at the shoulder decreases as the ball filling and pulp density increase. At the toe, the pool angle appears to decrease as the in-mill density and ball filling degree increases. Although the pulp level remains almost constant the ball load appears to expand (ball foot angle decreasing) which reduces the pool. Generally, the difference between the total pulp and ball angle decreases as the in-mill density and filling increase. This could lead to better mixing between balls and slurry and therefore improved mill performances. The effect of in-mill density on the mill performance at various filling degrees is given in The power draw appears to decrease with increase in the in-mill density. It is mainly due to the weight of the pool which increases with density. The mill power increases with the ball filling which is mainly due to the weight of steel media. Increasing the in-mill density appeared to give a slight increase in the reduction ratio of sub 75 From this work it can be concluded that there are two possibilities of improving the reduction ratio: either by increasing ball filling at the cost of increased power draw or by increasing pulp density at reduced power draw. Therefore, mill performance optimisation should first be done by increasing pulp density which has no cost associated with it. If the grind target cannot be reached only then should the ball filling be increased. Analyses of mill performance of usually challenging and different methods have been applied by various authors (  At the toe, in an overflow mill, the most significant angle is the ball angle. With decreasing ball foot angles, at a constant filling degree, the performance increases as indicated by a lower specific energy (kWh/t). There is a better mix between balls and pulp. The pool volume decreases due to balls entering into the pulp. At the shoulder, the pulp head angle is the most significant. As this angle decreases, the performance increases. Globally, the grinding performance increases as the ball angles and pulp angles are getting closer to each other. More specifically, in the case of an overflow mill, at constant ball filling, the mill performance increases as the pulp volume becomes more compact (mainly at the shoulder) and as the ball load expands (mainly at the toe). At constant ball filling degree, this mill’s performance increases as the pool angle and dry ball angle go toward zero. To recap, the dry head angle is the difference between the ball head and pulp head angles, and the pool angle is the difference between the ball foot and pulp foot angles. In the case of an improving mix of balls and pulp linked to a ball filling degree increase, the performances deteriorate because of high power (kW) cost, even though the reduction ratio seemed greatest for the highest filling degree. A total of 15 surveys were performed around the Waterval UG2 Concentrator secondary ball mill, at three different ball filling degrees and four in-mill density levels as part of optimisation studies. The filling degree and pulp level were measured using an on-line sensor called “Sensomag”, developed by Magotteaux. All the surveys performed at various ball filling degrees show consistent trends in terms of performance optimisation: The milling performance is linked to the quantity and quality of the ball/pulp interactions. To improve these interactions, several actions can be taken: The ball filling can be increased. These extra balls will take position where previously there was only pulp. This leads to a reduction of the pool and dry head volume. The associated cost is an increase of mill power draw. The pulp density can be increased, leading to ball load expansion. This also leads to a reduction of the pool and dry head volume. In this case, the mill absorbed power is also drastically reduced. In terms of pulp density, no optimum was reached. One can expect the milling performances to deteriorate at high density (somewhere above 75% solids), but this high value was not tested in the surveys performed due to limitations on current achievable cyclone underflow density. Increasing the pulp density has an unexpected consequence at the pulp shoulder: the pulp head angle decreases as density increases. This might be explained by gravity and cohesion forces which increase (more than adhesion forces) with pulp density. The milling performances are linked to the quantity but also the quality of ball and pulp interactions. The load expansion gives a direct image of the quantity of contact. The quality of contact is linked to the compactness of the load. Further studies will be required to correlate the ball load compactness with the mill operating and Sensomag parameters. The authors would like to express the appreciation to Anglo Platinum, Magotteaux, University of Witwatersrand, and University of Cape Town for supporting this work. In addition the authors acknowledge the valuable contributions of the following people who worked very hard to ensure that this project succeeded:     