The Gliding Arc Discharge (GAD) is an efficient non-thermal plasma technique able to degrade organic compounds dispersed in water at atmospheric pressure. The degradation of the organometallic lead acetate (PbAc) in aqueous solution was performed by two distinct plasmageneous processes: GAD and GAD/TiO2.
                  The global oxidation of the organic matter was followed by Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) and the mineralization was determined by the Total Organic Carbon (TOC). The Pb2+ ions released during the degradation process were measured by Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS).
                  For 2h of GAD treatment, the degradation rate of PbAc (10mM) reached 83% and for the same duration of GAD/TiO2 process ([TiO2]=1gL−1), it reached 93%.
                  The release of Pb2+ ions in the solution was respectively of 95% and 57% for GAD and GAD/TiO2 processes. The released Pb2+ ions were removed by precipitation process in a basic medium at pH=11.1.
                  A reaction mechanism was proposed to explain the PbAc molecule degradation and the Pb2+ elimination.Lead acetate is used as a mordant in textile printing, dyeing, in varnishes, in preparing other lead compounds, etc. ( The works of It is commonly known that the organic form of lead is more toxic than its mineral form (  According to the mentioned works, it is obvious that AOPs can be used to degrade the organometallic molecules in order to release the metal ions. The latter can be eventually eliminated after the oxidation process by a simple chemical precipitation. The Gliding Arc Discharge (GAD) has emerged as an important electrical AOP leading to the degradation of most of organic pollutants such as: synthetic dyes ( To make the electric treatment more efficient, the GAD was coupled with the TiO To our knowledge, the electrical techniques have never been applied to the degradation organometallic compounds. In this work, we propose to degrade lead acetate (PbAc) in aqueous solution by different GAD processes. The Pb The organometallic anhydrous lead acetate (C The photocatalyst used is the titane dioxide TiO The experimental GAD apparatus used is presented in The plasma plume is disposed close enough to the target liquid (volume Pyrex reactor is equipped with a cooling system to avoid evaporation. With an adequate cooling, the temperature in the reactor is of 30 The treatment is done in closed system fixing the functioning parameters. The gas flow is fixed at A volume of 180 The degradation was followed by the analysis of Total Organic Carbon (TOC) (Shimadzu 5000a) and the Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) ( The pH and the Ox/Red potential were systematically measured after each treatment using a Consort multi-parameter-analyser. All chemicals were of analytical grade and used without further purification. Each solution was prepared by dissolving the commercial chemical product in distilled water. In order to establish the degree of PbAc oxidation and mineralization, we followed the COD and TOC evolution in function of time. Both techniques are complementary to one another to illustrate the detoxification level of water. This study is based on the treatment of lead acetate in water (10 In previous works (  This phenomenon may be explained both by a screening effect of excess particles which masks part of the photosensitive surface; and by the scattering of the light which reduces the amount of photons produced by the discharge that normally must be absorbed by the catalyst ( In this work, the plasma-catalytic process GAD/TiO  It is important to mention that at the natural pH of 6.1 and in dark ambience, the removal rate of PbAc was of 2.5%. At pH The analyses by TOC or COD show that a time exposure of 120 The decrease in the TOC indicates the progress of mineralization ( In order to understand the degree of carbon mineralization of the PbAc molecule, the ratio COD/TOC was studied in this work.  The plasma chemical reaction takes place between the PbAc molecules and The integration of Eq. Whatever the analytic method used TOC or COD, the PbAc degradation rate was of 82% for the GAD process and of 93% for the GAD/TiO The On this basis, a degradation mechanism is proposed: Stage 1: degradation of the orbital Stage 2: degradation of the ionic bands in the O Stage 3: degradation of the  Other sources probably exist such as the photon impact on hydrogen peroxide as follows ( The initial pH of the PbAc aqueous solution (10 pH and oxidation potential measurements allowed the localisation of the lead form associated to the positions (1.6, 0.69  The linear profiles obtained in According to the experimental models, the constant rates of Pb Theoretically, the maximum of Pb The addition of the TiO The removal of Pb In the same context, the precipitation allowed the removal of lead ions formed during the treatment of GAD/TiO Precipitation The Pb A similar approach was used by Adsorption When pH However, when pH On the basis of the point of zero charge (pH  Precipitation/adsorption competition It is possible that the two phenomena happen simultaneously. In this case, the competition between the precipitation and the adsorption is highly probable. In order to evaluate the energy consumption, an electrical counter was placed on the GAD apparatus. The electric power consumed was of 0.4 In this context, we have applied the formula  With a degradation rate of 82%, the calculating according the formula It is well to remember that this power is specific to 1 Two distinct Gliding Arc Discharges (GAD and GAD/TiO For 120 For 120 Both processes seem to be appropriate for the treatment of organometallic compounds such as lead acetate that is difficultly removed by conventional methods. The authors thank 'Erasmus Mundus' for its financial help during Mr Ghezzar post-doctoral fellowship.