Cordierite-based glass-ceramics have been developed using gold tailings as one of the starting raw materials. The crystallization behaviour of gold tailings based glass samples was investigated by DTA, XRD, and SEM. On the basis of DTA analysis, nucleation experiments were carried out at 820°C for 2h and crystallization experiments were performed at 1010°C for 2h. X-ray diffraction analysis revealed that the major phase of the synthesized glass-ceramics was cordierite along with a trace of iron cordierite. The properties of the synthesized cordierite-based glass-ceramics compared well with the values of industrial cordierite. Results indicate an interesting potential for gold tailings to produce useful materials.It is well known that gold tailings containing sulphides and mixed sulphates of metals cause serious pollution of surface and ground waters in many ore fields ( Glass-ceramics are very useful in various applications such as building materials, cooking ceramics, machinable ceramics, bio-ceramics, optical materials, etc. ( The aim of the present work is to investigate the possibility of using gold tailings as one of the starting raw materials to synthesize cordierite-based glass-ceramics. Physical and mechanical properties, such as density, thermal expansion coefficient, bending strength and hardness, have also been examined. A discussion of the correlation between the microstructure and the properties of these glass-ceramics is also presented. Gold tailings for the present experiments were sampled from a gold mine in Hebei Province of China. The chemical composition of as-received gold tailings analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) was 77.84 SiO The glass was prepared by melting the starting powders in air using Pt-crucibles in an electrically heated furnace at 1550 The resulting glass was crushed and seived through a 200 mesh to produce glass powder suitable for differential thermal analysis (DTA) employing a Dupont DTA. The types of crystalline phases existing in a sample after heat treatment were determined by X-ray powder diffraction (D/max-RB). The microstructure observations of the samples were done on a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The bulk density and porosity were measured by Archimedes’ method using water as a medium. The thermal expansion coefficient ( The results of X-ray diffraction confirmed the raw gold tailings sample mainly comprised quartz (SiO Typical DTA trace of the glass sample crystallized at the heating rate of 10 The properties of the glass and cordierite-based glass-ceramics are summarized in The present work was conducted to verify the feasibility of the gold tailings as one of the raw material for cordierite-based glass-ceramics production. Cordierite-based glass-ceramics have been synthesized from gold tailings. The major phase formed after nucleated at 820