Leaching of roasted stone coal with sulfuric acid results in a mixed vanadium solution containing Fe(III), Fe(II), Al(III) and Mg(II). Separation of V from synthetic sulfate solution containing these impurities has been investigated by ion exchange and solvent extraction. In ion exchange experiments, anion exchange resin ZGA414 was tested as its optimum adsorption capacity compared with D202, D453, D301FC and ZGA351 resins, and D2EHPA and TBP diluted with kerosene were employed in solvent extraction. Ion exchange tests indicated that only V(V) was loaded from the synthetic solution at pH>1.5, while it was difficult to separate V(V) from Fe(III), which also made resin toxic. Solvent extraction experiments revealed that V(IV) had a better extraction ratio than that of V(V), while Fe(III) had a serious effect on the extraction of V(IV). The co-extraction ratio of Al(III) and Mg(II) can be decreased by controlling their concentrations lower than 10g/L. Counter-current experiments with D2EHPA presented that 99% of V(IV) was extracted from the real leach solution after reduction process, leaving most of Fe(II), Al(III) and Mg(II) in the raffinate.Vanadium is an important rare metal which has been widely used in ferrous and non-ferrous alloys to improve its hardness, tensile strength, and fatigue resistance. In China, apart from the vanadium titano-magnetite, the carbonaceous shale, also called stone coal is another important vanadium-bearing resource due to its vast amount of deposits ( Commonly, two methods, ion exchange and solvent extraction are adopted to separate and concentrate vanadium from leach solution. In ion exchange process, D296 ( In this work, ion exchange and solvent extraction experiments have been performed to find an optimum condition to separate vanadium from special acid leach solution. For this purpose, some anion exchange resins and acidic extractant were employed and the loading/extraction behavior of vanadium (IV), vanadium (V), iron (III), iron (II), aluminum (III), magnesium (II), sodium and potassium from the synthetic solution with loading/extraction conditions is reported. The real leach solutions were used to verify the results obtained by using synthetic solutions. Finally, the proper separation and purification technology was proposed for the extraction of vanadium according to the properties of the acidic leach solution of stone coal. The acid leach solution contains many kinds of metallic impurities, such as Fe, Al, and Mg. So the synthetic solutions with V and one kind of impurity were prepared to identify its effect on the vanadium extraction. The synthetic solutions containing only one kind of metal ion were prepared to investigate its adsorption/extraction behavior. Synthetic solutions containing V The anion exchange resins were obtained from Zhejiang Zhengguang Resin Co., Ltd, China. The function group and the diameter of resin beads are shown in The extractant di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA, ≥ In ion exchange experiments, with dynamic adsorption method, 20 In solvent extraction experiments, suitable volumes of aqueous and organic solutions (25 The pH value of the solution was adjusted by adding 1.5 The vanadium concentration was determined by ferrous ammonium sulfate titration using N-phenylanthranilic acid as an indicator ( It is reported that there are twelve vanadium (V) species in solution. These can be categorized as cationic species VO At present, many kinds of anion exchange resins especially with macroporous structure could be used to adsorb vanadium in the media of strong acid, so the experiments were carried out to test the loading capacity of vanadium (V In order to study the effect of valence of vanadium on its adsorption performance on the resin, five kinds of resins were also used to adsorb the V(IV). The V(IV) solutions (V Ion exchange experiments with ZGA414 resin were employed to separate V(V) from the synthetic sulfuric acid solution in the presence of various other metals, such as Fe(III), Al(III) and Mg(II). In the dynamic adsorption experiments with the real leach solution, the vanadium adsorption ratio was nearly zero on the ZGA414 resin unless the pretreated method of adding oxidant NaClO The effects of aqueous initial pH on the extraction of V As an acidic extraction, D2EHPA can extract cationic metal ions by an ion-exchange type. The effects of the aqueous phase pH on the extraction of metals can be explained by the following equilibrium reaction equation ( It is obvious that the lower H Based on the solution chemistry of vanadium, the cationic species V(V) (existing as VO As shown in The effects of metal ion concentrations on the vanadium extraction were studied at pH 1.5 by using organic solutions of 15% (v/v) D2EHPA and 5% (v/v) TBP with the O/A ratio of 1.0. The stock solutions (V The results ( It was also observed that the percentages of extraction of Fe(III) and Fe(II) decreased when the concentrations of the two latter in the feed solution increased. In the concentration range of 5–20 The experiments were conducted to discuss the effect of TBP on the vanadium and iron extraction by using organic solutions of 15% (v/v) D2EHPA and 5% (v/v) TBP with the O/A ratio of 1.0. The synthetic sulfuric acid solutions containing 3 As discussed above, Fe(III) had a marked influence on the extraction of V(IV). Meanwhile, the acid extractant D2EHPA extracted predominantly the VO The real acid leach solution was pretreated with Na The V(IV) extraction isotherm with 15% (v/v) D2EHPA and 5% (v/v) TBP in sulfonated kerosene was obtained using the pretreated real leach solution. The stock solution was contacted with the organic phase at A/O phase ratios of 1:2, 1:1, 2:1, 5:1 and 10:1 at initial pH 1.5 for 8 In order to confirm the predictions from McCabe–Thiele diagram, a five-stage counter-current simulation experiment was carried out in the separating funnels with 15% (v/v) D2EHPA and 5% (v/v) TBP at A/O of 5:1 at pH 1.5. The chemical analysis of the raffinate is listed in It was observed ( In ion exchange experiments, five kinds of resins ZGA414, D202, D453, D301FC and ZGA351 were tested. The ZGA414 resin presented a better adsorption performance of V(V) and gave a maximum V(V) adsorption ratio of 99.9% at pH 2.5 from the pure V(V) solution, but V(IV) showed the low adsorption capacity on the resins. The V(V) adsorption was greatly affected by Fe(III), which also led to the blocking of resins. In solvent extraction tests, the D2EHPA extractant preferred to extract V(IV) rather than V(V) and gave the extraction ratio of 96.2% at pH 1.5. The Fe(II) presented less effect on the V(IV) extraction than the Fe(III) did. The co-extraction ratio of Al and Mg can be decreased by controlling their concentrations lower than 10 The solvent extraction was the better separation and purification technology to treat the real leach solution where the V(IV) was the main existence form and contained high concentration of Fe(III) in this study. This work was financially supported by the Key Science and Technology Support Programs (nos.