In fast-growing tree plantations, decomposition of leaf litter is considered as a key process of soil fertility. A three-month field experiment, spanning both rainy and dry seasons, was conducted to determine how changes in litter decomposition affect the main parameters of litter quality—namely, the concentrations of phenolic and non-phenolic carbon (C) compounds, nitrogen (N), and fibres, and the litter C mineralization rate. This study was conducted to test (1) if these changes vary according to the compound and to the season, and if they are greater for soluble compounds, and (2) if after a three-month period of field decomposition, the chemical composition of the remaining litter drives C mineralization, as measured in laboratory conditions, through a greater influence on the concentration of N and lignin. We found that the concentrations of water- and methanol-soluble phenolic compounds and the concentrations of non-phenolic compounds decreased during decomposition in all plots and in each season, while the fibre and N concentrations increased. The relationships among litter decomposition, C mineralization, and litter quality depended on the season, which strongly suggests that different processes are involved in dry and rainy seasons. The C mineralization rates were driven by soluble organic compounds in the initial litter and by soluble phenolic compounds in the decomposed litter.Improving our knowledge of the processes of litter decomposition is necessary to assess how changes in land use affect nutrient cycling in tropical forest plantations and the sustainability of soil fertility. In particular, on poor soils litter decomposition and subsequent mineralization is the process that guides the sustainability and the productivity in low input but fast-growing plantations, which are developed worldwide for bioenergy, wood industry, and pulpwood supplies ( Different studies have been carried out on Congolese eucalyptus (Myrtaceae) plantations established on very nutrient poor sandy soils in order to investigate the biological factors of fertility, such as litter decomposition dynamics ( In the present study, we aimed to determine what changes occur in organic compound contents through easily measurable litter quality parameters after a three-month field decomposition period. We hypothesised (1) that these changes vary according to the compound and to the season, and are greater for soluble compounds; and (2) that after three-month field decomposition, the chemical composition of the remaining litter drives C mineralization measured in optimal laboratory conditions, through a greater influence of the litter concentrations of N and lignin. To test these hypotheses, we conducted a three-month field experiment on eucalyptus plantations in Congo. We measured the main quality parameters of both initial and decomposed leaf litter, these being the phenolic and non-phenolic C concentration, and the N and fibre contents. Then, we investigated how changes in these contents were influenced by seasonal climate and how they were related to C mineralization measurements. The study was conducted on a eucalyptus plantation near Point-Noire (4°48′S, 11°54′E) in the south of the Republic of Congo. The plantation was established in 1978 in a native savannah dominated by The decomposition experiment was conducted previously by All chemical analyses were performed on 1.5-mm-mesh milled leaf litter. The fibre contents (in terms of hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin) were measured according to the Van Soest method ( Two different extractions were performed with the litter samples. The water extracts were obtained by mixing 2 The total N was determined as NH Carbon mineralization was estimated by incubating the litter samples that had been decomposing for three months in the field. Micro-litterbags (50 Changes in each chemical compound were characterised by the fractional change over the three-month field experiment, defined as: The chemical composition of the initial litter varied among the plots and between seasons ( Correlations among phenolic C, non-phenolic C, and N were observed in both initial and decomposed litters. Some correlations were highly influenced by the litter decomposition state: in decomposed litter, high negative correlations between the phenolic concentrations and the lignin concentration were observed ( The The seasonal effect on The carbon mineralization rate decreased significantly during decomposition and, at three months, it was near 50% of that found in the initial litter ( The relative changes observed in concentration during the initial decomposition stage, i.e., A relative increase in fibre concentration, especially in lignin, during litter decomposition has also been observed in the particle size fractions on the forest floor of the same plantation studied here ( The observed increase in N during our study is in agreement with other studies reporting N immobilization due to either microbial growth during the first stage of decomposition of N-poor litter ( Changes in chemical compounds varied according to the season, as shown previously for the mean mass loss ( The strong inter-plot variability in Decomposition processes are known to be influenced by the initial litter quality and the environmental conditions, especially soil humidity. When the environmental conditions are optimised in the laboratory, C mineralization, measured as the total respired CO After the three-month initial stage of decomposition, the litter quality changed, where this change may be expected to affect C mineralization. A decrease in C mineralization usually results mainly from the disappearance of labile C (  In the N-poor and phenol-rich eucalyptus litter, soluble organic matter undergoes substantial changes over the first three months of decomposition. The potential C mineralization of the initial litter, in optimal conditions, was driven by the concentrations of soluble organic matter, which included the most easily degradable C compounds. After the litter had decomposed for three months in the field, soluble phenolic compounds had become the most easily degradable and most abundant compounds and had become the main driver of potential C mineralization. The results of laboratory C mineralization could suggest some general trends for further field decomposition. However, it is known that after the initial stage, soil invertebrates are increasingly involved in litter disappearance and are largely influenced by phenolic compounds. Thus, microbial degradation of phenolic compounds would appear to be particularly important in eucalyptus plantations insofar as it enhances decomposition by invertebrate activity. The effect of the season was characterised by a different relationship between C mineralization and litter quality, which strongly suggested that different processes are involved in dry and rainy seasons. The CIFOR is acknowledged for the partial support of this study. The field observations were conducted in the plantations of ECO S.A. (Eucalyptus du Congo, S.A.) with the assistance of UR2PI (Unité de Recherche sur la Productivité des Plantations commerciales, Congo). Y. Nouvellon (CIRAD, Pointe-Noire, Congo) is thanked for providing the leaf area index. The authors also acknowledge Annick Aing (IRD, Bondy, France) for her help with the figures, and the three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments that improved the present manuscript.