For describing the evolution of sensory properties during eating, dynamic sensory methods are still being developed and optimised. Temporal Dominance of Sensations (TDS) and Temporal Check All That Apply (TCATA) are currently the most used and discussed. The aim of this study was to compare TDS, TCATA and a variant of TDS, performed by modality (M-TDS) in the outcome of the dynamic sensory description. These methods were applied with the same trained panel (n = 10) for the evaluation of the dynamic properties of yoghurt samples, with identical composition, only varying in textural properties. Based on a design of experiment, the yoghurts varied in viscosity (thin/thick), size of cereal particle added (flour/flakes) and flavour intensity (low dose/optimised dose, by adding artificial sweetener and vanilla).
                  The TDS curves revealed that the variation in viscosity and particle size led to differences in perception mainly at the beginning of the eating process (Thin/Thick and Gritty/Sandy). Additionally, all samples were also perceived as Bitter at the end of the eating process. TCATA and TDS by modality results were, generally, in agreement with TDS, but they unveiled more details of the samples’ dynamic profiles in all stages of the eating process, showing the effect of Vanilla and Sweet for the samples with optimised flavour, and the masked perception of Bitter.
                  The duration of the eating process was standardized and split into three time intervals (T0-T40, T41-T80, T81-T100). Panelists’ responses were summarized as frequency values in each time interval. Principal Component Analysis was used to visualize sample trajectories over time in the sensory space, with the need to study up to the third dimension to better understand the trajectories. ANOVA models were used to find the attributes which were significantly differences among products. Panel performance was assessed based on MANOVA models for the three methods. The results indicated that TCATA was more discriminative and panelists were more in agreement. TCATA also described samples in more detail in terms of number of discriminating attributes as compared with TDS. The discussion also centers in the different aspects of perception that could respond to different research questions for the three compared methods.Eating facilitates two very basic functions for human beings: to gain energy and nutrition and to gain pleasure and enjoyment; understanding sensory perception is essential to explain people’s eating behaviour, consumers’ acceptance and linking of food products ( Descriptive sensory techniques are designed to provide a measure of sensory perceptions based on human assessments relying on methods from neurophysiology and psychology. In sensory analysis, various methods can be used to gain a better understanding of what sensory attributes are responsible for the perceived quality of the products. Classically, sensory methods have focused on static judgements, measuring the averaged intensities of sensations instead of time course of sensations ( Several temporal sensory methods have been developed for dynamic sensory characterization ( To cover more attributes, TI was extended to the Dual Attribute Time Intensity ( TCATA, the temporal extension of Check All That Apply developed in recent years, could potentially overcome some of those issues. In TCATA, the assessors’ task is to indicate and continually update the attributes that apply to the sample moment to moment, that is, one or more applicable sensations are tracked at a given time during mastication ( One important drawback of TDS is that dithering and dumping might be enhanced when taste and texture are evaluated in the same task, as fewer terms are available per modality and because panelists need to decide both on the modality and on the attribute ( Until now, some papers have shown that TCATA and TDS provided comparable sample information ( In this context, the objective of present work was to compare these three temporal methods (TDS, TCATA and M-TDS) based on detailed criteria consisting of dynamic profile, product trajectory and panel performance. The discussion will also center on the different aspects of perception that could respond to different research questions for the three compared methods. This critical comparison will add to the body of literature that can help researchers to select the temporal method best suited to their needs. The idea behind the present research was to start from a design of experiment (DOE) based on the same ingredients, only modifying the product texture by using different processing strategies, so as the samples would have the same calories and composition and these parameters would not influence satiety or satiation, as this methodological study is part of a bigger project looking into satiety perception. The parameters of the DOE were: viscosity (thin/thick), particle size (flake/flour) and flavour intensity (low/optimal). For creating the viscosity differences, two types of yoghurts bases were prepared, one commercial natural yoghurt and another using the same yoghurt in which the texture was modified by stirring for 10 min at 25,000 rpm in an Ultraturrax PT 3100, irreversible disrupting the gelled structure of the yoghurt and obtaining a thinner, stable version. For the two particle sizes, oat was added in either flakes or flour. Oat flour was obtained by milling the oat flakes with an Ultra Centrifugal Mill ZM200 using a 0.5 mm sieve. Flavour level was varied using two different levels of a combination of acesulfame K and vanilla aroma. “Optimal flavour” intensity was the recommended by the industry providing the yoghurt as the level of sweetener and vanilla they use in commercial low sugar vanilla yoghurt. The “low flavour” level was a perceivable lower level, as per informal tasting by the research team. The optimal intensity was 0.025% acesulfame K and 0.05% vanilla, whereas low level was half of those levels. Finally, eight yoghurt samples were obtained varying in viscosity, particle size of oats and flavour intensity, as per the DOE in The materials used in the preparation of the yoghurt samples were commercial yoghurts (TINE Yoghurt Naturell, TINE, Norway), oat flakes (AXA 4-korn, AXA, Norway), acesulfame K and vanilla supplied by TINE, Norway. All the sensory evaluations were conducted by Nofima‘s trained panel, in standardized individual booths according to ISO standards ( Nofima’s panel is a highly trained, very stable panel, the 10 assessors are solely hired as tasters, with a part time job, and some of them have more than 20 years’ experience working with descriptive analysis. Panel performance is assessed frequently, and checked for every project. That ensures that all panelists are good enough based on three important qualities: discrimination, repeatability and agreement. The panel has 7 years’ experience with TDS and one year of experience with TCATA. Generic quantitative descriptive analysis, inspired in QDA®, was also used in this study as a frame of reference on the static profile of the samples. Sensory profiling was performed on eight samples through generic quantitative descriptive analysis ( Trained sensory panelists (n = 10) were used for TDS task. The evaluation was conducted following the TDS approach presented by For the formal assessment, samples were assessed in triplicate. Assessors were asked to put a spoonful of the sample in their mouth and press “START”, subsequently selecting the dominant sensations while eating by clicking at all times one among the ten attributes presented on the computer screen. When the sample was ready to swallow, they pressed “STOP” and spat out the sample. The assessors could successively select as many attributes as they wanted during the oral processing of the samples, including re-selecting an attribute more than once during the test. At all times, only one attribute was selected (the dominant one). Assessors were asked to rinse their mouth with water between samples. Dominance was defined as the sensation that caught assessors’ attention at a given time, not necessarily the most intense. The procedure was as described by The procedure is similar to the one conducted in TDS task except for the evaluation of flavour and texture modalities in 2 different steps. The list of attributes is the same as describes on Time standardization was applied to remove assessor noise ( For each point of time, the proportion of runs (subject*replication) for which the given attribute was assessed as dominant was computed. These proportions were smoothed and plotted against time. The curves were called TDS curves. There were two main lines that assisted the interpretation of dominance curves in a plot, “chance level” and “significant level”. The former represented the theoretical proportion of subjects selecting an attribute at random. Its value, P For M-TDS, the two modalities – flavour and texture – were recorded on two consecutive screens. For each product and each point in time, the dominant rates by modalities were separately calculated and then plotted together. Since it is possible to obtain two dominant attributes (one for flavour, another for texture) at a given time, the sum of the dominance rates for attributes of each modality, instead of all attributes, was equal to 1. Basically, TCATA data was arranged in a matrix, with attributes in rows and time slices in columns. An evaluation was the citation proportion of each attribute, calculated as the proportion of judgments (assessors*replicates) for which it was selected for describing a sample at a given time. TCATA curves were showed as smoothed attribute citation proportions over time. For each TCATA attribute, the citation rate of a product of interest can be contrasted with the average citation rate of the other products ( Whether TDS or TCATA data, covariance Principle Component Analysis (PCA) was conducted on the table of mean citation proportions (TCATA data) or dominance rates (TDS data) with Product*Times in rows and Attributes in columns. By linking adjacent time points corresponding to the same sample, product trajectories described the evolution in how the sample was characterized over time ( Without loss of generality, the evaluation duration in temporal data was split into smaller time intervals (T0-T40: beginning; T41-T80: middle; T81-T100: end) as presented in several researches ( The ANOVA was carried out on the scores, considering sample (fixed effect), replicate (random effect), assessor (random effect) and their interactions as sources of variation ( The Canonical Variate Analysis (CVA) was conducted based on a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) model with product being a fixed effect, whereas subject as a random one. This is slightly different from standard CVA since it contrasts the between-samples covariance matrix with the interaction covariance matrix (interaction between assessor and samples) instead of the within-group covariance matrix. By doing so, CVA draws the product map based on product means with consideration of subject variability ( To quantify the degree of collinearity in the data, the distribution of Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) was assessed as proposed by Callaghan and colleagues ( The two criteria, namely discrimination ability and agreement, were proposed to assess the panel performance ( All data were collected with EyeQuestion (Logic8 BV, The Netherlands) and carried out using R version 3.4.1 ( The key point of this research is to focus on the similarities and differences between the temporal methods. Another discussion point will be what research questions can answer each of the methods. For brevity, the details of the specific sensory profiles of each of the samples were not presented here, but they are available on The TDS curves showed that texture attributes were the first dominant perceptions for all samples, regardless of the viscosity, particle size or flavour level. For flake-added samples, The temporal profiles of low flavour samples were mainly characterized by texture attributes during all eating process. While TCATA highlighted The M-TDS curves indicated that the initial dominant perception was related to the viscosity properties ( More specifically, In addition, differences between citation proportions in TCATA and dominance rates in TDS/M-TDS were observed in all attributes. On average, citation proportions in TCATA were larger than those in TDS, in most cases above 0.8 in TCATA and around 0.4–0.5 for TDS. The forced choice in TDS might explain the lower citation proportion as compared to TCATA. In principle, all the attributes in the list could be cited all along the evaluation in TCATA, but this is not the case for TDS where the probability of citation is always 1/number of attributes. One possible explanation is due to the lack of consensus among assessors on which attributes were dominant. The lower consensus can be due to several concurrent dominant attributes, added to the complexity to the concept of dominance. Consequently, several attributes did not reach significance throughout the evaluation. This complexity could in principle be a valuable result in itself although a difficult one to get direction from. Regarding method difficulty, in this study, none of the assessors commented about a major complexity or difficulty in the TCATA task. This is in agreement with previous studies on self-reported task perception measures ( The PCA scores from adjacent time points were joined to give the trajectories, which were presented in The first dimension of the PCA for the three methods was correlated to the attributes Meanwhile, the third dimension of the PCA in the three methods was mainly associated with the viscosity attributes ( As mentioned previously, the PCA plots also pointed out evolution of samples over time. The trajectories visualized the common pattern in temporal profile. The products could be split into two groups according to their sensory trajectories: one group with high viscosity (P2, P6, P4 and P8), another group with low viscosity (P1, P5, P3 and P7). The former group was characterized as being In general, the evolution pattern was similar among methods. The TDS trajectories, however, was the less resolved. One explanation was possible due to the dithering in selecting a dominant attribute of the panelists, which in turn made the low consensus in their results. Regarding QDA results, the 2-way ANOVA indicated that the panelists well discriminated between the samples for all the sensory attributes, except for To evaluate the sensory profiles provided by each method and to compare them together, a MFA was performed on the combined data composed of TDS, TCATA, QDA, TDS by modalities (flavour, texture) sensory profiles. Each profile was considered as a separate data table in MFA. Within each group, only significant attributes in the three time intervals were selected in the calculations. The MFA analyses were started by examining the canonical correlation coefficients. These coefficients measured the relationship between MFA dimensions and each group of data. The superimposed representation ( The perceptual map ( To better understand these differences, ANOVA was carried out ( The significant attributes were identified by the ANOVA ( The MANOVA results addressed the multidimensional discrimination, a measure of the separation of the samples in the sensory space generated by the descriptors relatively to panelist disagreement. The multicollinearities were checked for each of the datasets. As shown in The distribution of panelist scores around the product means could be visualized by confidence ellipses, showing the (dis)agreement between panelists. In TDS, the consensus in selecting dominant attributes was low, resulting in the high variability of the subject scores around the mean. In Apart from citation proportions and dominance rates, the difference among temporal methods is apparent when comparing the temporal profiles of the optimal flavour samples. The key point is the information related to sweetness; the assessors did not select For TDS tasks, the selection of dominant attributes followed the texture – flavour process. It is somehow logical because the dominant processes are described in hypothetical food-saliva systems, in these sequential steps: comminution – agglomeration – hydration – dilution ( Results confirm what Food perception is a multisensory phenomenon, reflecting the integration of taste, olfactory, and other sensory information into a perceived property of the food, rather than a collection of individual sensory attributes ( The sample trajectories show the different way how sample characteristics change over time. This observation corroborates that texture properties have a large influence on sensory perceptions of samples. In this study, the viscosity-related attributes were selected at the early stage of eating period, together with particle size attributes. Importantly, As testing panel performance, the results were in light with previous research ( The methods compared in this work are based on different conceptual aspects (applicability vs dominance), and there is still a lot of research and thinking to do, particularly in terms of which methods answer to which research questions. The results of the present study suggest that TCATA task could be recommended to capture in a more natural way the dynamic and multisensory perceptions of food products, where assessors could freely choose the number of sensations relevant at each moment. M-TDS on the other hand, also seems to retrieve the multisensory aspects of the dynamics of perception, and could be recommended when one is interested in dominance, or how one sensation could overshadow others in a product at different points in time, without losing sight of product complexity. TDS however, generates a more restricted outcome, less discrimination between products, and the biases because of attribute restriction could be limiting at the time of interpreting results (see Another point worth discussing is the difference in evaluation processes, from perceptual and cognitive points of view; in principle, applicability as measured by TCATA, seems to be quite different than evaluating dominance, as in TDS or M-TDS, i.e. “tick all what is there” as compared to select “the one” dominant attribute. However, the present results suggest that M-TDS is somehow closer to TCATA than to TDS, even if it relies in dominance evaluation. Then, one could think that applicability and a less restricted dominance are not that far in approach. Particularly thinking that the applicable attributes in TCATA need to be chosen in a very fast sequence, one could think that the “most applicable attributes” would in a way be also the “most striking”, generating a less restrictive selection of a higher number of “dominant” attributes. This point would definitely be worth further studying in future research. This paper presents a reasonable and meaningful basis for monitoring and comparing performances of three temporal methods (TDS, TCATA and M-TDS). The multiple selection of attributes (totally in TCATA or partly in M-TDS) at a given time provides a better dynamic sensory characterization. TDS provides a meaningful description of the attributes if for some reason one is interested in one attribute only to be selected at a time. M-TDS however, still looks into dominance as a concept, but allows for different modalities to be represented, obtaining a richer description, but also more robust results than TDS. TCATA would bring even additional information where interaction between attributes is required and allows to represent more than two attributes at any point in time. In the current research, TDS was performed according to the definition of dominance attribute proposed by Future research should go deeper in methodological comparisons of TDS, M-TDS and TCATA, to better understand what specific questions could be answered by the different methods, and what are their advantages and limitations for specific product categories. This could include comparison between different panels with the same training, as well as using consumers instead of trained panelists systematically to being able to further conclude on recommendations for application. The author Quoc Cuong Nguyen thanks the financial support received from Vietnam International Education Cooperation Department. The authors would also like to thank for the financial support received from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at                        