The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of intact rocks is an important and pertinent property for characterizing a rock mass. It is known that standard UCS tests are destructive, expensive and time-consuming task, which is particularly true for thinly bedded, highly fractured, foliated, highly porous and weak rocks. Consequently, prediction models have become an attractive alternative for engineering geologists. In the last several years, a new, alternative kernel-based technique, support vector machines (SVMs), has been popular in modeling studies. Despite superior SVM performance, this technique has certain significant, practical drawbacks. Hence, the relevance vector machines (RVMs) approach has been proposed to recast the main ideas underlying SVMs in a Bayesian context. The primary purpose of this study is to examine the applicability and capability of RVM and SVM models for predicting the UCS of volcanic rocks from NE Turkey and comparing its performance with ANN models. In these models, the porosity and P-durability index representing microstructural variables are the input parameters. The study results indicate that these methods can successfully predict the UCS for the volcanic rocks. The SVM and RVM performed better than the ANN model. When these kernel based models are considered, RVM model found successful in terms of statistical performance criterions (e.g., performance index, PI values for training and testing data are computed as 1.579 and 1.449). These values for SVM are 1.509 and 1.307. Although SVM and RVM models are powerful techniques, the RVM run time was considerably faster, and it yielded the highest accuracy.Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of intact rocks is an important and pertinent property for characterizing rock mass. This parameter is widely used in geological, geotechnical, geophysical and petroleum engineering projects. A UCS test requires high-quality core samples with regular geometry. Standard cores cannot always be extracted from weak, highly fractured, thinly bedded, foliated and/or block-in-matrix rocks. In addition, careful execution of this test is destructive, time-consuming, and expensive, as well as involving destructive tests ( Basic mechanical tests, including Schmidt hammer ( The mineralogical and textural characteristics of rocks significantly affect their mechanical behavior, including their UCS; these properties were widely used to estimate the UCS ( Most investigations involve determining the individual correlation between an index and the UCS (i.e., a simple regression analysis) (e.g., In addition to these conventional methods, new techniques for estimating the UCS have also garnered considerable attention. Several researchers have recently proposed meaningful relationships using a fuzzy inference system (FIS) to characterize rock properties, such as the UCS (e.g., In the past decade, a new, alternative kernel-based technique, support vector machines (SVMs), was derived from statistical learning theory ( The relevance vector machine (RVM) technique is based on a linear model Bayesian formulation with an appropriate prior that results in sparse representation ( In this study, the applicability and capability of RVM for predicting the uniaxial compressive strength of the volcanic rock from NE Turkey was examined, and its performance was compared with the ANN and SVM models. Considering that the rock materials consist of a solid and porous portion, intrinsic properties that affect the UCS of rock materials can be divided into two groups; one is pore characteristics, and the second is microstructural variables, consisting of the mineralogical composition and rock texture. These cases were considered using soft-computing models to estimate the UCS of the volcanic rock materials herein. To represent the mineralogical composition and rock texture, the P-durability index, a new engineering index, derived from the P-wave velocity in the solid portion of the rock materials, and the slake durability index were developed. Furthermore, the porosity was used as a characteristic of the porous rock material. The performance index (PI), Nash–Sutcliffe coefficient (NS) and weighted mean absolute percentage error (WMAPE) were used to determine the accuracy of the SVM, RVM, and ANN models developed. The study area is located in the Eastern Pontides of NE Turkey ( The dasitic and andesitic rock samples investigated are from the excavated slopes throughout the Gumushane-Giresun roadway in NE Turkey ( In this study, 47 block samples, each sample measuring approximately 30 The total porosity ( In this study, ultrasonic pulse velocity (UPV) tests were performed using the first method suggested by the The slake durability test was performed using the standard testing method developed by The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) tests were performed in accordance with the Many papers and books provide a detailed description of the ANN ( The running procedure typically involves two phases: forward computing and backward computing. In forward computing, each layer uses a weight matrix associated with each connection from the previous layer to the next layer ( In this study, three widely used transfer functions, namely tangent sigmoid, linear, and log-sigmoid, were evaluated in trial experiments. After the forward computing phase, backward computing, which depends on the algorithms to adjust the weights, was performed. The process of adjusting these weights to minimize the differences between the actual and desired output values is referred to as network training or learning. If the differences (errors) are greater than the desired values, the errors are passed backwards through the weights in the network. In ANN terminology, this phase is also referred to as the back-propagation algorithm. Depending on the techniques used to train the feed-forward neural network models, different back-propagation algorithms have been developed. In this study, the Levenberg–Marquardt back-propagation algorithm ( When training with the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm, the changing weights Δ Then, the update of the weights can be adjusted as follows: Similar to ANN, the primary concept underlying SVM is that neurons are organized in two layers ( An SVM model using a sigmoid kernel function is equivalent to a two-layer perceptron neural network Using a kernel function, SVMs are alternative training methods for polynomial, radial basis function, and multilayer perceptron classifiers, in which the network weights are determined by solving a quadratic programming problem with linear constraints rather than by solving a non-convex, unconstrained minimization problem as in standard ANN training ( Given an In the SVM, the empirical risk (ER) value is aimed at minimization, as follows: Given the training set The first term of the cost function is used to regularize the weights. The second term of the cost function is used to penalize Due to the high-dimension feature space, the constrained optimization problem, which is given in Eq. Eq. The kernel function can be defined in accordance with Mercer’s theorem ( The kernel functions used by SVMs are linear, polynomial, Gaussian radial-basis, exponential radial-basis, and spline functions, among others ( The advantages of a Gaussian radial basis kernel function are that it is computationally simpler than the other types of functions, and it nonlinearly maps the training data into an infinite-dimensional space. Thus, it can manage conditions where the relationship between the input and output variables is nonlinear ( Despite the successful performance of SVM, this method has certain significant drawbacks for improbable predictions. The SVM output is a point estimate, whereas the conditional distribution of a target given input is desired. Moreover, there is not a certain approach to determining the SVM parameters. Furthermore, in SVM, the kernel function must satisfy Mercer’s condition. The RVM method can be described as follows according to The likelihood of the dataset can be written as follows:  Eventually, the posterior over all unknowns can be obtained given the defined non-informative prior distribution by using Bayesian rule ( The posterior distribution over the weights is given as follows. Eq. The posterior covariance and mean can be written, respectively, as follows. For uniform hyperpriors over This maximization process also refers to maximum likelihood (type II) method ( Hyperparameter prediction is performed using iterative formula (e.g., gradient descent). The result of this optimization is that many elements of The intrinsic properties that affect UCS of rock material can be divided into two groups; one is pore characteristics, and the second is microstructural variables that consist of mineralogical composition and rock texture. Porosity is the index widely used to estimate rock material (e.g., Ultrasonic tests, among the most important non-destructive tests that can be applied to rocks ( The slake durability of a rock is an important property and is closely related to its mineralogical composition, and hence, its resistance to degradation (weakening and disintegration) is measured using a standard drying and wetting cycle ( Therefore, the P-wave velocity in the solid portion of the rock materials given in Eq. The input and output data were normalized to prevent the model from domination by variables with large values, which is common in artificial intelligence models. In this study, the data were normalized using Eq. The SVM and RVM model performances dependent on calibration of the related parameters. The SVM and RVM methods use three parameters ( The literature related to models training and testing suggests certain statistical approaches to evaluate prediction accuracy. To justify the SVM, RVM, and ANN model accuracies, the root mean square error (RMSE), variance account factor (VAF), maximum determination coefficient value ( RMSE evaluates the residual between desired and output data, and WMAPE measures the weighted mean absolute percentage error of the prediction. VAF represents the ratio of the error variance to the measured data variance. To evaluate the generalization capability of the ANN, SVM and RVM models, UCS data tests consisted of training and testing. In these models, the porosity and P-durability index, index, a new index are the input parameters. For the ANN application, a three-layered structure was constructed for modeling. The optimal number of neurons in the hidden layer was determined through trial and error by varying the number of neurons from 2 to 10. Various types of activation functions are possible, but the sigmoid function was used for each layer in this study; 15 training epochs were used. The values In the SVM application, the input function in model was controlled using In the RVM application, when the trials concluded, the The results from this study using SVM and RVM were compared to the ANN model results ( The difference between the training and testing performances of the ANN, SVM and RVM models is meaningful. For performance of these models during both the training and testing periods ( When the model performance measures obtained for SVM and RVM models were considered, the following results were obtained. WMAPE values in training and testing calculated for SVM models are 0.1615 and 0.1980, respectively. These values for RVM model are 0.1459 and 0.1814. RMSE values in training calculated for SVM and RVM models are 0.108 and 0.1035 while these values in testing are 0.1187 and 0.1077, respectively. NS values ranged from 0.88159 to 0.7483 during both in training and testing periods. The WMAPE, RMSE and NS values obtained for SVM and RVM models indicate that the model performances for the UCS residual variation ranged from very good to satisfactory. The Adj. The primary purpose of this study is to examine the applicability and capability of the RVM and SVM models for predicting the UCS of the volcanic rocks and compare its performance with the ANN model. In these models, the porosity and P-durability index, which is a new index, were the input parameters. To verify the accuracy of the soft computing models developed, the Adj. The results in this study indicate that the SVM and RVM methods are useful tools for modeling the sample UCS since they performed well. Simulated outputs on testing data where the model accuracy can be examined have shown that RMSE, WMAPE, In addition, P-wave durability index suggested in this study can be used to characterize the influence of the microstructural variables on the UCS and using a combination of the index and porosity as input parameters can be estimate engineering behaviors of rock materials.