In the archaeological site of Magdalensberg, a test furnace (for various experiments) was constructed using similar materials and techniques as during the Roman period. Samples were taken in order to investigate the spatial distribution of magnetic parameters in the floor-bricks after firing at 1300°C. Twenty samples (40 specimens) were obtained from a brick which was situated almost in the centre of the fired area.
                  The natural remanent magnetization as well as the magnetic susceptibility was measured. Plots (2D) of these values indicate lateral and vertical variations and pin-point the area in the upper part of the brick where the most intense heating took place during the experiment. Specimens from the lower part do not seem to be significantly affected by the heating.
                  Magnetic cleaning (thermal demagnetization) of all specimens revealed the presence of two distinct components of magnetization. Pilot samples were used for the determination of the “palaeo”- intensity using the Thellier method.
                  Although intensity and susceptibility values show remarkable differences between the upper and the lower part of the brick, the TRM effect of the fire is significant up to 5cm depth. On the other hand, the lateral variation indicates a limitation of the fire effect at a distance of 8–10cm.Due to the relatively short period of settlement (40 B.C.–50 A.D.) the Celtic-Roman site of Magdalensberg is among the most important sites for chronological control in the area of the Eastern Alps. The finds of the area include moulds for gold bars and 19 small furnaces for smelting gold. The furnaces may yield excellent archaeomagnetic data, provided the TRM-acquisition in such special settings is sufficiently understood. A replica of a Roman double furnace as found during the excavations in rooms AA/41 and AA/41A of the Magdalensberg site was constructed for metallurgical experiments which were performed during May 2001 ( Several archaeomagnetic studies have been performed on ancient bricks ( The main purpose of the present study is to understand the spatial distribution of the magnetic parameters and the possible effect of the fire inside the brick using classical archaeomagnetic measurements. From the test furnace ( The natural remanent magnetization (NRM) and the magnetic susceptibility of all samples were measured with a 2G squid cryogenic magnetometer and a GEOFYZIKA KLY-2 susceptibility meter, respectively. Thermal cleaning (demagnetization) has been performed for all specimens in order to determine the characteristic component of their magnetization. Isothermal remanent magnetization (IRM) and thermomagnetic analyses have been performed on pilot samples for the identification of the magnetic carriers. The IRM was imparted using a 2G pulse magnetizer. The thermomagnetic analyses were performed on a GEOFYZIKA KLY-2 susceptibility meter, which measures the variation of the magnetic susceptibility with temperature. For pilot specimens, measurements with a variable field translation balance (VFTB) and a MicroMag (AGFM, Princeton Measurements, Ltd.) have also been performed in order to provide information regarding their magnetic properties. Finally, the classical Thellier method ( The higher values of magnetization and magnetic susceptibility correspond to the more intensely heated area. In order to investigate the distribution of the magnetic parameters within the brick these values are plotted as colour maps for the two layers of the brick. In Similar behaviour is seen in the distribution of the unblocking temperature of the first components of magnetization ( In order to further distinguish the well-heated specimens from those that have not been sufficiently heated, the Koenigsberger ratio ( The demagnetization process reveals the presence of two components of magnetization as shown in Isothermal remanent acquisition curves (IRM), hysteresis loops and thermomagnetic analyses have been performed on pilot samples in order to identify the magnetic carriers. IRM measurements revealed the presence of low coercivity minerals as the main magnetic carriers with small portions of high coercivity ones (probably magnetite and haematite respectively) ( Thermomagnetic analysis for the upper part of the brick confirms the dominance of magnetite ( In order to clarify these differences of the magnetic carriers between the two levels in the brick, further mineralogical investigations were carried out. Raman microspectroscopy is a powerful non-destructive technique for providing straightforward identification of minerals as well as important information on structural/compositional variants of many mineralogical groups. Although Raman microspectroscopy has been extensively used in combination with such methods as Infrared spectroscopy, X-ray diffractometry, scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy, its combined use with rock magnetic measurements is limited. However, Raman spectroscopy may provide important information not only on the identification of the magnetic minerals, but also on the textures and the relations between the studied minerals (overgrowths, replacements, alterations, pseudomorphs, etc.) The Raman spectra of oxides were obtained with a Jobin-Yvon TM LabRam-HR 800 Raman micro-spectrometer at the Institute of Earth Sciences of the University of Graz, Austria. Spectra were excited at room temperature with the 633 Raman microspectroscopy applied to the oxides of two samples one from the lower part of the brick and one from the upper showed the following: The presence of haematite (α-Fe The presence of magnetite (Fe The possible presence of maghemite (γ-Fe The presence of rutile (TiO The presence of ilmenite (FeTiO The classical method developed by Due to the presence of two components of magnetization, in the present study the Arai plots have been slightly modified. Instead of NRM, the NRM loss was plotted against the pTRM. In this way the modified Arai curve shows two slopes and the low temperature one corresponds to the magnetization obtained in the furnace. The laboratory field used during the experiment was 50 Four specimens from the brick were used for intensity determinations. Samples were heated in a commercial furnace in vacuum. In As mentioned above, the distribution of the magnetic parameters within the brick allowed us to distinguish the more intensely heated area and also to map the spatial limit of the effect of the fire. There are noticeable differences between the two levels. Nevertheless, the effect of the fire is significant up to 5 The temperature in the melting vessel was above 1100 The charcoal was glowing, indicating a minimum temperature of 600 The rock magnetic measurements in comparison with the Raman microspectroscopy indicate that in the upper part of the brick due to the fire, transformation of haematite to magnetite has occurred. The magnetic measurements have not successfully revealed the presence of haematite because the concentration of the low coercivity minerals is evidently high enough to obscure the effect of haematite. Although large variations are observed within the brick, all the samples did record the recent geomagnetic field. The direction of the magnetization was determined by least squares fitting (principal component analysis, Although the demagnetization process revealed two components of magnetization, the determination of the TRM intensity of selected specimens proved to be successful. Even if the studied specimens were limited, they gave a good indication that Thellier experiment can be used successfully in cases where two components of magnetization are observed. The ‘in situ’ measurement of the intensity of the geomagnetic field (48.1 The distribution of intensity and susceptibility values show strong differences between the upper and the lower part of the brick. Nevertheless, the effect of the fire is significant up to 5 The thermal cleaning reveals the presence of two components of magnetization, the low temperature one being due to heating of the brick in the furnace and the high temperature one corresponding to its fabrication. The rock magnetism experiments and Raman microspectroscopy indicate the presence of magnetite and haematite in the upper part and larger quantities of haematite on the lower part of the brick indicating again the different effect of the fire in the two levels. Finally, the Thellier method gave some first evidence for the successful determination of the TRM intensity of the brick. As a general conclusion, the archaeological kilns may need to be sampled very carefully and at close spacing in order to find the best areas for archaeomagnetic investigations since as shown from the present study there is a spatial limitation of the fire effect. The Paldir program from the Palaeomagnetic Laboratory Fort Hoofdijk (University of Utrecht, Nederland) was used for the vector component analyses. The mean directions were calculated with Paleomag-tools program by M. Hounslow. The VFTB and Micromag measurements have been carried out at GfZ Potsdam with kind permission of N. Nowaczyk. This study is part of the EU-funded AARCH project (HPRN-CT2002-00219). G. Hoinkes (Graz) is thanked for providing access to Raman Spectroscopy facilities. Authors would like to thank Dr. Villalain and Dr. Evans for their valuable review of the manuscript.