Objective
                  The aim of this study was to define the characteristics of muscular activity in complete denture wearers and in dentate subjects during mastication of model foods differing in hardness but similar in terms of rheologically properties.
               
                  Material and methods
                  The foodstuffs used in this study were laboratory-developed gumdrops demonstrating viscoelastic properties. The test foods cover a range of four hardness levels. The group of complete denture wearers included 15 subjects, while the control group included 9 subjects with normal dentition. Electromyograph (EMG) recordings were taken from the masseter and temporal muscles during mastication of the test foods. The results were evaluated by one-way and two-way ANOVA followed by means comparisons using a Student–Newman–Keuls post hoc test (α
                     =0.05).
               
                  Results
                  Preparing the same food bolus for swallowing required a greater number of masticatory cycles and a longer duration of mastication for complete denture wearers than for dentate subjects. In addition, complete denture wearers failed to increase EMG activity per cycle in response to hardness of the food.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Denture wearers experienced difficulties during mastication, as indicated by a decreased masticatory rate and the observed failure to increase EMG activity per cycle in response to increased food hardness. The increases in number of cycle and masticatory duration appear to be a response to this impaired masticatory function.The main role of mastication is to transform foodstuffs into a bolus that is fit for swallowing. The aim of this work was to study complete denture wearers’ adaptation to increased hardness by monitoring masticatory patterns using electromyographic (EMG) activity. Number of cycles, duration of the sequence of mastication, masticatory rate and electrical activity produced per cycle and per sequence were used as muscular variables to describe how subjects adapt mastication to their dentition The foodstuffs used in this study were laboratory-developed gumdrops demonstrating viscoelastic but non-sticky properties. The variability (mean Complete denture wearers were recruited from the Clermont-Ferrand City Hospital Department of Dentistry for inclusion in the study over a 12-month period. Subjects had to state that they usually ate comfortably with their dentures. The ridge resorption level was not considered. The prostheses were more or less old models (average age of 3 years, minimum: 1 year, maximum: 10 years). Subjects were excluded from the study if they presented with salivation problems, degenerative disease, diabetes, an allergy to one of the ingredients in the test food or articular disease liable to cause discomfort during mastication All subjects included in the control group presented a normal dentition with at least 26 permanent teeth. Control subjects were excluded from the study if they presented with more than two missing teeth (excluding third molars), were undergoing dental treatment, had a removable denture or implant or displayed any one of the above exclusion criteria given for complete denture wearers. EMG recordings were taken from the masseter and temporal muscles during mastication of the test foods. Mastication recordings were taken from each subject in two sessions scheduled 1 week apart on the same day and at the same time. The first session acted as training for the subjects, enabling them to familiarise themselves with the experimental setting. Once the electrodes were attached, the subjects sat comfortably with their feet fully isolated from the floor by a plastic footrest. As the gumdrops were coloured according to their hardness, all subjects were asked to close their eyes while the experimenter placed the food sample on the tongue so as to prevent them from recognizing the food sample. The subjects then had to close their mouth and teeth without contracting their muscles, keeping the food sample between tongue and palate. When prompted by the experimenter, the subjects began masticating as naturally as possible. Each subject had to decide which side they preferred and this side was used throughout the experiment. Data acquisition continued until the test food was completely swallowed. Subjects were allowed to talk, drink and relax between recordings. Subjects were given each of the four gumdrops three times in random order at each recording session. Only the EMG data acquired during the second session were included in the study for analysis. The different steps of EMG analysis are described by Peyron et al. and Lassauzay et al. Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS In the dentate subjects, muscular activity was adapted to the hardness of the test food. Food sample hardness had a significant influence on number of cycles ( Number of cycles ( The complete denture wearers undertook more masticatory cycles with all the products. Dentate subjects performed an average of 34 (S.D. 14.63) cycles whereas the average for complete denture wearers was 47 (S.D. 19) ( Masticatory rate was lower ( Electrical activity recordings obtained from the masticatory muscles provided a good indicator for studying patterns in a masticatory sequence or in strategy used to masticate different types of food. The most relevant muscular activity indicators for studying the variation of mastication to increased food hardness appeared to be number of masticating cycles and total EMG activity. Four limits of this study must be emphasised. Firstly, comparing the absolute values of EMG recording between complete denture wearers and dentate subjects may lead to uncontrolled bias. Therefore, comparison of EMG activity per cycle between the two groups was not performed. Secondly, studying the EMG parameters did not give any indication about the crushing of food, and masticatory efficiency needs to be known before an overall understanding of the mastication process could be achieved. Thirdly, the results only apply for the rheological property (viscoelastic) characterising the model food used in this study and other results may have been reached with a plastic food model, for example ref. 18. Fourthly, it is known that the jaw-closing muscles contribute to the stability of complete dentures. Increased duration of EMG burst during the occlusal phase In the same way as dentate subjects, complete denture wearers are able to adapt their mastication to hardness of food substance by increasing the number of cycles and duration of masticatory sequence. This led to an increase in the number of chewing cycles, duration of mastication sequence and EMG activity per sequence, confirming preliminary data obtained with natural foods Total muscular activity, duration of mastication and number of masticatory cycles increased with hardness both in denture wearer subjects and in their dentate counterparts, but the number of masticatory cycles increased more with hardness in denture wearers than in dentate subjects. This increased number of cycle between dentate subjects and complete denture wearers may correspond to an adaptation to the limit of masticatory strength of the edentulous subjects. In addition, the possibility that the average muscle activity per cycle recorded in the edentulous group was overestimated must be considered. In edentulous subjects, the lip, cheek and tongue muscles may play an important role in stabilising the dentures. The observed increase in global muscular activity (temporalis and masseter) may have been caused by unwanted recordings from muscles innervated by the facial nerve. The same increase was, however, observed in the temporal muscle, which is located relatively far from the muscles involved in denture stabilisation. The jaw-closing muscles also contribute to the stabilisation of the denture, Again, a corresponding increase in the occlusal phase duration could account for a possible overestimation of total EMG activity developed for comminution of food. Previous studies have shown that complete denture wearers presented both lower masticatory efficiency and lower bite force than dentate subjects. It was suggested that cycle frequency is a good criterion for evaluating masticatory health. The lower masticatory rate observed in complete denture wearers is not due to a longer occlusion phase. Several studies This may be linked to the proposal of Neill et al., who suggested that the decreased applied load seen in denture wearers is to some extent compensated by an increase of the loading time during the closing phase It is also possible that the destabilising forces produced by the texture of the bolus and which mobilise the denture base can cause pain through mucosal damage. Thus, complete denture wearers may adopt a ‘safer’ mastication cycle with a dual aim of stabilising their dentures and avoiding pain In conclusion, denture wearers showed a greater increase in duration of mastication with hardness than dentate subjects. In addition, complete denture wearers failed to increase EMG activity per cycle in response to hardness of the food. This, together with the general increase in number of cycles and masticatory duration and a decreased masticatory rate indicates that denture wearers experience difficulties during mastication. Further investigations should be carried out in order to adapt diet texture for complete denture wearers.