Samarium-promoted of 10 wt% Ni-SBA-15 catalysts, were prepared with various loadings of samarium (0.5, 1.5, 3 wt %), by two-solvent impregnation, which was known as a desired metal dispersion method for dry reforming of methane. The catalysts with/without promoter, were characterized by N2 adsorption-desorption, x-ray diffraction (low and high angles of XRD), x-ray fluorescence (XRF), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), energy dispersive x-ray spectrometry (EDS), wavelength dispersive x-ray spectrometry (WDS), temperature programmed oxidation/reduction (TPO/TPR) techniques, and tested in dry reforming of methane (DRM). XRD and BET results indicated that by adding more than 0.5%wt of samarium, decreased the catalysts' surface area and particles size; and improved the activity and long term stability. Among these promoted catalysts, 3Sm-10Ni-SBA-15 showed the highest catalytic activity and stability. TEM and TPR analysis of 3Sm-10Ni-SBA-15 sample, revealed that addition of samarium enhanced the interaction of NiO particles with support, and promoted dispersion of NiO species. The TPO analysis revealed that the addition of 3 wt% samarium increased the amount of deposited coke, as well. Furthermore, FESEM and HRTEM images confirmed the formation of nanotubes carbon on the surface of spent catalysts.In the last decades, dry reforming of methane has become significant consideration due to the convert two main greenhouse gases (CO More than ten kinds of metals have been reported as catalyst for dry reforming of methane, which are belong to group 8 (Ruthenium The most supports, which are used to reforming reaction, are Silica, Alumina, Zirconia, Zeolite and Carbon Nickel nitrate hexahydrate, samarium nitrate hexahydrate and tetraethoxysilane (Merck, P99%) were applied as nickel, samarium and silica sources, respectively. Furthermore, P123 and hydrochloride acid were used as template and pH controller, respectively. The support SBA-15 was synthesized according to the method described by Zhao et al. Low and high angles of x-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization of the fresh and spent catalysts were investigated at ambient temperature; using a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Ka radiation (40 kV and 30 mA). The XRF analysis was used to determine chemical compositions of prepared catalysts by ED from 2000 models of Oxford Company. N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were described by a BEL sorp mini-II gas adsorption at 77 K. The prepared samples were outgassed in N2 atmosphere for 2 h at 150 °C before testing. The surface area was calculated by BET equation and pore size distribution was evaluated by the BJH method on both adsorption and desorption branches of the isotherm. The morphology of the fresh catalysts was characterized by Tecnai 20–100 kV from FEI Company from USA and Zeiss-EM10C-100 kV from Germany. Before obtaining micrographs, the catalysts were dispersed ultrasonically in alcohol bath and then a drop of dispersion was placed on holey carbon film grid and was dried. The reduction behavior of the catalysts was measured by the temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) method by a micrometrics chemisorb 2750. 50 mg of the prepared catalysts were loaded in a fixed-bed reactor and heat-treated from 100 °C to 700 °C (10 °C/min) in a mixture of 10H The catalytic performance of the calcined samples was evaluated by a quartz tubular fixed bed continuous flow micro reactor (i.e. 8 nm) at atmospheric pressure and different temperatures. The samples were pressed, crushed and sieved to 40–60 mesh particles. Typically, the micro reactor was charged with a constant weight of 0.2 g of the catalyst granules. Before the catalytic reaction, the samples were reduced in pure H The high angle XRD patterns of the calcined SBA-15, unmodified Ni-SBA-15 and samarium incorporated Ni-SBA-15 catalysts are displayed in In order to have information about structural modifications of the support, low angle XRD patterns of all samples are given in The XRF analysis results of Sm-Ni-SBA-15 sample in In order to get the more information about Ni dispersion into the matrix of 10Ni-SBA-15 and 3Sm-10Ni-SBA-15 catalysts, TEM and WDS analysis were used to characterize the fresh catalysts. TEM images of the fresh catalysts are shown in Before catalytic tests, the calcined samples were reduced in pure H In case of 0.5Sm-10Ni-SBA-15 catalyst, less activity is observed than other catalysts due to the larger particles of NiO and less dispersion of NiO. Similar results with the relationship between particle size and catalytic activity has been previously reported Short time stability tests were carried out at 700 °C for 3 h for all catalysts. A short time stability results showed that all of the catalysts, except 0.5Sm-10Ni-SBA-15, have sufficient stability during the test period for 3 h, ( The SEM images of 10Ni-SBA-15 and 3Sm-10Ni-SBA-15 catalysts, FESEM images with EDS pattern and HRTEM micrograph with ED patterns of 3Sm-10Ni-SBA-15 catalyst, after reaction at 700 °C for 12 h, are shown in The 10Ni-SBA-15 without/with samarium promoter were prepared by two-solvent way and tested in dry reforming of methane. From XRD results and Scherrer equation, the highest dispersion of NiO and the lowest particle size was belonged to 3Sm-10Ni-SBA-15, which these results are confirmed by TEM images, as well. The BET results showed that the addition of this promoter more than 0.5%wt decreased the surface area of Ni-SBA-15 catalysts. The TPR profiles, indicated that the addition of 3%wtSm into the Ni-SBA-15 catalyst increased the reduction temperature due to a good interaction of Sm with support. Based on dry reforming tests, the highest activity and stability is related to Ni-SBA-15 containing of 3%wtSm. The obtained results from TPO profiles and SEM images of spent catalysts, revealed that with adding of Sm into the Ni-SBA-15, is induced the formation of nanotube type of cock, which is a reason for stability of 3%wt Sm incorporated Ni catalyst for 12 h of the reaction. The authors thank semnan university, Dr. Mohammad reza Vaezi in department of materials and energy in materials and energy research center, catalyst and advanced materials research laboratory in chemical engineering department of kashan university, nanonafez company in semnan university science and technology park, and semnan university science and technology park for supporting of research.