Bioleaching of metals from hazardous spent hydro-processing catalysts was attempted in the second stage after growing the bacteria with sulfur in the first stage. The first stage involved transformation of elemental sulfur particles to sulfuric acid through an oxidation process by acidophilic bacteria. In the second stage, the acidic medium was utilized for the leaching process. Nickel, vanadium and molybdenum contained within spent catalyst were leached from the solid materials to liquid medium by the action of sulfuric acid that was produced by acidophilic leaching bacteria. Experiments were conducted varying the reaction time, amount of spent catalysts, amount of elemental sulfur and temperature. At 50g/L spent catalyst concentration and 20g/L elemental sulfur, 88.3% Ni, 46.3% Mo, and 94.8% V were recovered after 7 days. Chemical leaching with commercial sulfuric acid of the similar amount that produced by bacteria was compared. Thermodynamic parameters were calculated and the nature of reaction was found to be exothermic. Leaching kinetics of the metals was represented by different reaction kinetic equations, however, only diffusion controlled model showed the best correlation here. During the whole process Mo showed low dissolution because of substantiate precipitation with leach residues as MoO3. Bioleach residues were characterized by EDX and XRD.Spent hydro-processing catalysts, the major solid wastes of petro-chemical industries, contain various hazardous components, such as Al, Ni, Co, V, Mo and some organic contaminants. During the use of the catalysts, metal sulphides and oxides and metallorganic compounds are deposited on the catalyst surface, causing loss of activity and specificity Compared to conventional techniques, biotechnological leaching processes offer attractive features for metal extraction from solid materials. Such processes are more cost efficient, simpler and more environmentally friendly than their chemical counterparts. A review of literature reveals that the role of micro-organisms in bioleaching of various metals from ore deposits and mine tailings has been studied extensively Comparative studies of one step and two-step leaching processes were reported by different researchers, and the feasibility of the latter was demonstrated The most effective and common bacteria for metal solubilization are the chemolithoautotrophs The current investigation reports bioleaching of spent hydro-processing catalysts using All chemicals were analytical grade reagents (AR) unless otherwise stated and all aqueous solutions were prepared using de-ionized water. The hydro-processing spent catalyst was obtained from SK Petroleum Corp., South Korea, and this material was the basis of all samples used in the experiments. The spent catalyst material was a granular solid with black, waxy covering and a film of surface oil that drained on standing. Particle size ranged from 2 A mixed sulfur oxidizing bacteria was collected from Parker CRC (Murdoch University, Australia). The culture was mainly constituted by All experiments were performed in shake-flasks in an orbital shaking incubator at 32 Elements in liquid phases and digests of solid phases were determined by ICP-AES, Spectro Analytical Instruments (CIROS). After the desired leaching time, the solid and liquid phases were separated. The liquid phase was acidified and diluted to known volume, while the solid phase was digested in boiling (at 60 Prior to leaching, the oily spent refinery catalyst was pre-treated by various methods and the metal composition of the same was also examined by ICP-AES. Solvent extraction of replicate masses showed some variation in mass reduction due to the mobile oil film but losses of 15% were characteristic. Calcination of the oily spent catalyst (750 Growth of the mixed bacteria consortia was carried out using 10 As a primary test, the acetone washed pre-treated spent catalyst (15 Representative results of batch leaching of the spent refinery catalyst are shown in The major reaction takes place in the second step through the protonic attack of SO The soluble H Varying amounts of the spent catalysts, 5–50 While varying the spent catalyst concentration, the pH of the solution at all the solid loadings remain within pH 0.9–1.35 (data not shown), however, there is change in the redox potential of the lixiviant ( It can also be speculated that the low electrode potential and strong acidic medium at low concentration of spent catalyst favours Mo The major part of Mo is found attached with solid phase of catalysts when we analyzed the digest of solid residues. Also, it seems that by increasing the catalyst amount, an appropriate synchronization between the rate of Mo extraction and that of Mo precipitation occurred, and this caused Mo species to be low in the solution. Since the metal dissolution is accompanied by protonic attack through SO Control flasks containing no sulfur and no inocula but open to the atmosphere still had an oxidative solution with the Eh value set by the oxygen/water couple in sulfuric acid solution. Oxidation of the target metal phases is possible with dissolved oxygen from the atmosphere. This system recovered 63.7%, 18.6% and 24.9% of the Ni, Mo and V, respectively, after 7 days at 32 Varying the amount of elemental sulfur, we also studied the recovery of metal at three different temperatures, 25 The enthalpy, Δ Bioleaching experiments were initially compared with chemical leaching using similar amount of sulfuric acid that produced by the bacteria (200 In the present hydro-processing spent catalyst, Ni, V and Mo are expected to be present in oxide or sulphide form over the alumina matrix (α-Al Leaching kinetics are controlled either by diffusional mass transfer of either reactant or product ions through a liquid boundary layer or a product metal deposit Equations for the lines of best fit are given in The XRD of the leach residues ( The release of nickel, vanadium and molybdenum from hazardous spent refinery catalysts using bacterially produced sulfuric acid has been well demonstrated. In the whole experimental set up Ni and V showed significant recovery during the reaction process while Mo was being precipitated. Increasing elemental sulfur in the growth media resulted in a solution richer in sulfuric acid, and hence, a leaching efficiency of Ni, V and Mo of 88.3%, 94.8%, and 46.3%, was obtained, respectively, at 5% (w/v) spent catalysts concentration. The reaction processes were demonstrated as diffusion-controlled. The lower solubility of Mo in the reaction process is due to its sparingly soluble nature in acidic regime and this is supported by Pourbaix equilibrium theory. Thermodynamic parameters such as Δ This work was supported by the Korea Foundation for International Cooperation of Science & Technology (KICOS) through a grant provided by the Korean Ministry of Science & Technology (MOST) in 2007 (No. K20602000004-07E0200-00410).