The relevant environmental hazard related to the presence of pharmaceuticals in water sources requires the development of high effective and suitable wastewater treatment technologies. In the present work, a hybrid process coupling electro-Fenton (EF) process and aerobic biological treatment (Bio-EF process) was implemented for the efficient and cost-effective mineralization of beta-blocker metoprolol (MPTL) aqueous solutions. Firstly, operating factors influencing EF process were assessed. MTPL solutions were completely mineralized after 4h-electrolysis under optimal operating conditions and BDD anode demonstrated its oxidation superiority. The absolute rate constant of MTPL oxidation byOH (k
                     MTPL) was determined by the competition kinetics method and found to be (1.72±0.04)×109
                     M−1
                     s−1. A reaction pathway for the mineralization of the drug was proposed based on the identification of oxidation by-products. Secondly, EF process was used as pre-treatment. An increase of BOD5/COD ratio from 0.012 to 0.44 was obtained after 1h EF treatment, along with 47% TOC removal and a significant decrease of toxicity, demonstrating the feasibility of a post-biological treatment. Finally, biological treatment successfully oxidized 43% of the total TOC content. An overall 90% mineralization of MPTL solutions was achieved by the Bio-EF process, demonstrating its potentiality for treating wastewater containing pharmaceutical residues.The increasingly alarming environmental problem represented by the occurrence of human pharmaceuticals in wastewater and surface water has been extensively reported Electro-Fenton (EF) process is one of the most applied EAOPs for wastewater treatment Boron doped diamond electrode (BDD) is shown as the better anode in EF process because of its high O In spite of the their high oxidation power, AOPs present important drawbacks, mostly high costs associated with the important consumption of chemicals, as well as the elevated energetic needs resulting from the long treatment times required for mineralization experiments. With the aim of reducing these disadvantages, coupled technologies, combining the main advantages of individual processes, emerged as potential alternatives Metoprolol (MTPL) is a beta-blocker highly prescribed for the treatment of diverse cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, heart rhythm disturbances and coronary artery disease Low elimination rates of MTPL are usually reported in activated sludge treatment (up to 31% removal), due to the formation of persistent metabolites, which remain in the solution as they are refractory to microorganisms Considering the numerous reports concerning both, the ineffective biological and the advantageous electrochemical degradation of MTPL, this drug was chosen as a model for assessing the application of a hybrid “bio-EF” process as a potential alternative for the suitable and cost-effective treatment of wastewater containing pharmaceuticals. In the first part of the present study, the electrochemical oxidation of MTPL or mineralization of its aqueous solution by EF process was thoroughly assessed, evaluating the influence of different parameters affecting the process. In the second stage, biodegradability and toxicity tests were conducted with the purpose of evaluating applicability of a biological post-step. The last phase consisted on the application of an aerobic treatment of electro-Fenton pre-treated solutions in order to complete the mineralization of the drug. Metoprolol tartrate (purity Dissolved total organic carbon (TOC) analyses were conducted using a Shimadzu VCSH TOC analyzer. The percent of mineralization current efficiency (% MCE) was calculated according to Eq. The specific energy consumption per unit TOC mass (EC Concentration decay of MTPL was followed by HPLC using a Merck Lachrom liquid chromatography (L-7100 pump, L-7455 UV–vis detector selected at 270 Determination of aromatic by-products formed during EF treatment was performed by GC–MS analysis in EI mode (70 A 300 Acute toxicity evaluation during EF treatment was performed using bacteria A respirometric method was used to determine the biochemical oxygen demand at 5 days (BOD 12 pure cultures were selected from the collection of the laboratory of Molécules de communication et adaptation des micro-organismes of the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle (Paris). Cultures were maintained on agar slants and stored at 4° Biomasses were harvested by centrifugation (bacteria) or filtration (fungi). Before experiment, it was washed four times with distilled water and centrifuged after each washing step in order to eliminate any residual carbon or mineral source. Duplicate experiments were performed in a 0.5 Applied current is a key parameter affecting the electrochemical process, as it controls the generation rate of H The absolute rate constant of the oxidation reaction of MTPL with  Besides, EC The anode material plays a significant role in EAOPs as the production of M( Similarly, BDD anode resulted to be the most powerful electrode for TOC abatement, achieving total mineralization of the drug after 4 The nature of the electrolytic medium has been reported to influence the electro-oxidation of organic compounds. With the aim of clarifying its effect, different inorganic salts were used as supporting electrolyte. Results are presented in Fig. SM-1. It was found that degradation rates are greater in chloride medium, which can be ascribed to the formation of active chlorine species in the solution The influence of MTPL concentration on process efficiency was also evaluated (Fig. SM-2). It was observed that complete disappearance of the drug, as well as mineralization kinetics is faster at lower concentrations, whereas MCE increases with rising concentration. A more exhaustive discussion regarding the chemical reactions involved in different supporting electrolytes and the effect of drug concentration is provided in Supplementary material, Text SM-1 and SM-2, respectively. The identification of aromatic/cyclic by-products formed during EF treatment, along with short-chain carboxylic acids and inorganic ions, allowed proposing a reaction pathway for oxidation of MTPL by It was found that oxidation of the drug proceeds mainly through radical attack to the aromatic ether site with further cleavage of the C The evolution of carboxylic acids formed during mineralization experiments is depicted in The identification of inorganic ions released during EF–BDD (Fig. SM-3) by IC demonstrated that nitrogen atom present in MTPL structure is released mainly as NH The findings described so far highlight that EF process is a clean and powerful technology capable of mineralizing pharmaceutical solutions under optimized operating conditions, using electron(s) as reagent for in-situ electro-generation of strong oxidizing species ( The evolution of the biodegradability of MTPL solutions during EF treatment under selected optimal conditions was conducted by means of the BOD Toxicity curves depicting the % of luminescence inhibition of The obtained BOD Finally an overall mineralization rate of 90% was achieved by the coupled “Bio-EF process”, highlighting the potentiality of this sustainable hybrid process for efficiently destroying pharmaceutical residues, exploiting the great oxidation power of EF at the same time as their main disadvantages (elevated costs) are countered by its combination with a cheap and environmental compatible biological method. EF process was confirmed to be a highly powerful and clean process for the total removal and complete mineralization of MTPL solutions under optimal experimental conditions. It was found that higher current values enhanced TOC decay rates, but led to a fall of MCE, whilst greater EC In the second part of this study, BOD Finally, the relevance of the combined process “Bio-EF” was demonstrated. A global mineralization rate of 90% was attained: 47% being achieved during 1 Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: