Co-production of fermentable sugars and nanofibrillated cellulose from cassava pulp was achieved by the combination of thermophilic enzymes (endoglucanase, β-glucosidase, and α-amylase) and a new atomization system (Star Burst System; SBS), which employs opposing water jets. The SBS represents a key technology for providing cellulose nanofibers and improving the enzymatic saccharification of cassava pulp. Depending on the enzymes used, the production of glucose from cassava pulp treated with the SBS was 1.2- to 2.5-fold higher than that from pulp not treated with the SBS. Nanofibrillated cellulose with the gel-like property in suspension was produced (yield was over 90%) by α-amylase treatment, which completely released trapped starch granules from the fibrous cell wall structure of cassava pulp pretreated with the SBS. The SBS provides an environmentally low-impact pretreatment system for processing biomass material into value-added products.Cassava ( Efficient multi-enzyme hydrolysis processes, engaging amylolytic activity in combination with other hydrolytic enzymes, have been developed for application to raw starch or starch-based feedstocks. For example, Dry cassava pulp was kindly provided by the Advance Agro Public Co., Ltd., Bangkok, Thailand. To compare the effect of comminution methods, cassava pulp was pretreated by three methods: conventional milling followed by SBS treatment (Sugino Machine Limited, Toyama, Japan), treatment with a cutter-mill (Wonder Blender, WB-1) (Waring Products, Inc., Connecticut, USA), and grinding (Zojirushi Corporation, Osaka, Japan) to obtain particles less than 100 Two types of hyperthermophilic cellulases from The thermophilic cellulase cocktail (EGPh and BGLPf) was prepared as a mixture of the recombinant cellulase enzymes including 2.5 Approximately, 200 The sugar composition of the cassava pulp was determined according to the analytical procedure recommended by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory; NREL ( One-hundred-fifty microliters of thermophilic cellulase cocktail or cellulases and α-amylase cocktail was added to 2 The morphology of the fibrillated product with and without the SBS treatment was analyzed by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, S-4800, Hitachi High-Technologies Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). An accelerating voltage of 1.5 The chemical composition of cassava pulp is typically dependent on the starch processing technology used. The cassava pulp used in this study was composed mainly of starch and fibrous material, containing cellulose and hemicellulose, which are sources of fermentable sugars ( The viscosity of the suspension depended on the number of treatment cycles. However, after 10 cycles of SBS treatment, the suspensions of cellulose powder and cassava pulp were converted into a gel-like product with remarkably high viscosity (data not shown). The products from the microcrystalline cellulose powder and cassava pulp by the SBS treatment were stable and did not degrade over several months at room temperature ( Enzymatic saccharification of cassava pulp is distinct from that of raw cassava starch or cassava root homogenate, because higher non-starch polysaccharides, such as cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, are involved, and especially because of the trapped nature of raw starch granules. The cooperative action of an array of polysaccharide-hydrolyzing cellulases is essential for efficient degradation of cassava pulp (  The chemical composition of cassava pulp ( The trapped nature of starch granules in cassava pulp hinders their extraction and direct saccharification. For cassava pulp treated with the SBS, followed by enzymatic hydrolysis by AM or hyperthermophilic cellulases, the produced glucose was estimated to be 0.40 and 0.10 However, the enzyme mixture demonstrated no synergistic effect on saccharification of cassava pulp by grinding or cutter-mill treatment (data not shown). The results indicate that the efficient saccharification of cassava pulp by the combined action of multiple non-starch polysaccharide hydrolyzing enzymes and amylolytic enzyme can be attributed to the SBS treatment. Thus, in the multi-enzyme process, the increase in fermentable sugar yield was due to hydrolysis of both raw starch and cellulose to glucose. Based on the analysis of composite enzyme activities in cassava pulp saccharification, the high saccharification efficiency of the multi-enzyme cocktail could be due to the cooperative action of the composite multiple non-starch polysaccharide hydrolyzing enzymes (including EGPh and BGLPf). These enzymes saccharify the cellulosic component of the cassava pulp and release the starch granules from the fibrous cell wall structure. The released raw starch granules are then hydrolyzed by the action of the α-amylase activity present in the multi-enzyme cocktail, resulting in nearly complete saccharification of the substrate. Therefore, this multi-enzyme system has the advantages of reduced energy consumption and improved fermentable sugar yield compared with the conventional process. SBS processing reduced the micrometer-size of cellulose fibers ( The Star Burst System provides a new and mild pretreatment system for processing biomass material. The SBS can improve the saccharification efficiency of a multi-enzyme system that included thermophilic EGPh, BGLPf, and AM, on the hydrolysis of cassava pulp by more than 1.5-fold. Using SEM, a matrix of fine cellulose nanofibers could be observed in cassava pulp treated with both the SBS and thermophilic enzymes. The saccharification process using thermophilic enzymes and the SBS is likely applicable to cassava pulp as a feedstock for the production of various bioproducts, including biofuels, biochemicals, and especially, biopolymer composites of economic importance. The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 