The ability to forecast how a conveying system will operate prior to its construction is a major issue for both industry and research. A trustworthy prediction can assist in the design of a conveying system and save efforts and resources spent in trial and error. In the present study, a novel model is presented for predicting the size reduction of particles coupled with the flow field in pipeline conveying. The model consists of two parts: a one-dimensional two-phase model that calculates the flow field and a one-dimensional breakage algorithm that accounts for particle collisions and breakage. The breakage algorithm exploits both empirical comminution functions defining the particle characteristics and machine functions (impact velocity and collision frequency) defining the system behavior, which are developed from CFD-DEM simulations. In the breakage model, the particles are described as individual discrete entities within a representative mass. This approach facilitates the use of low computational resources in the prediction of particle size reduction in conveying systems, thereby making it especially applicable for long-range industrial pipelines. Furthermore, in this method, it is possible to take into account particle fatigue and attrition not only in straight pipe sections but also in bends. In the current study, our new breakage model was implemented in a dilute-phase pneumatic conveying system. The machine functions developed for this system showed the following clear tendencies: Finer particles collide with the pipe wall at higher impact velocities and higher frequencies, while particle-particle interactions occur more frequently for coarser particles. Furthermore, it was found that breakage due to particle-particle interactions was significant inside bend elements, thereby implying that these collisions cannot be neglected. The model predictions of particle attrition were in good agreement, with a mean deviation of 5.8%, with the breakage results obtained previously by our group in dilute-phase pneumatic conveying experiments.Particle attrition during pneumatic conveying constitutes a major problem in a wide variety of industrial applications. When particles are transported pneumatically through a pipeline, they collide with each other and with the walls of the pipe, which may lead to particle breakage. In addition, particles may slide along the bottom of the pipeline, thereby being subjected to abrasive wear. These actions lead to particle degradation and hence to undesirable changes in material characteristics and product quality. The attrition of particles during pneumatic conveying has been investigated experimentally in a large number of studies In the discrete element method (DEM) approach, particle breakage can be simulated by one of three different models An alternate approach is to adopt a macroscopic model for two-phase flow and to simultaneously predict particle breakage, albeit with reduced accuracy but with the advantage of far less computation time. Such a degradation model was proposed by Chapelle et al. In the present study, a new method is presented for calculating particle attrition due to impact events under steady-state flow conditions in conveying pipeline systems. The model consists of two parts: a one-dimensional two-phase flow model for calculating the fluid dynamics In the ODBA, the methodology of Kalman et al. The impact velocity function is used as the input for the comminution functions that determine whether a particle will break or weaken, and the collision frequency function is used to locate the positions of the collisions. These functions were developed in the present study for a particular experimental system In CFD-DEM breakage simulations, every simulated case provides a standalone result for the particle size distribution, which is accurate only for those specific simulation conditions. In principle, this approach facilitates a better classification of the attrition phenomena than the ODBA, since it can characterize every particle's collision event in a 3D domain. Nevertheless, it is impossible to apply this method in practice for long-range conveying systems and for process optimization because of the high computational cost. To overcome this drawback, the ODBA was developed as a fast calculation method for predicting attrition in conveying pipelines. Note that for developing the machine functions required for the ODBA, CFD-DEM simulations were conducted without taking particle breakage into account, which speeds up the simulation time in comparison with full CFD-DEM breakage simulations. Thus, in the present study, a set of CFD-DEM simulations was conducted for different conditions, the collision data was recorded, and correlations for the velocity and collisions frequency distributions were developed. In addition, the newly developed model was validated by comparing the model predictions with experimental results for conveying potash The purpose of the proposed model is to describe changes in particle size distribution along the pipeline, without conducting computationally expensive 3D CFD-DEM breakage simulations. Particle attrition is strongly affected by the carrier fluid flow, the particle concentration, and the geometry of the pipeline. The developed concept facilitates the prediction of the particle size distribution under different flow conditions in the following manner: The two-phase gas-solid flow field is calculated by a two-phase one-dimensional model. The ODBA is used for calculating the changes in particle size distribution within the flow field, utilizing, firstly, empirical comminution functions to obtain the particle characteristics In the present study, we developed the above two functions by applying 3D CFD-DEM simulations. In the DEM, particles are modeled as discrete entities, with the realization of Newton's Second Law on each particle for calculating the particles' motion. The DEM solver is coupled with an Eulerian phase solver (ANSYS Fluent™ in this study), which calculates the fluid dynamics. Therefore, this method allows us to capture every individual collision event throughout the simulation. Furthermore, the methodology of capturing the collision data allows us to store this data for subsequent statistical analysis with respect to the geometry of the system, the physical properties of the carrier fluid, and the material being conveyed. For each different case simulated, the ODBA will produce a range of results that can then be applied to produce a general correlation for the two machine functions. Since the development of general machine functions requires a large database, in the specific system that was simulated to verify the model in the present study, the machine functions were developed separately for each simulated case. The dynamics of the two-phase flow was predicted using a one-dimensional model with the following assumptions: 1) The flow along the pipeline is steady state. 2) Air is an ideal gas. 3) The solid holdup of the particles is equivalent to the particles' cross-sectional coverage area. 4) The particles have a uniform size distribution in the pipe cross section. 5) The particles are fully suspended, resulting in a homogenous concentration in the pipe cross section. 6) The kinetic energy loss of the particles due to bend collisions can be obtained from CFD-DEM simulations and implemented into the one-dimensional model. 7) In dilute phase pneumatic conveying, since the greater part of the pressure drop due to bends in the pipeline is caused by a change in direction of the gas phase, pressure drops due to bends are assumed for the gas phase alone: The well-known one-dimensional two-phase flow pneumatic conveying model was used together with the mass, momentum and energy conservation balance for each differential segment along the pipeline Convective heat transfer from the wall to the air phase is assumed, with a constant wall temperature, which leads to the following energy conservation equations: where The particle residence time within the flow, defined as the time taken by the particle to travel in space, is obtained from: Knowledge of the particle residence time was exploited to examine the collisions frequency in terms of time instead of space (see also The friction of the gas phase with the wall is modeled by the Blasius equation: The particle friction with the wall is modeled by the relationship The particle-gas convective heat transfer coefficient The convective heat transfer coefficient between the wall and the gas phase, In the present study, the new breakage model combines statistics from CFD-DEM simulations and empirical particle characterization. The ODBA is coupled with two-phase flow dynamics (which is given by the one-dimensional two-phase flow model) and may be implemented in one-way or two-way coupling, which means that particle breakage may or may not affect the two-phase flow dynamics. In the two-phase flow model, the pipeline geometry is divided into equally sized numerical cells, and the model is then solved in order to obtain the steady-state two-phase flow dynamics. From this solution, the mass of the solid phase in each numerical cell along the pipeline is known. However, in this model, the particle size distribution is not known. The main goal of the current study is thus to predict the changes in the particle size distribution along the pipe. Therefore, the ODBA starts with a known particle size distribution at the inlet and modifies it by choosing a ‘tracking mass’ and accounting for the attrition of this tracking mass along the flow. To demonstrate the algorithm, let us consider a pipe with two-phase flow ( The pipeline cross-sectional area and the particle density in Eq. Regardless of particle breakage, the element size depends only on the flow dynamics and the chosen tracking mass. Thus, the element sizes can be calculated after the flow dynamics is solved and the tracking mass is chosen (and regardless of the particle breakage calculations). The tracking mass, although constant in size, contains discrete particles having a particular size distribution and may therefore be calculated by: The solution of the two-phase flow model provides the particle mass in every fluid cell, while the solution of Eq. The ODBA follows the movement of the tracking mass from the pipe inlet at time The collision search algorithm is based upon the above tracking procedure, on the assumption that the tracking mass is composed of discrete particles of different sizes. Each particle can collide with another particle and with the pipe wall at collision times obtained from the collision frequency distribution function. The collision search algorithm begins in every element when the tracking mass enters the specific element at the corresponding time. The collisions are searched for every discrete particle until the flow residence time in the element is reached. Then, a new element size is calculated by Eq. When a collision is found inside an element, the velocity of the impact is obtained from the statistical impact velocity distribution function. The equivalent impact force is then calculated from the equivalence function. If the resulting force is stronger than the particle strength, the particle will break. The numbers and sizes of the new daughter particles are obtained from the breakage function. Every new daughter particle is initialized with a new id, diameter, strength, and time of the next collision. In contrast, if the force is weaker than the particle strength, the particle strength will be diminished according to the fatigue function. To obtain the time of the next collision, the particle-particle or particle-wall frequency distribution function is used again. The above detailed algorithm is also demonstrated by the block diagram in By applying the frequency function, the next collision time of every particle is known. Therefore, when a particle travels along the pipeline with a known velocity, it will collide when its traveling time equals the time determined by the frequency function. For straight pipe sections, the residence time is known from the one-dimensional flow model [integration of Eq. The residence time was calculated with the aid of the equivalent non-dimensional bend length, which is defined as: With this method, each particle in the tracking mass is calculated discretely. Hence, the particle size distribution in the tracking mass can be obtained in every element along the pipeline, thereby producing a steady-state representation of the particle population. The machine functions contribute the particle dynamics in a specific system. They provide information on how often a particle will collide with a wall or with another particle and on the velocity of the impact. In this study, 3D CFD-DEM simulations were conducted to develop these machine functions, although any other method that is able to provide these functions can be implemented in the ODBA. The computational domain was calculated for the two-phase flow in 3D, using FLUENT 14.5.0 as the gas phase solver and our in-house BGU-DEM model Since only dilute phase pneumatic conveying is considered in this paper, one-way coupling was implemented in all our CFD-DEM simulations. The particles were assumed to enter the pipeline with the same velocity as that measured experimentally The distribution functions were developed according to the experimental system of Kalman et al. It is complicated to develop the machine functions as general functions that support different systems, since there are requirements both for a massive amount of data and for the ability to describe the dependency on large number of governing parameters. We therefore limited this investigation to the specific experimental system of Kalman et al. To separate out the effects of the geometry orientation ( The distribution functions were first developed with respect to the above governing parameters. For different bends along the pipeline, a very small variation was obtained in the distribution functions, as can be seen in As expected, the impact velocity of the particles with the wall was significantly higher inside the bends. Furthermore, there was a clear trend for smaller particles to collide at a higher velocity with each other and with the pipe wall. There was a small, but noticeable, difference in particle velocity between the vertical upstream and vertical downstream pipes, with a tendency for a higher collision velocity downstream. For the horizontal sections, the impact velocity of the particles fell between the values for the downstream and the upstream wall collisions, as expected. The frequency of the collisions can also be calculated from the CFD-DEM data, assuming the same classification as in the velocity distribution. To develop the frequency functions, the collision data was analyzed in the following procedure; for each time step (1 The discrete frequency for particle-wall interactions was fitted to a logistic distribution given as:  The parameters of the distribution functions are displayed graphically as a means to emphasize the dependency of the parameters in terms of particle average velocity and the particle size. As can be seen in In the horizontal pipes, the particle-particle median collision velocity was higher than the particle-wall median collision velocity, as can be seen in The standard deviation of the velocity distribution can be extracted from the scale parameter The parameters of the frequency distribution functions ( It is clearly evident that for the three scenarios simulated there was a correlation between the governing parameters and the collision velocity and frequency distribution functions. In the future, the investigation of this phenomenon (with additional results) could lead to more general expressions relating the functions parameters to the governing parameters (i.e., particle diameter, pipe diameter, carrier properties, particle and gas mass flux, etc.). In the ODBA, particle characteristics are described by empirical comminution functions. The procedure for implementing these functions into the ODBA was adopted from the research of Kalman et al. Particles of the same material and the same size do not necessarily have the same strength; therefore, the strength of a population of particles is usually described statistically. In this study, the strength distribution of Rozenblat et al. The mechanism of impact loading differs significantly from that for compression loading. Thus, to obtain the compression force in terms of the impact velocity, Rozenblat et al. Particles subjected to an impact load that is smaller than the particle strength may cause a decrease in the particle strength; this phenomenon is referred to as fatigue behavior. In pneumatic conveying, the particles collide many times with the pipe wall, and therefore fatigue modeling is particularly important. In the present study, the fatigue model of Han et al. To obtain the fragment sizes after particle breakage, the method of Brosh et al. The mass of all the fragments must conserve the mass of the mother particle: The process of randomly choosing a diameter from Eq. With this improvement, the resulting size distribution will give a good prediction of the experimental number size distribution. As first implementation of the proposed ODBA, one-way coupling of the ODBA and the flow model (i.e., particle breakage does not affect the flow field) was used for calculating the particle size distribution along a pipeline. The predictions were then validated against the results obtained previously in dilute-phase pneumatic conveying experiments To validate the flow model, a comparison of the one-dimensional model with the 3D CFD simulations for gas alone was undertaken. The comparison of the total pressure drop showed a maximum deviation of 5%. Thereafter, the same boundary conditions were used as in the DEM simulations for the one-dimensional two-phase flow model. The axial velocity in the DEM simulation at the end of the third horizontal pipe (glass pipe in the experimental system, see In the pneumatic experiments of Kalman et al. From the simulations with our one-way coupling ODBA (with particle-particle interaction), the breakage ratio was calculated after each cycle for the three scenarios. Comparison of the predictions with the experimental results showed a good match with a relatively small deviation ( It is very common to neglect particle-particle interaction in dilute phase pneumatic conveying. Our test cases have a 0.3–0.7% particle volume fraction with an SLR of 0.7–1.7, which is in keeping with the conditions for dilute pneumatic conveying. The influence of the particle-particle collisions on the attrition phenomenon, as obtained from the ODBA, is demonstrated in One of the most important demands in the present study was to develop a model that would be much less time consuming than CFD-DEM breakage simulations. The duration time of each cycle of our simulation (~ A novel model for particle attrition in conveying systems is presented. The model is composed of two parts: a one-dimensional two-phase model to account for the flow field, and the ODBA to account for collisions and breakage of particles. The model incorporates empirical comminution functions (strength, equivalence, fatigue and breakage) for the particle characteristics and machine functions (collision velocity and collision frequency) that were developed from CFD-DEM simulations in framework of the current study. The advantages of the ODBA over existing models lie in the following aspects: the fast calculation time; the ability to take into consideration fatigue in repeated impacts; the ability to include particle breakage in horizontal and vertical pipes as well as in bends; and, moreover, the ability to take into account both particle-particle and particle-wall collisions. These advantages make the ODBA especially suitable for application in the design of long-range industrial pipelines. Several scenarios with different velocities of dilute-phase pneumatic conveying were simulated and compared with the experimental results previously obtained by Kalman et al.