Minerals can be liberated by random fracture of particles into smaller fragments or by detachment along phase boundaries. These two mechanisms represent borderline cases. When ores get comminuted the liberation of minerals is achieved to some extent by both mechanisms. This article describes a method to determine the extent of transgranular and intergranular fracture based on 2-dimensional analysis of surface exposure of minerals.
                  The approach uses the unbiased surface information of phase specific surface area (PSSA), phase specific free surface (PSFS) and phase specific interfacial area (PSIA) of minerals and their change with comminution. The parameters are discussed related to the normalized grain size, which is the ratio of mineral grain size in the product to mineral grain size in the unbroken material. Finally, the amount of transgranular and intergranular fracture on surface exposure can be calculated using the phase specific surface parameters.
                  A sedimentary rock (apatite ore), an igneous rock (nepheline-syenite) and an artificial material (copper slags) were ground to different fineness. Based on the mineral liberation analysis (MLA) of feed and products, the extent of phase boundary fracture on the surface exposure of the minerals is studied.Mechanisms causing mineral liberation were first described by Random fracture is often accounted for as the dominating mechanism for the liberation of ore minerals. It therefore had been a basis to simplify models for liberation modelling ( As pure random fracture and pure detachment are borderline cases, fracture mechanisms will be based on both to some extent. Therefore, The speed of crack propagation and its role in transgranular and intergranular fracture has been discussed by XMT provides 3-dimensional data and gives thus the most complete picture of breakage along irregular shaped surfaces. It therefore was used in recent studies to investigate crack propagation ( In SEM-based automated mineralogy two-dimensional image analysis is used to measure three-dimensional sample features. This leads to a loss of one dimension during analysis which is known as the stereological bias. Nevertheless, there are material characteristics which can be measured without being biased. These characteristics are grades of components based on point ( Taking this into account there are restrictions when a change in surface area of minerals is studied to investigate grain boundary fracture. Samples for liberation measurement with a two-dimensional method have to be representative and in the case of grain mounts isotropic subsamples of the feed and the product of a comminution process. Thus segregation and preferential orientation of particles inside the mount must not be present. Results are valid for the material or mineral types in total. Therefore, the samples can neither be reduced to fractions of interest, nor is it valid to study individual particles or size classes of the product. In particles of broken rock, the surface area ( When two-dimensional methods are used, the liberation distribution is measured on a polished surface of an epoxy block. Thus volumes are represented by areas and areas are represented by lines (see The surface of a mineral locked to other minerals is given by the length of the bordering lines of this phase to other phases. Referred to Investigations on liberation and breakage phenomena are performed on particle populations. The surface areas are therefore represented by the sum of areas calculated on the individual particle sections. Different samples in liberation analysis will have different total numbers of particles visible in the sliced surface of an epoxy block. Thus absolute values of cumulative particle parameters like volume and surface have to be transferred to phase specific ( This is done by relating the particle surface to the particle volume. The phase specific surface area ( Using phase specific parameters furthermore enables comparing different minerals which typically differ in their proportions within a rock sample.  If pure transgranular fracture takes place The change in free surface area is a combination of new surface generated by transgranular fracture and the free surface generated by a loss of interfacial area between different minerals caused by intergranular fracture. When Given as a percentage Automated mineralogy on feed and product of comminution enables to measure changes of all three specific surface parameters. However, it needs to be emphasized that both samples have to represent the whole material. It is not valid just to analyze a specific size class. That is why selective breakage phenomena can lead to an enrichment of phases in different sizes. When liberation characteristics of different minerals have to be compared based on minerals of different grain size distributions, a normalized size parameter is needed. Thus a normalized grain size ( This normalized grain size relates the mean mineral grain size in the product particle population to the one in the feed. The mean mineral grain size For studies on an individual step of grinding, the mean mineral grain size in the feed of grinding has to be used. When fracture is studied over the whole chain of comminution the mineral grain size of the feed has to be the one in the original ore body. The data needed for calculating The nepheline-syenite sample originates from the Norra Kärr alkaline complex located in the south-eastern part of Sweden. The elliptical body covers an area of approximately 38,000 A sample of around 40 The apatite samples for this study were provided by the Vietnam Apatite Limited Company. It originates from a deposit in the Lao Cai province. With estimated reserves of about 820 The entire sample of about 150 The investigated slag is a waste material from a smelter of a copper porphyry mine. It mainly comprises of silicate and oxide mineral phases. So far, the slag is stockpiled in a dump which leads to major environmental problems for the mine and the surrounding area. The main slag phase is fayalite, accounting for around 60 The slag sample first was crushed with a jaw crusher followed by a roller mill to a defined upper particle sizes of 1.5 The feed materials as well as the products of the milling tests on the three materials were handed to automated mineralogy (Mineral Liberation Analyzer, MLA). In order to analyze the loose material from milling it was mounted in an epoxy block. Therefore aliquots of 3 The MLA comprises a FEI Quanta 650F SEM (FE-SEM) equipped with two Bruker Quantax X-Flash 5030 EDX detectors and FEI's MLA suite 3.1.4 for data acquisition. Identification of mineral grains by MLA is based on backscattered electron (BSE) image segmentation and collection of EDX-spectra of the particles and grains distinguished in BSE-imaging mode. Collected EDX-spectra are then classified using a list of standard mineral spectra collected by the user. More detailed information on the functionality of the MLA system can be found in In this study, the GXMAP measurement mode was applied on all samples. Consistent operating conditions were applied using 10.0 The evaluation of the MLA measurements provides information on the qualitative and quantitative mineralogy as well as the grain size distribution and mineral liberation. In this study, grain size distribution and liberation are the main attributes assessed. Data processed with the Mineral Liberation Analyzer does not comprise stereological transformation ( This section gives a briefly description of the calculations done for this study and the output information from MLA on which the calculations are based on. Besides what was written in the theory section, some special calculations were done for data adjustment before analysis. In the first step, the data from size classes must be combined by their mass fractions from sieving to cover the entire sample. This was done for the nepheline-syenite and the slag sample using the combine function in MLA-view software. In case of the apatite ore un-sized material was analyzed by MLA. To adjust the data of the apatite ore, its particle size distribution from analytical sieving was used. Therefore the particle population from MLA-data of the un-sized sample was virtually sieved into the size fractions from analytical sieving using filters for ECD. These virtual size classes were than recombined using the mass fractions from analytical sieving. In the second step, the tables “Modal Mineralogy”, “Phase Specific Surface Area” and “Mineral Association” as well as the particle size distribution and the mineral grain size distributions were exported from MLA-view software to Microsoft Excel. When the combine function in MLA-view is applied to the data, information on “Mineral Boundary” and “Mineral Area” is lost, as it is not valid to combine these parameters. This is due to the fact, that the mineral area as well as the mineral boundary visible in a section of a mount is a function of the random particle concentration in the epoxy. Therefore “Area%” of the minerals from “Modal Mineralogy” table together with In the last step, the parameters When measurements are done on mounts of sample material having a wide size distribution, fines get underestimated and measured particle size distributions will be biased. In case of isotropic mounts there should be no such effect, thus basics of stereology are valid ( To prevent errors caused by segregation, grain mounts were produced from size classed material as described in the above sections. After combining the data of the size classes to a virtual total sample using the mass fractions, the particle size distributions from MLA fit to the cumulative mass fractions from sieving. This is shown in  Distinct to the mineral grades all the other parameters listed in The diagrams of As expected, By using the approach presented in chapter section 2 the extent of detachment (which is intergranular fracture) on surface exposure can be calculated. When this parameter is plotted against the An interesting trend can be seen for eudialyte, nepheline and feldspar, which show an increasing percentage of detachment with decreasing It has to be mentioned, that the data of aegirine seems to scatter. The data point of aegirine in As there were no size classes analyzed by MLA for the apatite ore samples, the data was checked on consistency based on the size distribution from MLA and the cumulative mass fraction from analytical sieving. It was found that fines are strongly underestimated in the MLA data compared to analytical sieving. Comparing the data of the un-sieved sample with the virtually sieved and recombined one given in As can be seen in the mineral grain size distributions (cf. Comparing specific mineral surface parameters, the effect of size is obvious. Calcite shows the highest values in During comminution, the particle size is reduced and new free surface is generated (cf. When the percentage of detachment is plotted against the The coarse grain size distribution of apatite combined with grinding to a specific fineness results in small normalized grain sizes. Furthermore, high reduction ratios of apatite lead to a generation of free surface by transgranular fracture. Thus the percentage of detachment on generated free surface is small. Dolomite, calcite and silicates show values of more than 50% detachment. These minerals tend to be liberated by intergranular fracture. A difference in the liberation characteristic of the carbonates can be related to the difference in The parameters of the slags investigated in this study differ strongly from the ones of the two ores discussed above. This artificial material comprises of very fine grained phases (cf. Distinct to the other specific surface parameters the It has to be mentioned, that there is an inconsistency in the data of the slags. The parameter Similar to the nepheline-syenite, some mineral groups in the slags show an increasing percentage of detachment when mineral grain size is reduced (cf. There are significant differences in the liberation characteristic of different materials. The minerals in the apatite ore, which is a sedimentary rock, show high proportions of detachment on the generation of free surface even at high reduction ratios. In contrast, minerals in the nepheline-syenite seem to mainly be liberated by random fracture. In slags, which are artificial materials, the percentage of detachment is very low. This can be explained by their anisotropic structure and their rough interfaces compared to the natural rocks. The liberation characteristic not just differs between different materials it also differs between minerals within a specific material. This can be seen for the minerals in the nepheline-syenite ore. Eudialyte, nepheline and feldspar in the nepheline-syenite as well as silicates and magnetite in the slags were found to have an increasing percentage of detachment at high reduction ratios. This is in good agreement with the model published by Detachment can also occur right from the beginning of comminution, as long as the strength of phase boundaries is weaker than the one of the locked phases. This can be seen in the liberation characteristic of the apatite ore. It may be true for some types of sedimentary rock in general. On the other hand, phases which are locked together by rough grain boundaries will be difficult to liberate by detachment (e.g. slags). When there is a dendritic texture, phases will mainly be liberated by transgranular fracture. Some minerals showed a size dependent amount of detachment on mineral surface exposure. Therefore, the definition of a single detachment factor to model mineral liberation ( Mineral properties, like hardness, cleavage and crystal structure are reported to have an influence on the amount of detachment on surface exposure ( Ball milling, which was used to grind the different materials, is known to be an unselective type of grinding ( Two-dimensional SEM-based automated mineralogy can be used to investigate the extent of transgranular and intergranular fracture on surface exposure when the following constraints are fulfilled: The samples have to cover the entire material (feed or product) of a comminution process. All samples have to be measured using the same resolution and horizontal field width. Otherwise the fractal effect has to be considered. When samples were fractioned before analysis, a back calculation based on the mass balance is necessary. It has to be considered, that only specific parameters can be used in back calculation as lengths of boundaries and mineral areas depend on the amount of particles visible in the sliced surface of the epoxy block. This amount of visible particles is random and does not have any relation to the mass balance. Parameters for surface area, free surface and interfacial area have to be calculated as mass or volume specific ones. Results are valid for the overall material. It is not possible to draw conclusion for single particles within the samples. This case study on different materials shows material specific breakage behavior. Furthermore a size specific change in the extent of transgranular and intergranular fracture on surface exposure was found. This is in good consistency with literature. Different minerals or phases inside a material differ in breakage and liberation characteristics. Further studies on the role of material properties, morphology of boundary area and cracks have to be performed to understand and influence intergranular fracture for improved liberation. This will help to liberate at coarser grind which directly leads to energy savings. Research for this study was mainly performed at the research groups of Mineral Processing at the Institute of Mechanical Process Engineering and Mineral Processing, TU Bergakademie Freiberg and Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology. It was supported and benefited from numerous discussions and measurements by Petya Atanasova, Andreas Bartzsch and Sabine Haser. The authors would like to acknowledge Vietnam Apatite Limited Company and colleagues from the Department of Mineral Processing, Hanoi University of Mining and Geology for apatite ore sample provision and preparation to transport to Germany. Furthermore, the authors are particularly indebted to Tasman Metals Ltd. for providing rock samples and useful information about the Norra Kärr deposit.