AA5052/ZrB2 composites with different volume percent (i.e. 0, 3, 6, 9 and 10vol.%) ZrB2 particles were developed by in-situ reaction of molten AA5052 alloy with two inorganic salts K2ZrF6 and KBF4 at a temperature of 860°C. The in-situ composites were characterized by DTA, XRD, SEM, TEM for reaction analysis and morphology. Their mechanical properties like hardness and tensile properties were evaluated using standard methods. Morphology studies show that grain size of Al-rich phase reduces due to the presence of ZrB2 particles. Microstructural studies also reveal the uniform distribution of second phase particles, clear interface, good bonding, dislocations and morphology of ZrB2 particles. It is found that ZrB2 particles are mostly in nano size with hexagonal or rectangular shape, however, few particles in micron size are also observed. Density and hardness of the composites increases with increase in the amount of reinforcement. Ultimate tensile strength and 0.2% yield strength (YS) also improved continuously with increase in the volume fraction of ZrB2 particles up to 9vol.% but beyond this composition strength reduced. It is important to note that with dispersion of ZrB2 particles in base alloy an improvement in ductility is observed which is contrary to many other composites.Increased demand of light weight and superior performance materials in aerospace and automotive industries makes aluminium matrix composite (AMCs), a potential candidate for many applications. Hence, AMCs are extensively used in manufacturing of various components such as brake drums/rotors, cylinder liners, connecting rods, cylinder blocks, pistons, gears, drive shafts and suspension systems AMCs could be produced either by solid state or liquid state processing. Liquid state techniques are generally used because these are economically viable, simple and applicable in large quantity production. Liquid processing methods are of two types namely ex-situ and in-situ. In ‘ex-situ’ technique ceramic reinforcements are added externally to the molten metal whereas in ‘in-situ’ process the production of reinforcement takes place within the matrix as a result of chemical reaction. The in-situ composites pose several advantages over ex-situ such as uniform distribution of reinforcement particles, grain refinement, clear interface, enhanced thermal stability and economical processing Zhao et al. In the present work, AA5052 aluminium-magnesium alloy with medium strength, good formability, with reasonable weld ability and corrosion resistance has been taken as matrix alloy. Presence of magnesium in aluminium gives rise to strength without losing ductility. It also acts as a surface active element and reduces the interfacial energy which results in enhanced wettability and uniform distribution of reinforcement AA5052 aluminium–magnesium alloy in the form of sheets was acquired from Hindalco Industries, Renukoot and analysed for the constituents present ( DTA (NETZSCH STA 449F3 STA449F3A-0843-M) study was conducted to study the reaction temperature of in-situ composites. The composite sample was heated at the rate of 10 Actual amount of ZrB Differential thermal analysis (DTA) was conducted to study the endothermic and exothermic transformations with respect to the temperature during the composite preparation. When AA5052 alloy is heated with two inorganic salts K DTA curve shown in If the reaction time at 860 Grain size, density and porosity measurements of both base alloy and composites are reported in  TEM study of the composites clearly reveals morphology, interfacial characteristics and presence of dislocations in the matrix around ZrB The effect of ZrB  Tensile properties of base alloy and composites were evaluated at room temperature. UTS, 0.2% YS and percentage elongation have been evaluated from engineering stress–strain diagram. It is observed that UTS and yield strength of composites improves continuously up to 9 Ductility (% elongation) of composites is improved significantly as compared to base alloy ( True stress ( Fractography study was carried out to identify the cause and type of failure in materials. Tensile fractured surfaces of base alloy and composites are shown in It can be inferred from the present study that AA5052/ZrB XRD spectrum of composites confirms the formation of ZrB Microstructural examinations show uniform distribution of ZrB Interface between the ZrB There is significant improvement in all mechanical properties due to in-situ formation of ZrB Ductility of composites improved in a significant way as compared to the base alloy. Though a decrease is observed with increase in ZrB Corresponding author gratefully acknowledges