A coal-based direct reduction process was used to recover the ferronickel from low-grade nickel laterite ore. The effects of basicity on the compressive strength, metallization rate, microstructure, and reduction characteristics of carbon-bearing nickel laterite ore pellets were investigated. The results show that the metallization rate of iron and the compressive strength of metallized pellets follow a parabolic function with increasing basicity. The optimal reduction temperature of the rotary kiln should be controlled at 1150 °C to 1250 °C with pellet basicity of 0.56 to prevent the ring-forming phenomenon. Under optimum process conditions, the metallized pellets mainly consist of ferronickel ([Fe,Ni]), forsterite ferroan (Mg1.38Fe0.61Ca0.01SiO4), and pigeonite ((Ca0.06Mg0.68Fe0.26)SiO3). The particle size of ferronickel can reach to 30 μm with a high nickel‑chromium concentrations. The compressive strength of metallized pellets is 5220 to 7223 N·Pellet−1, and the metallization rates of iron and nickel are 95.28% to 98.45%, 94.75 to 96.33%, respectively.Nickel is an important strategic resource with high strength, good ductility, high temperature resistance, corrosion resistance and oxidation resistance [ In this work, a coal-based direct reduction process was used to recover the ferronickel from low-grade nickel laterite ore at high reduction temperature. The effects of basicity ( Indonesia's nickel laterite ore and anthracite from Yangquan in Shanxi Province were used in this work. More than 95% nickel laterite ore and anthracite were crushed to 10 mm by a jaw crusher (PE100–60). The crushed nickel laterite ore and anthracite samples were dried by a drying oven at 180 °C for 30 min. Then the dried nickel laterite ore and anthracite samples were crushed to powder by using a high-energy ball milling analyzer (F The particle size distribution of nickel laterite and anthracite powders were examined by using a laser particle size analyzer (Malvern Mastersizer 2000), and shown in The mineral phase composition of nickel laterite ore sample was determined by an X-ray diffractometer, and shown in A coal-based direct reduction process was used to reduce the nickel laterite ore under a constant C: O ratio (1.2: 1) and reduction time (90 min). The effect of basicity and reduction temperature on microstructure and reduction characteristics and of carbon-bearing nickel laterite ore pellets was investigated. In this work, slaked lime (Ca(OH) The reducing experiments were carried out in a horizontal electric heating furnace in Ar atmosphere, and shown in Compressive strength of dried pellets and metallized pellets was determined by using a pellet strength tester (WDW-QT-10). The phase evolution of carbon-bearing nickel laterite ore pellets was investigated by X-ray diffractometer (Smartlab 9kw) with CuKα (λ = 1.5406 Å), and the diffraction Angle was from 10° to 90° with a scanning speed of 5°·min The mineral composition of nickel laterite ore is very complex. The metallic minerals mainly consist of hematite and magnetite, and contain small amounts of limonite and chromite. In order to investigate the thermodynamic mechanism of carbon-bearing nickel laterite ore pellets, standard Gibbs energy varying with reduction temperature was calculated by HSC Chemistry 7.0, and shown in The effects of pellet basicity and drying temperature on the compressive strength of carbon-bearing nickel laterite ore pellets are shown in The effects of basicity on the compressive strength and metallization rate of metallized pellets are shown in The effects of reduction temperature on the compressive strength and metallization rate of metallized pellets are shown in The phase composition of metallized pellets obtained with various basicity was identified by XRD, and shown in The microstructure and elements composition of metallized pellets obtained with various basicity were determined by SEM-EDS, and shown in The phase composition of metallized pellets obtained with various reduction temperatures was identified by XRD, and shown in The microstructure and elements composition of metallized pellets obtained with various reduction temperatures were determined by SEM-EDS, and shown in Although the increase of pellet basicity and reduction temperature has a positive effect on the compressive strength, metallization rate and ferronickel size of the metallized pellets, too high pellet basicity and reduction temperature will lead to the soften and possibly even melt of the metallized pellets. The optimal reduction temperature of the rotary kiln should be controlled at 1150 °C to 1250 °C with pellet basicity of 0.56 to prevent the ring-forming phenomenon. When the reduction temperature is 1250 °C, the metallized pellets have higher compressive strength and metallization rate. The metallized pellets mainly consist of ferronickel, forsterite ferroan (Mg None. This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.