Numerous studies have demonstrated the effect of shear stress on osteoblasts, but its effect on odontogenic cells has never been reported. In this study, we focused on the effect of shear stress on facilitating tissue-engineered odontogenesis by dissociated single cells. Cells were harvested from the porcine third molar tooth at the early stage of crown formation, and the isolated heterogeneous cells were seeded on a biodegradable polyglycolic acid fiber mesh. Then, cell-polymer constructs with and without exposure to shear stress were evaluated by in vitro and in vivo studies. In in vitro studies, the expression of both epithelial and mesenchymal odontogenic-related mRNAs was significantly enhanced by shear stress for 2 h. At 12 h after exposure to shear stress, the expression of amelogenin, bone sialoprotein and vimentin protein was significantly enhanced compared with that of control. Moreover, after 7 days, alkaline phosphatase activity exhibited a significant increase without any significant effect on cell proliferation in vitro. In vivo, enamel and dentin tissues formed after 15 weeks of in vivo implantation in constructs exposure to in vitro shear stress for 12 h. Such was not the case in controls. We concluded that shear stress facilitates odontogenic cell differentiation in vitro as well as the process of tooth tissue engineering in vivo.During tooth organogenesis, reciprocal interactions between epithelial–mesenchymal cells result in the cytodifferentiation of epithelial cells into ameloblasts and ectomesenchymal cells into odontoblasts An important goal of dental research is the efficient regeneration of lost teeth The cell-scaffold technique still did not produce tooth completely because the regenerated tooth was less than 2 mm in diameter, and the regeneration process required more than 20 weeks to generate dentin and 25 weeks for enamel There is accumulating evidence that mechanical stress has a variety of effects on cell growth and differentiation The process of enamel formation occurs in an extracellular matrix laden with enamel proteins Odontoblast and dental pulp cells synthesize and secrete several collagenous and noncollagenous proteins (NCPs) such as osteocalcin (OCN), osteopontin (OPN), bone sialoprotein (BSP), and dentin sialoprotein (DSP), to form a unique dentin extracellular matrix. Collagen type I is the predominant protein in dentin and comprises about 90% of the organic matrix. Sialic acid-rich proteins are associated with the mineralization process. Osteocalcin is known to localize in bone, dentin, cementum, and the formative cells of these hard tissues but not in other tissues or cells Runx2 (also known as Cbfa1, Osf2, til-1, Pebp2aA, or AML-3) is a transcription factor belonging to the The ALP genes are encoded to four different types in rodents The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of applying shear stress on the differentiation of odontogenic cells and histogenesis of odontogenic tissues. This study shows for the first time that shear stress facilitates tissue-engineered odontogenesis. Furthermore, using RT-PCR and Western blot technique, we provide evidence for the expression of teeth-related marker as to whether tooth cells facilitate cell differentiation by exposure to shear stress. Tooth cells were harvested and prepared as previously described As preliminary studies, we examined the effects of three different types of mechanical stress on the differentiation of the cells. Uniaxial stretch, ultrasonic wave, and shear stress generated by bi-directional fluid flow were given, and the levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity were evaluated as a marker for pulp cellular differentiation Shear stress was generated by bi-directional fluid flow inside a tube, the velocity of which depended on the frequency of the agitating motion of the Bio-Shaker (TAITEC, Tokyo, Japan). After cells were seeded onto the scaffolds, cell-polymer constructs (CPCs) were first cultured for 2 h under static conditions. Subsequently, CPCs were placed into 15-ml centrifuge tubes with Dulbecco's modified Eagles medium (DMEM) containing 10% of fetal calf serum (FCS) (all from Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA). To determine the more effective stress, we compared three distinct shear stresses by exposing seeding cells and evaluated the ALP activity. The used frequencies were between 10–20, 40–50, and 70–80 rpm at 37°C for 12 h. Swing frequencies of constructs were 40, 90, and 120 rpm, respectively. Their mechanical load exerted on the CPCs was estimated at 0.7 × 10 The effect of shear stress on cell proliferation was measured with a WST-8 kit (Wako, Tokyo, Japan) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Primary heterogeneous cells were seeded onto the PGA fiber mesh in 48-well plates (Becton Dickinson and Co., Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). The cells were fed with DMEM with 10% FCS and allowed to attach to the scaffold undisturbed in a humidified incubator (37°C, 5% CO To assess the effects of shear stress on cellular differentiation, ALP activity was evaluated. Cells were seeded at 2 × 10 To discover whether odontogenic-related protein expression is up-regulated in the cells exposed to shear stress for 2, 12, or 24 h, Western blot analysis was carried out. As proteins were collected as secreted proteins, CPSs were cultured in serum-free DMEM containing Insulin–Transferrin–Selenium (ITS) supplement (GIBCO). The collected medium was desalted by using Ultrafree-4 centrifugal ultrafiltration devices (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) and lyophilized. These protein samples were mixed with SDS-PAGE sample buffer and boiled for 5 min. Moreover, samples were separated by SDS-PAGE in a 4–20% polyacrylamide gradient gel (Bio-Rad). Protein separated by SDS-PAGE was blotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane using a wet electroblotter (Mini Trans-Blot Cell, Bio-Rad). After blotting, the membrane was incubated overnight in blocking reagent (Block Ace, Dainipponseiyaku, Osaka, Japan). The membrane was reacted with rabbit anti-pig amelogenin polyclonal antibody (1:1000 dilution) (gift from Dr. J.P. Simmer, University of Texas, San Antonio), rabbit anti-pig bone sialoprotein (BSP) polyclonal antibody (1:500 dilution) (gift from Dr. J. Sodek, University of Toronto, Canada), and mouse anti-pig vimentin monoclonal antibody (1:1000 dilution) (NeoMarkers, CA, USA) at 25°C for 2 h and then with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit or goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Biosource, CA, USA) at 25°C for 1 h. The blots were washed with distilled water and then developed in BCIP/NBT color substrate kit (Promega, WI, USA). Total cellular RNA was purified from cell-polymer constructs with or without exposure to shear stress for 1, 2, or 12 h using TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen, Rockville, MD, USA) and treated with DNase I (Rnase free, RQ1, Promega) as recommended in the manufacturer's protocol. Following isolation, total RNA was reverse transcribed using the Superscript™ First-Strand Synthesis System for RT-PCR (Gibco). PCR Supermix (Gibco) was used in all of the PCR reactions. Primers for the PCR reaction for amelogenin (present study), ameloblastin (present study), enamelin (present study), and enamelysin (MMP-20, present study), Runx2 Ten male athymic rats (F344/NJcl-rnu. CLEA JAPAN INC., Tokyo, Japan) 4–5 weeks old were used for recipients in this study. The isolated heterogeneous cell population (1.0 × 10 Fifteen weeks after implantation, the constructs decalcified with nitric acid were processed for histological and examination using standard procedures. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed using the Vectastain ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA, USA). The procedure was followed All experimental values are given as means + SD. Student's An initial experiment was designed to determine the shear stress level most effective for cell differentiation, by measuring the ALP activity of cells seeded into scaffolds. The cell responses to shear stresses ranging from 0.7 × 10 Cell proliferation was compared with and without shear stress ( There is an increase in the ALP activity at 5 days which is not significant but becomes significant at 7 days. It was approximately 3-fold higher in the stressed cells than in those without shear stress ( With regard to epithelial markers, Western blot analysis for amelogenin revealed that the expression in the stressed cells was higher than in nonstressed cells for 24 h ( To evaluate the effect of shear stress on mRNA levels, cell-polymer constructs were exposed to shear stress for 1, 2, or 12 h, and then mRNA levels for several odontogenic-related markers were assessed. As for the relative control value in no-shear stress, a significant increase in mRNA levels for amelogenin was observed after 2-h exposure to shear stress, and thereafter, mRNA levels for amelogenin returned to control levels after 12 h ( After 15 weeks, the implant formed solid tissue in both groups. Although the dimensions of the original PGA fiber mesh were maintained in the experimental group from stressed cells (approximately 6 mm by 6 mm), those in the control group with no stressed cells decreased ( Fifteen weeks after implantation, the tooth structures containing enamel–dentin complex were revealed in the implants containing stressed cells ( All of the above RT-PCR experiments have been repeated three or four times with results similar to the pattern of change in mRNA levels reported here. Furthermore, a second independent RT and PCR analysis of aliquots of RNA from individual experiments yielded the same patterns of change as the first analysis (data not shown). Such rigorous evaluations of the pattern of significant changes in mRNA levels, as well as the use of two different housekeeping genes for normalization, support the conclusions drawn from the semiquantitative approach for estimating mRNA levels. Cell-scaffold complex-based tissue-engineered tooth has not been completely achieved yet. The duration of dentin and enamel development is at least 20 weeks for dentin and 25 weeks for enamel The present study revealed that the tissue-engineered dentin and enamel derived from stressed cells were formed at 15 weeks, and thus, dentin tubule was clearly observed in the tissue-engineered dentin, while without shear stress, such tissues were recognizable only at 20 and 25 weeks, respectively (data not shown). The data from nonstressed cell were consistent with that of the previous study The spatial organization and growth of mineralization in tissue-engineered odontogenesis have been proposed to be under the control of matrix macromolecules. To examine how early the tissue-engineered tooth was regenerated, we evaluated ALP activity, expression of teeth-related proteins and genes. Our findings showed ALP activity was increased by shear stress, while cell proliferation was not affected. It is well known that ALP activity is a marker for pulp cellular differentiation Our findings showed the amelogenin, BSP, and vimentin protein levels were more increased with shear stress than without it. Vimentin is an intermediate-filament protein observed in all fibroblast phenotypes including human pulp cells Odontogenesis is a complex phenomenon involving the differentiation of various types of cells, extracellular matrix deposition, and mineralization. Because of numerous reports of a reciprocal and functionally coupled relationship between proliferation and differentiation, we explored the effect of shear stress on tooth-related genes by RT-PCR. Tooth development has been proposed to be under the control of matrix macromolecules, mainly collagen type I and noncollagenous proteins such as bone sialoprotein, phosphoproteins in dentin Another possible mechanism for early regeneration of tooth might be associated with the influence on epithelial cells because odontogenic cells in the epithelium are a key factor in the onset of tooth development These results indicate that odontogenic cell differentiation is facilitated by shear stress and that odontogenic cells then result in the early production of tooth matrix. Fluid shear stress is thought to transduce the effects of mechanical loading on bone to the osteoblasts and osteocytes within the mineral matrix In conclusion, our data showing a stimulatory effect of shear stress on the level of ALP activity are in agreement with studies on the RNA level, protein level, and in vivo studies. Although the original scaffold configuration containing stressed cells was mostly maintained after 15 weeks implantation, the scaffold containing unstressed cells was found to have shrunk. In this study, the early start of odontogenic differentiation is thought to result in early deposition of the extracellular matrix and its subsequent mineralization. It is suggested that shear stress is capable of enhancing odontogenic differentiation in vitro and subsequently leads to early regeneration of the tooth. The present study may be a promising step towards the complete regeneration of tissue-engineered teeth. However, further study is needed before the development of tissue-engineered teeth becomes a useful technique in the clinical setting. We would like to thank Professor Joseph P. Vacanti, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA, Dr. Pamela C. Yelick, Dr. John D. Bartlett, and Dr. Conan S. Young, Forsyth Institute, Boston, USA, for their valuable advice, and Drs. J.P. Simmer and J. Sodek for generously providing the amelogenin, BSP, and collagen type I antibodies. This work was supported by Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research, KAKENHI (B) (16390578 to M.H.) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science and a grant from Hitachi Medical Corporation.