Desilication products (DSPs) generated due to the dissolution and reaction of Si-containing minerals in the Bayer liquor during the digestion of bauxite ores have always been the research focus in the Bayer process, the precipitation mechanisms and kinetics of which have been widely studied. This paper deals with the precipitation activity of DSPs formed during the Bayer digestion and its effects on the stability of the Bayer liquor. The DSPs formed with a pre-desilication treatment and lime addition can largely decrease the hydrolysis degree of the Bayer liquor after digestion. The DSPs precipitating with or without a pre-desilication are comprised of amorphous phase, zeolite, sodalite and hydroxy-sodalite, while the DSPs precipitating with lime addition are comprised of hydrogarnet, tri-calcium aluminate hydrate and zeolite. The thermodynamic calculation of DSPs reveals that the Gibbs free energies of DSPs decrease with the increasing precipitation temperature, and the Gibbs free energies of zeolite and hydrogarnet are much higher than those of other DSPs. The crystal composition, crystallinity, and microstructure of DSPs can affect the stability of sodium aluminate solution, and the proportions of amorphous phase and hydrogarnet in DSPs are the major factors determining the stability of the Bayer liquor.The Bayer process is the dominating method of refining alumina from bauxite ores containing gibbsite, boehmite and diaspore throughout the world. The basic flow chart of the Bayer process is shown in Meanwhile, another important reaction during the Bayer digestion is the desilication process in the digested liquor, as shown in Eq. As shown in The main chemical composition of gibbsitic bauxite used in this study (wt.%) is as follows: Al The pre-desilication experiments were carried out in a stainless steel vessel with a nominal capacity of 500 The slurry samples prepared by mixing the bauxite and adjusted liquor (28.0 The dilution and desilication experiments were carried out in the same pre-desilication equipment. The digested slurry was diluted with hot deionized water and the diluted slurry was added into the vessel immediately. The sealed vessel was then put into the pre-heated oil bath followed by agitation at 100 In order to simulate the DSP precipitation conditions during the pre-desilication and digestion process of bauxite, the DSP precipitation experiments were carried out at 95 In order to simulate the effect of DSPs on the hydrolysis of the diluted Bayer liquor during the settling process, the stability experiments of synthetic sodium aluminate solution in the presence of DSPs were carried out at 95 The concentrations of Al The Al The hydrolysis degree of sodium aluminate solution was determined by the following formula: X-ray diffraction measurements were performed to identify the minerals in samples with an X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD, PANalytical PW3040/60) using Cu-Kα radiation with a scan rate of 3° 2θ/min. The total crystallinities of DSPs were calculated using the Jade software. The weight proportions of different crystalline phases in the DSPs were semiquantitatively calculated by the RIR method. Scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were performed on samples using a scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Zeiss UltraPlus), operating at an accelerating voltage of 15 In order to minimize the scale formation from DSPs on the heat exchangers during the Bayer digestion process, the pre-desilication procedure is commonly utilized in the alumina plants ( The digestion and dilution results from different digestion modes are listed in The degrees of hydrolysis in the diluted liquors after digestion, as well as the corresponding alumina digestion efficiencies of bauxite, were calculated according to Formulae ( The alumina digestion efficiencies of bauxite under different digestion modes are in good agreement with the hydrolysis results, as shown in The gibbsitic bauxite in this research includes several minerals, such as gibbsite, goethite, hematite, kaolin, quartz and boehmite. The corresponding minerals of bauxite residue after digestion are mainly comprised of hematite, goethite, quartz and DSPs ( In order to study the stability of Bayer liquor in presence of various DSPs, pure DSPs were synthetized for use to simulate the desilication in synthetic sodium aluminate solution under different digestion modes. The desilication (digestion) modes used here are the same as the above used with gibbsitic bauxite: (A) desilication at 145 The XRD patterns of DSPs obtained from different desilication conditions are shown in  The proportions and crystallinities of each crystalline DSP under different desilication conditions were semiquantitatively calculated as listed in The microstructures of DSPs obtained under different desilication conditions were characterized by SEM and the SEM images are shown in The addition of lime results in an increase in the particle size of ZEO at 145 The small and irregular-shaped amorphous phase of DSPs can act as the precipitation nucleus of gibbsite more easily during the hydrolysis process, which increases the precipitation activity of DSPs. As for the particle size of ZEO shown in As the DSPs belong to the complex silicates which have different compositions, it is difficult to directly determine their thermodynamic data by the experiments. According to Wen's theory ( The calculated standard Gibbs free energies of DSPs involved in this paper are listed in The DSPs precipitating under different desilication conditions were added to the synthetic sodium aluminate solution at the same concentration of 5.0 The hydrolysis degrees of sodium aluminate solution increase with the increasing duration. The effects of DSPs formed under different desilication conditions on the stability of sodium aluminate solution are in good accordance with the hydrolysis results of different digestion modes. The sequence of the DSPs favoring the stability of sodium aluminate solution is the desilication modes (D) Comparing the results of The precipitation of Al(OH) In this research, the precipitation of Al(OH) The crystal compositions of DSPs under different desilication conditions are different. Adding lime during the desilication process decreases the proportions of ZEO and SOD, but increases the proportions of HG and TCA. The pre-desilication with lime addition increases the proportion of HG but decreases the proportion of TCA in the DSPs. Therefore, by combining with the hydrolysis results, the favoring sequences of DSPs on the stability of sodium aluminate solution can be drawn: HG   In summary, the increases of crystallinity and dimension of DSPs, and the hydrogarnet proportion in the DSPs favor the stability of sodium aluminate solution during the Bayer process. The proportions of amorphous phase and HG in the DSPs are the major factors determining the hydrolysis degree of digested liquor. The stability of the diluted Bayer liquor after digestion for a gibbsitic bauxite with different digestion modes in industrial sodium aluminate solution was firstly studied. Pre-desilication and adding lime before digestion greatly promote the desilication performance and stability of the digested liquor, especially for their synergism. In order to elucidate the mechanism of pre-desilication and adding lime to decrease the hydrolysis degree of the Bayer liquor, the precipitation behavior of DSPs under different desilication conditions according to the digestion modes and the effects of DSPs on the stability of synthetic sodium aluminate solution were systematically researched. The DSPs precipitating without lime addition are comprised of amorphous phase, ZEO, SOD and OH-SOD, while the DSPs precipitating with lime addition are comprised of HG, TCA and ZEO. The thermodynamic calculation of complex DSPs demonstrates the Gibbs free energies of DSPs decrease with the increasing precipitation temperature, and the Gibbs free energies of HG and ZEO are much higher than those of other DSPs. The effect of DSPs formed under different desilication conditions on the stability of sodium aluminate solution is in good accordance with the hydrolysis results under different digestion modes. The crystal composition, crystallinity, microstructure of DSPs can affect the hydrolysis degree of sodium aluminate solution. The favoring sequences of DSPs on the stability of sodium aluminate solution are: HG We acknowledge the financial supports from the