Catalytic wet air oxidation reaction (CWAO) of stearic acid is carried out in a batch reactor over a series of transition metal-based perovskite samples synthesized by reactive grinding. It is observed that the LaCoO3 sample presents the highest initial activity for this reaction. For comparison, pure and substituted LaMnO3 samples show largely smaller activity in spite of similar specific surface areas. The results show that the accessibility of the low temperature active oxygen (or the reducibility of the transition metal) on the surface of the catalyst conditioned the initial activity of the catalyst. Then, a mechanism involving the reaction of stearic acid molecules with adsorbed oxygen surface site (Co3+O2
                     −) is proposed on the basis of the experimental results. Stearic acid oxidation proceeds via a recurrent decarboxylation process that results in the reduction of cobalt surface sites and formation of surface carbonate species (CO3
                     −). In opposition to what was observed for gas phase oxidation reactions, lanthanum (and Ce or Sr) is found to be massively carbonated during the reaction, leading to the destruction of the perovskite structure and loss of the catalytic activity.Due to more and more drastic environmental restraints, recently developed catalytic wet air oxidation process (CWAO) found legitimacy for application in industrial and urban water depollution. Different treatments can be used for the abatement of the chemical oxygen demand (COD). While for diluted non-toxic pollutants a biological treatment is used, depollution of heavily polluted water is generally performed by incineration. In the case of polluted water presenting an intermediate pollution (COD typically comprised between 5 and To our knowledge, the activity of transition metal-based mixed oxides in wet air oxidation reaction such as carboxylic acids CWAO has rarely been studied. However, some mixed oxides, and especially transition metal-based perovskites (of general formula ABO In this work, four perovskite samples were tested for wet air oxidation reaction of stearic acid. Stearic acid is the most common saturated fatty acid present in the animal fats Four perovskites of different compositions (LaCoO The oxide precursors were first calcined in a muffle furnace and introduced in a stainless steel vial with stainless steel balls. The sample was ground for 4 XRD patterns of the samples, before and after the oxidation test, were recorded using a SIEMENS D5000 diffractometer with a Cu Kα radiation as X-ray source ( Specific surface areas were obtained from N The amount of carbon deposited on the catalyst after test was quantified using a C, H, N analyzer NA2100 from C.E. Instruments. Amounts of cobalt, manganese and lanthanum lixiviated during reaction were evaluated by ICP analysis of the reaction medium using a PerkinElmer Optima 2000 D. OSC setup and data treatment were fully described in Ref. O CO pulses, until zero consumption of CO. O Alternated pulses CO–O Reactant and products analyses were performed using a gas chromatograph equipped with a TCD and a Porapak Q type column (i.d. The oxygen storage capacity (OSC values in In the case of the lanthanum cobalt perovskite, cobalt is mainly trivalent Stearic acid wet air oxidation reaction was performed in a 440 Gas phase analysis was performed using a gas chromatograph Intersmat IGC120ML, equipped with a catharometer for quantification (carrier gas Liquid samples, collected at different reaction times were analyzed to determine:   After test, the catalyst was recovered by filtration, and analyzed using the same methods as for the fresh catalysts. Carbon balance ( The initial rate of mineralization (mol of CO For manganese-based samples,  Four samples of different compositions were synthesized by reactive grinding: LaCoO Since the grinding method results usually in some iron contamination The four samples were calcined at 200 The reduction of LaCoO As in the case of the LaCoO As observed for LaCoO OSC results obtained for the Sr (LaSrMn) and Ce (LaCeMn) substituted samples showed slight differences from those obtained for the pure LaMn sample. A slight increase in CO conversion was observed during the first CO pulse of the alternate series (OSC) on the LaSrMn sample. The differences observed during the first CO pulse (quantification of the most active manganese) are attributed to an increase of the Mn The samples were tested in a batch reactor (  The evolutions of the carbon balance, defined as the sum of the gas phase as well as dissolved CO After test, the catalyst was recovered by filtration, and the specific surface area was measured by N The carbon analysis, performed on the used samples, showed strong carbon accumulation of 12.1 It is also observed that part of the transition metal is partially leached out during the reaction. The amount of transition metal leached out, measured by ICP analysis of the reaction liquid, is presented in A similar reaction may proceed with the manganese-based perovskites, but with a lower conversion of the solid into lanthanum carbonate hydroxide hydrate and manganese oxide. The OSC values obtained for the used catalysts ( The mineralization curves show high initial activity for the stearic acid CWAO reaction (see A pure decarboxylation process leads therefore to a [CO All these results show that CO The results obtained with the Mn-based samples slightly differ from those obtained with the LaCo sample. The [TOC In conclusion, the LaCo and Mn-based samples seem to promote a recurrent decarboxylation process with high rate of CO Significant differences in oxygen storage capacity were observed between the LaCo sample and the manganese-based samples. It was also observed that the lanthanum substitution by a divalent cation (Sr As a matter of fact, the initial rate of oxidation ( Gaseous O Based on these considerations, the oxygen active in the stearic acid oxidation reaction may be considered to be any of the surface oxygen species (O The reduced sites (Co The reaction of the stearic acid molecule with surface O Similar mechanism can be proposed for the Mn-based samples, taking into account that reactive oxygen is located on 4+ valency sites, and that reaction with the stearic acid molecules leads to the formation of Mn Results obtained for the stearic acid oxidation reaction reveals a strong deactivation of perovskite samples during reaction ( As mentioned above, the mechanism of stearic acid oxidation reaction forming CO These carbonates should obviously be more stable than surface carbonates so that the process described by Eq. The initial rate of CO In the present work, lanthanum carbonation is then proposed to be the major cause of catalyst deactivation (decrease of the number of active sites). Moreover, the partial dissolution of the transition metal during reaction ( In this work, four perovskite samples synthesized by reactive grinding were tested for the stearic acid wet air oxidation (CWAO) reaction. It was observed that the nature of the transition metal strongly affects the initial activity of the sample. Significantly higher activity was obtained for the LaCoO A direct relationship between the reducibility at low temperature (OSC value) and the initial catalytic activity of the sample was observed. This clearly showed that the reactivity of the redox couple (either Co The proposed scheme of reaction involves the formation of stable bulk carbonates with lanthanum. The destruction of the perovskite structure by carbonate formation results in a decrease in stearic acid reaction sites concentration, and consequently in catalytic activity as suggests by the shape of the mineralization curves. The financial contribution of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada and Nanox Inc. (Québec, Canada), through an industrial chair, are gratefully acknowledged.