Complex fibular fractures as a result of either high-energy mechanisms or advanced age can be difficult to manage as significant comminution can preclude standard operative techniques. Furthermore, the maintenance of osseous reduction postoperatively throughout convalescence can present an equivalent challenge. Strict weightbearing restrictions in the elderly and the noncompliant postoperatively convey an additional risk of potential failure. We present a technique that has offered additional reassurance in these instances. We retrospectively evaluated 25 consecutive patients who had undergone this fibular double plating technique and evaluated the patient outcomes to determine whether this technique conferred any additional risk when weighed against its benefits. All 25 patients underwent benign postoperative courses. No additional operations were performed as a result of this technique. No patient undergoing this technique complained of any hardware irritation, and no hardware removal was required. This double plating technique may confer additional stability to fracture patterns that are inherently unstable. It does not appear to increase the incidence of hardware removal or irritation, and patient morbidity remained low. Based on our results, we advocate this technique especially for comminuted fracture patterns.Fractures about the ankle joint can be associated with various outcomes after surgical repair. When the injury is complicated by poor bone quality, complex fracture patterns, and/or high-energy mechanisms, the prognosis has been generally less favorable. Particularly in the geriatric population, the preinjury functional capacity should be a significant influence on the decision to proceed with open reduction and internal fixation Complex fractures of the fibula are most commonly seen in 2 scenarios. The first occurs in the geriatric population, with diminished bone stock. In this scenario, low-energy rotational forces can produce complex fracture patterns, complicating fracture reduction and maintenance. The second scenario is seen in fractures produced by high-energy mechanisms generated by combined axial and rotational loading and producing significant metaphyseal and diaphyseal comminution ( Our indications for this technique were preoperative radiographs of ankle fractures demonstrating significant osteoporosis and/or significant comminution or bone loss associated with the fibular fracture. Additional indications included reduced bone quality at surgery and its reduced ability to accept hardware with appropriate torque. To assess the clinical value of this technique, we retrospectively evaluated the interval to radiographic union, subjective complaints related to hardware irritation, incidence of hardware removal, and incidence of wound complications. After approval by the institutional board review, all patients provided informed consent to be included in the retrospective case series. Two study investigators (K.Y.K., D.L.) identified patients by reviewing all operative procedures performed by the primary author (J.J.F.) from January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2011 abstracted from the medical records. Both investigators (K.Y.K, D.L.) also participated in the operations and were not blinded to the outcome of the study. In order to ensure that additional procedures were not dictated incorrectly, one study investigator (K.Y.K.) also performed a search with the Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes 27792 (open treatment of distal fibular fracture), 27814 (open treatment of bimalleleolar ankle fracture), 27822 (open treatment of trimalleolar ankle fracture), 27826 (open treatment of fracture of weightbearing articular surface of distal tibia), and 27829 (open treatment of distal tibiofibular joint). We initially identified 524 operations matching these search criteria. The inclusion criteria were unstable malleolar fractures with the double plating technique used for fibular fractures without the use of interfragmentary fixation and the ability to provide informed consent. The exclusion criteria included any plating technique that incorporated interfragmentary screw fixation. Preoperative computed tomography was performed at the surgeon's discretion to evaluate posterior malleolar fracture size. Of the 524 patients, 25 (4.77%) met our inclusion criteria. Distal tibial fractures were classified with the Orthopaedic Trauma Association (OTA) fracture classification Patients were placed in the supine position with a bolster under the ipsilateral hip. With hemostasis accomplished with the aid of a pneumatic thigh tourniquet, a standard lateral incision was created over the fibula. This incisional approach was modified in cases of concomitant tibial plafond fractures and those patients requiring direct posterior exposures to the ankle. If a medial malleolar fracture was present, it was frequently fixed first to provide a stabilizing effect on the talus and facilitate the lateral reduction. Exposure was facilitated using sharp and blunt dissection techniques. After debridement of the fracture interface and periosteal reflection, reduction was performed and maintained with a combination of bone reduction clamps and Kirschner wires. Periosteal stripping was minimized, and the attached cortical fragments were maintained on a periosteal hinge in an effort to preserve the blood supply. At that point, an intraoperative assessment of bone quality was performed. If the reduction forceps could sink into the cortex of the fibula with little resistance, the utility of an interfragmentary screw was precluded ( When direct cortical interdigitation could not be used to confirm the reduction because of severe comminution, bone loss, or both, the distal fragment was often provisionally fixated to the talus to maintain the length and rotation. A 1/3 tubular plate with the locking capability was placed posterolaterally with its most inferior end just proximal to the superior peroneal retinaculum. The plate was compressed to the bone using a serrated bone clamp. Six cortices were engaged in the diaphysis, with the first screw placed just proximal to the fracture. The application of locking screws on the posterior plate is rarely needed because the available cortical bulk in the fibular diaphysis. Although a distal screw in the posterior plate has not been standardly employed in published studies, we found that this screw routinely has good purchase and appears to provide rotational control of the distal fragment. With careful technique, bicortical purchase can be achieved. In a patient with a smaller diameter fibula, a 1/4 tubular plate can be substituted. After posterolateral plate placement, a 1/3 tubular plate with similar capacity was applied laterally and its length confirmed fluoroscopically ( Another beneficial technique in the severely comminuted setting is to overdrill the near fibular cortex immediately deep to the plate and subsequently underdrill the far fibular cortex. This serves to reduce scattering of the comminuted fragments during screw insertion. Once satisfactory alignment has been achieved, the provisional fixation can be removed. Careful fluoroscopic assessment is critical to ensure extra-articular screw placement and overall plate positioning. In complex fractures, the radiographic parameters as described by Weber and Simpson Postoperative management consisted of immobilization in a well-padded posterior splint with the ankle in neutral alignment. Range of motion exercises were begun when the wounds were “sealed.” Serial radiographs were obtained to monitor bone healing and early fixation failure. Progressive protected weightbearing was begun when radiographic and clinical union were present. To assess the clinical value of this technique, we evaluated the interval to radiographic union, subjective complaints related to hardware irritation and the incidence of removal, and wound complications. Charts and radiographs were analyzed retrospectively, and the following items were documented: radiographic and clinical union, compliance, mechanism of injury, other musculoskeletal injuries, complications, comorbidities, and the interval to unprotected weightbearing. We defined For the 25 patients who met our inclusion criteria, we additionally sought to evaluate them from a functional perspective to inquire of any potential impairments that could be attributed to this technique. Of the 25 patients, 14 (56%) were able to be reached for additional evaluation. These patients were contacted for telephone interviews and were evaluated using the Bristol Foot Score after a full return to activity A total of 25 ankle fractures in 25 consecutive patients were included in the case series. Of the 25 patients, 12 (48%) were males and 13 (52%) were females with a mean age of 52 (21 to 75) years and 53.32 (27 to 79) years, respectively. Of these 25 fractures, 3 (12%) were isolated lateral malleolar fractures, 2 (8%) of which demonstrated associated deltoid insufficiency, 6 (24%) were bimalleolar ankle fractures, 14 (56%) were trimalleolar ankle fractures, and 2 (8%) were tibial plafond fractures with associated lateral malleolar fractures. A total of 13 (52%) injuries required syndesmotic stabilization. Three (12%) patients each sustained the following associated injuries: a nonoperative cervical spinal injury, nonoperative metatarsal fractures, and a spiral fifth metatarsal neck fracture that required surgical repair. Five (20%) patients sustained high-energy injuries: motor vehicle accident for 2 (40%) patients, a pedestrian versus motor vehicle accident for 1 (20%) patient, and a fall from a 3-story building in 2 (40%) patients. A rotational mechanism was the etiology of the injury for the remaining 20 (80%) patients. Two (8%) patients sustained Gustilo-Anderson grade IIIA open injuries. The remaining 23 (92%) patients sustained closed injuries. Ten (40%) patients sustained dislocated injuries that required closed reduction. Additional patient demographics and comorbidities are listed in There were 2 (8%) hardware-related reoperations, neither related to the fibular plates. One (4%) patient complained of discomfort of a medial distal tibial plate used for osteosynthesis of his tibial OTA 43C3 fracture, which was removed 1 year postoperatively. In the second case, revisional osteosynthesis unrelated to the fibular repair was performed 20 days after the initial fibular repair. No other instances of hardware removal because of symptomatic complaints or local irritation of the fibular plates were required. There were 2 (8%) instances of superficial postoperative infection in the perioperative period, which was defined as the interval until the incision site had healed. Both infections occurred in patients with long-standing and poorly managed diabetes mellitus. One (4%) patient was treated uneventfully with oral antibiotic therapy. The second patient required hospitalization because of mild systemic manifestations that resolved uneventfully with intravenous antibiotic therapy. Owing to real life scenarios that influenced the patients' ability to keep appointment times, it was difficult to unequivocally correlate suture and staple removal with delayed wound healing. However, the latest follow-up visit within the first postoperative month, with respect to all distal fibular incisions of 23 (92%) of the 25 subjects, objectively documented either of the following: staples and/or sutures removed or wounds healed. In the other 2 (8%) cases, chart review unequivocally documented instances of delayed wound healing over the site of fibular exposure at 1 and 1.5 months, both of which were managed uneventfully with local wound care. The mean interval to unrestricted weightbearing was 11.2 (6 to 26) weeks. Unrestricted weightbearing was prolonged to 16 weeks in a noncompliant diabetic patient with a closed dislocated trimalleolar fracture who had undergone osteosynthesis with multiple syndesmotic screws. Unrestricted weightbearing was similarly prolonged to 21 and 26 weeks in 2 (8%) patients: 1 with an OTA 44C2 and 1 with an OTA 43C3 pilon fracture with associated fibular fractures. Another patient who underwent revisional surgery at 20 days unrelated to the original repair of the fibular fracture was not cleared for unrestricted weightbearing until 14 weeks postoperatively. With these patients eliminated, the mean interval to unrestricted weightbearing was 8.12 (6 to 11) weeks. Mean interval until radiographic and documented fibular fracture consolidation was 7.5 (5 to 11) weeks, all of which preceded unprotected weightbearing. Of the 25 patients, 14 (64%) were available for additional functional evaluation using the modified Bristol Foot Score. The mean follow-up duration for these patients was 19.6 (range 16 to 22) months. The mean score of 23.8 (range 21 to 30) and 15.7 (range 14 to 19) was recorded for the injured limbs and uninjured limbs, respectively. Since the inception of the AO Foundation, the concepts and application of internal fixation with special attention to fractures of the appendicular skeleton have accelerated exponentially. With these principles as the mainstay, many investigators have described various methods of fixation involving the use of locking and nonlocking screws, highlighting placement to influence optimal biomechanical stability The lateral plating technique has historically been demonstrated to guard against axial, rotational, and cantilever bending forces by the principles of neutralization, behaving as a load sharing device. With friction generated between the interdigitating bone ends by interfragmentary compression, the plate serves to neutralize the effects of bending, rotational, and axial forces at the fracture site. Stability is created by friction at the plate–bone interface. This is directly proportional to the amount of available torque when inserting the nonlocking screws. In standard lateral plating of Weber B fractures, unicortical screw fixation has been used in the distal portion of the fibula, with the objective of not violating the articular components of the lateral articular gutter of the ankle mortise. The working length of the screws, defined as the amount of the screw thread within cortical bone, is coincidentally reduced in the lateral malleolus compared with the diaphyseal portion of the fibula. The disadvantage of this plating technique will be magnified in porotic bone for this very reason. Isolated posterior plating techniques in Weber B fractures serve to obviate the need for distal screws by placing the plate over the fracture apex. Additional rotational stability can be achieved by placing bicortical screws from posteriorly to anteriorly in the distal fibula, with little concern of violating the ankle joint. This increases the working length and pullout strength of the screws, improving the construct's resistance to failure. Despite the greater use of laterally placed fixed angle plates in lateral malleolar fractures, posterior nonlocking plates have been shown to provide improved construct stiffness and torque to failure We have nonetheless encountered scenarios at our institution in which these previously described techniques when evaluated individually have not always appeared to provide sufficient fracture stability, particularly in noncompliant patients. With special attention to high-energy injuries, porotic malleolar fractures with significant comminution and bone loss, and those fractures without an identifiable fracture apex, the use of interfragmentary screw fixation in most instances appears to be a poor choice: approaching a torque of 3-5 Nm for a 3.5-mm cortical screw is not possible when the sturdy, structural cortical bone is sparse Additional hardware considerations can be given to the screw density and screw position within the plate and their relative proximity to the fracture. Freeman et al Stiffness was most influenced by the number of screws: it increased by 33% from 3 to 4 screws per side. The use of at least 3 locked screws per side increased the torsional stiffness of the construct by 24%. Postcyclic removal torque of the nonlocked screw furthest from the fracture was increased by 274% when they were protected by locked screws. Stoffel et al The Bristol Foot Score Invariably, most subjective evaluations are inherently imprecise and difficult to reproduce because significant differences exist in patients' perception of outcomes according to their life experiences and pain and, therefore, functional threshold. In contrast, despite the reproducibility of questionnaires with more objective criteria, they, at best, correlate good outcomes by inference, ignoring that a patient's approval of their function and outcome is of highest importance The scoring system was originally designed to measure the pre- and post-treatment changes in function. Naturally, it is an impossible task to evaluate the prefunctional baseline of a candidate for whom our first encounter is in the setting of the acutely traumatized limb. The alternative in this scenario is the use of the contralateral limb as the control or to compare documented Bristol Foot Score outcomes of patients with similar injuries who have been treated with more traditional surgical techniques. When performed in this manner, the results and outcomes were promising. These comminuted fractures are not unique to our institution, and, historically, these have been managed with single bridged plating and bone grafting. Therefore, randomized control trials evaluating the outcomes of malunion and subsequent post-traumatic arthritis might more appropriately justify the use of this technique. Additional long-term follow-up might grant better insight to time-related screw loosening and hardware irritation after fracture union. We nonetheless believe that this construct is structurally more sound and will better resist hardware failure due to cyclical loading. Additional biomechanical evaluations of this double plating technique are required to justify the cost benefit of the additional hardware and operative time. However, the short-term follow-up data have demonstrated that this is a safe and viable option for the operative management of these complex fibular fractures with little inherent risk of delayed healing or hardware-related complications. As with all retrospective investigations, the validity of this report is threatened by a number of methodological limitations. For instance, a number of variables that reasonable surgeons would consider clinically important were not taken into consideration, including smoking status, body mass index, and other comorbidities. We did not undertake an explanatory analysis that could have shed some light on the associations of the pathology with clinical outcomes, such as the Bristol Foot Score, although we referenced them as relating to our 2 infections in our 2 diabetic patients. Furthermore, our methodology and rationale for use of the Bristol Foot Score to compare the injured and the uninjured limb within patients was likely to have resulted in some ambiguity because each leg was linked by the individual patients. This portion of the study, originally championed for its reproducibility and ease of completion by the patient, was performed over telephone by the study investigator (D.L.), who was not blinded to the outcome, imparting additional bias. That we further modified the scoring system confers another threat to drawing any definitive conclusions; however, we felt that most participants considered questions 6 and 7 redundant. Still further, the operating surgeons determined when the fractures had healed, and this could have been associated with bias, even though it is generalizable to clinical practice. In conclusion, our experience with the patients described in this report leads us to believe that, at the very least, with the advent of new low-profile anatomic plates, the theoretical and biomechanical benefits of this technique may outweigh the risk of hardware-related complications. We also believe that the results of this report could be used in the development of future randomized controlled trials and prospective cohort studies that focus on the surgical treatment of fractures of the fibula.