The aim of this study is to predict peak particle velocity level at a limestone quarry located in Istanbul, Turkey. The ground vibration components were measured for 73 blast events during the bench blast optimization studies during a long period. In blasting operations; ANFO (blasting agent), gelatine dynamite (priming) and NONEL detonators (firing) were used as explosives at this site. Parameters of scaled distance (charge quantity per delay and the distance between the source and the station) were recorded carefully and the ground vibration components were measured by means of vibration monitors for every event. Then, the data pairs of scaled distance and particle velocity were analyzed. The equation of scaled distance extensively used in the literature was taken into consideration for the prediction of peak particle velocity. At the end of statistical evaluations, an empirical relationship with good correlation was established between peak particle velocity and scale distance for this site. The established relationship and the results of the study are presented.Ground vibrations and air blasts are the parts of rock blasting. Therefore, they are unavoidable. With high intensity of wave motion, they can damage nearby buildings. Thus, the technical and economical aspects, such as block size, uniformity and cost, should be taken into consideration together with the elimination of environmental problems resulting from ground vibration and air blast by blasting engineer in bench blast designs. The prediction of ground vibration components has a great importance in the minimization of the environmental complaints. Estimating the particle velocity and other components of ground vibration with reliable approaches will be very useful in blast design An extensive research program was carried out at a quarry named Sarikayatepe which belongs to Akcansa cement company in order to establish a reliable formula for the prediction of peak particle velocity and to minimize the environmental problems arising from blasting. The test site is located near Istanbul and the layout of the quarry including the shot points and monitoring stations is shown in As it can be seen from The ground vibration components were measured for 73 blast events in order to predict peak particle velocity for this site during bench blast optimization studies over a period of 10 months. In this study, while the parameters of scaled distance (charge quantity per delay and the distance between the source and the station) were recorded carefully, the ground vibration components were also measured by means of two vibration monitors (Nitro Consult UVS 1504 and Instantel Minimate Plus models) for 73 blast events as shown in Peak particle velocities (PPV) have been calculated from the following equation that is widely used in various studies For predicting the peak particle velocity for this site, the developed blast design was applied accurately for each shot. The maximum amount of instantaneous charges per delay was recorded carefully and the distance between the shot point and the monitoring station was measured accurately by using survey equipment. The damage from vibration induced by bench blasting has been evaluated on the basis of its peak particle velocity related with corresponding dominant frequency. A large number of blasts (73 events over a period of 10 months) were monitored for recording the peak particle velocity in order to develop a similar formula. The results of ground vibration measurements that were carried out at the limestone quarry, including peak particle velocity, frequency, total charge, charge per delay, distance and scaled distance have been presented in At the end of the study, this determined equation for limestone zone is found to be in accordance with the literature and the equation can be used to eliminate environmental problems for the events that the vibrations will not be monitored. The formula, which has 95% confidence level, is given below The empirical factors  Hence, given a particular scaled distance, we offer a best guess as to the PPV as well as upper 95% prediction limit below which we expect future blasts to occur Additionally, the relation was also tested and it can be seen that the measured and calculated values of PPV were fairly close ( As it can be seen from Environmental constraints will be restrictive more and more on mining activities. So, the measurement of ground vibration induced by blasting is significantly important on controlling and elimination of environmental problems. Since the particle velocity is still one of the most important ground vibration predictors for regulating the blast design, an empirical relationship with good correlation has been established between peak particle velocity and scaled distance for this site where host rock is limestone. Using this relation, practical charts should be prepared for various charge levels and distances to control blasting for this quarry. This empirical formula obtained from 73 data pairs can only be used to provide approximate levels of the particle velocity. It must be taken into consideration that its use in the blast design could give erratic results. In order to support this formula more events should be monitored in various directions and the regression analysis should be updated considering the results of further measurements. Additionally, this formula should also be revised depending upon the time and progressing of the pit. This work was supported by the Research Fund of University of Istanbul (Project numbers are 1056/031297, B-66/120199, UDP-46/24072002, 39/11092002, UDP-93/20122002 and UDP-215/18122003) and Turkey Scientific and Technique Research Society (Project number is YDABCAG-199Y027). The author is grateful to the authorities of Akcansa Quarry for providing all the facilities during the field investigation. Opinion and conclusions are of the author.