Most of the materials undergoing comminution processes on their way to final use or destination show non-brittle material or deformation behaviour. In contrary to brittle materials, the scientific view on the microprocess of comminution is nearly zero. The profound knowledge about shaping by cutting, as for instance by lathes, is excluded in this paper because the point of view is different in cutting and comminution. Cutting is mainly interested in the geometry of the tools and in the optimal velocity for different material combinations (shaped material and tool material). Comminution is interested in the necessary energy input, related to mass or to the newly created surface, and the resulting particle size. The latter is normally greater than with cutting processes. In addition, multiple loading combined with bending, friction and compaction will occur during comminution. During the last 5 to 10 years, some fundamental work was done on such different fields as harvesting wheat or corn and preparing waste and metal scraps for reuse. The paper gives some examples of research results.Let us start with the question: what are brittle materials? This question is simply answered by the three models or the limiting cases of real material behaviour: elastic, elastic–plastic and elastic–viscous behaviour. These models are best illustrated by their stress–strain characteristics ( Elastic–plastic behaviour leads after loading and relieve to a durable strain. The process shown in Elastic–viscous behaviour is shown in Real materials show more or less mixed behaviour. Example given: With metals, the term plasticity is often used. They show a time dependence for dislocation movements in their lattices. However, it is small compared to viscous behaviour of thermo-plastics. Therefore in this paper, non-brittle materials are called all materials except those showing brittle material behaviour. According to this assumption, most of the materials to be crushed and ground can be classified to non-brittle material behaviour ( A necessary demand in comminution is: sufficiently high stresses must result from deformation. Thus, consequences out of the material behaviour for comminution purposes are: Particles with mostly elastic behaviour cannot be influenced by temperature and stressing velocity. Particles which show elastic–plastic behaviour are advantageously stressed at low temperatures. Particles with elastic–viscous behaviour need very high stressing velocities (impact mills) at room temperatures or they have to be cooled down. Non-brittle materials such as leaves or grass and cereals were used for food since animals and human beings exist. There was an evolutionary and empirical development of tools for comminution. Example given: the teeth ( We can recognise a specialisation of the different teeth groups. Cutting tools at the entrance into the mouth for tearing leaves from bushes and trees as well as to prepare them in size for the mouth dimensions. Hunting animals developed a powerful caninus (see As with brittle materials, machinery for non-brittle materials was developed and used much earlier than the scientific view on the microprocess (loading of a particle →deformation→stressfield→crack propagation; what energy is necessary for what particle size?). If we look to the broad variety of machines, the types of loading are as follows: Cutting and shearing ( Tensile stresses in combination with bending and torsion ( Bending ( Experiments as defined by In general, one can see the applications of the different types of loading as shown in It is distinguished between two main tasks: producing particle size distributions and opening of connections between different components. All types of loadings are used for particle size distributions but realised with different machine designs. Liberation tasks can be successful only under tearing conditions. The comminution behaviour of non-brittle materials is more or less unknown compared to brittle materials. This thesis excludes shaping by cutting by means of machine tools ( Let us have a look at some examples in different industries and with different materials. Cutting trees in the forests: a development from axe to saw to sawing chains can be seen. The fundamentals about the cutting process, i.e. necessary geometry of the cutting tool (the tool angles and so on) and velocities were taken from the knowledge of shaping ( Using wood for particle boards: For the production of chips and strands, the knowledge of machine industry is used. Using wood for paper: Paper production needs the cellulose of wood. To free the cellulose fibres in the wood, a thermal or thermal-chemical preparing process is necessary before handling the chips in so-called refiners (disk–disk machines). Refiners use shear and compression forces. Four years ago at the comminution conference in Albi, a paper was presented looking in detail at the microprocesses in the refiner ( Using wood as polisher in tooth paste: What type of mill is suited to produce particles less than 80 μm? Application is the aim of experiments. In general, it may be said: energy is no question for food processing in connection with comminution. Main aims are for instance: selecting active substances, avoiding of oxidation, obtaining taste (chocolate), preserving flavour (spices). Besides these main aims, some research relevant for comminution has become known. For instance, the question what is better for chocolate production having cocoa and sugar separately ground on different mills or together ( The machines in agricultural technique and the process of culturing the soil after harvesting changes. For instance, straw is more and more used to serve as fertiliser and is spread by the harvesters on the fields without ploughing it into the ground. The demands concerning size reduction of straw are: to be short enough to start to be rotten during wintertime, however, not fine enough for transport on behalf of the wind and again fine enough not to disturb the soil cultivating machines in next spring. This, for instance, led to fundamental investigations on the microprocesses in traditional cutters for stalks at the Braunschweig Institute of Agricultural Machines ( During household waste treatment, materials of biological origin very often undergo an anaerobic digestion process to produce a digestion gas or to reduce smell. Comminution as pre-treatment is thought to give better access to the microorganisms . In Braunschweig materials like hay, almonds, apples or carrots were treated as single pieces by different types of loading (pressure and cutting) as well as in a cutting machine. The background for these investigations and experiments is the question: what type of loading (may be with different types of loading the cells are differently disintegrated) and what fineness delivers the optimal working or living circumstances for the microorganisms. First results are given in the conference paper of In the last 20 years, the ecological ideas concerning recycling and saving energy led to an increase in investigations and developments for handling waste and scrap. These materials are fairly inhomogeneous and most of them show non-brittle behaviour (see Research in this field not only comprises the look at the ability of different mills to reach a distinct goal but also investigations with single specially selected representative material pieces—both under single particle stressing and machine stressing—are known. At the moment, a DFG project called “Comminution of non-brittle materials“ runs at the universities of Kaiserslautern, Freiberg and Clausthal. Non-brittle materials were reduced to two representative test materials: AlMg There is a broad variety of machines using cutting and shear forces. The principle of loading in such machines is shown in The difference between different machines lies in the form of the tools (suited for cutting, shearing or tearing), in the gap width in axial and radial direction and in the form of the anvil. Double rotor machines use the second rotor as a moving anvil. The gap width decides whether a cutting and shearing type of loading, respectively, or a tearing type of loading predominates. If the gap width is broad (lager than the material thickness)—in one or in both directions—with the contact of the working tool at first strong deformations occur, that means tensile stresses according to bending. (This would be a tearing type of loading according to our definition.) If the working tool is formed for instance like a hook-nose (see Fundamental experiments on the u-shaped loading situation were done at the Freiberg University ( The results for crack formation and crack propagation are given in In continuation of these experiments, the axial gap width was broadened ( There are not only homogeneous non-brittle materials undergoing size reduction but—especially for recycling purposes—composite materials. There may be additional help for size reduction of such complicated and complex materials by cooling, warming up and the use of ozone or different techniques like water jets ( However, Nearly all machines realising the demonstrated types of loading use a rotating movement of the working tools. A systematic survey is given in Main applications of the machines are: Rotor shears (see Cutting mills (see Shredders [see In the group of fast running shredders, the swing-hammer types (