MnFe2O4 ferrite powder was synthesized by a facile one-pot hydrothermal route and then consolidated into dense nanostructured compacts by the spark plasma sintering (SPS) technique. The effect of sintering temperature, on densification, morphology, magnetic and microwave absorption properties was examined. Spark plasma sintering resulted in uniform microstructure, as well as maximum relative density of 98%. The magnetic analysis indicated that the MnFe2O4 ferrite nanoparticles showed ferrimagnetic behavior. Moreover, the dielectric loss and magnetic loss properties of MnFe2O4 ferrite nanoparticles were both enhanced due to its better dipole polarization, interfacial polarization and shape anisotropy. It is believed that such spark plasma sintered ceramic material will be applied widely in microwave absorbing area.The spinel-type magnetic materials have attracted much attention in the past few decades, due to their potential applications in high density magnetic recording, magnetic fluids, data storage, drug delivery, pigments, sensors and catalysis Among the family of ferrite materials, manganese ferrite (MnFe For many applications in electronic devices, a solid, high density material is needed, instead of a powder. However, the classic sintering techniques lead to a rapid grain growth, thereby losing the unusual magnetic properties associated with the nanometric scale. A promising novel technique to consolidate nanoparticles (NPs) powders into high density ceramics maintaining a grain size within the limits of the nanoscale is spark plasma sintering (SPS) Spark plasma sintering (SPS), also known as the field-activated sintering technique and pulsed electric current sintering, is a comparatively novel sintering process that allows fabrication of bulk materials from powders using a fast heating rate (up to 1000 Conventional method for the synthesis of spinel ferrites requires temperatures in the range of 1000–1200 Analytical grade iron nitrate (Fe(NO The spark-plasma sintering experiments (SPS) were performed in an SPS apparatus (Dr. Sinter Model 1050, Sumitomo Coal Mining Co. Ltd., Japan) in argon gas (See After SPS sintering, the graphite sheet on the sample was scraped out and the pellets (10 The density of the spark plasma sintered MnFe X-ray powder diffraction analysis was used to identify the crystal structure of nanoparticles. The effect of sintering temperature on the phase structure of MnFe This overall data reveals the formation of nanocrystalline nature of all sintered samples. The lattice constant, density, grain size from XRD, particle size from SEM and saturation magnetization, for as-synthesized and different sintering temperatures (SPS) is computed and listed in  Magnetic properties like saturation magnetization ( The electromagnetic parameters such as relative complex permittivity The values of tan In summary, single phase manganese ferrite nanoparticles were successfully synthesized by the one step hydrothermal method and subsequently sintered by the novel spark plasma sintering process. The effects of the sintering temperature on the particle size, and coercivity, as well as saturation magnetization and microwave absorption properties of the ferrite samples were investigated and interpreted with valid reasons. The experimental results showed that SPS specimens possess the dense microstructure, superior magnetic properties and better microwave absorber properties than the conventional ones and they exhibited a promising prospect as microwave absorbing materials.