Talar body fractures are rare. Four major types of talar neck fractures are known but talar body fractures are rarely described. An unusual case of a sagittal fracture of the body of talus is reported in this article. No similar cases are reported in the English literature to the best of our knowledge. The risk of avascular necrosis is very high and accurate reduction with solid fixation remains the key to better outcome. We discuss the possible mechanism of injury along with review of literature.A 30-year-old painter fell 10 Open reduction and internal fixation was performed through a medial approach. The Deltoid ligament was protected. The lateral half of talar dome was found rotated posteriorly along with some small loose fragments. These were removed and the fracture was fixed with two AO cancellous lag screws under image intensifier control. The medial malleolus was fixed with tension band technique ( At The radiographs taken at seventh month showed signs of revascularisation at junction of lateral and medial halves. Patient had some pain while walking but ankle and subtalar movements were normal. At 16th month, radiographs revealed early osteophytes formation at outer edge of tibial joint surface. The metal work was removed two years following the surgery. At 28 months following injury, patient had good range of movement with little pain. Radiographs showed irregular ankle joint surface ( At 14 years following the injury, he still had full range of movements. Recent radiographs had shown some sclerosis of the lateral fragment of talus. The joint space was well preserved and there were no signs of collapse ( Talar fractures have a relatively low incidence, accounting for 0.3% of all bone fractures and 3.4% of foot fractures The mechanism of injury in this case was most probably marked dorsiflexion with inversion. Sneppen and Buhl (1974) suggested that a medial site talar body fracture was typical of supination injury, whereas pronation-external rotation usually produces lateral site fracture In head and neck of the talus are supplied by branches from the anterior tibial and dorsalis pedis vessels. The main artery supplying the body of the talus is the artery of the tarsal canal whish arises from the posterior tibial artery. Deltoid branches arise from the artery of the tarsal canal and supplies the medial third of the body of talus. A sagittal fracture therefore devascularises the lateral portion of the talar dome as the only remaining blood supply after displacement is through the deltoid branches entering the body medially. Union of the fracture in such case is extremely slow as it depends on a new blood supply growing into the avascular bone. This process of revascularisation can be enhanced by accurate and stable reduction of the fracture The outcome of our case was less severe than originally expected ( Despite considerable disagreement within the literature, it seems that accurate, rigid fixation of fragments with protection in a non-weight bearing cast may prevent the risk of avascular necrosis and collapse. We would recommend non-weight bearing in similar cases guided by the radiological evidence of bone union.