The effect of processing variables on the growth of a titanium aluminide layer produced from elemental titanium and aluminum foils was examined, with the intention of yielding a titanium–titanium aluminide composite structure. To produce the intermetallic phase in situ, two processing techniques were employed, diffusion bonding and combustion synthesis. Microstructural examination of the titanium aluminide layer revealed striking similarities in the resulting morphology yielded by both processing techniques, in particular for those samples diffusion annealed at lower temperatures (615°C and below) and those reacted by combustion synthesis. In both cases, an exothermic chemical reaction was responsible for aluminide formation in specimens, and in those samples processed by diffusion bonding, this reaction was observed to be rate controlled by a diffusion mechanism. Chemical analysis of the product aluminide showed the layers to be composed completely of a single phase, TiAl3, which is believed to be the result of thermodynamic stability of this phase relative to other stable equilibrium phases in the titanium aluminum system. The results of these experiments are discussed with a view of utilizing these processes to optimize the mechanical behavior of titanium aluminide by incorporating it into a laminated metal composite.Over the past several decades, great demand has been placed on the metallurgical community for the development of high strength/low weight substitutes for conventional nickel and cobalt-based superalloys for gas turbine use. This has generated a great deal of interest in the study of intermetallic compounds. Titanium aluminide intermetallics in particular, have attracted a great deal of interest due to their high strength to weight ratio and good high temperature properties. However, these materials have been traditionally characterized as brittle, demonstrating low ductility and poor fracture toughness, which has to a large extent limited their practical application. Since the late 1980s, a large number of research projects have been initiated, concentrating on broadening the applicability of titanium aluminides. Two approaches have been taken to this end: alloying to improve the mechanical properties of the intermetallics Of the numerous processing techniques available for the formation of a titanium aluminide based LMC, two processes in particular lend themselves well to the synthesis of a Ti–Ti aluminide composite: diffusion bonding and combustion synthesis. Diffusion bonding of elemental titanium and aluminum foils to produce an alternating Ti–Ti aluminide LMC structure provides a low temperature approach to the formation of a composite, allowing growth of the intermetallic phase(s) to occur while both reactant materials (presumably Ti and Al foils) are in the solid state. Combustion synthesis reactions are yet another feasible technique to form metal–intermetallic composites, which require minimal energy input to the process and offer reduced processing times. The aim of the present study was to produce a composite material consisting of alternating layers of titanium and titanium aluminide. This was to be achieved by use of two processing routes described earlier, diffusion bonding and combustion synthesis reaction, with the intermetallic titanium aluminide phase to be formed in situ from elemental Ti and Al metal foils. Specific emphasis throughout this research was placed on determining the effect of processing variables on the resulting morphology, chemistry and growth rate of the resulting titanium aluminide phase. Samples were prepared from 99.995% purity aluminum foil, 0.025, 0.05, and 0.1 mm thick, and 99.7% commercial purity titanium foil, 0.05 mm thick. Square stamps of size 20×20 mm were cut from bulk foils and cleaned using a 20% NaOH solution for aluminum and a modified Kroll's reagent, consisting of ratio of 54:40:6 parts distilled water, HNO The diffusion bonding process was begun by placing samples constructed from 0.001, 0.002, and 0.004 in. aluminum foils in a compression fixture to facilitate static loading of specimens, ensuring intimate contact between the stacked foils during processing. The fixture was loaded into a cylindrical vacuum chamber and evacuated to ∼10 Specimens processed by combustion synthesis reaction utilized a Gleeble 1500 thermomechanical simulator (Dynamic Systems Inc.) as apparatus. Samples constructed from 0.002 in. thick titanium and 0.004 in. aluminum foils were placed between two anvils fabricated from 19 mm diameter, 316 stainless steel which were inserted into the grips of the Gleeble. A type K, chromel–alumel thermocouple was affixed to the surface of the specimen to supply temperature feedback to the Gleeble. Samples were heated to 640 Preparation for microstructural examination required cross-sectioning of specimens using an Agemaspark EDM machine to prevent cracking of the brittle intermetallic layer which would occur by using abrasive cutting techniques. Selected specimens were prepared for examination along the plane of aluminide growth. These were additionally sectioned by cooling in liquid nitrogen and fracturing along the aluminide layer using a sharp metal blade. Sectioned samples were then mounted in bakelite resin and polished using standard metallographic techniques. Microstructural examination and preliminary chemical analysis of samples was conducted on a JEOL 5900 scanning electron microscope, equipped with an Oxford EDS system using Samples annealed at 635 Further examination of specimens revealed the formation of cracks in the aluminide layer, parallel to the direction of growth. Cracks appeared to manifest themselves at random, independent of layer thickness and cooling rate. This was first thought to be the result of rapid cooling of specimens on completion of anneals, however, subsequent attempts to induce cracking were ineffective. Upon compiling electron micrographs of typical microstructures found in specimens over a broad range of annealing times, it was observed that intermetallic layer growth proceeded to the complete consumption of all available aluminum. A typical micrograph of a specimen constructed from 0.1 mm Al foils, annealed for 6 h, is provided in Examination by backscattered electron imaging seemed to suggest that the intermetallic formed at the interface of the titanium and aluminum foils was a single phase, where no significant difference of contrast was observed in the layer. This was confirmed by both EDS and X-ray diffraction analysis, showing the intermetallic layer to be composed completely of the equilibrium phase TiAl Measurements of aluminide layer thickness versus annealing time supported the assumption of a diffusion-controlled mechanism responsible for layer growth, which was illustrated by the parabolic relationship of layer thickness with time demonstrated in the plot ( Imaging of the thin intermetallic layers produced at these lower processing temperatures proved rather difficult, which lead to the planar sectioning of specimens for the purpose of microstructural characterization. By this technique, it was revealed that the morphology of the aluminide layer was quite different than that observed in specimens annealed at 635 The uneven surface created by planar sectioning of specimens provided a unique opportunity to examine the titanium–titanium aluminide interface in areas where fracture occurred directly at this interface. Here, nucleation of titanium aluminide at the titanium grain boundaries was observed ( EDS and X-ray diffraction analysis of specimens showed once again that the phase formed by annealing in this lower temperature range was stoichiometric TiAl One notable exception to the near exclusive formation of TiAl Thermal profiles generated from temperature measurements during processing revealed the presence of exothermic events which had occurred in all reacted specimens. Profiles typical of specimens processed at heating rates of 12.5, 25, and 100 As has been noted in the previous work The observed morphology of the combustion synthesis reacted specimens bore a number of striking similarities to that seen in specimens subjected to lower-temperature diffusion anneals (i.e. 615 The results of EDS and X-ray diffraction analysis showed that again, composition of the aluminide, in all specimens, was restricted to the TiAl Based on the single-phase chemistry and globular morphology encountered in low temperature annealed specimens (i.e. below 635 The process of aluminide layer growth presumably begins with the diffusion of aluminum atoms across the titanium–aluminum interface, into titanium. Although there seems to be little agreement among various authors that this is indeed the predominant direction of atomic flux, the work of van Loo and Rieck Instability caused by saturation of titanium with diffused aluminum atoms, results in the initiation of an exothermic combustion synthesis reaction. It is quite likely that the grain boundaries act as primary initiation sites for these reactions, considering their higher energy state relative to the grain, and thus possess a lower activation energy requirement for initiation of a combustion synthesis reaction. The assumption that these reactions initiate first at the grain boundaries is evidenced in numerous scanning electron micrographs, where globular aluminides could be observed at the titanium grain boundaries, surrounding the unreacted grains was as shown in The completion of these primary reactions results in the formation of an initial layer of titanium aluminide at the titanium–aluminum foil interface. Further growth of the intermetallic phase is subsequently restricted to the ability of the reactant species to diffuse through the aluminide layer. Hence, layer growth becomes a diffusion-controlled process, thus yielding the parabolic time dependence as seen in the time-thickness profiles discussed previously. It is quite likely that aluminum is the more predominantly diffusive species due to its high mobility. Diffusion, in this case, may be facilitated via one of two mechanisms, vacancy diffusion through the aluminum sub-lattice of the TiAl In addition to providing proof of a highly exothermic mechanism responsible for aluminide formation, the presence of high temperature phases, such as, Ti The apparent coalescing effect of prolonged annealing time or increased annealing temperature on the globular morphology of the aluminide layer is likely the result of interdiffusion between the intermetallic particles. Since each of these variables are accounted for directly in the Fick equations for diffusion Differences observed in growth rate of specimens produced from 0.025, 0.05, and 0.1 mm thick aluminum foils are accounted for by variation in surface quality of the aluminum foils prior to sample annealing. Thin 0.025 and 0.05 mm thick foils were produced via a chemical milling process, which had a tendency to degrade the foil surface and create asperities. This effect became more pronounced with further thinning of the foils, which directly resulted in the formation of an irregular aluminide layer. The single phase composition of the titanium aluminide layer, although a curiosity, is likely the result of the thermodynamic stability of the TiAl Due to a number of morphological and chemical similarities, it is reasonable to suggest that the mechanisms discussed previously to describe the results of diffusion bonded specimens are equally applicable to those reacted by combustion synthesis. Therefore, it is again likely that the globular morphology resulting from reaction can be attributed to a kinetic effect, rather than formation of intermetallic in the liquid state. The single-phase chemistry of the aluminide layer may also be similarly described as the result of the high negative free-energy of formation of the TiAl At this point, it is of primary importance to separate and clearly define the two modes by which a combustion synthesis reaction may be initiated and mechanisms by which they proceed. The simultaneous combustion reaction or thermal explosion as it is commonly termed, is initiated by the uniform heating of reactant species to the point of simultaneous ignition of reaction at all interfaces between dissimilar reactant species. Exothermic chemical reactions then occur at these interfaces, yielding product material at all points of contact. These reactions are characterized by the evolution of a large quantity of heat and rapid formation of product material. The SHS or Self-propagating High-temperature Synthesis reaction differs kinetically from the thermal explosion reaction as it requires only a point source of ignition. Large enthalpy differences between the reactant and product species allow for the formation of a combustion front, which passes through the specimen, sustained by the evolution of heat to adjacent unreacted material generated by the formation of product. This type of reaction is particularly attractive from a manufacturing perspective due to its low energy input requirements. On a practical level, it is generally accepted that most combustion synthesis reactions are a combination of both the simultaneous combustion and SHS reaction. From analysis of the thermal profiles discussed in the previous section, it would appear as though a heating rate of 25 Due to the occasional extrusion or ‘squeeze-out’ of residual aluminum observed in the combustion synthesis reacted specimens, it is likely that the constant 5 μm layer thickness observed is the result of limited reactant availability. Since this material is removed from specimen before having the opportunity to react with titanium, aluminide layer thickness is limited. A second possible explanation for this phenomena is that the combustion synthesis reaction is ‘quenched’ by the thermal mass of neighboring material, resulting in incomplete reaction of available aluminum. To ascertain if this is the case, future work will study the effect of reactant foil thickness on the thickness of aluminide during combustion synthesis experiments. Through examination of specimens processed by diffusion bonding and combustion synthesis reaction, it may be concluded that. (1) The selection of key processing variables profoundly impacts the resultant chemistry and morphology of the product intermetallic phase (TiAl The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC). As well, they express their sincere appreciation to Bristol Aerospace Limited, Winnipeg, Man., Canada and Alcan Canada Limited, Kingston, Ont., Canada for their generous contribution of the material used in these experiments.