A three-dimensional model of a single cubic particle in a thin liquid film has been developed using the Surface Evolver (Brakke, 1992) program. It has been used to investigate the effect of a particle’s contact angle on its energetically stable orientations at a liquid–vapour interface and how these, in turn, affect the particle’s ability to stabilise a thin film. It has been found that depending on the contact angle there are two possible stable orientations for a cubic particle (termed horizontal and rotated) at a liquid–vapour interface. For a film containing a cubic particle in a rotated orientation it has been found that the capillary pressure required to rupture the film is roughly 30% of that required for a film containing a particle of the same contact angle but in a horizontal orientation. The probability of a particle adopting one orientation over another is also investigated, showing that this too is affected by contact angle and leading to the conclusion that contact angle has a profound effect on non-spherical particles behaviour in thin films.Particle-stabilised foams are present in many industrial processes. A foam is made up of a series of thin films which form the walls of the individual cells or bubbles. Capillary pressure is exerted on the films as liquid drains from the foam under gravity, causing them to thin. The film fails when it reaches a critical thickness, at which point the opposite sides touch and rupture occurs. However, when particles are attached to the film they hold the opposite sides apart and increase the capillary pressure required to draw liquid out of the film. This slows the thinning process and increases film lifetime and stability. It has long been known that the particle hydrophobicity affects the froth stability ( Experimental investigation of the effect of particle contact angle ( Previous analytical and modelling work on film stability in both two-dimensions (2D) and three-dimensions (3D) has concentrated on the effects of the hydrophobicity and particle spacing of spherical particles. In a classic study, Using 2D analysis In this study we will use a surface energy minimisation approach to model and further analyse the Surface Evolver ( In the first case the model has been used to investigate the stable orientations of the particle in the film and how they vary with the particle contact angle. The initial simulations used contact angles between 45° and 90° so that the complete range of contact angles that support either orientation in 2D could be expanded to 3D. Once the stable orientations were identified the second model was used to investigate the effect of particle orientation on film stability. The single film model was set up with a single cubic particle in the centre of a circular film with a radius 15 times that of the particle edge length in line with the experimental apparatus used by The particle is defined as a single surface within Surface Evolver and its hydrophobicity is characterised by the contact angle In Surface Evolver the contact angle is set by altering the surface tension values for the facets that make up the dry surface of the particle in accordance with Young’s equation, (Eq. The energy of a surface that is minimised in Surface Evolver is made up of the sum of its component energies; one of these is the energy per unit area which can also be regarded as surface tension. The default value for surface tension in the model is 1, as the total surface area of solid is fixed, only the difference between However, if Substituting Eq. The particle shape is described as a single surface using a superquadric equation which is capable of describing a parametric shape as a continuous surface in both 2D and 3D ( In Eq. Initially the model with only one surface bridged by the particle was used to investigate the effect of contact angle on particle orientation. First the particle was assigned a contact angle and rotated to a specific orientation. Surface Evolver was then run through a series of iterations and mesh adjustments until the minimum energy surface had been reached. This process was then repeated for 190 different particle orientations to produce the data required to find the energetically stable orientations for that contact angle. The whole process was then repeated for different contact angles ( Once the stable orientations were identified the model with a particle that has bridged both sides of the film was used to investigate the effect of orientation and contact angle on film stability. The model was initially set with a capillary pressure of 0 and the film evolved to find the film shape. The entire film surface was then tested to see if at any point the opposite sides were touching (this indicating film failure). If not, the capillary pressure was increased by a small amount, the new surface evolved and tested for failure. This was repeated until the film failed and so the critical capillary pressure of the film was ascertained. The total energy of the evolved model was found for cubic particles with contact angles between 45° and 90° and rotations between 0° and 90° around the When both sides of the film are bridged the horizontally orientated particle stabilises the film by holding its opposite sides apart at the upper and lower faces as shown in A cubic particle with a contact angle of 45° is only energetically stable in the horizontal orientation and this is also the lowest energy orientation it can adopt. The rotated orientation at this contact angle is the highest energy orientation possible and is surrounded by lower energy orientations making it energetically unstable. There are no other local surface energy minima so whatever the initial orientation in the film, the particle will always move to a horizontal one. At In between these two contact angles there is a transition from horizontal stability to rotated stability and there is a range of contact angles for which either orientation is energetically stable. In this case both orientations are situated at a local minimum in energy and are separated from each other by a set of unstable, higher energy orientations. For a specific contact angle, both stable orientations have different energies with the lower energy orientation being the more energetically favourable one. Whilst the horizontal orientation is energetically most favourable at a contact angle of 60°, as it increases above this value, the difference in energy between the two orientations decreases. At about a 72.5° contact angle, the surface energies for the two stable orientations are the same whilst still separated by a ridge of higher energy orientations. As There is a surface energy landscape, defined by the It can be seen in  As noted earlier, a 2D geometric analysis of a cubic particle in a film indicates stability in both horizontal and diagonal orientations for 45° It should be noted that whilst the Surface Evolver simulation results show that horizontal or rotated orientations are stable at different contact angles, The same procedure that was followed for the cubic particle was used for an oblong particle with It has been found that contact angle has a large effect on the orientation of cubic particles bridging one side of a film, however eventually a film will thin to the point where the particle will bridge both of its sides. At this point both the contact angle and the particle orientation will have an effect on the film stability. A Surface Evolver model in which the particle has bridged both sides of a film was used to determine the critical capillary pressure required to rupture the film. The critical capillary pressure has been found for horizontal particles with contact angles of 45–80° and for rotated particles with contact angles between 65° and 90°. It can be seen in If it is assumed that a particle enters the film at an initially random orientation then its final orientation and stabilising effect will depend on which side of the unstable maximum energy orientations it lands. If it is on one side it will move to the horizontal orientation, if it is on the other it will prefer the rotated orientation, with a much lower stabilising effect. However, the position of the energy maximum separating the stable orientations changes with the contact angle. This changes the range of initial orientations that will move to one stable orientation instead of another. Once the positions of the stable orientations are known as well as the position of the energy maximum separating them it is possible to identify whether a particle with a given contact angle and initial orientation will end up horizontal or rotated in the film. This information can also be used to calculate the probability of a particle entering the film with a random orientation ending up in a particular stable orientation. Consider The results indicate that if a cubic particle enters the film with a random orientation then the higher the contact angle the higher the probability it will adopt a rotated orientation, significantly lowering its stabilising effect on the film when it bridges the opposite interface. It has been shown that a cubic particle has two stable orientations, horizontal or rotated, when attached to a film. The preference for one orientation over the other depends on its contact angle and the orientation with which it enters the film. Both particle orientations will help stabilise a film, but the horizontal orientation is more effective. A diagonal particle orientation is energetically unstable for a cubic particle, but if its length along one axis is increased the diagonal orientation becomes stable and the rotated one unstable which is in line with As the rotated orientation of a cubic particle reduces its ability to stabilise the film by 70% more research is required into the effect of particle shape on film stability. 2D geometric analysis shows that there are two stable orientations for a square particle in a film when it has a contact angle between 45° and 90°, however 3D modelling has shown that for a cubic particle the two stable orientations are horizontal and rotated (three facet normals of the cube at 55° to the For any given contact angle in the range of 65° This study was performed in the Rio Tinto Centre for Advanced Mineral Recovery at Imperial College London. G. Morris gratefully acknowledges the EPSRC and CIKTN with Anglo Platinum for their financial support of this project.