Rolling dynamic compaction (RDC) is a soil improvement technique that involves a heavy noncircular module (impact roller) that rotates about a corner as it is towed, causing the module to fall to the ground and compact it dynamically. While conventional circular rollers are able to compact layer thicknesses typically up to 500mm, thicker layers are able to be compacted using RDC due to the dynamic effect of the module, which yields a greater depth of influence. When combined with the ability to compact ground efficiently, by means of its faster operating speed (9–12km/h) when compared to conventional circular rollers, RDC can be a productive and cost-effective option in many different earthwork applications. However, the depth of influence of RDC can vary significantly depending on the soil type, moisture content, loose layer thickness, or number of passes adopted.
               Applications of RDC as well as verification techniques that can be used to quantify ground improvement are presented. A featured case study investigates the zone of influence of a 4-sided impact roller that was measured in a systematic fashion in the field by means of a number of earth pressure cells that were buried at varying depths beneath the ground surface and measuring the in situ stress over a range of module passes. In addition, a variety of in situ tests were performed including penetrometer, field density, and geophysical testing to measure density improvement, again as a function of the number of module passes. The field measurements conducted on mine tailings indicated that the depth of improvement due to RDC exceeded 2m below the ground surface. At a depth of 1.5m, RDC imparted soil stresses of approximately 150 kPa into the ground; positive pressure readings were also measured by earth pressure cells buried up to 3.85m below the ground surface, indicating that the actual zone of influence (for which there is improvement) extends beyond this depth.The authors wish to acknowledge the various staff and students at The University of Adelaide, who, over the years, have contributed to the research on which this chapter is based. The authors are also grateful to Broons and HWE Mining personnel; without their help and support, the work undertaken in the case study featured in this chapter would not have been possible. Ground improvement is a fundamental and essential part of civil construction; an increasing number of new technologies and ground improvement methods have been developed and implemented to assist the geotechnical engineer in providing cost-effective solutions for construction on marginal or difficult sites. The available methods and techniques to improve the geotechnical characteristics of soils are described in detail by The advantage of dynamic compaction is that it enables ground to be improved to a much greater depth (> RDC was originally developed by Aubrey Berrangé in South Africa in the late 1940s, but its value was not fully appreciated until the mid-1980s. Since then, RDC has been successfully implemented worldwide with different module designs having 3, 4, and 5 sides, as shown in The ability to compact thick layers can make RDC a productive and cost-effective option for many different earthwork projects and applications. This view is supported by Quantifying the effectiveness of RDC via field-based trials has been the focus of different researchers over the years, including The underlying theory of compaction applies to RDC. In simple terms, an impact roller applies mechanical energy used to reduce air voids and rearrange soil particles to increase density, which results in a reduction in the void ratio within a soil. As is the case for compaction with conventional circular drum rollers, to achieve the maximum dry density, an optimum amount of moisture is required; if too little or too much moisture is present, a reduction in dry density will result. A unique relationship between moisture content and dry density is generated for a given soil type and compactive effort. A key difference between RDC and conventional circular drum rollers is in the compactive effort applied, akin to the modified and standard Proctor compaction tests, respectively. To highlight the difference in compactive effort, both modified and standard Proctor compaction curves, performed on the same soil, are presented in It can be observed that the As The ability of RDC to compact material in thicker lifts and at lower moisture contents (when compared to the optimum) has the potential for significant time and cost advantages. However, it is important to understand which baseline laboratory test is more representative to the field compactive effort that is proposed; a decision is often based on the loads to be supported, which in turn affects the compaction equipment to be used to ensure an appropriate dry unit weight will be achieved. The soil type, moisture content, and compacted layer thickness are all factors that affect density results and are often varied depending on the target specification required (typically a percentage of the maximum dry density) relative to either the standard or modified Proctor test. It should be noted that there is no “magic formula” that converts standard and modified compaction results, as the relationship between the two is unique for each soil type. The authors’ experience has demonstrated that, for cases where the standard Proctor test is used, impact rollers are likely to achieve the desired dry unit weight criterion (depending on the soil type and moisture content) in loosely placed layer thicknesses up to 1500 RDC has been used successfully in many earthwork applications, including general civil construction works ( The ability of RDC to identify weak (low density) areas or soft spots (zones of high moisture content in clayey soils) that can then be replaced or reworked, reduces the potential for differential settlements resulting from subgrade soils that have inadequate stiffness. The ability of RDC to improve the uniformity and density of subgrade soils makes RDC highly suitable as a proof roller, a view supported by The use of RDC is becoming more prevalent in the mining sector, where large earthmoving equipment capable of hauling and placing high material volumes quickly complements the ability of RDC to compact large volumes efficiently. The authors have observed the effective use of RDC for the compaction of bulk earthworks of mine spoil materials, as described by Deep fills have been traditionally constructed by compacting soil in thin layers using relatively small particle sizes placed in a highly controlled manner. Field density tests are typically undertaken in each layer to confirm performance specifications of placed fill. The determination of field density testing using a nuclear density gauge is the current industry standard, and involves determining in situ density at discrete locations within a depth of 300 The ability of RDC to compact material in larger quantities is an obvious advantage over compacting fill in thin layers; however, as noted by  While RDC has the ability to improve a variety of soil types in a range of applications, not all site conditions lend themselves to using RDC. Small or restricted sites are unsuitable, where the roller is not able to maintain an operating speed within the range of 9–12 As a result of dynamic effects, ground vibrations induced by RDC can be problematic if working close to adjacent infrastructure and can restrict its use. The authors recently observed an impact rolling trial (the results from which are yet to be published) that involved the use of RDC adjacent to historic infrastructure and therefore highly sensitive to vibrations and ground settlement. Vibration monitoring was undertaken to ensure that allowable peak particle velocities commensurate with cosmetic (if any) damage to historic buildings were not exceeded (typically 2–3 The aim of the trial was to determine how close the module could traverse so that the structural integrity of the nearby building was not compromised. The measurements of the vibration monitoring at a site consisting of fill that is not engineered resulted in a buffer distance being recommended by the authors. In this particular case, a safe (buffer) distance of 50 Vibration monitoring undertaken by Careful assessment of the suitability of RDC is needed, particularly for marginal or difficult sites. Although capable of compacting soils at moisture contents that are less than optimum, just as with other compaction techniques, RDC relies on sufficient moisture within the soil mass to attain a density in reasonable proximity to the maximum dry density. As observed earlier in In applications where deep layers of imported fill material are being compacted, cost benefits can still be obtained while limiting the layer thicknesses to well within the capability of the machine, however, the variable depth to which ground improvement can be achieved is one of the biggest limitations on the use of RDC when improving in situ material, as a backup plan may need to be implemented if ground improvement is not achieved to the required (or expected) depths. The variable depth of treatment of RDC also has the potential to cause damage to existing services, culverts, or bridges (via load transfer) if an insufficient thickness of soil is not placed over such structures. It is recommended by the authors that at least 1.5 In the authors’ experience, careful assessment (e.g., the use of an RDC trial) is highly recommended in soil conditions where nonengineered fill material is present, particularly if the site contains large oversized material. Depending on the nature and depth of the material, it may be able to be rubblized and compacted, however, there is also the potential for it to bridge underlying soil that would otherwise be improved, as found by When working at sites with a shallow water table, there is the potential for the repeated dynamic loading of soil to induce increased pore water pressures, which can bring water to the surface if too many passes are applied within a short period of time. The authors have observed RDC successfully used at sites with a shallow water table (i.e., within a depth of 1–2 Cases have also been observed by the authors where the high energy impacts of RDC have caused existing interparticle bonds to break within weakly cemented sands at low in situ moisture contents, which actually resulted in negative improvement in soil density. The depth of influence of RDC varies, depending on factors such as the soil material type, moisture, groundwater conditions, and the applied input energy (number of passes). The influence depth is typically a measure of the depth to which the imposed load from the module quantitatively affects the soil. This can vary considerably due to inherent differences between sites and interpretation on how the magnitude of improvement is both defined and quantified. For example,  Due to the ability of RDC to compact thick layers, alternative testing strategies may be appropriate depending on site conditions. As discussed in this section, one of the key aims of a field trial should be to determine the most appropriate testing regime for any particular project or site. Common testing methods associated with the use of RDC applications include intrusive techniques such as dynamic cone penetration (DCP) testing, cone penetration testing, Marchetti flat plate dilatometer (DMT), field density testing (either via the use of a nuclear density gauge or, less commonly used, the sand replacement method). Nonintrusive (surface methods) are also widely used in RDC applications to measure ground response, including the use of plate load tests, accelerometers, the Clegg hammer, and lightweight falling deflectometer. Seismic (geophysical) techniques are also becoming more widely used in RDC applications, such as the multichannel analysis of surface waves (MASW) technique, as used by Observational techniques (visual and audible) are common, particularly in proof rolling applications. The measurement of ground deformation via surface settlement monitoring is a commonly used technique. Depending on the application, permeability, infiltration testing, or vibration monitoring (when working adjacent to existing infrastructure) are also appropriate. In situ stress measurement via the use of earth pressure cells has also been used by the authors as described in the case study presented in This section presents a field trial where the use of RDC for thick lift compaction was assessed. A test pad was constructed to assist in the determination of the optimal number of passes, moisture content, and range of loose layer thicknesses that could be compacted using RDC, as well as to determine verification techniques that were appropriate, given the site conditions. RDC was used to proof roll the subgrade prior to placement of any fill material to ensure there were no observable soft spots that required remediation prior to commencement of placed fill. The test pad was constructed such that nine impact rolling lanes could be rolled. This enabled three separate zones of 10, 20, and 30 passes to be constructed that would allow testing after rolling to be undertaken simultaneously in the center of each zone. Given that one of the key objectives of this trial was to determine the thickness of fill that could be compacted under various compactive efforts, the height of the placed fill varied in thickness from 0.5–1.5 The total length of the test pad, including ramps, was approximately 120 The case study presented summarizes an RDC trial whereby the underlying objective was to determine an efficient relationship between the number of passes, placed loose layer thickness, moisture content, and corresponding dry density ratio that could be achieved. RDC was achieved using an 8-t, 4-sided impact roller, and the water table was located at a significant depth below the excavated bench level. A test pad approximately 4 While adopting multiple layers for the trial added extra time, it did mean that the compaction trial could address one of the key concerns for the large-scale operation: to determine whether a target density of 95% of maximum modified dry density could be achieved, not only for a single layer but also in the second and third layers placed above. Undertaking the trial in this manner was then representative of the construction of the tailings dam that was proposed, while it also enabled the depth of influence of the impact roller to be investigated. The site contractors had the advantage of having previously worked with RDC for the construction of haul roads (albeit using different material), so had a preference for adopting a layer thickness that would complement the operational efficiency of other equipment onsite, even if it meant that the placed layer thickness was less than what the roller was capable of compacting to achieve the specified performance criteria. Given that the contractors had a preference for fewer passes and less thick layers, this enabled a trial pad to be constructed that featured layer thicknesses no greater than 1500 To measure the zone of influence and effectiveness of the impact roller, a test pad was constructed in three separate lifts of 1200, 1530, and 1460 Verification of RDC was undertaken using a combination of surveying of surface settlements, soil sampling, and conducting a series of laboratory tests (e.g., particle-size distribution, hydrometer test, Atterberg limits, standard and modified Proctor tests) to characterize the soil. In situ tests were performed at intervals of eight passes to quantify soil conditions with changes in compactive effort. The in situ tests undertaken included field density measurements, the SASW geophysical technique, and DCPs to measure and infer changes in density as a function of the number of module passes. Surface settlement monitoring was undertaken to quantify the change in surface level with number of passes. Earth pressure cells (EPCs) were installed at different depths to measure dynamic pressures to assist in quantifying the depth of influence and stress distribution induced by RDC.   The SASW technique was used in conjunction with DCPs to assess the improvement with depth at the same location using two different methods at intervals of eight passes. Typical results are shown in  It is evident from Settlement of the ground surface as a result of varying numbers of impact roller passes was determined from survey measurements of the ground surface at 0, 8, and 16 passes. Due to the undulating nature of the ground surface after rolling, a consistent approach of determining settlement was adopted by always measuring the surface at the lowest point left by the impact rolling module. The average settlement presented in Four Geokon 3500 earth pressure cells (EPCs) were buried at different depths and used to measure the dynamic pressures imparted by RDC. The locations of the EPCs (in cross section) were shown previously in After installation, the soil was then replaced in the trench by the excavator and was compacted lightly by means of its bucket. This process attempted to replicate the virgin construction of each lift. The EPCs were connected to a data acquisition system and a laptop to continuously record the pressures induced by the impact roller. Measurements from the EPCs were acquired at a sampling frequency of 2 An indication of the depth of influence can be obtained by analyzing the variation in peak pressure (resulting from a strike of the roller) with depth. To develop that relationship, data from all three lifts were used. As shown earlier in An example of data obtained from an EPC is shown in  The pressure measurements from all lifts and EPCs were combined to produce a cross section showing the zone of influence in the plane perpendicular to the direction of travel. The results of the compaction trial indicated that the target dry density ratio (95% of maximum modified dry density) can be expected to be achieved after a minimum of eight passes on a loose lift thickness of tailings material of 1200 While RDC is a simple and effective ground improvement technique, there is a need to understand the basic principles that govern its compaction of soil. As RDC can be used in a wide range of applications, it is important to understand that there is not a “one size fits all” approach, and each site needs to be treated individually. The involvement of an experienced geotechnical engineer will be of great benefit, as he or she will be able to realize the advantages of RDC, while also recognize its limitations, which is particularly important at marginal or difficult sites. While the ability to compact material in large volumes effectively and efficiently is a significant advantage of RDC, there are challenges associated with verification. A field trial can be a useful way to determine the appropriateness of RDC at a particular site. One of the key aims of a field trial should be to determine the most appropriate testing regime for any particular project or site, which depends on factors such as the target specification, site conditions, budget, efficiency, risk mitigation, and available equipment. Other aims of a field trial should include determining the number of passes required, the range of moisture contents that are appropriate, and the depth of influence or range of loose layer thicknesses that can be compacted using RDC.