Gas phase reactions amongst filament-generated radicals play a crucial role in growth and properties of films deposited by hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) technology. Gas phase species of interest are SiH4, H2, Si, H, SiH3, SiH2 and SiH. Partial pressures of these species for different sets of deposition conditions have been determined from the standard Gibbs free energy data. Equilibrium concentrations of the film forming precursors have been determined. The effect of the various process parameters on the equilibrium concentration of the precursors has been studied. H, Si and SiH are found to be the dominant species in gas phase above a filament temperature of 2300K. However SiH3 and SiH2 concentration peaks are between 1900 and 2300K, of the filament temperature.Understanding the gas phase chemistry and the energetics of the growth process is very important in the case of decoupled chemical vapor deposition processes such as plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) and hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) where the decomposition of the source gas takes place away from the substrate plane. The decoupled nature of these processes enable us to deposit films at much lower substrate temperatures than what is required in a conventional thermal CVD process. However, unlike in the thermal CVD where we consider the transport of only of the source gas, in these cases the transport of the dissociated species from the plane of formation to the substrate surface has to be considered. Since these species are quite reactive they undergo what are called as secondary gas phase reactions before finally landing on the substrate surface. Subsequently the growth kinetics and energetic decide the final film properties. In the HWCVD it is the heated filament, which is responsible for the dissociation of the source gas into various species. The filament is at very high temperature while the substrate could be at room temperature. Thus we have gradients of both temperature and pressure as we approach the substrate plane. Having reached the substrate the radicals undergo various sequential events like surface migration, nucleation coalescence etc., before the film starts to grow. Simultaneously these are the species in the gas phase, which led to abstraction of species from the growing surface. All these events make the entire deposition process quite complex. Nonetheless there have been numerous attempts to understand these intricacies of the decoupled CVD process. In this work we have made attempts to profile the equilibrium concentration of the important species as a function of some process parameters. We show from these results that some radicals show very different pattern of variation, which can be related to the interaction of the generated species with the incoming precursors. A mixture of two gases namely hydrogen and silane are introduced into the reaction chamber containing the hot filament. The hydrogen and the silane gas undergo complete dissociation when they come in contact with the hot filament. The silicon and hydrogen atoms that are formed then undergo secondary gas phase reactions giving rise to new species that actually take part in the film deposition. Typical operating conditions used in the process for the deposition are: Filament temperature: 1800–2300 Substrate temperature: 423–523 SiH H Pressure in the chamber: in the range of mTorr. Thermodynamics gives information concerning the stability of substances, the yields and the methods of avoiding undesirable substances. Thermodynamic analysis comes first when understanding a phenomenon. It helps to know the window of operation for process variables such as temperature, pressure, composition etc. In HWCVD the velocity of incoming gases is quite small and temperature especially near the hot wire is quite high, hence a reasonable picture of gas chemistry can be obtained from thermodynamic analysis. In this paper the gas phase composition in HWCVD has been obtained assuming thermodynamic equilibrium at various temperature, pressure and composition. Initially the chamber consists of SiH Following reactions have been used for the calculation of the equilibrium constants The values of the parameters A, B, C are given in the following table The following equations give the Si and H balance of the species of interest. There are seven unknown variables namely partial pressures of Si, H, SiH The equilibrium gas composition at chamber pressure of 50  The analysis was further carried out for chamber pressure of 50 and 100  Doyle et al. In According to Gallagher The understanding of how