Introduction
                  The outcome of displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneus is affected by many factors such as fracture type and age. The restoration and maintenance of the posterior facet is a priority and has a strong correlation with improved outcome. The fracture occasionally extends anteriorly to the calcaneocuboid joint (CCJ). Currently there is little literature discussing pain, functional or radiographic information about calcaneal fractures, which involve the CCJ or those that do not. The aim of this study was to compare pain and functional outcome measurements in a cohort of calcaneal fractures treated operatively and non-operatively to determine whether CCJ involvement was important.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A prospective database of calcaneal fractures managed by a single surgeon was reviewed. CT images allowed us to assess the degree of CCJ involvement before and after surgery. Final outcome was determined by pain (validated visual analogue score) and functional outcomes (SF-36) taken 2 years after injury with further CT imaging used to determine the presence of arthritic change at the CCJ. 59 patients with 64 intra-articular calcaneal fractures were identified who also had 35 fractures that extended to the CCJ. Pre-operative CT imaging identified 3 levels of CCJ involvement: Undisplaced fracture line (n
                     =27); fractures that involved <50% of the CCJ (n
                     =4) and fractures that involved >50% of the CCJ with joint subluxation (n
                     =4).
               
                  Results
                  Pain and functional scores were comparable between fractures that involved the CCJ and those that did not. All fractures that involved >50% of the CCJ demonstrated arthritic change 2-years after injury.
               
                  Discussion
                  Displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneus will often have a fracture line extending into the CCJ. This is commonly undisplaced and does not appear to predict continued pain, dysfunction on radiographic appearance using generalised outcome measurements.Displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneus often have a poor functional outcome. Restoration of the posterior subtalar facet is a priority during surgery and this can improve functional outcome in selected patients. The aim of this study was to compare clinical and radiological (CT) outcomes in a cohort of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures with or without CCJ involvement. A prospective database of calcaneal fractures treated by a single surgeon in a Level 1 trauma centre was reviewed. These patients had sustained displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures and were randomised to operative or non-operative treatment as part of a previous study. Fifty-nine patients with 64 calcaneal fractures fulfilled the above criteria of which, 33 received operative and 31 non-operative treatments. A standard surgical protocol that involved rigid internal fixation through a standard lateral approach was applied. Weight bearing was started at 6–12 weeks after surgery. Non-operative care involved no attempt at closed reduction, and treatment with rest, ice and elevation with weight bearing beginning at 6 weeks. Pre-operative CT imaging demonstrated calcaneocuboid joint (CCJ) involvement in 35/64 fractures. The pre-operative CT scan was analysed to separate further the sub-group of calcaneal fractures that involved the CCJ ( The patients were followed for a minimum of 2 years (mean All information was recorded and analysed using the SPSS software package version 11.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Unrelated numerical data sets were compared using an unpaired   The mean VAS and SF-36 results 2 years after injury are demonstrated in The outcome scores were analysed between those patients who demonstrated X-ray features of osteoarthritis at the CCJ and those who did not. Again, no significant differences were detected with any outcome measurement. The strengths of this study are that the data was collected in a prospective fashion, in a unit where patients are treated by a single, experienced surgeon. Detailed CT imagings were obtained before and after surgery and 2-year clinical outcomes obtained in a standard fashion. All CCJ injuries were treated with no directed surgical interventions. A criticism of this study would be that that the functional outcome measurement used (SF-36) is a global rating system, less sensitive for localised/regional problems such as a calcaneal fracture. A recent article has suggested that its use may be justified This study suggests that involvement of the calcaneocuboid joint (CCJ) with a calcaneal fracture seems to have little effect upon the clinical outcome 2 years after injury. Similarly, Hutchinson demonstrated that CCJ involvement did not correlate with clinical outcome 1-year after injury, in a cohort of intra-articular calcaneal fractures managed operatively. In a retrospective review of 100 intra-articular calcaneal fractures Silhanek Images of the CCJ are most clearly visualised on axial CT images and their incidence may be under-reported with less detailed radiographs. In some cases, it can be difficult to interpret whether the fracture line does extend into the CCJ. In our study, this may explain the radiological evidence of CCJ osteoarthritis found in patients with no apparent joint involvement. This was an unexpected finding and difficult to clearly explain. There may have been significant CCJ cartilage damage and impaction, sustained at the time of injury with bone bruising not visualised on CT imaging. An additional reason could be that distortion of calcaneal anatomy occurred after injury/surgery and that this altered CCJ biomechanics to produce degenerative change. In our study, severe (>50%) comminution of the anterior calcaneal tuberosity consistently produced radiographic degenerative change 2 years after injury. The majority of fractures in our study did not involve the CCJ or only had a fracture line extending to an undisplaced joint surface. This is similar to the previous literature which describes single vertical splits of the joint surface as the most common fracture pattern. We would suggest that the majority of calcaneal fractures that have CCJ involvement are undisplaced and that displacement can be corrected indirectly by reduction of the posterior calcaneal facet. The severity of the initial CCJ injury and any subsequent arthritic changes, do not correlate with clinical outcome. Other factors such as the condition of the subtalar joint seem more likely to determine residual pain and dysfunction. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related to the subject of this article by any of the authors. There are no conflicts of interest from any of the authors with regards this study.