Well-crystallized nanocrystalline Mg–Al layered double hydroxides (LDHs) were prepared by hydrothermal method and subjected to mechanical treatment to evaluate the structural and textural changes upon grinding. The powder samples were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), field scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), and N2 adsorption analysis. Grinding caused progressive reduction of crystallite size and structural degradation of the Mg–Al LDHs, resulting in a decrease in its crystallinity. The grinding products at various treatment times were mainly with micropores, resulting from the transformation of the original mesoporous structure, whereas the total pore volume of the milling samples gradually decreased with prolonged treatments. At shorter milling time (<48min), marked increases in surface area coupled with a severe reduction in crystallite size were observed. Delamination and fragmentation of the crystallites mainly occurred at this stage. At intermediate milling time (48min to 72min), the crystallite size approached a saturation value (ca.4.4nm in the c axis direction), and the surface area reached a maximum value (about 117.0m2g−1). Aggregations of the crystallites were clearly observed at this period. During the last milling stage (from 72min to 240min), heavy agglomeration contributed to the reduction in surface area, and the final grinding products were amorphous materials due to the complete destruction of the layer structure of the solids. The distribution, orientation, and aggregation degree of the Mg–Al LDH platelets during the mechanical process may be responsible for the textural evolution.Layered double hydroxides (LDHs), also known as hydrotalcite-like anionic clays, can be formulated as [M The physico-chemical properties of LDHs are closely related to its composition, structural, and microstructural changes. Many techniques can be used to modify the structural and surface properties of LDHs to improve their potential industrial applications. The treatment methods include: (a) calcination at elevated temperatures ( Mechanochemical treatment is an efficient technique to alter the physico-chemical properties of solids and to synthesize several nanosized inorganic compounds. In the course of milling, the powder is subjected to severe deformation, multiple fractures, and cold weld, resulting in the reduction of their particle size, decrease in the degree of structure order, increase in the surface area, and formation of the amorphous phase ( Much work has been performed on the structural features of the mechanical treated cationic clays such as kaolinite ( To the best of our knowledge, this study reports for the first time the structure and microstructure evolution of Mg–Al LDHs during dry grinding using a vibratory mill. The effect of mechanical milling on the crystallite size, crystallinity, morphology, and textural characteristics of the samples was extensively investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD), field scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and N Mg–Al LDHs were prepared through the hydrothermal method. In a typical synthesis, 1.20 The Mg–Al LDH samples were mechanically treated in a laboratory vibration mill (Dandong, China) driven by a motor (1100 The XRD patterns for the as-milled products were recorded on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation, 40 Particle morphology of the resultant powders was examined by FESEM (Sirion200, FEI). The surfaces were coated with gold to avoid charging during the SEM observations. FTIR spectra were obtained on a Nicolet 5700 FTIR spectrometer (resolution of 4 Textural properties of the samples were estimated using N The typical XRD patterns of Mg–Al LDHs ground for different periods are shown in Structural changes in the Mg–Al LDHs during grinding could be monitored through the characteristic features of the (003) and (110) peaks in the XRD patterns. The (003) and (110) diffractions were indicative of the periodicity of the Mg–Al LDH structure perpendicular to the layers and in the layers, respectively. In the samples milled for 9 The XRD patterns of the sample treated longer than 240 The average crystallite sizes (coherently diffracting domain size) in the direction of the The crystallographic parameter  The FTIR spectra of the initial and treated samples of the Mg–Al LDHs are shown in The changes in both the position and shape of the main bands of the FTIR spectra were indicative of the Mg–Al LDH structural changes during the mechanical treatment. In general, a continuous asymmetric broadening of the bands with prolonged milling was clearly observed, a result which is a characteristic decrease in its crystallinity degree ( After 48 The shift of the carbonate vibration from 1367 Furthermore, the gradual decrease in the intensity of metal–oxygen and metal–hydroxyl lattice vibrations recorded below 1000 The comparison of the XRD patterns ( FESEM micrographs of the samples ground for various durations are presented in Grinding seriously altered the morphological features of the pristine Mg–Al LDH particles. After milling for 9 In the samples treated between 48 and 72 Upon increasing the grinding time to above 150 Further increasing the grinding time to 240 The N The isotherm of the as-synthesized sample was found to be of Type IV according to the IUPAC classification and exhibited a H3 hysteresis loop, which is associated to capillary condensation in mesopores ( The isotherms for the milling samples had similar patterns and exhibited a hysteresis loop. These isotherms seemed to lie between the Type I and Type IV shapes ( The BET surface area, pore volume, and mean pore size of the original sample were 33.0 According to Vibration milling treatments had a significant effect on the structure and physico-chemical properties of nano-Mg–Al LDHs as shown by XRD, FTIR, FESEM and N The authors acknowledge the financial support of the