Based on the loose medium flow field theory, the loose top-coal drawing law of longwall top-coal caving (LTCC) mining technology is studied by using self-developed three-dimensional (3D) test device. The loose top-coal drawing test with shields and the controlled test without shields are performed in the condition without any boundary effect. Test results show that shields will cause reduction in drawing volume of coal in the LTCC mining. The deflection phenomenon of drawing body is also observed in the controlled test, which is verified that the deflection of drawing body is caused by shield. It is found that the deflection angle decreases with increasing caving height, with the maximum value of α
                     tail and the minimum value of 0. In addition, the formula to calculate the drawing volume is proposed subsequently. The deflection of drawing body is numerically simulated using particle flow code PFC3D and the proposed formula to calculate drawing volume in LTCC is also verified.Longwall top-coal caving (LTCC) mining technology is a productive and economical method to extract thick coal seams, and thus is widely used in many coal mines in China ( In this study, based on the loose medium flow field theory, we conduct the loose top-coal drawing test with shields and controlled test without shields by using self-developed 3D test device for the LTCC mining. As for the controlled test, the effects of other factors during the test are ignored but the effect of shields on the loose top-coal drawing law in top-coal caving is analyzed. Meanwhile, the PFC During the process of coal face advancing of the LTCC panel, the top-coal and immediate roof above the shields are basically broken and can then be regarded as loose media. Thus the caving top-coal moving and drawing process complies with the law of loose medium flow. As shown in The physical model tests are conducted using self-developed 3D test device in top-coal caving laboratory at China University of Mining and Technology (Beijing) (CUMTB). The geometrical ratio of the shield prototype to physical model is 20:1, and the height of caving shield ( The particles are marked to analyze the flowing characteristics of loose media and locate the spatial shape of drawing body. In order to keep the same flowing characteristics as the materials used, the marked particles are selected from the materials used with diameter of 5–10 mm. The different ID number on each marked particle is given to represent its coordinate ( As for the controlled test, two schemes are designed as models 1 and 2. Model 1 is the loose top-coal drawing test with shields, and the test box with shields is shown in The 3D similar simulation tests can represent the top-coal drawing process. After comparing and analyzing the results of two physical models, the key point is to study the impacts of shields on the drawing volume (i.e. the volume of drawing body) and the developing process of the drawing body. The drawing volume of the loose top-coal is recorded when the marked particles located in different layers reach the drawing opening. The drawing volume ( For the loose top-coal drawing test, we have For the controlled test without shields, we have It can be found from When the height of drawing body Most researchers utilized the ellipsoid theory of the metal mines to analyze the top-coal drawing law during top-coal caving without taking shields into consideration. This paper has verified the difference of the drawing volume between the loose top-coal drawing test (representing coal mine) and the controlled test (representing metal mine). Furthermore, the difference of drawing body can lead to various developing processes of drawing body evidently. Consequently, it is extremely significant to study how shields affect the spatial shape of drawing body. In this study, we define Δ Therefore, in the LTCC mining, the drawing volume can be calculated by The controlled test can be regarded as single opening drawing of metal mines. Therefore, according to the ellipsoid theory of the metal mines ( In field practice, the first term in Eq. When As can be seen in In Eq. In practice, the precise result is difficult to be acquired and then the linear relation, Eq. When The essence of Eq. By analyzing the ID numbers of marked particles which were drawn out during the test, the initial spatial coordinates of marked particles can be obtained, with which the developing process of drawing body's spatial shape can be plotted accordingly. For better analysis and observation, morphological analysis of drawing body is conducted in four planes: The developing process of drawing body is illustrated in We can know from Due to the asymmetry of shields in the direction of advancing face, the drawing body shows an obvious deflection towards the front of shields (direction of In order to observe the spatial shape of drawing body, a study on the drawing body is conducted in ( As illustrated in In The analysis above shows that the deflection of drawing body exists towards the front of the shield during the developing process of drawing body, which is observed through 3D similar simulation test for the first time. Through the controlled test, the fact that the deflection is caused by the shield is verified. When analyzing the deflection phenomenon of drawing body, the eccentricity of ellipse In the loose top-coal drawing test, the relations between It can be seen from The eccentricity of ellipse in The differential value of Deflection angle In When When The whole process that the deflection angle decreases with the increase in In order to verify the existence of deflection of drawing body and Eq. In the loose top-coal drawing test model, the shield is simulated by “wall” in PFC The analysis focuses on the developing process of drawing body during the caving process. Drawing bodies are plotted in From The difference in the upper left part of drawing body decreases with the increase in caving height gradually. When In the controlled test without shield, the drawing body is roughly an ellipsoid, with boundary matching the ellipse without deflection in different caving heights, i.e. the deflection phenomenon of drawing body does not appear in the controlled test. This result also agrees with similar simulation tests. Comparing numerical simulation with similar simulation tests, the deflection of drawing body in the LTCC mining is verified. Comparing In Under different caving heights, the deflection angle of drawing body in numerical simulation is basically consistent with that in similar simulation tests. When the caving height reaches the thickness of coal seam, the deflection angle tends to be 5.88°. This verifies that when In order to verify Eq. In Above analysis verifies the reasonability of the first term in Eq. In In other words, Eq.  The self-developed 3D test device can be used to carry out similar simulation test of LTCC effectively, which could provide a new method for studying the mechanism of top-coal caving in three dimensions. In the LTCC mining, the shields will cause the decrease in the drawing volume. By modifying the formula for calculating the drawing volume in the classical ellipsoid theory of metal mines, the formula to calculate the drawing volume in the LTCC mining is proposed. The deflection phenomenon of drawing body exists during the developing process of drawing body. The deflection of drawing body is caused by shield. The deflection angle decreases with the increase in caving height. The deflection of drawing body and the reasonability of Eq. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This research is financially supported by the Coal Joint Funds of the