Graphitic quantum dots (GQDs) are synthesized from natural graphite powder. This process involves a few steps such as oxidation, reduction and filtration to obtain the precursor to prepare GQDs. Finally, a combination of UV irradiation and sonication is used to produce GQDs. These quantum dots are further investigated by various characterization techniques. They exhibit blue luminescence and ferromagnetic behavior. The ferromagnetic nature of the GQDs is discussed and explained. Based on the experimental data obtained and theoretical models available in literature, a possible mechanism for the formation of GQDs is proposed. Their properties, including the production yield can be tuned by simply changing the synthesis parameters.Graphene, a 2-dimensional sheet of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb pattern has intrigued the world’s science community with its extraordinary properties Graphene quantum dots have gained much popularity mainly due to their ability to be used for bioimaging Here, we report a simple method that does not require an acidic medium (HNO Natural graphite powder (trace metals Recently, Garcia et al. Since the oxidizing power of the holes is greater than that of reducing power of electrons, h Raman measurements were carried out using a LabRAM HR 800 micro-Raman microscope (514.5 Crystalline graphite has only one Raman active peak at ∼1575 The D′ band is absent in SRGO and GO. Thus, these are analyzed by a single consolidated Voigt contours (3L We suggest that UV irradiation on SRGO creates high defect density in the basal plane of the nano sized graphitic flakes produced by oxidation cutting of large sized flakes. These GQDs get functionalized with various functional groups The GQDs were further characterized by FTIR spectroscopy so as to discern the kind of functional groups attached to the graphene layers after exposing the SRGO to UV radiation. The band seen below 900  The GQDs were investigated using XPS so as to obtain more insight into composition and functional groups of GQDs. From the two XPS survey given in Thus it is obvious that UV exposure causes chemical changes in SRGO thereby functionalizing it. The high resolution normalized C 1s spectra of both SRGO and GQDs are given in the The UV–VIS absorption spectrum is shown together with that of the PL emission spectra for GQDs in It has been reported It is interesting that the peak shifts to the right. RGO is non-luminescent while SRGO do show a single peak at ∼456 The Raman spectrum suggests that GQDs have considerable amount of defects. Emergence of PL spectra is another evidence to support the presence of defects and dangling bonds in the material. This may be due to any interaction between these sp Ferromagnetism in carbon-based materials with only s and p electrons is well documented. There are various sources for ferromagnetic behavior in nano graphitic structures. Several kinds of defects and the interaction between them induce magnetic behavior in the absence of 3d or 4f electrons 1 Another possible source of error comes from the diamagnetic background (BG). To overcome this problem, we also measured the moment of the BG and subtracted the same from that of the material’s moment. We have then plotted the difference between the magnetic moment in the zero field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) states, Δ Recently, Scheike et al.  The emergence of magnetic behavior in the GQDs supports the formation of defect centers in the material Esquinazi et al. As mentioned earlier, the GQDs prepared by UV irradiation have defects and are functionalized by various functional groups. Thus we expect a collective effect in magnetic contributions. Also, the zigzag edges which were partly responsible for PL properties are not expected to contribute to the ferromagnetic order due to its inability to maintain a long range order. This is because the correlation length of the short range magnetic order present at the zigzag edges was predicted to be less than 1 A simple method to produce GQDs by exposing SRGO to UV radiation is reported. The GQDs get functionalized due to irradiation which is revealed by XPS and FTIR studies. These GQDs exhibit blue luminescence and ferromagnetic behavior. The intriguing magnetism of GQDs is discussed with suitable mechanism. The underlying mechanism of the photochemical reaction is also discussed with experimental evidences on oxidation cutting. It is envisaged that these may be further used for bioimaging and quantum computing applications. This method can be used to scale up the production and tuning the properties by varying the synthesis parameters. Also the byproducts can be used in several other applications. This project was sponsored by DST-Nano Mission of government of India and IITB Monash Research Academy. We humbly express our gratitude for their support. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 