Wet comminution is an important process in the mineral processing industry. Modelling of wet comminution in stirred media mills requires the simultaneous modelling of grinding media, a moving internal stirrer, and slurry. In the present study, a novel approach for modelling the physical interactions between slurry, grinding media and mill structure in a stirred media mill is presented. The slurry is modelled with the particle finite element method (PFEM). The grinding media is modelled using the discrete element method (DEM) and the mill structure is modelled using the finite element method (FEM). The interactions between slurry, grinding media and mill structure are modelled by two-way couplings between the PFEM, the DEM and the FEM models. The coupled model of the present study is used to predict the motion of slurry and grinding media, and to calculate the power draw during wet comminution in a pilot scale horizontal stirred media mill. Furthermore, the model is used to compare a Newtonian and a non-Newtonian model of the slurry, where the non-Newtonian model is used to capture experimentally observed shear-thinning. The coupled PFEM-DEM-FEM model preserves the robustness and efficiency of each of the methods and it gives the possibility to use large time increments for the fluid, greatly reducing the computational expense. The coupled model of the present work provide information on the complex dynamics of slurry and grinding media. The numerical model is shown to be a useful tool for increasing the knowledge and understanding of wet comminution in stirred media mills.In the mineral processing industry, the cost of comminution constitutes a large fraction of the total operating cost ( Stirred media mills can be either dry or wet. The operation of dry stirred media mills and the impact of material and process parameters have been the focus of many recent studies, for mills with both horizontal ( Wet comminution in stirred media mills is a technology that is not completely understood. To further the knowledge and understanding of the operation of stirred media mills, modelling and simulation are powerful tools. Modelling and simulation allow for investigation of phenomena that can be difficult or impossible to study experimentally. Furthermore, a reliable numerical model can be used for the development of new, or optimisation of existing stirred media mills. Numerical prediction of the dynamics involved in the transient motion of the grinding media and the slurry is a complex problem that requires robust and efficient computational methods. The motion of the grinding media during comminution can be modelled either at the particle scale or at the continuum scale. Originally formulated by The modelling of wet comminution requires some numerical treatment of the mix of feed material and fluid. Due to the small particle size of feed material, it is not feasible to model larger quantities of slurry using the DEM. Instead, it is modeled as a continuum, and its motion is predicted using some continuum-based numerical method. A continuum-based numerical method that is frequently used in the literature is the smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) method. The SPH method was originally developed independently by An alternative to the SPH method is to use computational fluid dynamics (CFD). This paper presents a numerical investigation of the motion of grinding media and slurry in a wet stirred media mill. The mill structure is modelled using the FEM, the grinding media using the DEM and the slurry using the PFEM. In the original PFEM developed by The modelling tries to mimic the conditions in a small stirred media mill under the following conditions. The grinding media in the present study are beads of a sintered aluminum oxide (Al In this section, the numerical methods used for the simulations in the present study are reviewed. Numerical models used for the grinding media, the slurry and the mill structure are presented. This is followed by a description of the coupling schemes and the simulation procedures. In the present study, the grinding media is modelled with the DEM, the slurry with the PFEM and the mill structure with the FEM. The particle size of the feed material in the slurry is below 70 In the DEM, the translational and rotational motion of a particle In the present study, fluids are modelled based on the incompressible hypothesis. The incompressible hypothesis is valid if the Mach number M is less than 0.3 ( The continuity equation (conservation of mass) states that for a steady state process, the mass flow rate into a system equals the mass flow rate out of the system. The continuity equation is given by The conservation of linear momentum is given by the Navier–Stokes equations In a nearly incompressible flow we have By this procedure, the term With this simplification of the viscous term in the momentum equations, the Eulerian form of the governing system of equations for incompressible Newtonian fluids is obtained To complete the governing equations requires an appropriate definition of the boundary and initial conditions. The boundary conditions are defined either as Dirichlet boundary conditions, where the value of the solution is prescribed on the boundary, or as Neuman boundary conditions, where the derivative of the solution is prescribed on the boundary. Initial conditions are imposed by prescribing the velocity In the present study, the time integration of the Navier–Stokes equations is performed using the fractional step method, originally outlined independently by In the present study, the fluid structure interaction (FSI) between slurry and mill structure and between slurry and grinding media is modelled using a partitioned (or staggered) approach. In a partitioned approach, the fluid and solid equations are uncoupled, allowing the use of different computational codes for the fluid and the solid domains, respectively. A major advantage of this method is that codes that are specifically designed for fluids or solids can be used simultaneously in the computational domain. A loosely coupled scheme for FSI is used. In a loosely coupled scheme, only one solution of either field is required per time step. Thus, there is no requirement of convergence of the fluid and solid variables at the interface. This is advantageous in terms of computational efficiency since it avoids the iterative step required for convergence. The loosely coupled scheme is suitable in cases where the solid density is much greater than that of the fluid ( A feature of the current modelling approach is that the description of motion is dependent on the problem conditions. The description of motion is Eulerian for problems without FSI. Thus, for such problems the mesh remains fixed in space. In a FSI problem, the boundaries between the solid and the fluid are Lagrangian and are allowed to deform with the structure. In the present study, an arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) approach is used for FSI problems. Using the ALE formulation for FSI problems allows for a robust and accurate imposition of solid boundary conditions on the fluid. The ALE description of motion requires some reformulation of the governing equations for incompressible Newtonian fluids (Eqs. The interaction between the slurry and the grinding media is modelled as a two-way coupling between the PFEM and DEM models. A partitioned approach with a loose coupling scheme is used. A loose coupling scheme is required since the DEM code use explicit time integration and the PFEM code use implicit time integration. The explicit scheme is conditionally stable and requires small time steps for numerical stability. The implicit scheme is unconditionally stable and allows the use of larger time steps, without suffering from stability issues. In the two-way coupling, the grinding media affects the fluid by adding the mass and velocity of the DEM particles to the volume forces in the governing equations for the fluid. In the other direction, the fluid flow over the DEM particles result in a drag force on the DEM particles. This force is computed by assuming a potential flow around a sphere for each DEM particle, and using the drag force equation of a sphere The rheological behaviour of the dolomite slurry was investigated experimentally. It was observed that the shear stress was not linearly related to the shear-rate. Thus, the slurry is a non-Newtonian fluid and since the relationship between shear stress an shear-rate is nonlinear, the dynamic viscosity is dependent on the shear-rate. The behaviour of the slurry was like that of a shear-thinning (pseudoplastic) fluid. In a shear-thinning fluid, the dynamic viscosity In the present study, different cases are considered where the fluid in the stirred media mill is either water or a dolomite slurry. Water is modelled as a Newtonian fluid, with parameters according to The simulations in the present study were performed on a geometrically simplified pilot-scale sized stirred media mill (Drais PMH 5 TEX), shown in A number of simulations were set up to investigate the ability of the coupled PFEM-DEM-FEM model to reproduce comminution in the stirred media mill. Initially, the mesh convergence of the PFEM model was investigated. In the subsequent simulations, the dynamics of the fluid and grinding media and the performance of the stirred media mill were investigated for different operational conditions. For the mesh convergence study, a Newtonian fluid with density A driving torque In The proposed model can be used to obtain detailed information on the dynamics of both slurry and grinding media during mill operation. The numerical model was used to study the velocity of the slurry ( Modelling the slurry as a non-Newtonian fluid and with a grinding media fill ratio of 60%, an abrasive wear distribution was calculated on the agitator and shaft, this result is shown in The contact energy dissipation associated with grinding media interactions was calculated from the stirred media mill model. Each particle–particle contact event is associated with an energy dissipation. To quantify the individual particle collisions during the motion of the agitator, a contact energy spectra was calculated. The calculation of energies associated with particle–particle collisions was based on a strategy outlined by Modelling of the breakage of the feed material was out of scope in the present study. In the literature, the breakage rates of the feed material has been quantified by the collision energy spectra from DEM simulations of a mechanistic model of a ball mill ( A novel approach based on fundamental, measurable physical relations is used to model the interactions between slurry, grinding media and mill structure in a wet stirred media mill. The approach is based on two-way couplings between PFEM, DEM and FEM models. The PFEM was used to model the slurry, the DEM to model the grinding media and the FEM to model the mill structure. The slurry was modelled both as a Newtonian fluid with constant viscosity and as a non-Newtonian fluid with viscosity dependent on the shear-rate. The presented computational model was used to quantify the dynamics of the grinding media, the power draw and the particle–particle contact energy distribution. In conclusion, the proposed numerical approach is capable of representing the interactions between slurry, grinding media and mill structure in a stirred media mill. The model developed in the present study can be used to investigate how varying slurry and grinding media properties as well as operational parameters affects the efficiency of a wet stirred media mill. Finally, it is concluded that the numerical model of the present work is a powerful tool for increasing the knowledge and understanding of wet comminution in stirred media mills. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. For financial support of the project