In situ Al-based composites were fabricated by exothermic dispersion method. Dry sliding wear results showed that the original C/ZrO2 mole ratio is a key factor to the wear behavior of the composites. When the ratio of C/ZrO2
                     =0, the reinforcements are mainly composed of Al3Zr particles and α-Al2O3 particles, and it is suggested that the dominant wear mechanism is abrasive wear. The wear resistance of the composites is not satisfactory due to the low mechanical strength and brittleness of the Al3Zr phase. When the C/ZrO2 ratio increases from 0 to 1, the wear resistance is significantly improved by the increased volume fraction of α-Al2O3 and decreased volume fraction of Al3Zr, plus newly formed nanosized ZrC particles. Moreover, experimental results showed that the mass loss of the composites linearly increases with the sliding distance. The wear rates decrease with the increment of the sliding velocity, but increase with the C/ZrO2 mole ratios. When the C/ZrO2 mole ratio is increased, the friction coefficients of the composites reduce, and the wear surface becomes smoother. When the C/ZrO2
                     =1, the produced ceramic reinforcements are composed of nanoscaled α-Al2O3 phase and ZrC phase, without Al3Zr phase. Under this circumstance, it is proposed that the adhesive wear becomes the predominant, and the composites have the best wear resistance and friction properties.Aluminum matrix composites reinforced with ceramic fibers or particles have been widely applied in automobile, aerospace and mineral processing components due to the excellent properties, such as specific strength, specific stiffness, and elastic module It is well known that In this study, economical C powders were chosen to substitute the costly B powders to fabricate Al-based composites by exothermic dispersion reaction in an Al–ZrO Pure Al powders (30–50 In this study, the Based on the obtained atomic ratio Al/Zr ∼3:1 (shown in the inset in When the carbon powders were added into the mixture (Al It is well known that wear properties always have close relationship with mechanical properties of the material. With the C/ZrO  In general, wear rate of MMCs increases with the increment of sliding velocity, which may be caused by the properties of the reinforcements and their connections with the matrix. Sato et al. By the experimentally recorded curves shown in The wear surfaces of samples with C/ZrO Normally, most of reinforcements can detach from the matrix (as debris) and retain on the wear surface of the MMCs It is known that wear resistance of MMCs significantly depends on the characteristics of reinforcements, such as the shape, size, kind, distribution, bonding with the matrix, and the volume fraction. In this study, when the C/ZrO With the increase of C/ZrO The wear characterization of the composites fabricated by exothermic propagation method in Al–ZrO When the C/ZrO The mass loss of the composites increases linearly with the sliding distance. The wear rates of the composites decrease with the increment of the sliding velocity, but increase with the C/ZrO The friction coefficients of the composites are affected by the applied load and the C/ZrO When the C/ZrO This research work was financially supported by a grant from the