Background
                  Capitellum and trochlea fractures are truly rare and the treatment is not fully appreciated. So we evaluate the impact of associated injuries and fracture classifications on elbow functional outcomes after open reduction and internal fixation.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  PubMed, Embase, Ovid Medline, and the Cochrane Library were searched from January 1, 1974 to January 1, 2017. All English literature with the treatment of capitellum and trochlea fractures by open reduction and internal fixation were included.
               
                  Results
                  For associated injuries, the results suggested that the MEPI score of patients without associated injuries was higher than that of patients with associated injuries (P = 0.001). However, there was no significant difference in the arc of motion between the two groups (P = 0.052). For Bryan and Morrey classification, there was no significant difference in the MEPI score (P = 0.622) and in the arc of motion (P = 0.652) between type-I fractures and type-IV fractures. For Dubberley classification, there was significant difference only in the MEPI score between subtype-A fractures and subtype-B fractures (P = 0.005).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The associated injury of fracture may have a negative impact on the functional outcomes of elbow. And Dubberley classification is more suitable to classify this kind of fracture. Furthermore, high-quality studies are required to attain robust evidence.Coronal fractures of the distal humerus involving the capitellum and trochlea. And the morbidity of this partial articular fracture is truly rare, accounting for 1% of all elbow fractures and 3%–6% of all distal humeral fractures [ Capitellum and trochlea fractures are also associated with ligamentous injuries (lateral or medial collateral ligament lesions) or ipsilateral fractures (radial head fractures or epicondylar fractures of humerus) [ Treatment options included closed reduction [ We performed a systematic search of the keywords ‘‘(((((trochlea) OR trochlear)) AND fracture)) OR ((((capitellum) OR capitellar)) AND fracture)) OR ((distal humeral) AND coronal fracture’’ in the online databases PubMed, Embase, Ovid Medline, and the Cochrane Library repeatedly from January 1, 1974 to January 1, 2017. Only English literature were included. Unpublished studies were not included. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs), cohort, case control, and case series studies about the treatment of capitellum and trochlea fractures by ORIF were included. Case reports, comments, reviews, technical notes, letters and cadaveric studies were excluded. All references of included studies were manually searched to determine other eligible studies. Potential researches found through database search were reviewed for inclusion by two independent reviewers. Where there was disagreement, a higher reviewer was consulted. All procedures were conducted in accordance with the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines [ The data extracted from included studies included the name of the first author, year of publication, study design, demographic data, types of fracture, associated injuries, follow-up time, and clinical outcomes. For meta-analysis, we sought individual patient data from all included studies. Every attempt was made to contact the corresponding authors of published studies via email to access data. Because of the low incidence of this fracture, all of included studies were clinical case series. So, we only performed quality assessment on the 10 studies used in the meta-analysis by using the Methodological Index for Non-Randomized Studies (MINORS) [ The primary outcome for the first meta-analysis was the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI) score and the arc of motion of elbow between patients without associated injuries and those with associated injuries. And the primary outcome for the second meta-analysis was also the MEPI score and the arc of motion of elbow between patients diagnosed with different types of fracture by Dubberley classification [ We carried out a 2-stage meta-analysis of individual patient data based on available data in the 10 studies. In the first step, the parameter estimates and standard errors of the MEPI score and the arc of motion were extracted from different patients groups of the above analyses for each study. In the second step, we used weighted mean difference (WMD) with 95% confidence interval (CI) obtained from the 10 studies to calculate the overall effect size. Heterogeneity was assessed using Cochran's Q test, and the inconsistency index (I A total of 1786 studies were identified by the database search ( The systematic review included 24 non-comparative studies and 1 comparative study, enrolling a total of 369 patients ( Across the 25 studies, the surgical approach also varied and including lateral approach/extensile lateral approach (n = 21), posterior approach with/without olecranon osteotomy (n = 10) and anterolateral approach (n = 2) ( The method used to assess elbow function following surgery included MEPI (n = 20), the Broberg and Morrey Functional Rating Index questionnaires/the Broberg-Morrey score (BMFRI/BMS) (n = 6), the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons scores (ASES) (n = 5), the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand scores/shortened Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand scale (DASH/QuickDASH) (n = 4), Grantham criteria (n = 2), the Morrey score (MS) (n = 1) and the Patient-Rated Elbow Evaluation (PREE) (n = 1). Most of these studies reported the increased range of motion of elbow including flexion, extension, pronation and supination after operations ( We only evaluated the quality of the 10 non-comparative studies included in the meta-analysis ( Four studies provided detailed information of the MEPI score and were included in the meta-analysis [ For Bryan and Morrey classification, three studies provided detailed information of the MEPI score and were included in the meta-analysis [ For type 1 and type 2 of Dubberley classification, two studies provided detailed information of the MEPI score and were included in the meta-analysis [ For type 1 and type 3 of Dubberley classification, two studies provided detailed information of the MEPI score and were included in the meta-analysis [ For type 2 and type 3 of Dubberley classification, two studies provided detailed information of the MEPI score and were included in the meta-analysis [ For subtype A and subtype B of Dubberley classification, four studies provided detailed information of the MEPI score and were included in the meta-analysis [ To assess the potential heterogeneity and the reliability of outcomes that were reported by at least 4 studies, we performed sensitivity analyses by repeating the analysis after removing one study at a time. For the impact of associated injuries, the combined estimates of MEPI score did not change markedly with the removal of any one study ( For the impact of Dubberley classification, the combined estimates of the arc of motion between type-1 fractures and type-2 fractures did not change markedly with the removal of any one study ( Capitellum and trochlea fractures are relatively rare, and the incidence of female patients is higher (65.6%) due to more frequent presence of cubitus valgus and cubitus recurvatum [ We included seven non-comparative studies including 113 patients. The results of our analyses suggested that the MEPI score of patients without associated injuries was higher than that of patients with associated injuries (P = 0.001). However, there was no significant difference in the arc of motion between the two groups (P = 0.052). Ruchelsman et al. found that the mean scores of function and motion of five patients with a radial head fracture were lower than those for the patients without a radial head fracture [ Currently, ORIF has become the best method for the treatment of capitellum and trochlea fractures, which can maximize the recovery of elbow function [ For Bryan and Morrey classification, we included four non-comparative studies including 64 patients. The results of our analyses suggested that there was no significant difference in the MEPI score (P = 0.622) and in the arc of motion (P = 0.652) between patients with type-I fractures and patients with type-IV fractures. Although Ruchelsman et al. reported that patients with a Type-IV fracture had significant reductions in the arc of motion [ For Dubberley classification, we included six non-comparative studies including 97 patients. The results of our analyses suggested that there was no significant difference in the MEPI score and the arc of motion between the type-1, type-2 and type-3 fracture subgroups (Type 1 vs Type 2, P = 0.326; Type 1 vs Type 3, P = 0.766; Type 2 vs Type 3, P = 0.187). However, compared with patients with subtype-B fractures, patients with subtype-A fractures had a higher MEPI score (P = 0.005) but had the same arc of motion (P = 0.523). Although no significant difference of the MEPI scores was found between type 3A and 3B fractures, Durakbasa et al. suggested that the posterior condylar comminution might have a negative effect on the elbow functional recovery [ This review has several limitations. First, selection bias may exist because of a limited number of included studies. Second, there is significant heterogeneity in the meta-analysis for the MEPI scores and the arc of motion. And quality assessment shows that the quality of included studies is varied, indicating there is a methodological difference. Sensitivity analysis indicates that the study of Tarallo et al. (2015) may impact the finding for the arc of motion of associated injuries. And the studies of Durakbasa et al. (2013) and Ashwood et al. (2010) may affect the finding for the MEPI score between subtype-A fractures and subtype-B fractures. Last but not least, our meta-analysis includes young patients and it can affect the combined results because they recover better than adults. In conclusion, the associated injury of capitellum and trochlea fractures may have a negative impact on the functional recovery of elbow after open reduction and internal fixation. And compared with Bryan and Morrey classification, Dubberley classification is more suitable to classify this kind of fracture. In the future, larger multicentre studies with a standardized fracture classification and fixation technique are required to eliminate heterogeneity and attain robust evidence. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. There is no funding source. This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. reviewregistry468. Shu-Kun He: Data analysis, Writing the paper. Long Xu: Data analysis, Writing the paper. Jin-Hai Guo: Data analysis. Jing-Ping Liao: Data collection. Ting-Wu Qin: Data collection. Fu-Guo Huang: Data collection, Data analysis, Design of study. Shu-Kun He and Fu-Guo Huang.