The present book under review is authored by Professor Shaw, who is an international authority in metal cutting and wear and currently Emeritus Professor at Arizona State University, Tempe, USA. The author is conscious of the fact that in the day-to-day intensity of the search for new engineering solutions, it is possible to loose touch with the foundations of the engineering creativity. The aim of this book has been to make that exposure more durable. In the first Chapter ‘What Engineers do?’ the spectrum of engineering activity has been described. While assessing the quantitative dose in various engineering disciplines, the author puts ‘Materials Engineering’ at the bottom, which is now a matter of past. The book and its companion, Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences by Galileo, 1638 are intended to provide the working engineer a visit home to foundations of the engineering profession. The companion book is available as free e-book at the website: Rigid body mechanics (2nd Chapter) introduces topics like statics, trusses, friction, kinetics including vibration. Dimensional analysis is covered and a detailed analysis in pendulum problem is illustrated. Further, the author ventures on deformable body mechanics and problems involving strength of members, stability of structures and impact have been considered. Fluid Mechanics (Chapter 5) apart from describing fluid properties includes topics like pipe flow, hydrodynamic lubrication and capillary flow concepts. The complexity of lift and drag of air foils and other bodies are considered although in qualitative terms. One of the most important use of dimensional analysis lies in the design of engineering models and the interpretation of their performance. In the Chapter entitled ‘Similitude’, the author has taken examples from hydrodynamic bearings, wind tunnel, towing tank, soil bin, hydraulic machinery and structural models. He has rightly pointed out the significance of physical simulation too. The Chapters entitled Materials Science (Chapter 8) and Engineering materials (Chapter 9) can be grouped in one category, where all groups of materials are briefly described. In the Chapter ‘Electrical engineering’ (Chapter 10), the historical background has been extended to electronics and electromagnetic waves. A brief account of heat, work and temperature is given in Chapter 11 (Thermal Engineering) including the Laws of Thermodynamics. Steam power plants and I.C. Engines has been posed as case studies. The Chapter on Engineering Design (Chapter 12) includes topics covering creativity and some real design examples like wind power generation, mechanical fuse, highway crash barrier, high speed grinding wheel designs, and the speed wand. Apart from these, the book includes topics like engineering economics, statistics. The book ends with the Chapter ‘Computers in Engineering’. Each chapter of the book ends with a series of problems both objective and numerical types. The answers of the problems are given at the end of the book. The author has rightly suggested that the book is not a core text book, but can be used in elective courses in engineering. The book is a valuable reading for the students of materials science and engineering, who must be keen to widen their horizon in engineering per say, while keeping in view the historical development into sight.