Salt lakes in northwest China have rich lithium reserves. However, because of their high Mg/Li ratios, lithium recovery is very difficult. In this work, lithium was recovered from Qarhan salt lake using counter-current extraction. The Li+ ions were extracted using tributyl phosphate (TBP) in methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) as the extractant and FeCl3 as the coextractant. The process involved four sections: extraction, washing, stripping and regeneration. The optimal conditions for each section were first determined based on equilibrium data. Then the process was conducted in a 10-stage mixer–settler with LiCl/NaCl as the washing agent, HCl/NaCl as the stripping agent, and NaOH/NaCl as the regenerating agent. The operation was stable over 14cycles. The overall recovery of lithium was higher than 98% and the Mg/Li molar ratio changed from 94.8 in salt lake brine to 0.03 in the stripping solution. The results show that solvent extraction is a highly effective method for lithium recovery from salt lake brines with high Mg/Li ratios.Lithium has important applications in lithium-ion batteries. The development of electrical vehicles and portable electrical devices has led to a significant increase in lithium consumption in recent years ( The research on lithium recovery has focused on solvent extraction ( The effect of MIBK is to avoid formation of a third phase by increasing the solubility of extracted complex ( In this study, TBP/FeCl  The brine from Qarhan salt lake was first concentrated by solar evaporation, during which most sodium and potassium were crystallized. After liquid-solid separation the aqueous phase was further concentrated by solar evaporation and the lake brine rich in lithium was obtained. The brine composition and physical properties of the extraction system are presented in The regenerated organic phase was prepared using a previously reported method ( Extraction efficiency of Li The equilibrium line was obtained as follows. Salt lake brine was extracted with the regenerated organic phase at various A 10-stage laboratory mixer–settler unit (MSU-0.5, MEAB Metallextraktion AB) was used to recover lithium from the salt lake brine using TBP/FeCl The cation concentrations in the aqueous samples were determined using optical atomic absorption spectrometry (Z-5000-AAS, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan). The anion concentrations in the aqueous samples were determined using ion chromatography (ICS-1100, Dionex). The cation concentration in the organic phase was determined by washing the organic phase with an equal volume of distilled water to remove all cations, and then the concentrations of Li The effect of the TBP volume concentration on Li In general, washing is performed to remove impurities from the organic phase after extraction. In this study, washing was used to strip Mg However, because H As shown in Hydrochloric acid is commonly used as a stripping agent according to the reaction: However, a high HCl concentration can cause severe equipment corrosion. The HCl concentration can be reduced by using a mixture of HCl and NaCl instead of HCl alone as the stripping agent. The stripping performance of HCl/NaCl is shown in After stripping, almost all metal ions in the organic phase were exchanged with H After regeneration, the organic phase was used to extract salt lake brine at Based on above work, process conditions for Li McCabe-Thiele method was used to determine theoretical stages of extraction section. The overall Li First, the regenerated organic phase was prepared. The mixer–settler was operated for about 180 The extraction efficiency of Li  Previous studies have verified that extraction with regenerated organic phase follows ion-exchanging mechanism which involves exchange of Li After the washing and stripping section, the stripping solution was obtained. The detailed composition is presented in  MIBK is a strongly polar solvent and has an appreciable solubility in water ( Lithium in Qarhan lake in northwest China was recovered using a process involving extraction, washing, stripping, and regeneration. The extraction was performed using TBP as the extractant and MIBK as a diluent; 40% TBP/MIBK achieved the best extraction properties. In the washing section, LiCl + NaCl was used as the washing agent. Compared with HCl This work was supported by the