A geometallurgical framework was developed in three steps using the Malmberget iron ore deposit, northern Sweden, as a case study. It is based on a mineralogical-particle approach which means that the mineralogical information is the main focus. Firstly, the geological model describes quantitatively the variation in modal composition and mineral textures within the ore body. Traditional geological textural descriptions are qualitative and therefore a quantitative method that distinguishes different mineral textures that can be categorised into textural archetypes was developed.
                  The second step of the geometallurgical framework is a particle breakage model which forecasts how ore will break in comminution and which kind of particles will be generated. A simple algorithm was developed to estimate the liberation distribution for the progenies of each textural archetype. The model enables numerical prediction of the liberation spectrum as modal mineralogy varies. The third step includes a process model describing quantitatively how particles with varying particle size and composition behave in each unit process stage. As a whole the geometallurgical framework considers the geological model in terms of modal composition and textural type. The particle breakage model forecasts the liberation distribution of the corresponding feed to the concentration process and the process model returns the metallurgical response in terms of product quality (grade) and efficacy (recovery).Geometallurgy embraces geological and metallurgical information to create spatially-based predictive models (3D) of ore bodies that supply all relevant information for mineral processes ( Geometallurgical programs are needed for better resource management and to lower the risk in the process operation related to geological variations within the ore body. It is a vital part of the profitability of the operation. The mine needs to have the capability to adjust the concentration process and the product qualities to meet the requirements of a changeable global market e.g. by a more effective utilisation of the ore resources or the ability to handle larger volumes of lower grade ore. Today there exist different kinds of geometallurgical models depending on the ore, its quality and the mineral processing circuit (e.g., Most of the geometallurgical programs are established by using certain steps and rely on metallurgical and geometallurgical testing ( Iron mines are big volume operations and the production is driven by throughput. Most iron ore companies produce high volumes of iron ore products with a Fe grade between 62% and 64%. Examples of such production are direct shipping of hematite ores in Australia and Brazil ( In the literature there is very little information on existing geometallurgical programs of iron ores, but a few can be found, e.g. from Kiruna, Sweden ( The problem with using only the chemical components is that it is not always the typically primary reason for the metallurgical response. As chemical components are bonded in minerals we suggest it is more appropriate to use mineralogy for building the metallurgical functions and the geometallurgical domains. However, minerals do not occur independently in the processes they occur in particles which vary in size, shape and composition.  The texture characterisations are typically subjective (e.g. In mineral processing the relationship between the mineral (micro) textures and liberation has been a separate research subject for a long time. Basically the aim has been to forecast the liberation distribution from a two-dimensional picture of an ore. This is generally called This case study aims to find a solution to allow the incorporation of mineral texture information into a particle-based approach ( The final purpose is to deliver a geological model which can offer quantitative rather than descriptive data to be used in a process model. Firstly, the geological model is complemented with textural information. Secondly, it is demonstrated how such a geological model can be linked with a process model capable of forecasting the metallurgical response such as grade and recovery for any given geological unit (sample, block, or domain). Two different ore bodies in Malmberget deposit were selected in this study. Fabian ore body that is proved to be one of the larger ore bodies in the deposit and the Printzsköld ore body that was considered for validating the results of Fabian ore but also to identify the differences of the ore bodies in the deposit. In the first dataset were over 100 mineralogical samples selected for polished thin sections aiming to characterise the mineralogy and the textural properties of the ore. The second dataset consist of the metallurgical samples, sampled from five drill cores of Fabian (Fa) and Printzsköld (Pz) ore body of both massive ore and semi-massive ore, referred as ore type in In an earlier paper of The (metallurgical samples) composite samples were processed and analysed at the LKAB, Malmberget laboratories. They were first crushed to a particle size below 3 The purpose of the processing of the mineral liberation data was to quantitatively track how different kinds of multiphase particles were derived from different GEM-types of different size fractions during processing. For that purpose a particle tracking technique developed by Particle tracking uses mass balanced mineral by size data. Instead of using mineral grades such as those determined by QEMSCAN ( The QEMSCAN analysis identified a total of 16 minerals but to make this match with the mineralogy determined from element to mineral conversion some of the trace minerals were combined with more abundant minerals. This gave a total of five most important minerals (the average value of ore sample; magnetite (55 To mass balance particles they must be grouped somehow and in the particle tracking this is done based on composition. The basic binning stage groups particles for exactly defined binary and ternary combinations. In this study the system of five minerals plus others, (tot. six minerals) and five size fractions the total number of particles after this step, in each stream, end up to be 2166. Some of the particle groups may have very few particles if any. Therefore, the advanced binning is a stage which combines established groups to ensure that each group has enough particles for sound mass balancing of particle groups. The liberation measurement is challenging in very fine (<10 After the previously described stages each process stream will be composed of similar particles classes but they are not in balance. The last step reconciles and mass balances the whole circuit for the given particle classes. This is done by keeping the total solids flow rate of the stream fixed and by minimizing the weighted sum of squares between measured and reconciled mass proportion of the particle classes. The particle tracking has an option for smoothing the data, but this step was not used in this study. The error analysis was done with Monte Carlo simulation which means that based on given standard deviations HSC Chemistry drew a new dataset and solved the particle mass balance. This was done 100 times, and finally the standard deviation for the particle grades and recoveries was calculated. Textures are critical mineralogical characteristics in governing ore behaviour in mineral processes. This is commonly accepted and has been widely known for decades (e.g. The geological definition for The Malmberget iron ore deposit consists of several ore bodies of massive magnetite and hematite ( Massively-textured ore represent the bulk of the Malmberget iron ore bodies. These massive ore a broad variation of mineral-textures can be identified. The magnetite has textural variations mainly in the magnetite grain size, grain shape and association. The texture is mostly granoblastic with distinct triple junctions at the grain boundaries. Coarse grained magnetite occurs as porphyroblasts or as veins in a finer grained matrix of magnetite. Larger magnetite grains can have an elongated shape following the mineral lineation in the host rock. In the western part of the deposit, hematite is the main mineral together with magnetite. Typical metamorphic textures are exsolutions patches of spinel in magnetite or oxidation surfaces of hematite. The magnetite grains show also intergrowth of ilmenite as lamella or rutile needles. As contrast to the massive ore, semi-massive ore surrounds the ore bodies. It abounds in particularly in the eastern part of the Malmberget deposit. It is lower in Fe and higher in SiO The distinct chemical discrepancies of the massive ore and the semi massive ore are important to consider as the ore resource estimation uses traditional 3D block models which solely are based on the chemical analyses of the ore samples. The mass proportion amounts of semi-massive ore that is present in the process is consequently very significant and will not only influence the ore reserve estimation but also contribute to elemental variations in beneficiation. Therefore, a classification between the massive ore and the semi-massive ore can clarify the true distribution of the chemical elements from the valuable and the gangue minerals and give more precise information for defining the boundaries of the ore bodies. Using drill core logging (e.g. macroscopic observations) and optical microscopy an attempt was made to further develop the classification system of the GEM-types which now also will include mineral textures. The classification is based on the mineralogical and textural composition of both the massive and the semi-massive ore ( The textures were described and classified according to magnetite grain size, shape and the main mineral associated with magnetite. For that purposes more than 4500 grains of magnetite and associating minerals were measured using the In The feldspar (Fsp) GEM-type in the semi-massive ore shows the largest variation in textural features. It basically consists of two different materials identified by their colour. Melanocratic magnetite-rich material brecciates the leucocratic feldspar-rich magnetite-poor matrix. The melanocratic parts consist of magnetite, apatite and amphibole veins, bands or patches that locally develop into networks in the leucocratic rock. The mineralogy of the leucocratic rocks consists of a varying proportion of albite, orthoclase, quartz and biotite with minor magnetite ( The grain size of the magnetite in the leucocratic parts are smaller in the samples for all texture types than in the melanocratic parts as shown in The Bt-(Amph-Ap) GEM-type is structurally controlled and is located in the footwall of the massive ore. Texturally, the Bt-(Amph-Ap) GEM-type is unique showing a schistose appearance due to the orientation of biotite. Tabular biotite grains, mainly (10–400 The Py bearing Amph-(Ap-Bt) GEM-type contains a significant amount of sulphides. Single euhedral grains of pyrite and chalcopyrite are in general 5–200 Two different GEM-types exist in the massive ore: Amph-(Ap-Bt) and Ap-(Amph). The Amph-(Ap-Bt) type shows wide variation in the amphibole (-pyroxene) grain sizes and grain shapes, and two end members can be identified. The coarser grained variant consists of large recrystallised amphibole (-pyroxene) grains occurring as a cluster (0.8–3.2 The classification visualise that the combinations of the different mineral textures are unique for almost each GEM-type, but they do have in common that each of them has both a fine and a coarse grained variant ( The textural study shows that when the mineral textures are considered the modal GEM-types divide into numerous types, and the closer one looks the more complicated and numerous the classes become ( In mineral processing, ore is comminuted to liberate ore from gangue minerals and to make the particle size suitable for downstream processes. Comminution is an energy intensive stage, and therefore a good balance is needed between mineral liberation and throughput. Full liberation is not a feasible target since besides high energy required the separation efficiency of downstream processes tends to decrease towards very fine particle sizes (<20 In comminution, the ore is broken into particles using multiple stages of size reduction, such as blasting, crushing and grinding combined with classification processes such as screening and hydrocycloning. The behaviour of an ore during comminution is dependent on machine parameters, such as nature and magnitude of the applied comminution energy (unit operation properties and operational parameters), and on the material’s physical properties, such as elasticity, hardness and strength. These together will define in a given process the relationship between specific energy (energy/mass) and overall size distribution of the material. The term grindability describes this, and it is the Comminution circuits are designed and operated to provide a targeted product size, and almost without exception this figure is fixed or changed very seldom ( The liberation distribution of a comminuted ore is dependent not only on (1) nature and magnitude of applied comminution specific energy and (2) type of comminution equipment (3) crushability and grindability, but also on (4) modal mineralogy and (5) mineral textures. The first factor is independent of material. The four other factors cannot be separated fully from each other since the physical properties controlling the comminution behaviour are highly dependent on modal mineralogy and mineral texture ( How does one recognize respective effects of the modal mineralogy and texture on the liberation distribution? Firstly, the mineral grain size is basically a pure textural property, but as shown above the magnetite grain size has a positive correlation with the magnetite grade ( This is an effort to separate the comminution properties and the modal mineralogy from the textural properties as well as establish a way to do the textural classification. By using the liberation distribution of the different GEM-types an attempt was made to quantify the mineral textures using samples including different textural types ( The degree of liberation of magnetite decreases in all samples as particle size increases ( In order to compare the liberation distribution of five different samples, a characteristic size fraction, 150–300 The comparison of mineral association for non-liberated particles is challenging. If just comparing the mass proportion of magnetite with, for example, albite the value is affected by the magnetite liberation and the albite grade. If the liberation degree is high, the association of magnetite with albite must be low, and similarly if the albite grade is low the mass proportion of the binary magnetite-albite grains will also be low. Therefore, a new “Association Index” (AI) was developed. It aims to describe how common it is to find the target mineral associated with the other minerals regardless of the liberation degree and the modal composition. The association index for each mineral pair is calculated using the following formula: Hypothetical examples of the calculations of the association index are given in The association indices of magnetite with feldspars (albite Because the association index is calculated for particulate material, it carries information on both the mineral textures (grain size, shape, associating mineral) and the ore breakage. This is clearly illustrated in The decoupling of the texture and breakage is not possible with the association index. Some more information is needed, and therefore the association index values are compared to the textural description of original uncrushed ore samples. The Fsp GEM-type consists of leucocratic and melanocratic parts and the magnetite and amphibole content is higher in the latter and feldspar grade is higher in the former. Association index values for magnetite with feldspar (AI Coming to the definition of texture, the Fsp GEM-types of Fabian and Printzsköld can represent similar textures since the liberation degree of magnetite and association indexes do not differ from each other strongly. The Fabian Amph and Ap GEM-types are also potentially similar in texture, and the Printzsköld Ap GEM-type is a textural type of its own. The question remains how small or big the difference between the liberation distributions and the related key figures used here (degree of liberation and association index) should be to justify saying that two samples are similar or different in their textures In addition how this information will be gathered and used in a geometallurgical context. To extend the modal compensation also into liberation degree, the calculation algorithms of the particle tracking technique were applied (  The particle population for a given sample is calculated by taking the particle population of the corresponding archetype. This is now iteratively adjusted, and for the adjustment, a correction factor, k, is calculated for each mineral (i) in a size fraction before each iteration round:  Basically the formula above is a ratio of mineral grade from the geological model (M(i)) and the mineral grade back calculated from the liberation data of the archetype (denominator). p refers to mass proportion of particle in a size class and x(i) is the mass proportion of mineral in a particle. The mass proportion of particle j (p  Using equations given above, the particle mass proportion is iteratively adjusted until the difference between mineral grades of the geological model and archetype has reached the required tolerance defined case by case. The results of the magnetite deportment of one pair Fa and Pz Fsp GEM-types are given in  The process model takes the information of the geological model and transfers it to forecast on the metallurgical performance. When developing a metallurgical model, one needs to answer questions, such as: (1) what is the purpose of the model? (2) What is the level of the complexity of how material (ore) is described? (3) And how detailed is the information that the model can provide on a metallurgical performance? Typically in the processing plants this would include information like throughput, concentrate quality, recovery of the commodities and the tailing quality. In the case of Malmberget, the metallurgical parameters considered by the process model are: Throughput, recovery of iron and concentrate grade in terms of iron, phosphorous and silica. The tailing quality is not a limiting factor in Malmberget, and there is no need to include that in the model.  The un-sized level uses minerals on an un-sized basis, which means that there is no information on the particle sizes available. The sized level uses the mineral by size for the material description and for the process models. This enables including particle size and the metallurgical functions can be size dependent. The liberation level uses liberation information. Therefore, the process must describe the behaviour of particles by their composition and size. The level of processing details means how detailed the process is described in terms of unit operations and operational parameters. In the lowest level, one black box represents the whole process and no operational parameters are included. In the other end of the complexity lies a model where all unit operations are described and all effective operational parameters are included. In this study the feasibility of the mineralogical approach is tested using a simple process: the one stage dry magnetic separation (cobbing) test for the Fsp GEM-type of Fa and Pz ore. The process model is developed here includes all three levels. To reach the sized level, the calculated modal mineralogy needs to be mass balanced on a size fraction level. The readers are referred to The comminution unit models (grinding mills, crushers), is it possible to use the particle breakage model. Therefore, in the model the forecasting of the liberation distribution and the total size distribution can be decoupled. In the latter the traditional populations balance breakage models can be used ( The particle breakage model gives the liberation distribution of a sample when the information on corresponding textural archetype and modal composition is given ( For the Malmberget concentration process, the first unit model was developed for the dry magnetic separation stage, e.g. cobbing. Studying the behaviour of the minerals by particle size it can be seen that for magnetite the recovery is quite constant between 92 to 96% in particle size range from <38 Entering into the liberation level, it is obvious that magnetite rich particles enter into the magnetic concentrate, whereas particles rich in gangue minerals are found in the tailing (  For the simulation of the magnetic separation the split values, which is the distribution value for each liberated mineral, given in Three cases were simulated ( As the process model is based on the particle properties, the model can be used more widely than traditional unit models which need to be calibrated if there is a change in size distribution, modal mineralogy or liberation. This is the first effort to develop a geometallurgical framework relying on two important mineralogical characteristics: modal composition ( To get the full benefit, the geometallurgical model should be established already in a feasibility stage. For ore deposits in production, like Malmberget, the geometallurgical model can potentially be used to recognise the process limitations and re-evaluate the mining plan. It facilitates also the possibility to make realistic process predictions which potentially improve the performance by giving on daily basis useful and achievable production targets. To use modal mineralogy in geometallurgical classification for some weathered iron ores and bauxite ore has shown to be useful before ( The quantification and usage of mineral textures is still a challenge and so far quite undeveloped and qualitative. There are some new methods to produce the mineralogical and textural data, rapidly and inexpensively ( However, these tested textural archetypes do not answer how to recognise whether two samples are texturally different and if a new item in the textural archetype library should be added. Here, the comparison and identification was based on the degree of liberation by size and the association index (AI). Another question for textural archetypes is how large the variation in the modal mineralogy one textural archetype can cover and whether each separate iron ore deposit needs textural archetypes of its own (e.g. variation in grain size). This will require more experimental work to be conducted and also use several different ore deposits to be tested. The developed metallurgical framework adopted here relies on assumption that similar particles, in terms of composition and size, will behave similarly regardless where they coming within the ore. Instead of extensive variability testing only few samples were tested and the behaviour of different particles was studied in details. Once being capable to forecast the behaviour of individual particles accurately in the process the challenge is shifted to be able to forecast what kind of particles are generated when an ore is comminuted. An approach which uses textural archetypes and simple compensation algorithm to correct the effect of mineral grades was developed. The results from the tests of this approach show error level below 5% which fulfils the criteria for technical sampling and estimations ( In this paper a geometallurgical framework using the Malmberget iron ore deposit as a case study was developed. The results of this work provided an indication of the potential of using modal mineralogy and mineral texture to forecast the product grade and recovery. A classification scheme was established to identify the mineral textures that are present in the ore and is used to verify the accurateness of the developed textural archetypes. Two different textural archetypes are defined in terms of the degree of liberation by size and the association index (AI). This developed technique describes and distinguishes quantitatively different mineral textures by processing the liberation data of the included particles without the influence of the modal mineralogy to be used in a geological model. Based on the modal composition and the mineral textures, three different geometallurgical ore types (GEM-type) were established for the Malmberget ore body. Each of these GEM-types describes quantitatively: the present mineral and its chemical composition, rules how to calculate the modal composition from routine chemical assays ( Finally, the geometallurgical framework and the geological model were tested comparing the forecasted metallurgical key figures against the ones received by metallurgical test. The difference in terms of product quality (Fe, Si and P grade) and in iron recovery were reasonable small validating the developed methodology. This project is financial supported by the