The filtration kinetics and the cake properties of the alumina leach slurry were investigated. Four kinds of alumina leach slurry were prepared by the hydro-chemical process to treat the bauxite, the Bayer process, the Bayer process with less lime, and the hydro-chemical process to treat the Bayer red mud. The filtration kinetics was regressed by filtration test method at constant pressure. The diversity of the solid-liquid separation behaviors indicates that the digestion conditions play an important role in the filtration process. The composition and phase, the size distribution, the shape and the surface properties of the solid particles as well as the viscosity of filtrate were measured, and their effects on the filtration resistance and the cake compressibility were confirmed. Results indicate that the fine size and the broad size distribution of the particles lead to a high cake resistance. And the substances containing Fe or Ti exhibit a noticeable influence on the cake characteristics. Methods of filtration optimization through changing digestion conditions were recommended.Solid-liquid separation is essential for many processes. In alumina plant, it's of great value to improve the separation of the red mud and the sodium aluminate liquor from the leach slurry. The separation performance strongly depends on the particle properties such as the size distribution, the shape as well as the properties of liquor, which are mainly determined by the conditions of the previous digestion process ( In China, the bauxite resources are nearly all of the diaspore type, and the majority is with low A/S (the weight ratio of Al In the alkaline processes for alumina above, the filtration of leach slurry is used to be considered as the major bottleneck, which limits the productivity of alumina. The primary feature of the hydro-chemical process is the adoption of high caustic concentration (Na The size and the shape of the particles have critical influences on the filtration behaviors, especially the cake resistance and the cake compressibility, and the relevant influence during filtration has been extensively investigated ( The properties of particles and liquors are essentially determined by the digestion conditions. Therefore, the digestion process should be firstly studied to clarify these properties. Though many studies about the bauxite digestion have been conducted, how the digestion condition affecting the filtration behaviors is rarely reported. In practice, the digestion process includes the desilication and the transformation of the iron-bearing minerals, which was proposed to be a dissolution-reprecipitation mechanism ( Efforts for enhancing the filtration capacity are focused on the chemical agents to alter the surface characteristic of the red mud or the slurry rheology, the optimization and improvement of the filter equipment or the filtration media, and the design of process to improve the separation efficiency ( Simplified as the viscous liquid fluid through a porous medium, the cake filtration is described by the Darcy's law with two assumptions that the flow velocity is slow and the particles and the bed are incompressible ( When the filtration pressure is kept constant, the filtration is expressed by the Ruth's filtration equation ( All the parameters could be determined by experiment, except that the As for the situation affected by the filter pressure, the In Eq. The cake specific resistance Based on the capillary model, the permeability of a cake is described by the Kozeny-Carman equation ( The Substituting Eq. Eq. The diasporic bauxite and the Bayer red mud were provided by Coalmine Alumina Co., Henan Province, China. And the chemical compositions and XRD analysis are shown in Leaching of the bauxite or the red mud with caustic solution was carried out in a 2 L stirred autoclave. The reactor is made of 316L stainless steel, and the inner lining is made from the nickel material. The caustic solutions were prepared at a certain caustic ratio, and then introduced into the nickel lining. The amount of the bauxite or the red mud was thereafter added to the liquor. In the Bayer process with less lime, the additive amount of lime was no more than 3% of the bauxite mass, and was 10% for the Bayer process. As for the hydro-chemical process to treat the Bayer red mud, the lime dosage was decided according to the final ratio of CaO to SiO Filtration test was conducted with a pressure filtration device, which has a heating jacket to ensure the constant temperature of slurry during filtration. And the apparatus is shown in Dynamic viscosity of the filtrate was measured with a rotary viscometer (SNB-1, Shanghai Fangrui Instrument Co. Ltd, China) at 60– The chemical components in solid samples were determined by X-Ray Fluorescence (ARL9800X, Thermofisher, USA). Phases of residues were identified by an X-Ray diffraction meter (X'pert Pro MPD, PanAnalytical, Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation. Particle size and its distribution were measured with a laser particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malven, UK). Brunauer-Emmett-Teller specific surface area was tested using a physical adsorption instrument (Autosorb-iQ-MP, Quantachrome, USA). And SEM/EDX analysis was examined using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (JSM-7001F, JEOL, Japan) equipped with an EDX detector (Inca X-MAX, Oxford, UK). The digestion conditions of bauxite and red mud are shown in The chemical compositions of the residues were determined by XRF and listed in Cake filtration experiments were performed to investigate the filtration behaviors of the leach slurries at 105 The slope of the curve is indicative of the filtration rate. Larger slope means a faster filtration rate. It is thus shown that the filtration rates vary distinctly in the studied range of pressure. With the increase of the thickness of the cake and the volume of the filtrate, the cake specific resistance increased, and the slopes of the curves decreased with the filtration time. On the other hand, the filtration pressure shows a complicated impact on the filtration velocity.  As the slurry B was taken from the diluting tank, the viscosity of the filtrate ( The average specific cake resistance was calculated through the regression of the t/q vs. q curves ( Based on Eq. The compressibility factors of cake H-B, BL, B and H-BM are accordingly 0.52, 0.46, 0.37 and 0.38. And the compressibility factor of cake H-B is the highest, which means the rapid increase of the average specific cake resistance over the pressure. This observation is accordant with The difference in the cake characteristics of the varied slurries confirms the effect of digestion conditions on the filtration behaviors. The average specific resistance of cake B is roughly 3.5 times of BL at 0.1  According to the filtration theory, the finer particles cause the larger specific surface area, and increase the cake resistance. Experimental results show that the order of the BET surface area of the residue H-B, BL and B is contrary to the order of D XRD patterns of residues are exhibited in Main particles in residue H-B appear as polyhedral shape with smooth and flat surface, as shown in The particles obtained from the Bayer process with less lime presented a cubic shape with rough surface and structural flaws, as shown in The particles in residue B exhibit irregular shape, as shown in The particles obtained by the hydro-chemical process to treat the Bayer red mud have a stick shape with rough surface, as shown in Based on the aforementioned analysis, the cake resistance and the compressibility are closely associated with the phase and the morphology of particles, which determine the surface charge and the surface area of solids. In order to decrease the colloidal effect and reduce the surface area of residues, the digestion conditions should be appropriately optimized, such as using some additive to convert the hematite or TiO The dynamic viscosity of the filtrate was measured at a series of temperatures. According to the Arrhenius-type relationship ( The viscosity is affected by the concentrations of Na On one hand, the distinction in the viscosity of the filtrate is essentially caused by the variation of the digestion. On the other hand, the temperature can't be endlessly elevated to improve the filtration due to the limited impact of the temperature on the viscosity and the restriction of the filtrate vapor pressure. Thus, it is preferable to regulate the concentrations of SiO Filtration behaviors of the typical leach slurries in the alkaline processes for alumina were investigated for the first time, including the hydro-chemical process to treat the bauxite, the Bayer process with less lime, the hydro-chemical process to treat the Bayer red mud, and the Bayer process. Although the hydro-chemical process to treat the bauxite exhibits the highest efficiency for recovering alumina, the separation of the leach slurry from the hydro-chemical process to treat the bauxite is the most difficult to separate, for which its cake specific resistance is as high as 2.76 The solid-liquid properties of the leach slurries are characterized, and those influences on filtration are investigated. The diversity of the leach slurries in the phase, the shape, the size, the surface area as well as the filtrate viscosity gives rise to the difference in the filtration resistance and the cake compressibility. In particular, the cake resistance is closely related with the size and the shape of particles, and the cake compressibility is affected more by the size and the solid phase, especially the solids with colloidal properties. To control the phase and the morphology of the particles as well as the concentration in liquors, it is worth trying to adjust digestion conditions appropriately which can essentially enhance the filtration efficiency of the alumina leach slurry.  filtration area (m solids concentration in the slurry (kg·m diameter of equivalent sphere (m) cake permeability (m Kozeney constant (−) mass ratio of the wet and dry cake (kg·kg cake compressibility coefficient (−) reference pressure (Pa) filtrate volume per unit filter area (m filtration resistance (m cake resistance (m medium resistance (m specific surface area per unit volume (m filtration time (h) filtrate volume (m mass fraction of solids in the slurry (kg·kg cake specific resistance (m·kg average cake specific resistance (m·kg cake porosity (−) dynamic viscosity of filtrate (Pa·s) sphericity of particle (−) filtration pressure (Pa) filtrate density (kg·m filtrate density (kg·m The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by the