It is well known that the mechanical material properties of a material sample after solidification are strongly tied to its microstructure structure. Nevertheless, the precise laws governing the initial stage of this structuring process, i.e. nucleation and the scenario of the successive transiental microstructure evolution, are still far from being fully understood.
                  Here we will show that the phase-field method, which originally established itself to tackle the free boundary problem given by microstructure evolution, can also be employed to investigate the energetics of heterogeneous nucleation in a solidifying sample. Moreover it is demonstrated at the example of a generalized phase-field crystal model recently derived by the authors [R. Prieler, B. Verleye, R. Haberkern, D. Li, H. Emmerich, J. Phys. Condens. Matter, accepted for publication], how the phase-field crystal method can shade more light in open questions regarding a quantitative formulation of nucleation statistics to thereby simulate the phase transition phenomena in solidification from nucleation to crystallization in larger domains thoroughly.
                  The aim of this contribution is to give an overview how both methods allow to study jointly nucleation from the atomic to the microscale.The application of continuum methods as phase-field and phase-field crystal modeling to nucleation as phenomenon at the nano-scale is justified if one takes into account the great success of continuum approaches in nano-fluidics as proven by vast comparison to experiments. Phase-field modeling, as the older of the two approaches, has become an accepted model approach for studying the dynamics of systems out of equilibrium over the past decades. In particular it has found numerous applications in materials science A functional of form The aim of this contribution is to give an overview how both methods allow to study jointly nucleation from the atomic to the microscale. To do so we will proceed as follows: we will first in The starting point for a free energy functional for heterogenous nucleation needs to be a multiphase model. In the following this is based on a free-energy functional of the form: We use three phase fields Their dynamics are derived from the free energy functional The concentration field is given by To study nucleation energetics based on such a phase-field model approach it is important to realize that a nucleation event arises as a critical fluctuation, which is a non-trivial time-independent solution of the governing equations we can derive from the underlying free energy functional. Our derivation follows the standard variational procedure of the phase-field theory (for a review see e.g. In As an example the unconstrained growth of a nucleus made up of ellipsoidal colloids in the volume phase is depicted in We applied it to the heterogenous nucleation of ellipsoids at a wall. This accounts to the case, where heterogenous nucleation comes along with partial wetting of the surface. A still different nucleation mechanism which is not discussed in the following and has not yet been studied by us with this method, is based on complete wetting. Details on this mechanism can be found in The realization of capillar forces as described above results in smaller contact angles. Moreover, the contact angle values for different orientations have smaller fluctuations from a mean value than without realization of capillar forces. The larger the interaction strength, the smaller the contact angle. An interaction potential realizing adhesive as well as capillar forces results in contact angles that lose their obvious dependence on the orientation of the ellipsoids with respect to the wall, which is obvious for the ’hard wall’ interaction. At this point our APFC model still does not include a notion of surface energies, thus it does neither allow a comparison respectively a validation with important experimentally accessible mesoscopic parameters, nor does it allow to make use of important continuum model concepts already developed in the field (see e.g. This work was supported by the