Spontaneous combustion is an inherent problem to the coal mining industry. The paper describes an electro-chemical method called wet oxidation potential technique for determining the susceptibility of coal to spontaneous combustion. Altogether 78 coal samples collected from thirteen mining companies spreading over most of the Indian Coalfields have been used for this experimental investigation and 936 experiments have been carried out by varying different experimental conditions to standardize wet oxidation potential method for wider application. The results of wet oxidation potential (WOP) method have been correlated with the intrinsic properties of coal by carrying out proximate, ultimate and petrographic analyses of the coal samples. Experimental results are first analyzed with principal components analysis and then by multiple regression analysis. Results obtained from this method have been compared with one of the widely used method, i.e. crossing point temperature (CPT) in India. The experimental investigation clearly indicates that WOP method with 0.2N KMnO4 in 1N KOH solution at 45°C (susceptibility index PD12) should be used for finding out the susceptibility of coal to spontaneous combustion. PD12 results are well corroborated with CPT results.Spontaneous combustion leading to fire is a recurrent danger in coal mining industry of the world. The oxidation of coal causing spontaneous combustion is an exothermic reaction. Heat produced by this reaction, if not properly diluted, accelerates and speeds up the reaction. Finally, it automatically leads to spontaneous combustion of coal. Coal is a complex organic matter and its exact chemical formulae are not yet known. Therefore, the exact mechanism of these reactions has not been fully understood by the researchers ( Internationally, it has been established that spontaneous combustion leading to fire in a coal mine depends both on intrinsic and extrinsic parameters. The intrinsic parameters are mainly associated with the nature of the coal, i.e. its physico-chemical characteristics, petrographic analysis and mineral matter content. Extrinsic parameters are mainly site specific and are related to geological, mining methods and environmental conditions prevailing during extraction of coal. It may be mentioned here that all the experimental methods for finding out the liability of coal to spontaneous combustion mainly depend on the intrinsic properties of coal ( Therefore, in this paper an attempt has been made to collect 78 coal samples from different Indian Coalfields and to carry out extensive experimental investigations for determining the susceptibility of coal to spontaneous combustion by the existing CPT method and the wet oxidation potential method. In addition, intrinsic properties of the coal samples which govern the susceptibility of coal to spontaneous combustion have also been determined for all the samples by using proximate, ultimate and petrographic analyses. It may be mentioned here that altogether 936 experiments have been carried out by varying different experimental conditions of wet oxidation potential method which will help to standardize this method for wider application. The results of the wet oxidation potential method have been correlated with the intrinsic properties of coal. Further, the results of the method have been correlated with the CPT which is widely used in India for finding out susceptibility of coal towards spontaneous heating. Authors have collected 78 coal samples from thirteen different mining companies of India. These are Eastern Coalfields Ltd. (ECL), Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL), Central Coalfields Ltd. (CCL), Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. (MCL), Northern Coalfields Ltd. (NCL), South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. (SECL), Western Coalfields Ltd. (WCL), North Eastern Coalfields (NEC), Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL), IISCO Steel Plant (ISP) SAIL, Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd., Neyveli Lignite Corporation (NLC), and Tata Steel Ltd. The Indian coal resource is integrated mainly in two different stratigraphic horizons and geological set-up. The Permian coal of Lower Gondwana basins with intracratonic setting comprises more than 99% of the country resource. The Permian coal basins occur as failed rift barriers and pull-apart extensional basins. The early tertiary coal and lignite found in near shore basins and continental shelf with precratonic set-up account for less than 1% coal resource. The early tertiary is the major period of Cenozoic for coal and lignite formation. The coal and lignite originated in estuarine, lagoonal and deltaic environmental settings. The coal samples were collected from different mines following channel sampling procedure ( This method is an electro-chemical analysis with the aim of knowing the susceptibility of coal to spontaneous heating. Wet oxidation potential analysis was carried out with potassium permanganate (KMnO In total, 936 experiments were carried out for wet oxidation potential analysis. 100 PD at 0.05 PD at 0.05 PD at 0.05 PD at 0.1 PD at 0.1 PD at 0.1 PD at 0.15 PD at 0.15 PD at 0.15 PD at 0.2 PD at 0.2 PD at 0.2 Repeatability of experimental results was verified with three coal samples, carrying out 5 experiments each for a sample. Sample No. 13 (Kumardhubi Colliery, Singhpur top seam, ECL) with 0.2 Earlier, researchers ( Principal components analysis (PCA) was performed with data obtained from proximate, ultimate and petrographic analyses and PD (  Thus it reveals that independent variables like moisture, volatile matter yield (daf basis), hydrogen and oxygen on daf bases and dependent variable like susceptibility index (PD) are close to each other and it indicates that they are significantly and positively correlated. On the other hand, variable like carbon on daf basis is located on the opposite side of PD therefore they are negatively correlated. Variables like ash yield, fixed carbon, vitrinite, inertinite, and liptinite are orthogonal. Therefore, there exists no correlation between them. Multiple linear regression analysis was performed with Design Expert 7.0.0 software. Physical and chemical characteristics of coal, specifically moisture, volatile matter yield (daf basis), and carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen on daf bases were considered as input parameters and susceptibility indices PD1, PD2, PD3, PD4, PD5, PD6, PD7, PD8, PD9, PD10, PD11 and PD12 were taken as output parameter one at a time. Response surface method was used for this analysis. Backward elimination was used as the regression variable selection technique in this study. Each time the model equation along with ‘R-Squared’ and ‘Adjusted R-Squared’ values and standard deviation (SD) is obtained. Thus 12 numbers of model equations are attained. ‘R-Squared’ value of these model equations obtained from linear regression analysis ranges from 0.3677 to 0.7033 and SD ranges from 21.74 to 26.47. Therefore by using multiple regression analysis of the experimental data it may be concluded that the susceptibility index, PD12, should be chosen for wet oxidation potential method that means 0.2 To verify the results of wet oxidation potential method the best possible susceptibility index PD12 is correlated with CPT. It has been observed that as crossing point temperature increases potential difference (PD12) decreases. Correlation coefficient between these two parameters is found to be 0.69 ( The following conclusions are drawn from the present investigations: 78 coal samples are taken covering major parts of the country including fiery and non-fiery seams belonging to Permian, Eocene, Oligocene and Miocene age. These samples consist of sub-bituminous, lignite, high sulfur, non-coking, semi-coking and prime coking coal. The whole purpose was to standardize wet oxidation potential methods with a variety of coals. It has been revealed from the PCA analysis results that intrinsic properties of coal, specifically moisture, volatile matter yield, and hydrogen and oxygen are positively correlated with susceptibility index and PD, and carbon is negatively correlated with PD. Further, ash yield, fixed carbon, and vitrinite, inertinite and liptinite on mineral matter free basis have no correlation with PD. Multiple regression analysis reveals that susceptibility index PD12 should be chosen for wet oxidation potential method that means 0.2 PD12 of all the coal samples is correlated with crossing point temperature, a thermal analysis method, which is widely used in India. It has been observed that wet oxidation potential results are well corroborated with CPT. Authors are indebted to Dr. C. Özgen Karacan, Editor, International Journal of Coal Geology for his valuable suggestions and help in PCA to improve the quality of the paper. They are also thankful to Dr. A. K. Raina, Principal Scientist, CSIR-CIMFR, Regional Centre Nagpur, India for the help in the preparation of KML file. The following KML file contains the Google map of the most important areas described in this article. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version, at