In metal extraction processes, such as reduction or smelting, a source of energy is required for the endothermic reactions. This energy is often supplied by the combustion of carbonaceous materials or hydrocarbons or by inputting some electrical energy. Typically, large-scale reactors are used and the energy is transported to the reacting materials from the heat source via convective, conductive and radiative processes. Additionally, considerable heat is transferred to the containment vessel, the surroundings and the off-gases and this energy is difficult to recover. On the other hand, microwave heating systems can be designed such that only the material to be processed absorbs the microwaves, since microwave radiation is deposited directly in the material to be heated. Other potential advantages of microwave processing include; high energy densities, selective heating, improved control, environmental benefits and minimal off-gas generation. In the present research, the utilization of microwaves as an energy source in metal extraction and, in particular the pyrometallurgical processing of oxide ores, is reviewed.Microwave radiation is a relatively new energy source, which has considerable potential for various applications in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy, specifically hydrometallurgy and pyrometallurgy. The research activity in these areas has been growing significantly as evidenced by the exponential growth in publications, as shown in The energy is transported from the microwave source to the interior of the material in the form of microwaves, which are converted into thermal energy only in the interior of the material. There is very little heat deposited in or lost to the surroundings. In many cases, the temperature of the interior of the material to be heated is much higher than the surface. Thus, for materials such as oxides, where the poor thermal conductivity limits conventional heat transfer from the outside to the inside, significant improvements in heat transfer can be attained. Also, this inverted temperature gradient minimizes the temperature of the refractory container or crucible. The energy densities in microwave systems can be relatively high and this in combination with the low thermal conductivities of oxides and minimal heat absorption by the surroundings can lead to very high internal heating rates. The electrical energy source can be relatively clean and is easily controlled. Continuous processing is facilitated. Since there is no combustion of carbonaceous or hydrocarbon fuels, then the only gases generated are those produced as a result of the intended reactions. This minimizes the amount of off-gas and also the amount of entrained dust particles. The working conditions in microwave processes would be expected to be far superior to those in conventional processes. The thermal energy is generated on the atomic or molecular level and thus both endothermic and exothermic reactions can be promoted. In special cases, some degree of selective heating can be attained but this is restricted by heat conduction, which limits temperature gradients. On the other hand, there are a number of issues to be addressed in microwave processing and these can be summarized as follows: The initial capital investment cost is higher than conventional processing. The maximum microwave power is limited to about 100 The operational costs are dependent on the lifetime of the magnetron (the usual heat source) but significant improvements are being made. Uneven heating can lead to thermal runaway and hot spots. The efficiency of conversion of the electricity to microwaves is between 65% and 90% (depending on the system design and frequency selection), so energy is lost as heat in the microwave source. The technology is relatively complex in comparison to other heating techniques. Electrical energy can be an expensive in contrast to hydrocarbons or carbonaceous materials. In the present paper, the research, which has been conducted at Queen’s University over about the last decade, on the application of microwaves to mainly pyrometallurgical processing of oxide ores, is reviewed. These processes are as follows: drying, calcination and sintering, reduction and smelting, heating and reduction of slag, the segregation process, and the processing of electric arc furnace dust and gold-bearing materials. The removal of water is a major cost factor in the processing of ores and concentrates. Microwaves have been utilized to dry iron oxide pellets ( In microwave drying, the heat is absorbed primarily by the water. Thus, after the moisture near the surface is evaporated by microwave heating, the microwaves penetrate deeper and heat the interior water directly, bypassing the heat transfer or moisture migration processes. In later stages, the temperature gradient can be inverted and the temperature in the interior may be higher than on the surface. This situation can result in transport phenomena, which are completely different than those in conventional drying. This results in significantly higher drying rates during both the constant rate drying period and the decelerating rate period and also the critical moisture contents are increased. These improvements are attributed to three possible mechanisms: (i) reflux condensation, (ii) enhanced capillarity and (iii) microwave pumping. Reflux condensation refers to the simultaneous evaporation and condensation of the water in the sample due to temperature and moisture gradients, which leads to higher mass transfer rates. Higher internal temperatures result in enhanced capillarity since the surface tension of water decreases with increasing temperature. Microwave pumping is due to the formation of gas bubbles, which push liquid to the surface. These bubbles could either be water vapour or air, which comes out of solution. The traditional manganese oxide-containing ores are being depleted and therefore manganese carbonate ores are becoming an increasingly important potential source of manganese oxide. In this regard, the application of microwave energy for the calcination and agglomeration of these ores was investigated ( The differences in the morphological features of the calcines produced in the conventional resistance furnace and the microwave system are shown in The application of microwave energy for the production of ferronickel via the carbothermic reduction and smelting of briquettes of a nickeliferous silicate laterite ore has been investigated ( Slags can contain significant metal values and these metals can represent considerable potential revenue. Most slags are both poor electrical and thermal conductors and are therefore difficult to heat by conventional techniques. Since, in general, the microwave response of a material increases with temperature then it is possible that molten slags could be good microwave absorbers. However, there is very little information in the literature on the microwave heating behaviour of melts of interest in pyrometallurgy. The presence of carbon as a reductant could result in some selective heating and since the slag is molten then susceptor additions could be made to facilitate microwave absorption. In this regard, the heating and reduction of steelmaking slag ( With regards to steelmaking slags it has been shown that they could be rapidly heated and melted in a fireclay crucible, with minimal attack of the crucible (  The segregation process is a complex vapour phase process, in which calcium chloride is usually added as the chloridizing agent and carbon is added as a reductant and fine ferronickel particles are produced. This process has been investigated for the recovery of nickel from nickel oxide-containing ores but has not been commercialized. In almost all of the nickel segregation research performed to-date, the primary source of heat was provided by electrical energy in the form of resistance heating. The utilization of some microwave radiation in the segregation process for nickeliferous silicate laterite ores has been studied ( Nickel recoveries similar to those observed in the conventional segregation process were achieved by developing two different hybrid segregation processes, which combined both the conventional and the microwave heating processes. In the first, the briquetted ore was surrounded by charcoal, which acted as a susceptor, while in the second, the briquette was first microwaved and then heated conventionally. Nickel recoveries approaching 100% could be achieved. Due to the excellent microwave absorption characteristics of the charcoal bed, the power requirements were significantly lower than the values required when only microwaves were employed. The results for the second hybrid heating method are shown in As a result of the remelting of automobile scrap in an electric arc furnace (EAF), about 1–2% of the charge is converted into a dust, which contains valuable amounts of iron and some non-ferrous metals such as zinc and lead. The dust contains numerous species and is physically, chemically and mineralogically complex. In most countries, EAF dust is considered as a hazardous waste and is either recycled for metals recovery or stabilized and landfilled. Although numerous pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical metal recovery processes have been devised, the most successful are variations of the Waelz rotary kiln system, in which the lead and zinc oxides in the dust are reduced using a carbonaceous reductant at high temperatures. In the freeboard of the kiln, the lead and zinc are reoxidized and a crude zinc oxide is produced. The oxide residue contains mainly iron oxide and calcium oxide, but if the price of steel scrap is sufficiently high, then a metallic iron-containing residue can be produced and this can be recycled back to the steelmaking operation. The application of microwaves for the processing of EAF dust has been investigated both at high temperatures ( Additionally, the application of microwaves to the caustic leaching of EAF dust was investigated as an example of a hydrometallurgical process ( Waste activated carbon is produced in plants that recover gold by carbon adsorption technologies. Usually, this carbon contains high levels of gold and the recovery of this gold represents a significant source of revenue. Microwave radiation was investigated as a possible method for combusting this carbon ( Gravity concentration is a common method for recovering gold from ores. This method is efficient if the metal is liberated and has a relatively large particle size. In order to liberate the gold, fine grinding is required and this can lead to overgrinding, slime generation and inefficient recovery. For some ores, liberation can be enhanced by utilizing microwave radiation to induce intergranular and transgranular thermal stress cracking ( The microwave roasting of a double refractory gold ore demonstrated that there are three major reactions involved: oxidation of pyrite, oxidation of the carbonaceous matter and the decomposition of carbonates (  The application of microwaves to a wide range of extractive metallurgy processes for oxide ores, ranging from drying to the segregation process to EAF dust recycling, have been investigated over the last decade. The major advantages of the application of microwaves in extractive metallurgy processes are enhanced kinetics and potentially some enhanced recovery. In pyrometallurgical processes, the microwave radiation can overcome, to some extent, the heat transfer limitations of the oxide ores, which arise mainly from their low thermal conductivities. There can be other specific benefits such as the enhanced transport in drying, as a result of the inverted temperature gradient, and also the low iron content of the crude zinc oxide produced from the EAF dust due to the minimal carry-over of entrained solids in the off-gases. The author would like to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for their support of this research. Also, the contributions of the various co-authors of the papers discussed in this review are gratefully acknowledged. Ron Hutcheon of Microwave Properties North (