Fine hydrophilic particles are known to be entrained with water in flotation of many ores. Flocculation of the hydrophilic particles by polymer depressants could potentially reduce the mechanical entrainment of these particles. This paper reports testwork completed on fine particles of several solids, iron oxide, hydroxyapatite and sphalerite, as well as on a relatively coarse quartz sample (−75+38 μm). Dodecylamine was used as a collector for quartz, and several dispersants and polymer depressants, including sodium silicate, sodium metaphosphate, zinc sulfate, cornstarch, corn dextrin and carboxymethyl celluloses (with molecular weights of both 700,000 and 80,000) were used as flotation modifiers. The major part of the testwork involved flotation tests in a 200 mL flotation column. It was observed that flocculation of the fine hydrophilic particles significantly reduced their mechanical entrainment, while dispersion severely aggravated it. Thus, in the flotation separation of synthetic mixtures of the −75+38 μm quartz and fine (reagent grade) iron oxide or hydroxyapatite, polymer depressants that caused flocculation performed better than those that did not cause flocculation.Mechanical entrainment of hydrophilic minerals is a severe problem in the froth flotation of fine particles. As has been shown by Since mechanical entrainment is proportional to the recovery of water, many studies have been and are being conducted to investigate froth draining behavior with the objective of lowering water recovery into the froths thus lowering mechanical entrainment. This approach has a limit because the froth flotation process relies on the formation of a froth layer on pulp surface. This layer is comprised of gas bubbles stabilized by intervening water films. Therefore the recovery of water into froth product cannot be avoided. The other major factor that contributes to severe mechanical entrainment is the small particle sizes. Large hydrophilic particles have a low tendency to entrain into the froths because they can easily drain from the intervening water films that separate gas bubbles, thanks to their large masses and high inertia. Small particles, on the other hand, cannot overcome the fluid drag and tend to be carried together with water into the froths. Therefore, it is logical to increase the particle sizes of these hydrophilic (gangue) particles in order to reduce their mechanical entrainment into froth products. However, this is not what is being practiced today. In the study of fine particle flotation technologies, attention is focused mainly on the improvement of the floatability of fine hydrophobic mineral particles, either using small gas bubbles/small oil droplets, or increasing the particle sizes of the hydrophobic particles by shear flocculation, oil agglomeration, etc. In these processes the fine hydrophilic (gangue) particles are kept highly dispersed. It is hoped that the flotation rates of the fine hydrophobic particles would be improved by these processes that the retention time would be shortened significantly so that water recovery into the froth thus mechanical entrainment would be minimal. However, the success of some of the industrial fine ore flotation systems, in which polymer depressants are used, is probably at least partly due to a reduction of mechanical entrainment by the polymer depressants. For example, in the well-known Tilden process ( In a similar manner, starches were used as depressants for phosphate minerals in the reverse cationic flotation of quartz gangue from phosphate ores (e.g., In potash ore flotation, sylvite (KCl) is floated with long-chain amines following a de-sliming stage which removes much of the insoluble fine gangue slimes. Any remaining slimes are depressed by polymers such as carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), guar gum and starch in the amine flotation stage ( Polymer depressants, especially CMC and guar gum, have been widely used in the depression of talcose gangue in the flotation of copper and nickel sulfide ores. However, it is not clear if flocculation or dispersion by the polymers plays a significant role in their depressive effects. Understandably, if the flocculation caused by polymer depressants is not selective, or if the flocculation is not performed correctly so that there is severe “entrapment” of different minerals in the flocs, mineral separation would not be possible with the polymer depressants that can also cause flocculation. However, if a polymer depressant not only selectively renders gangue minerals hydrophilic but also selectively flocculates them, it may be a better depressant than the low-molecular weight depressant that cannot cause flocculation. Without enlarging the sizes of fine gangue mineral particles, a depressant may make the gangue particles hydrophilic but still cannot stop them from entering into the froth product (by mechanical entrainment). A research project is currently being conducted jointly by the University of Alberta and COREM to study polymer depressants of high molecular weights with the objective of exploiting their roles in depressing the flotation of hydrophilic minerals through a reduction of both true flotation (hydrophilization) and mechanical entrainment (flocculation). As a proof-of-concept study, this paper reports results on the collectorless flotation on fine particles of iron oxide (hematite), hydroxyapatite and sphalerite, using several organic polymeric depressants and inorganic depressants. The flotation recovery in these cases is related to the flocculation/dispersion behavior caused by the depressants. Test results are also reported on the flotation of synthetic mixtures of fine iron oxide or hydroxyapatite and relatively coarse quartz (− High purity iron oxide (> High purity quartz crystals (> High purity sphalerite originated from Carthage, Tennessee, was also purchased from Ward's Natural Science Ltd. The mineral specimens were crushed and ground similar to quartz sample. The − Dodecylamine was purchased from Sigma Chemicals and was prepared as an acetate salt stock solution with stoichiometric amount of acetic acid and used as a collector for quartz. Cornstarch and corn dextrin (from Sigma Chemicals), carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC, with a degree of substitution of 0.7 and purchased from Polysciences), sodium metaphosphate, sodium silicate and zinc sulfate (from Fisher Scientific) were used as flotation modifiers for the iron oxide, hydroxyapatite and sphalerite. Nitric acid and sodium hydroxide were used to adjust solution pH. Dowfroth 250 was used as a frother in all flotation tests. Stock solutions of the polymer depressants were prepared at a concentration of 1 g/L. Dextrin stock solution was prepared by making a paste of the dextrin powder with cold water, then dissolving the paste with boiling water. Starch was prepared in a similar way except that sodium hydroxide was added to the stock starch solution to a concentration of 0.5 mol/L NaOH to assist in the dissolution of the starch. Stock solution of CMC was prepared by sprinkling it on a stirring vortex of hot water. The stirring was continued until all the CMC powders were dissolved (about 30 min). Flotation tests were conducted in a columnar flotation tube whose base is made of a 4-cm diameter sintered glass disc. The glass disc has a pore size of ∼ Flotation of artificial quartz–iron oxide and quartz–hydroxyapatite mixtures was conducted in the same tube using similar procedures, except that dodecylamine acetate was added after conditioning with a depressant. At the end of flotation, the amount of quartz and iron oxide in the flotation products was determined by separating the quartz from the iron oxide on a 400 mesh (38 μm) screen, while the amount of quartz and hydroxyapatite in the flotation products was determined by dissolving the hydroxyapatite with 1 M nitric acid. Flocculation/dispersion of the iron oxide and hydroxyapaptite was determined by settling tests conducted in a 250-mL graduated cylinder. Five grams of the solid powder were conditioned in a 250-mL beaker at the desired pH for 5 min, followed by the addition of a depressant stock solution and 3 more minutes of gentle stirring. Afterwards, the slurry was transferred to the 250-mL cylinder and distilled water was added to bring the water level to 250 mL. The cylinder was then stoppered, inverted eight times, and then set still in the upright position. The slurry of the upper 200 mL was siphoned out after a pre-determined time of settling, and the contents of solids in both the siphoned 200 mL and the bottom 50 mL were determined. A “degree of flocculation” was calculated as the percentage of solids settled into the bottom 50 mL. Zeta potential measurements were conducted using a ZetaPALS zeta potential analyzer manufactured by Brookhaven Instruments Corporation. In these measurements, all solutions and reagents were prepared with stock solutions of 10  On the other hand, after adding 50 mg/L of cornstarch, the iron oxide almost completely settled to the bottom 50 mL in 2 min between pH 4 and 12, indicating strong flocculation of the iron oxide by the cornstarch. The addition of 50 mg/L of CMC with a molecular weight of 700,000 had the same effect between pH 2 and 10. Above pH 10, the amount of settled solids dropped steeply and was reduced to below 80% at pH 12.   The corresponding collectorless flotation results of the hydroxyapatite are shown in The − The results obtained with the two CMC (of different molecular weights) seemed to support this conclusion. As can be seen, the CMC with the low molecular weight of 80,000 was not a good depressant since sphalerite recovery increased rapidly with water recovery, reaching ∼ Zinc sulfate depressed sphalerite probably by forming zinc hydroxyl species and thus imparting hydrophilicity onto the sphalerite surfaces at pH 10. The fact that its depression effect was similar to cornstarch indicated that the zinc hydroxyl species on the sphalerite surfaces may also cause coagulation of the sphalerite, enlarging its particle sizes and thus reducing its mechanical entrainment. If there is such coagulation by the zinc sulfate it may be at play in complex sulfide ore flotation pulp as well. Experimental work is currently under way in our laboratory to examine these dual functions of zinc sulfate, i.e., hydrophilizing and coagulation, on different sulfide minerals. The results will be submitted in a separate paper. The collectorless flotation results on the fine solid powders suggest that the roles of selective depressants in froth flotation need to be re-defined. A depressant may be able to render mineral surface hydrophilic (such as dextrin and the low molecular weight CMC) but this alone does not guarantee that the mineral will not float. If the mineral particle is small enough it may “float” to froth product by mechanical entrainment. Only when the sizes of the particles are also enlarged besides being made hydrophilic, can the mineral particles be depressed and stay in flotation pulp. This is probably the case with starch, high molecular weight CMC and zinc sulfate. In practice the size enlargement processes for the hydrophilic particles have to be selective and the floc sizes have to be controlled such that they do not entrain to the froth but in the meantime do not trap fine hydrophobic particles. In this context, the intensity of agitation of the flotation pulp would play a significant role. For one thing, the high agitation intensity in a commercial flotation machine will almost certainly destroy some of the polymer flocs. However, the purpose of using a polymeric depressant is to reduce mechanical entrainment of hydrophilic minerals but not to cause a fast settling rate of the flocs. Therefore, the polymer flocs do not need to be very large. In fact, some degree of mechanical agitation may be beneficial to release any trapped particles inside the polymer flocs. The results reported in this work were obtained in tests using a flotation column with a magnetic stirrer. Therefore there was some degree of agitation. The correlation between the degree of mechanical agitation and entrainment with the use of polymer depressants certainly warrants more in-depth study and is the subject of a project that is currently being conducted in the authors' laboratories using batch flotation machines. In this series of tests artificial mixtures of −    In fact, the diagonal line in The dotted lines in  Therefore, the flotation separation tests on the artificial mixtures of − Research is currently being conducted on the selective flotation separation from sulfide and oxide ores containing different minerals that are all of fine particle sizes. The beneficial roles of flocculation caused by polymer depressants in reducing mechanical entrainment in these systems are exploited with the objective of separately enlarging the particle sizes of both hydrophobic mineral particles (to be floated) and the hydrophilic mineral particles (to be depressed). One important aspect that has not been touched in this paper is the effect of the depressants on froth stability, the effect of flocculation of the pulp on froth stability, and the resulting froth stability on particle entrainment. In fact, it was observed that the addition of different dispersants and depressants significantly affected the froths. For example, the addition of sodium silicate caused strong froths whereas the addition of starch weakened the froths. The behavior of the froth clearly had important implications in its carrying capacity and will thus affect the degree of mechanical entrainment. This is a subject of further research. Mechanical entrainment of fine hydrophilic mineral particles is a severe problem that limits the effective treatment of low-grade finely disseminated ores by froth flotation. In the various fine particle flotation technologies being developed today, the fine hydrophilic particles are typically kept highly dispersed. However, as shown by the results from this paper, dispersion of the fine hydrophilic particles increased their mechanical entrainment. It was shown that moderately high molecular weight polymer depressants such as cornstarch and CMC (with a molecular weight of 700,000) may have rendered the iron oxide and hydroxyapaptite particles hydrophilic and in the meantime flocculated these particles. This not only depressed the genuine flotation of the particles but also reduced their mechanical entrainment. The low molecular weight polymer depressants such as corn dextrin and CMC with a low molecular weight of 80,000 could render the iron oxide and hydroxyapatite hydrophilic but could not reduce their mechanical entrainment. Thus, when used as depressants in the separation of artificial mixtures of − The beneficial roles of high molecular weight polymer depressants in reducing mechanical entrainment of hydrophilic (gangue) minerals should be exploited. Flotation depressants should be evaluated in terms of not only their ability to make the target minerals hydrophilic but also their ability to reduce the mechanical entrainment of the target minerals. Polymer depressants are a group of such reagents that possess these dual functions. The authors appreciate the support of Natural Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada to this project through a Discovery Grant.