The central composite rotatable design (CCRD) was used to design an experimental program to model the effects of inlet pressure, feed density, and length and diameter of the inner vortex finder on the operational performance of a 150-mm three-product cyclone. The ranges of values of the variables used in the design were: inlet pressure: 80–130 kPa, feed density: 30–60%; length of IVF below the OVF: 50–585 mm; diameter of IVF: 35–50 mm. A total of 30 tests were conducted, which is 51 less than that required for a three-level full factorial design.
                  Because the model allows confident performance prediction by interpolation over the range of data in the database, it was used to construct response surface graphs to describe the effects of the variables on the performance of the three-product cyclone. To obtain a simple and yet a realistic model, it was refitted using only the variable terms that are significant at greater than or equal to 90% confidence level. Considering the selected operating variables, the resultant model is significant and predicts the experimental data well.The design and operation of the three-product cyclone have been described in detail ( Previous work showed that the length of the inner vortex finder has a substantial influence on the operational performance of the three-product cyclone and by varying it: the amount of fine dense mineral particles that reports unnecessarily to the underflow can be reduced ( a middlings stream can be generated that is more suitable for flash flotation than the usual conventional underflow ( the unit can be used for fine separation and desliming duties ( Thus the unit has several potential industrial applications some of which are being explored. This necessitated the design of a detailed experimental program to establish some major process trends to help in understanding the separation process and in achieving the desired separation. This work was therefore aimed at establishing the effects of inlet pressure, feed density, and the length and diameter of the inner vortex finder on the operational performance of the three-product cyclone. To achieve this aim, an appropriate experimental design technique had to be used. The experimental design techniques commonly used for process analysis and modelling are the full factorial, partial factorial and central composite rotatable designs. A full factorial design requires at least three levels per variable to estimate the coefficients of the quadratic terms in the response model. Thus for the four independent variables mentioned above, 3 An effective alternative to the factorial design is the central composite rotatable design (CCRD), originally developed by In the following sections, the requirements for the CCRD and its application to the design of experiments and modelling the effects of inlet pressure, feed density, and the length and diameter of the inner vortex finder on the operational performance of the three-product cyclone are described. The number of tests required for the CCRD includes the standard 2 Once the desired ranges of values of the variables are defined, they are coded to lie at ±1 for the factorial points, 0 for the centre points and ± When the response data are obtained from the test work, a regression analysis is carried out to determine the coefficients of the response model ( Linear terms in each of the variables ( Squared terms in each of the variables ( First order interaction terms for each paired combination ( Thus for the four variables under consideration, the response model is: A detailed analysis of variance (ANOVA) is also carried out to determine the statistical significance of the linear, square and interaction components of the response model. The value of the model is that it identifies statistically different significant factors, allows confident performance prediction by interpolation over the range of data and facilitates the construction of response surface (3-D) graphs which help in understanding the process being investigated. To provide data to model the effects of the variables on the operational performance (feed volumetric flowrate, particle size distribution in overflows and water recovery to overflows) of the three-product cyclone via the CCRD approach, the range of values of each variable was defined as follows: Cyclone inlet pressure ( Cyclone feed density (FS): 30–60% (w/w) Length of IVF below the OVF (LIVF): 50–585 mm Diameter of IVF (DIVF): 35–50 mm. Using the relationships in The three-product cyclone used for the tests was a 150-mm diameter unit with an inlet diameter of 36 mm, an outer vortex finder (OVF) diameter of 60 mm, a spigot diameter of 25 mm and a cone angle of 10°. The test material was a mixture of magnetite and silica in which the former comprised approximately 18% by weight. The 80% and 20% passing sizes were 203 and 13 μm respectively. The test rig, procedure and sample analysis were the same as described previously ( The mass balanced experimental results are summarised in The effects of the four variables on cyclone feed volumetric flowrate are shown in Substituting the coefficients of the terms in  Substituting the values of the coefficients in From Substituting the coefficients in  Substituting the coefficients of the terms in From Substituting the coefficients of the terms in  The central composite rotatable design (CCRD) has been successfully used to design an experimental program to provide data to model the effects of cyclone inlet pressure, cyclone feed density, and IVF length and diameter on the operational performance of the three-product cyclone. The ranges of values of the variables used in the design were: inlet pressure: 80–130 kPa, feed density: 30–60%; length of IVF below the OVF: 50–585 mm; diameter of IVF: 35–50 mm. A total of 30 tests were conducted, which is 51 less than that required for a three-level full factorial design. Because the model allows confident performance prediction by interpolation over the range of data in the database, it was used to construct response surface graphs ( To obtain a simple and yet a realistic model, it was refitted using only the variable terms that are significant at greater than or equal to 90% confidence level. The results show that the simplified model (Eqs. Based on the results from this work, the effects of the variables on the operational performance of the three-product cyclone can be summarised as given in Diameter of inner vortex finder (m) 20% passing size in cyclone feed (mm) 80% passing size in cyclone feed (mm) Cyclone feed density (w/w) Inner overflow stream Inner vortex finder Length of inner vortex finder below OVF (m) Outer overflow stream Outer vortex finder Cyclone inlet pressure (kPa) 80% passing size in cyclone product stream (mm) Cyclone feed volumetric flowrate (m Adjusted mean square Adjusted sum of squares Analysis of variance Degrees of freedom F-statistic Probability value of Probability value of Coefficient of determination Standard error of coefficient Sequential sum of squares t-statistic The authors are grateful to the sponsors of the JKMRC/AMIRA P9L/M Mineral Processing projects for the financial and logistics support. 