Objectives
                  The effect of shot blasting treatment on the cyclic deformation and fracture behavior of a commercial pure titanium with two different microstructures; equiaxed (α-phase) and acicular (martensitic α′-phase) was investigated.
               
                  Methods
                  Fatigue tests were carried out in artificial saliva at 37°C. Cyclic deformation tests were carried out up to fracture and fatigue crack nucleation and propagation were analysed. Residual stresses were determined by means of X-ray diffraction.
               
                  Results
                  The results show that shot blasting treatment improves fatigue life in the different microstructures studied. The equiaxed phase has improved mechanical properties compared to the acicular one. Despite the fact that control of the variables of shot blasting is not precise because of the nature of the treatment, it improves the fatigue life by the fact that the initiation site of the fatigue crack changes from the surface of the specimen to the interior of the shot blasted specimen. This is a consequence of the layer of compressive residual stresses that the treatment generates on titanium surfaces. The acicular morphology of the martensite favors crack propagation along the interface of the α′ plates.
               
                  Significance
                  Shot blasting, which is widely used on titanium dental implants in order to favour their osseointegration, can also improve their fatigue resistance.The design of an oral implant device has always to take into consideration cyclic loading during the life in service of the implant, and therefore the fatigue endurance of the materials used will play a very important role when trying to estimate the long-term performance of the device. Thus the assessment of the fatigue behavior of implantable alloys has been taking on greater importance. Wrought cobalt–chromium, titanium and Ti–6Al–4V alloys show similar fatigue endurance, both when evaluated by means of rotary bending fatigue tests (about 550  Moreover, titanium and titanium alloys can be strengthened and their mechanical properties varied by controlling their composition by means of thermomechanical processing techniques Titanium and titanium alloys are also resistant to general corrosion, pitting and crevice corrosion, which may occur in other alloys as a result of the aggressive attack of body fluids Because of all these properties, commercially pure titanium (c.p. Ti) is widely used as a dental implant material Shot blasting is one of the most frequently used treatments for obtaining a rough surface of a dental implant The influence of the shot blasting treatment on the fatigue and fracture properties of titanium with different microstructures has been studied in this work. The c.p. Ti Grade III used in the present work was kindly donated by Klockner, S.A. The material came as cylindrical rods of 12 Tensile specimens with a ratio diameter to gage length of 1/5 and fatigue specimens were machined. A first batch of specimens was kept as the as-received material, whilst second and third batches of specimens were heat treated. These specimens were kept for 1 The c.p. Ti Grade III discs were shot blasted with particles of Al Qualitative surface roughness was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (6400, Jeol, Japan), and quantitative surface roughness was determined by means of a profilometer with a diamond tip (Surftest SV500, Mitutoyo, Japan). The hardness distribution in a cross-section of the shot blasted specimens was measured using a Vickers microhardness indentor (Akashi, Matsusawa, Japan) with a load of 100 Residual stresses were measured with a diffractometer incorporating a Bragg–Bentano configuration (D500, Siemens, Germany). The measurements were done for the family of planes (2 The tensile specimens were tested in a universal screw driven testing machine (Bionix, MTS, USA) of 100 The surface roughness of the as-machined metal for α-phase and α′-martensite are The hardness distribution at the above cross-section of the materials studied is presented in  The different materials have been tested in unidirectional tension in order to obtain their monotonic stress–strain curves. The relevant parameters are listed in  The fatigue behavior of the samples submitted to shot blasting treatment is better due to the compressive effect of the residual stresses on the surface, which makes crack nucleation difficult. This fact can be observed in The four types of specimens are cyclically deformed at different total strain amplitudes, and cyclic softening is observed in all cases. The maximum stress reached at every total strain amplitude is higher for the equiaxed than for the acicular microstructures. The highest rate of softening was observed for the acicular phase. Consequently, shot blasting treatment increases the implant surface roughness by the impingement, at high pressure, of small abrasive particles, which results in local plastic strain. This fact will produce a firmer and earlier fixation and a better osseointegration of a dental implant as explained in the Introduction. Besides, this impingement produces an increase in the surface hardness due to the compressive load of the impact of the particles. Despite the fact that the variables of the shot blasting treatment are not exhaustively controlled, the value of the residual compressive stresses on the surface layer affected by the treatment suggests that the crack nucleation site changes from the specimen surface (for the as-machined metal) to the specimen interior (for the shot blasted metal). This change is postulated to result in a significant modification of fatigue properties of dental implants made of c.p. Ti. Shot blasting of c.p. Ti dental implants not only improves the osseointegration of the implants because of the increase in the metal surface roughness but should also improve their fatigue life because of the layer of compressive residual stress that is formed. The authors are grateful to the CICYT for funding the present work through project MAT2003-08165 and to Klockner, S.A. for kindly donating the material.