This paper describes the effect of the partial concentrate (rougher floated product) recirculation to rougher flotation feed, here named concentrate recirculation flotation – CRF, at laboratory scale. The main parameters used to evaluate this alternative approach were flotation rate and recovery of fine (“F” 40–13μm) and ultrafine (“UF” <13μm) copper sulphide particles. Also, the comparative effect of high intensity conditioning (HIC), as a pre-flotation stage for the rougher flotation, was studied alone or combined with CRF. Results were evaluated through separation parameters, grade-recovery and flotation rates, especially in the fine and ultrafine fractions, a very old problem of processing by flotation. Results showed that the floated concentrate recirculation enhanced the metallurgical recovery, grade and rate flotation of copper sulphides. The best results were obtained with concentrate recirculation flotation combined with high intensity conditioning (CRF–HIC). The kinetics rate values doubled, the Cu recovery increased 17%, the Cu grade increased 3.6% and the flotation rates were 2.4times faster. These were accompanied by improving 32% the “true” flotation values equivalent to 2.4 times lower the amount of entrained copper particles. These results were explained and proved to proceed by particle aggregation (among others) occurring after HIC, assisted by the recycled floatable particles. This “artificial” increase in valuable mineral grade (by the CR) resulted in higher collision probability between hydrophobic particles acting as “seeds” or “carrier”.The poor flotation recoveries of fine (“F” 40–13 Many alternatives for solving this problem have been tried, but unfortunately most of them have not found practical applications ( Main problems associated to the fines flotation are caused by their intrinsic properties, among others, small mass (low momentum), high interfacial free energy. Thus, main flotation drawbacks are related to the low probability of bubble–particle collision and adhesion, mechanical entrainment and entrapment, “slime coating”, higher flotation reagent adsorption, formation of dense froths and low process kinetics. It is well known that ultrafine and coarse particles float more slowly than particles in a mid-size range. The size limits are not precise but for many mineral systems, the ultrafines are those below 5–10 Most selective aggregation using chemicals has not proven to be a unique and general solution, the conventional or column type flotation machines do not generate the bubbles size distribution required for an efficient capture of the very fines particles, neither the actual “conditioners” (merely pulp distributors) allow aggregation of the fines particles, F–UF, themselves ( The concept of shear flocculation has been extending to the conditioning stage ahead of flotation ( However, there is a situation, not much explored, viz. staged or multifeed flotation, whereby differ from conventional flotation in that two or more feed inputs are used and improvements in both mineral recovery and grade (through autogenous carrier effects) and conservation of flotation reagents were reported. There are some industrial cases whereby concentrate (a fraction) is, occasionally, being recycled but is not a common practice worldwide. Several authors (   The aim of this work is to compare, at laboratory scale, standardized rougher flotation tests with partial concentrate (rougher floated product) recirculation to rougher flotation feed (concentrate recirculation flotation – CRF). Also, the comparative effect of high intensity conditioning (HIC), as a pre-flotation stage for the rougher flotation, is studied alone or combined with CRF. Comparisons were measured through the separation parameters: grade, recovery (global and true flotation) and flotation rate constants included size-by-size results to assess the flotation behaviour of the fine fractions of copper sulphides. Copper porphyry samples, containing 0.98–1.10% Cu were supplied by Codelco – Chile. About 1/4 of the mass and about 40% of the total copper content is in the fines and ultrafines fractions (<35 Lime, as pH regulator to pH 10.5 was added at the conditioning stage together with SF-113 (sodium isopropyl xanthate) and SF-508 (Promoter) at 30 and 8 The standard mill tests were carried out in a laboratory D12 Denver flotation machine and in a square flotation cell with 3 L of capacity, endowed with a manual scrapper to remove the froth. The pulp with 38% in weight and with pH in 10.5 (monitored with an AnalionTM pH meter model PM 608), was conditioned with the collectors SF-113 (25 The CRF studies were divided into two-stages. The first stage was carried out a standard mill test, and the first minute concentrate (higher flotation probability) was collected. The volume of this concentrate was measured and added to the second stage feed. At this second stage, a new standard mill test was carried out, being its feed composed by a new feed plus the first concentrate of the STD test (first stage), whilst the pulp volume was kept constant. The HIC studies were carried out similarly to the standard mill test, with the exception than the stage of the conditioning of the pulp with the reagents (collectors and frother), was substituted for a high turbulent stage, obtained with the introduction of four baffles in a flotation cell equal to the mill flotation test and a Rushton impeller ( The HIC were carried out in the same D12 Denver flotation machine, when the stator was taken out, and the rotor was substituted for a Rushton impeller with 1400 Herein, the studied variable, conditioning time, was quantified in terms of energy transferred to pulp. This energy was measured with a wattmeter, as described by The CRF–HIC studies were carried out as a HIC test (stage 1), as described previously, and the first minute concentrate (higher flotation probability) was collected. The volume of this concentrate was measured and added to the second stage feed (new HIC). At this second stage, a new HIC mill test was carried out, (stage 2) being its feed composed by a new feed plus the first concentrate of the HIC test (stage 1), whilst the pulp volume was kept constant. All concentrates and tailings were filtered, dried, weighed and analyzed for copper by atomic adsorption (SpectrAA 110-Varian®). The process efficiency was measured by evaluating separation parameter recovery, “true” recovery and entrainment grade (as described by Finally, to assess the performance of flotation in the F and UF fractions, size-by-size copper recoveries were measured in the fractions: >53  The concentrate recirculation flotation (CRF) test (1st When the high intensity conditioning (HIC) precedes the STD flotation test, the kinetics rate values approximately doubled; the Cu recovery increased by 8.5% and the recovery by true flotation by 21%. Also, the entrainment grade reduced to 0.9 and the copper final concentrate grade slightly increased. Hence, results show that the high intensity conditioning, as a pre-flotation stage, might increase both copper grade and recovery revealing, like in other studies, high process selectivity. This specificity appear to be demonstrated by the enhanced true flotation values, which can only be explained in terms of the appearance of “new” valuable and hydrophobic particles in the concentrate. Thus, either particle aggregation or surface cleanliness or both, are the mechanisms involved. Yet, best metallurgical and kinetic results were obtained with concentrate recirculation flotation combined with high intensity conditioning (CRF–HIC). Results were 17% greater Cu recovery and 3.6% improved Cu grade at a higher flotation rates (2.4 A comparative analysis of copper concentrate grade with flotation time ( This general behaviour might be the result of an “artificial” increase in valuable (values) grade followed by an aggregation occurring during the HIC, improving overall flotation performance. The recycled valuable mineral particles would be acting as “seeds” or carriers whereby other particles can be attached. This combination of methods appears to be similar to the mechanisms proposed for the so-called autogenous flotation ( In order to prove the aggregation hypothesis, the mean size of floatable particles (concentrate) were measured comparatively. Moreover, the particle size distribution of concentrate products for STD, CRF, HIC and CRF–HIC presented in  Finally, Results found showed that the concentrate recirculation, to a rougher flotation feed, enhanced the metallurgical recovery, grade and rate flotation of copper sulphides. The best results were obtained with high intensity conditioning (HIC), as a pre-flotation stage, combined with concentrate recirculation flotation (CRF), increasing the kinetics rate values, Cu recovery and concentrate grade. These results were accompanied by an enhancement in the “true” flotation and a low amount of entrained copper particles. Particle aggregation occurring after HIC, enhanced by the higher number of recycled floatable particles, might explain these results. This “artificial” increase in valuable mineral grade resulted in higher collision probability between hydrophobic particles acting as “seeds” or “carrier”. Size-by-size flotation recoveries appear to confirm this aggregation mechanism. Hence, it is believed that these results represent real advances and that this concentrate recirculation based technique may establish a new basis to improve the potential of HIC, as an efficient pre-flotation stage. The authors are thankful to all institutions supporting research in Brazil and Chile and all colleagues from the 31-year old LTM (Environmental and Mineral Technology Laboratory) from our Federal University in Porto Alegre, South Brazil.