Rockburst is one of the leading disasters in mining and rock engineering causing serious casualties and property losses. A major engineering challenge for underground roadways in mines experiencing significant seismicity is the performance of the support system. Applicability of energy-absorbing support system was studied basing on a novel facility, and the support performance was compared with that of the ordinary rock bolt support under the same simulated geology conditions. The results demonstrate that the modelled roadway still kept in good condition after several successive impacts with increasing energy level, suggesting that the roadway retained its resistance to dynamic loads at that time. The bursting failure occurred suddenly when the dynamic loading energy reached a certain critical level. Significant differences of acceleration signals from two roadway sections with different support types appeared, indicating that the energy-absorbing support could greatly change the shock behaviour of the roadway under dynamic loading. A very significant decrease in acceleration amplitudes was produced by the good shock resistance of the roadway section supported with additional energy-absorbing elements to perfect absorbing shock energy of the roadway structure. During the bursting failure, roadway section with traditional rock bolt support was severely damaged and almost closed, while the front roadway section supported by additional energy-absorbing elements remained in relative good condition. The combination of energy-absorbing elements and rock bolt support provides a very efficient and ductile support type in extreme burst-prone conditions.Rockburst is a sudden and violent failure of rock, posing a serious threat to the production and safety of underground mining and rock engineering. This disaster has been encountered frequently in coal mines and represents a significant threat to the safety of miners and equipment. More than 170 coal mines in China have suffered rockbursts as mining depths increase. On 20 October 2018, bursting failure of a tunneling roadway happened in Longyan Coal Mine in Yancheng City, resulting in the closure of a 100-m-long section of the roadway, trapped 22 miners, and killed 21 miners in spite of a valiant rescue effort. Numerous tremors that generate seismic waves and dynamic stresses occur in underground mining engineering, and low-energy tremors often occur before strong tremors. Many rockbursts, particularly large damaging events in deep underground mines, occur spontaneously and unexpectedly. A major engineering challenge for underground roadways in mines experiencing significant seismicity is the performance of the support systems. The threat of rockbursts to the safety of miners as well as to the total coal production economy has necessitated the investigation of the adoption of new effective support systems. Research shows that the function of support systems in burst-prone roadways under both static and dynamic loading conditions is different from conventional ones. Rockbursts occur spontaneously and unexpectedly in situ, it is very difficult to monitor the shock behaviour of the roadway and study the bursting failure process at the excavation scale. In spite of the many attempts to understand the mechanism of support system with energy-absorbing elements, very little is known about the response of such energy-absorbing support to dynamic loading. Based on a novel facility available to perform bursting failure tests of modelled roadways under coupled static and dynamic loading, the applicability of energy-absorbing support system was studied and it's performance was compared with that of the ordinary rock bolt support under the same simulated geology conditions. In laboratory tests, an energy-absorbing element was developed and used as protection device against bursting damage of roadways. Shock behaviour and bursting failure of the modelled roadway with and without energy-absorbing support were investigated. An ultra-dynamic signal testing system was used to measure acceleration signals. A high-speed camera was used to observe the initiation of the abrupt and violent failure processes. Relevant studies remain both rare and limited. This study may eventually lead to a methodology for laboratory study of shock resistance of underground roadways, and benefit the efforts to develop new support systems that can protect roadways against rockbursts. It would provide a significant advance in the enhancement of safety in coal mines. As mentioned above, designing rockburst support in underground engineering needs to be based on the knowledge of shock behaviour and bursting failure of underground roadways under dynamic loading. However, it is difficult to measure such parameters in the field. Laboratory model testing is conducive to revealing causes of rockburst. Thus, A Drop Hammer Impact Test Facility was developed to study the occurrence of rockbursts triggered by dynamic loads (  Before Modelling, Plexiglas plates were installed on the front and back of the model box through screws ( Two accelerometers were installed on the left wall and roof of the back roadway section with traditional rock bolt support. The accelerometer was first bolted to a plate. Then the plate was anchored to surrounding rock of the modelled roadway. Meanwhile, the same locations in the front roadway section with additional energy-absorbing elements also equipped with two accelerometers. Thus, the shock responses of the roadway sections with different support types were compared both in vertical and horizontal directions. An ultra-dynamic signal testing system (DH5960) with an acquisition rate of 50 kHz was used to measure acceleration signals. A high-speed camera (NAC Memrecam GX-3) was used to observe the initiation of the abrupt and violent failure processes. The camera was located on the front of the model and set to record at 1000 frames per second. For successive impacts with increasing energy level, the measured accelerations and deformation in roadway section with energy-absorbing elements were compared to the data obtained in that with the ordinary rock bolt support under the same simulated geology conditions. As mentioned above, the front half (0–200 mm) and the back half (200–400 mm) of the modelled roadway were supported with and without additional energy-absorbing elements. As shown in  Hoek Testing results indicate that rockburst occurrence is closely related to the energy-absorbing elements. In geoengineering projects, the combination of energy-absorbing elements and rock bolt support can carry out a highly efficient operation and protect the roadway against rockbursts. The energy-absorbing support can provide additional kinematic control over shock process of the roadway, helping retaining the rock arch formed by rock bolt in place. Thus, the combination of energy-absorbing elements and rock bolt support provides a significant increase in the shock resistance of the roadway to dynamic loads and help the roadway protect against impact forces. The findings presented here will be of practical importance in the design of reinforcing measures for roadway support in rockburst prone areas. The combination of energy-absorbing elements and rock bolt support provides a very efficient and ductile support type that can be an option when a ductile high strength support is required in extreme conditions. Shock resistance of the energy-absorbing support system was tested using a novel facility and the results demonstrated its good performance in energy absorption and the ability to protect underground roadways against the effects of bursting failure. The following conclusions could be obtained. Bursting failure occurred suddenly when the dynamic loading energy reached a certain critical level. The energy-absorbing capacity and shock resistance against the effects of bursting failure generated by rock bolt support was limited. A serious convergence was formed in roadway section with rock bolt support. The damage was localized and the front roadway section supported with additional energy-absorbing elements only showed slight damage in the roof under the same bursting intensity. Usage of energy-absorbing elements resulted in substantial improvement in shock resistance of roadways. A very significant decrease in acceleration amplitudes was produced by the good shock resistance of the roadway section supported with energy-absorbing elements. The combination of energy-absorbing elements and rock bolt support provides a very efficient and ductile support type in extreme burst-prone conditions. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at