In this study, selective agglomeration is used as a simple physical technique to reduce the ash content of coal tailings, in order to reduce environmental pollution and to increase the value of these materials for combustion and energy recovery. A pilot plant based upon this separation method was constructed, permitting the de-ashing of the tailings to a high level and the recycling of the agglomerant used for these operations by thermal desorption from the agglomerates. The effects of many operating variables have been examined for two different tailings and the efficiency of the process for cleaning tailings and agglomerant recovery has been demonstrated. Moreover, a tailings de-ashing efficiency of 90% was achieved for this process, and a recovery and re-cycling efficiency for the agglomerant of 82% was also realised.In the past, large reserves of coal resulted in much wasteful mining and preparation practices. Traditionally, coarse-coal cleaning has been rated as an effective, economical method for the reduction of the ash content of raw coal. This method was performed almost exclusively by gravity concentration methods. The efficiency of the process was low. As a consequence, fine coal particles were frequently discarded along with the refuse, which was stored in basins, sometimes for >20 years. This product contained a high ash level (25–50%), but also ≈50–75% combustible matter. In this study, selective agglomeration was used as a simple solid/solid separation method to reduce ash in coal tailings, in order to reduce environmental pollution and to increase the value of these materials as an energy source through the combustion of the carbonaceous matter. The treatment of tailings in aqueous suspension consists of separating the carbonaceous fraction from the ash-forming mineral matter. The separation process, based on selective agglomeration, involves the principle of preferential wetting of hydrophobic carbonaceous particles by agglomerants (hydrophobic). This selectivity allows the coal (carbonaceous matter) to be wetted by the agglomerant and the impurities (minerals, trace metals), which are typically hydrophilic, to remain in aqueous suspension. In the presence of an adequate amount of agglomerant and sufficient mechanical agitation, the agglomerant-coated coal particles collide with each other and form agglomerates of a sufficient size to permit separation by screening with a sieve. Agglomerate growth depends on many process variables and affects the de-ashing and recovery efficiency of coal as well as its moisture content. The following phenomena may affect the agglomeration process The originality of this study essentially concerns the recovery and recycling of the agglomerant by thermal desorption from the agglomerates and resultant dry carbonaceous matter. Many studies have already been performed that apply this method to coal The tailings used for this study came from Simbourg in Belgium. Their composition is illustrated in The ash content in the tailings and agglomerates was determined according to the ASTM D3174 method A pilot plant (see In this phase, the solid is mixed with water and agitated in order to wet the particles and to homogenise the suspension. The agitation is performed using a high-speed double-turbine agitator and was driven by compressed air, in a tank with a 50-l capacity. The agglomeration is carried out in a 250-cm The formed agglomerates and free minerals in the water are conducted from the bottom of the agglomeration vessel to a vibrating sieve (SWECO). The mineral particles pass through the screen, while the agglomerates are collected by the screen and are conducted to a heated screw pump. At this point in time, the agglomerates contain both water and the agglomerating agent. The screw pump is heated using electrical resistance (see The agglomerant–water mixture is recovered in the decantation apparatus, which permits the separation of the two liquid phases on account of their difference in density. The solvent’s density is less than that of water, hence, it is recovered from the top of the decantation apparatus, whereas the water is recovered from the bottom. The recovered water is retained for preparation of the tailings suspension, while the solvent is sent to the agglomerant storage tank for recycling. Different agglomerants have been tested (heptane, hexane, pentane, heptanol, hexanol) and their performances evaluated. Other factors, such as residence time in the agglomeration vessel, concentration of tailings in the water suspension, agglomerant concentration, and other factors affecting the recovery of the agglomerant from the agglomerates have also been studied. Each of the operating conditions has been examined in relation to the major objectives of coal preparation, namely: (a) reduction of the ash content in tailings, (b) recovery of the purified coal while rejecting impurities, (c) recovery and recycling of the oil used for the agglomeration. The viscosity and density of the agglomerant have an important influence on the agglomeration quality and efficiency of de-ashing. The influence of several agglomerants upon ash reduction and carbonaceous matter recovery has been studied for SL 57 tailings, with an initial ash content of 42% (w/w). The experimental conditions of the agglomeration process are depicted in Tailings cleaning increases when there is an increase in the density and viscosity of the agglomerant (see Carbonaceous matter recovery also depends on the nature of the agglomerant, as can be observed in Aliphatic alcohols exhibit a higher carbonaceous matter recovery and a better tailings purification than aliphatic hydrocarbons Heptanol was used for the next set of experimental trials, especially on account of its good efficiency for tailings purification. It also displayed the best results for carbonaceous matter recovery during agglomeration and had a low temperature of desorption from agglomerates that form an azeotropic mixture with water. Agglomerant concentration is a critical factor for agglomerate growth. Both ash reduction and coal recovery are functions of an optimum oil concentration, which gives significant differences between agglomerate and mineral matter sizes. The ash content of agglomerates decreases with an increase of oil concentration up to an optimum value (see For a good recovery of carbonaceous matter, a minimum amount of heptanol was also necessary for a good coal recovery, as is indicated in Agitation for agglomeration is performed with a high-speed agitator equipped with a high-shear impeller. It causes the agglomerant to disperse effectively into the tailings/water suspension, and it facilitates the contact of agglomerant with coal particles. The growth of agglomerates increases with agglomeration time The concentration of coal in water is generally not a critical factor in selective agglomeration, according to Swanson et al. A large dilution would require prolonged mixing to ensure that contacts between particles occur. Very low concentrations of coal are undesirable, due to the large volume of water which is required. A mass concentration of ≈30% of tailings in water has produced favourable results and has, therefore, been adopted for this stage of the experiments. This concentration is considerably greater than that used in the flotation process for coal cleaning The last phase of the process is the agglomerant (heptanol) recovery by desorption of the azeotropic mixture (heptanol/water) included in agglomerates. In order to optimise the vaporisation operation, the process was studied using a fixed optimal residence time of 4 The results obtained are presented in There was, however, a decrease of condensation in the cooling column when the suction exceeded 1.5 The results of desorption from the agglomerates made from SL 60 tailings are shown in It is to be noted that desorption and recovery efficiency were calculated as follows: Our study shows that selective agglomeration can be used as an effective physical method to reduce the ash content of tailings to a lower level and to recover the agglomerant by desorption from the agglomerates for recycling. Improvements in ash reduction and carbonaceous matter recovery efficiencies were achieved by optimising the parameters studied. A mass concentration of ≈30% tailings in water and 60 The used agglomerant was recovered by desorption from the agglomerates as an azeotropic mixture (heptanol–water), then separated by decantation. Altogether, 82% of the heptanol used was recovered and recycled.