During the plasma spraying process, the splat-substrate interaction is a key factor to understanding the formation of the coating-substrate adhesion. In the present study, both experimental and simulation methods were employed to analyse the splat-substrate interfacial bond and its formation. Individual cast iron splats were sprayed onto polished aluminum substrate surfaces, which were preheated to temperatures ranging from 25°C to 240°C. After spraying, polished cross sections of the collected splats were examined by scanning electron microscopy to identify the splat-substrate interface bonding characteristics. Furthermore, numerical simulation was conducted using a finite element method (FEM) to obtain quantitative information on heat exchange between the splat and the substrate. Results showed that the substrate preheating temperature (initial substrate temperature) significantly affected the splat-substrate bond formation. When the initial substrate temperature exceeded 190°C, the formation of a metallurgical bond at the splat-substrate interface was detected. The results of the analysis based on both experimental and simulation data, demonstrated that the higher initial substrate temperature caused obvious plastic deformation of the substrate surface and atomic diffusion at the splat-substrate interface under the present conditions, which contributed to the formation of the metallurgical bond. Moreover, a barb-shaped structure was found at the periphery of the splat when the initial substrate temperature reached 240°C, which was beneficial to the enhancement of the mechanical bonding between the splat and the substrate.A major shift has occurred in the public's perception of the importance of automobile fuel efficiency and CO Extensive research has been conducted to improve the tribological characteristics of the piston ring and cylinder liner system with the aim of minimizing the energy loss, guaranteeing the long life of the engines, and particularly, many efforts have been devoted to identify the effects of material, surface treatment, and surface finishing process on the tribological characteristics of the system In order to obtain favorable service performance of the cylinder block, it is critical to ensure a good bond between the coating and substrate (cylinder bores) in service. It is generally accepted that the thermally sprayed coating is mechanically bonded together with the substrate Previous investigations conducted by the current authors revealed that a strong metallurgical bond, resulted from an epitaxial growth of the columnar grains from the substrate surface under the splat, could be realized between adjacent ceramic splats A plasma-sprayed coating is built up by a stream of molten droplets. The individual droplet forms a splat through the processes of impacting, flattening, rapid solidification and cooling. During spraying, the deposition behavior of a single droplet determines the droplet-substrate interaction, the splat structure, and the properties of the coatings. It has been confirmed that the deposition behavior of a droplet is nearly independent of the impingement of forthcoming droplets The aim of the present work is to investigate the effect of the substrate preheating temperature on the bond quality between the splat and the substrate, in particular if preheating the substrates can enhance the metallurgical bond with the possible occurrence of substrate melting. This investigation will explore the metallurgical interaction in the splat-substrate interface using both experimental and numerical simulation methods. Commercially atomized powder Fe-4.1C-1.5Si-1.5B-36.6Cr (wt%) (DG.Fe-05, Chengdu Daguang Thermal Spraying Materials Co., Ltd., China) was used as feedstock for the plasma spraying process. The powder consists of spherical particles with a size range from 20 to 75 During spraying, the arc power and the spray distance were set at 30 After spraying, the cross-sectional structure of the splats was characterized by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, S-4800, Hitachi, Japan) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS, EX-250, Horiba, Japan). In order to avoid the separation of the splat from the substrate during the specimen preparation for metallographic observation on the cross-section, the surface of the splats was protected by epoxy adhesives (E-7, Shanghai Research Institute of Synthetic Resins, Shanghai, China). The protected specimens were cut along the diameter and then hot-mounted by a metallographic mounting press (XQ-1, Shanghai Optical Instrument Factory) with phenolic moulding powder as mounting material. Subsequently, the mounted specimens were prepared through a standard procedure including grinding and polishing to obtain cross-sectional specimens for FE-SEM observation. To study the effect of substrate preheating on the surface geometry of aluminum substrate during spraying, the surface roughness of post-sprayed substrates was also detected by the portable roughmeter. This measurement was repeated for six times at the locations near the deposited splats. In the spraying process, the deposition stages of a single molten droplet are impacting and flattening followed by solidification and cooling on the substrate surface. It was suggested that the duration of the flattening process is generally less than 10% of the solidification time of the droplet  In addition, as the initial substrate temperature was higher than 190 To further characterize the splat-substrate bonding state, cross-sectional EDS line scan tests of S2, S3, and S4 were conducted, as shown in To describe the degree of element diffusion, the slope of Al concentration curve at the splat-substrate interface was calculated. It was found that the slope of the Al concentration curve for S2, S3, and S4 was 14.8, 9.6, and 7.6 respectively. The data suggests that the element diffusion becomes more intense with increasing the initial preheating temperature of the substrate, as well as enhancing the metallurgical bond. Due to the difficulty in direct measurement of the bond strength between a single splat and the substrate, the diffusion distance of the aluminum element was employed to quantitatively characterize the splat-substrate bonding features in the present work, as shown in Generally, the coating-substrate adhesion derives from chemical bonding, physically contact and mechanical interlocking at the coating-substrate interface It is generally accepted that localized substrate melting will occur when a high-melting-point droplet deposits on a low-melting-point substrate surface. This phenomenon has been confirmed experimentally and numerically when spraying Mo, Ta and W particles on the steel substrate, and Ni, Cr and Mo particles on Al substrate With regard to the cast iron-aluminum combination in the present work, the substrate melting should occur during deposition due to the higher melting point of the cast iron than that of the aluminum. However, this assumption is not strongly supported from our present data. According to the formation mechanisms of the splat splashing To further ascertain whether the substrate melting occurred or not, the temperature profiles of the substrate surface were calculated by numerical simulation, as shown in Based on above results and analysis, it is confirmed that surface melting does not occur in the substrate surfaces preheated to 25–240 In the process of flattening of a droplet, the pressures imposed on the substrate surface under the flattening droplet exhibit a normal distribution with the distance along the diameter of the resultant splat. The maximum pressure appears right at the spot where there is contact with the center of flattening particle Generally speaking, the quality of metallurgical/chemical bond depends on the diffusion of the heat and the reaction produced at the intersplat and splat-substrate interfaces. This means that high temperature at the interface is indispensable. Assuming that the splat and the substrate are semi-infinite substances and the contact between them is perfect, the interface temperature It can be rewritten as It is clear that the interface temperature is mainly determined by the particle and substrate temperature except for thermo physical properties of both the particle and the substrate. Therefore, in order to realize the metallurgical bonding between the splat and the substrate, two basic approaches could be employed. One is to raise the temperature or enthalpy of impacting particle, while the other approach is to increase substrate surface temperature prior to droplet impact, which is referred to as the deposition temperature. As for the impacting particle, although raising the arc power can be utilized, it is usually difficult to substantially raise the temperature of the molten particle due to mutual restriction between heating temperature and heating time of the in-flight particles in the plasma jet with the increase of the arc power However, for a single spraying material, the shell-core-structured powder is not suitable. As a consequence, increasing deposition temperature becomes a necessary approach to promote significantly the formation of interface metallurgical bonding. In recent years, increasing the deposition temperature has been utilized to increase the interlamellar bonding of ceramic coatings such as YSZ According to classical diffusion theory In the case of the deposition of cast iron droplet onto aluminum substrate, the rise in the substrate surface temperature is mainly derived from two aspects: (1) heat transfer from the molten droplet to the substrate, and (2) energy conversion from the kinetic energy of the impact droplet to the heat energy of the substrate surface. The contribution of the heat transfer to the substrate surface temperature can be regarded as a constant due to the identical temperature of impact droplets when various preheating temperatures were used. However, with increasing the preheating temperature, yield strength of aluminum substrate will be reduced significantly and the substrate will become more ductile, which promotes the local plastic deformation on the substrate surface resulting from the impinging of the droplet. The total energy (heat energy and kinetic energy) of the droplet will convert into two parts, including the energy consumed in prompting the spreading of the droplet, and the energy used in raising internal energy of the substrate (the increase in the substrate temperature) by the plastic deformation of the substrate. During droplet flattening process, the deformation of the substrate surface will retard the splashing of the droplet, which reduces the energy consumption in the spreading of the droplet, and then more energy of the droplet will be converted into the internal energy of the substrate by the deformation of the substrate, indicating that the easier the substrate deforms, the more heat the substrate holds. These mean the diffusivity increases exponentially with the increase of the interface temperature. That is to say, the diffusivity increases with increasing initial substrate temperature. Meanwhile, the diffusion duration is prolonged with increasing initial substrate temperature due to the reduced cooling rate of the splat As shown in At the beginning of the impacting, the molten droplet flattens with the melt spreading around driven by kinetic energy The formation of the splat-substrate interface bonding between plasma-sprayed cast iron splat and aluminum substrate was substantially investigated through experimental and simulative approaches. Results showed that the interface bonding was remarkably influenced by the initial substrate temperature. With increasing the initial substrate temperature from room temperature to 240 This work was supported by