Cone mill was well studied for milling of wet agglomerates. This study evaluated the effects of various process parameters of cone milling roller compacted flakes on the granules produced. Impeller sidearm shapes, screen surface profiles and impeller speeds were studied. Impeller speed was found to play a major role in determining the granule attributes. Besides this, median size, size distribution and percent fines of a milled granule population were mainly determined by the size reduction mechanisms of different impellers and screens. Pre-breaking followed by shearing and slicing of flakes inside the milling chamber was primarily responsible for determining the size, size distribution and percent fines of milled granules. The pre-breaking action could be achieved using teethed round sidearm impeller and lowered the need for screen-based size reduction, thus generating less fines. The shearing and slicing of flakes due to the raised impaction edges of the grater screen also helped to minimize the production of fines. Therefore, the lowest percentage of fines was observed when the teethed round sidearm impeller was used with a grater screen. The results indicated that fines can be reduced considerably with the judicious selection of a suitable impeller and screen combination in the cone mill.The main purposes of granulating pharmaceutical powders are to improve flow properties, prevent segregation of components, decrease dust and ensure uniform distribution of ingredients. Roller compaction is a commonly used dry granulation process and is especially useful for heat and moisture sensitive products that do not possess the necessary properties for direct compression into tablets. It is an easily scalable and continuous process in which the material is being densified by compression between two counter rotating rolls to form flakes, ribbons, or briquettes. These roller compacted flakes are then comminuted into granules for tabletting or capsule filling after blending with extra-granular excipients ( The granule size, size distribution and amount of fines of the milled flakes are among the most important physical properties which may affect subsequent operations such as flow and compaction, and in turn, content uniformity and dissolution characteristics of final dosage form. Large sized granules improve the flow due to reduced contact surface area with each other. However, large sized granules tend to yield tablets with unacceptable pitted surfaces especially when the granules generally do not have sufficient plasticity. This consideration is specifically important for the roller compaction process as compacted granules are more difficult to deform plastically during tabletting due to their loss of reworkability ( In conical screen mill, the rotation of impeller creates a centrifugal acceleration force which pushes the feed material toward the surface of the screen. Particles are trapped between the edge of the impeller and the screen, causing breakage and broken down products are instantaneously discharged through the screen opening diametrically. The discharging action lowers power consumption by the mill as well as excessive fine generation by reducing the retention time of product in the milling chamber. Efficiency of conical screen mill is improved when the milling chamber is kept relatively full ( In conical screen milling, screen aperture size, screen type, shape of impeller sidearm and impeller speed are the various process parameters which can be varied to customize the desired final granule attributes. These process parameters of conical screen mill had already been evaluated for comminution of commercially available granulations ( In this study, roller compacted flakes prepared from a placebo dry granulated formulation were selected to evaluate the effect of conical mill process parameters, specifically impeller type and screen type at different impeller speeds. The resulting granulation was evaluated for particle size distribution and fines. Finally, various mill settings were investigated for the minimal fines approach. A simple placebo formulation consisting of α-lactose monohydrate (Pharmatose 200M, DMV, Veghel, Netherlands), microcrystalline cellulose (Avicel PH102, FMC, UK) and magnesium stearate (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) in the ratio of 49.5:49.5:1 (w/w) was used in this study. Prior to experimentation, all the materials were passed through a 355 The powder blend was roller compacted (Pharmapaktor L200/30P, Hosokawa Bepex, Germany) at 50 Flakes were milled using conical screen mill (Model 197S, Quadro Comil, Quadro Engineering, Waterloo, Canada) to produce granules. Impellers ( A minimum gap between the impeller and the screen was always maintained using a spacer of suitable thickness to prevent damage done to the machine and metal contaminations entering the final blend ( Each batch of milled granules was collected and characterized for size and size distribution using a nest of sieves of aperture sizes in √2 progression from 180 to 2000 In size analysis of granules batches, granules of particle size less than 180 Preliminary studies were conducted on the roller compactor to determine the optimal operating range for producing flakes of acceptable quality using the abovementioned placebo blend. The roller compactor was operated using an automated mode where the desired roll force can be set for a particular roll speed, with roll gap and screw speed varied automatically. The selected roll force for this study was 50 Preliminary studies were also carried out on conical screen mill to select the suitable screen aperture size and impeller speed range for the main study. Flakes produced at 50  The uneven surface of the grater screen due to the raised impaction edges of the holes allowed the flakes to trap more firmly between screen and impeller, which caused the flakes to break more readily by shearing action and faster release of the milled material from the milling chamber. In case of the smooth screen, flakes were not trapped as firmly and this resulted in a slippage of flakes between the impeller and the screen. This led to the longer residence time of flakes inside the milling chamber, causing prolonged total milling time and increased the extent of size reduction and formation of smaller granules or even fines due to greater impact. However, this mechanism was applicable for impellers I-1, I-3, I-4 and I-5 but not I-2 when used with the smooth screen. This observation could be attributed to the pre-breaking action of I-2 impeller. Pre-breaking of flakes by the pointed teeth of I-2 impeller led to the production of smaller sized flakes which were easily trapped in between the round sidearm of the I-2 impeller and the smooth screen, thus facilitating the passage of milled flakes from the milling chamber (  The generation of fines during compaction and milling is a major problem in the pharmaceutical industry, especially when potent active ingredients are involved. Fines generation is undesirable as it contributes to material loss and environmental pollution. Selection of suitable formulation ingredients and their concentrations (e.g. binder) as well as proper processing conditions can help to reduce the generation of fines. Because dry granulation does not involve the addition of binding liquid, it causes inefficient distribution of binder particles throughout the blend, which results in many composite particles to be loosely held together. As such, milling step is much more critical in dry granulation process as a culprit for fines generation. The effect of impeller sidearm shapes, screen types and impeller speeds on the amount of fines (%) generated during milling is shown in In a milling operation, the combination of impeller and screen was considered to be superior if it produces granules with the same MMD as granules produced by another set of mill conditions but with less fines. Hence, for comparison of two batches of granules with respect to the amount of fines, it would be ideal to use granule batches with similar MMD values. Therefore, from the observations of Section Fines formation can also be reduced by the application of multiple step milling. Multiple step milling reduced fines by reducing the degree of size reduction. However, increasing the number of separate milling step would reduce efficiency of the manufacturing process. Therefore, the use of in situ pre-breaking of roller compacted flakes inside the milling chamber would be the better approach at minimizing the fines generated as well as optimizing milling efficiency in manufacturing. Conical screen mill was used to evaluate the effect of various processing parameters on the characteristics of the milled granules from roller compacted flakes. From this study it appears that both the type of impeller and screen play important roles in determining the quality of milled granules. It seems the impeller and screen, which have pre-breaking and shearing action due to their special geometric configuration, are best for the comminution of flakes. I-2 impeller and grater screen were found to have these requisites. Either one of them when present in any mill setting resulted in the production of granules with better quality from flakes, in terms of granules size, size distribution and fines.