Extraction of manganese from a pyrolusite ore was investigated using molasses alcohol wastewater as a reducing agent in dilute sulfuric acid medium. The effects of molasses alcohol wastewater dosage, concentration of sulfuric acid, leaching temperature and reaction time were studied. High manganese recovery, coupled with relatively low Fe and Al extraction yields, was obtained with this leaching process. The optimal leaching conditions were obtained using 1.9mol/L H2SO4 and 2.0mL/g ratio of molasses alcohol wastewater to pyrolusite for 120min at 90°C. These conditions resulted in leaching yields of 93% for Mn, with relatively low recoveries of 37% for Fe and 25% for Al.
                  These results demonstrate that molasses alcohol wastewater is a low cost resource, containing renewable and non-hazardous reducing agents (when compared to other available reagents) that can be used for manganese leaching under mild acidic conditions. In short, the method provides a good extraction yield while making an economically productive use of molasses alcohol wastewater.Hydrometallurgical treatment of low-grade manganese oxide ores has attracted great attention in recent years. Various routes have been developed and reported for use in the aqueous leaching of manganese oxide ores. Specifically, the ores can be treated by reduction roasting, followed by acid leaching ( The use of organic reductants to leach pyrolusite has been shown to be both simple and efficient. However, there has been little commercial application of this technique, due to the expense of the reductant and its high consumption rate in the process. At the same time, fermentation of cane sugar molasses to produce ethyl alcohol is a very large and growing agro-based chemical industry in China, India and South America. 12–17 Manganese ore was obtained from Mugui Manganese Mine, Guangxi, China. Both the bulk and sieved samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku model D/max-2500, Rigaku Co., Japan) to define the mineralogical structure and phase purity. From the XRD pattern, the main metallic minerals were determined to include pyrolusite (MnO Molasses alcohol wastewater (Nanning Sugarcane Refinery, Guangxi, China), containing 7.3% organic compounds, 2.9% reducing sugars, COD All other chemicals used in this study were of analytical grade and were used without further purification. The leaching experiments were carried out in a 250 In order to evaluate the effect of molasses alcohol wastewater dosage on the leaching efficiency, a series of leaching experiments was carried out in which the ratio of molasses alcohol wastewater to pyrolusite varied from 0.0 to 2.5 A series of leaching experiments was carried out using a 2.0 The data in Controlled experiments on leaching time were conducted to gain further insight into the most favorable reaction conditions. The data in A reductive leaching process for a pyrolusite ore has been successfully demonstrated for the first time using a mixture of sulfuric acid and molasses alcohol wastewater as a reductant. The results indicate that the leaching efficiencies of all the studied metal quantities increase as the H This leaching technology is optimized at 1.9 In a subsequent step when the pH Therefore, reductive atmospheric leaching of pyrolusite ore using molasses alcohol wastewater and sulphuric acid medium is a feasible technology for extracting manganese. Considering that the process productively uses molasses alcohol wastewater from the sugar industry, the technology should be beneficial from both an economic and an environmental perspective. This work was financially supported by Natural Science Foundation of Guangxi (Grant No. 0832035) and Scientific Research Project of Education Department of Guangxi, China (No. [2006]26). The authors wish to express their gratitude to Dr. Donald Barnes, guest professor of Guangxi University, for helpful discussion and edition in grammar.