Simple kinetic model is proposed for fitting experimental data of degradation and total organic carbon (mineralization) of phenol. Reaction rates analysis of phenol in water are employed to compare different photocatalysts under the same experimental conditions. The global photonic efficiency for degradation and mineralization of phenol ξ
                     g, is calculated to facilitate comparison with other photocatalysts or experimental systems. Under identical conditions of catalyst loading, pH and phenol concentration the most of photocatalysts presented a global efficiency much lower than that for a TiO2 standard photocatalyst named Degussa P-25. However, two photocatalysts prepared by different methods showed approximately the same global efficiency than the commercial material.Photocatalytic oxidation offers an excellent possibility for removing variety of pollutants from contaminated waters. A number of advanced photooxidation technologies for water treatment, consisting of illumination by UV light of aqueous suspensions of TiO Suitable treatments are ideally achieved in small-scale plants in order to prevent toxicity, which is easier to remove before transferring toxic materials to other medium. However, highly efficient catalysts are still needed. Thus, development of new photocatalysts for pollution treatment is of current interest In some earlier papers Some researchers recommend using formal rate constants in the photodegradation of organic substrates as a measure of the photo-oxidation efficiency The present report extends the previous works to organic substrate disappearance and mineralization and proposes the applicability of a global efficiency measure since relative efficiencies of degradation or mineralization do not indicate which material is better than the other. Here, it is reported on a method for the comparison of various photocatalysts into the same photocatalytic process. This is for determining the more efficient one for a given organic substrate by considering its transformation as well as its mineralization. Degussa P-25, with a composition anatase/rutile of 80/20, surface area of 55 To deposit thin films of TiO A piece of 8 In the first method, TiF The preparation procedure of TiO TiO Raman spectra of TiO The amount of TiO The BET specific surface areas of the powder samples prepared through the same procedure as the thin films were determined using nitrogen adsorption measurements with an Accusorb 2100-E porosimeter. The BET specific surface areas of the TiO The experimental set-up used for the photocatalytic evaluation consisted of a batch reactor (100 All experiments were carried out at pH 3.0 with 500 Each experiment was performed at 30 Adsorption of phenol on Degussa P-25 was determined by contacting the photocatalyst powder with a phenol solution for a given time in the photoreactor used also for photocatalytic experiments. Typically, the reactor was loaded with 100 Dimensional and textural data of the samples ( First of all, amount of adsorbed phenol increases smoothly with increasing catalyst concentration. Phenol adsorption data obtained at 25 It has been found that the photoactivity and the photonic efficiency in the presence of Degussa P-25 and other photocatalysts depend on the catalyst loading. Although San et al. determined that the optimum concentration of TiO  The degradation and mineralization to total organic carbon (TOC) for three different concentrations of phenol in the presence of the commercial P-25 TiO The evolution of curves is according to apparent first-order kinetics, ln( The correlation constants ( Plots of normalized concentration vs. irradiation-time for eight different photocatalysts (FHM, FSG and PSG samples) are reported in  The experimental results shown in The experimental results agree reasonably well with the model proposed and the constants were determined from experimental data. Thus, initial rates were calculated using these rate constants ( Photodegradation initial rates of phenol were calculated from the equation: As seen from straight lines of The concept of relative photonic efficiency In this work, a global photonic efficiency parameter was used to follow the rates of disappearance and TOC degradation of phenol due to the fact that both processes are very important and complementary. Thus we propose, As can be noted, the above equation is a very simple expression, however, if the transformation of intermediates detected or the direct coupling of two phenoxy radicals are regarded, then this can be lead to a more complex kinetic expression. The equation proposed above is supported by a general mechanism of the photocatalytic degradation of phenol. As proposed by several authors, all oxidation routes consider the hydroxylation of phenol to hydroquinone and catechol as a first step A complete mineralization to CO In addition, all intermediates can suffer an attack with OH The value of Using Eqs. All the global efficiencies are lower than one, indicating that the maximum photocatalytic oxidative degradation of the photocatalytic samples at the selected initial concentration was obtained with Degussa P-25, although two samples give values for Consequently, it can be concluded that in comparison to the Degussa P-25, only two TiO Satisfactory agreement between the experimental and predicted concentration–time profiles for degradation and TOC was demonstrated. Global photonic efficiency based on the initial rates of degradation illustrates all aspects of photodegradation of organic contaminants for water treatment purposes. The use of global photonic efficiency The authors wish to thank Miss Jitka Kirchnerova, École Polytechnique de Montréal, for her assistance in the revision of the final manuscript. Financial support from CIO, AC, Project No. 203TM-012, is acknowledged.