Clavicle fractures are common in adults and children. Most commonly, these fractures occur within the middle third of the clavicle and exhibit some degree of displacement. Whereas many midshaft clavicle fractures can be treated nonsurgically, recent evidence suggests that more severe fracture types exhibit higher rates of symptomatic nonunion or malunion. Although the indications for surgical fixation of midshaft clavicle fractures remain controversial, they appear to be broadening. Most fractures of the medial or lateral end of the clavicle can be treated nonsurgically if fracture fragments remain stable. Surgical intervention may be required in cases of neurovascular compromise or significant fracture displacement. In children and adolescents, these injuries mostly consist of physeal separations, which have a large healing potential and can therefore be managed conservatively. Current concepts of clavicle fracture management are discussed including surgical indications, techniques, and results.Approximately 2% to 5% of all fractures in adults and 10% to 15% in children involve the clavicle. In adults, more than two-thirds of these injuries occur at the diaphysis of the clavicle, and these injuries are more likely to be displaced as compared with medial- and lateral-third fractures. In children, up to 90% of clavicle fractures are midshaft fractures. Traditionally, nonsurgical management has been favored as the initial treatment modality for most clavicle fractures because of the high nonunion rates reported after operative treatment. The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of the current treatment strategies for clavicle fractures based on their anatomic location and stability. In addition, a necessary distinction is made between fractures in adults and fractures in skeletally immature patients. A number of classification systems have been proposed to aid in the description of clavicle fracture patterns for clinical and research purposes. Fractures of the lateral third of the clavicle were further subclassified by Neer, A more detailed classification system (Edinburgh classification) was proposed by Robinson. Craig Fractures of the medial third of the clavicle (Edinburgh type I) are nearly always treated nonoperatively. These clavicle fractures are uncommon, are frequently nondisplaced or minimally displaced, and rarely involve the sternoclavicular joint. Surgical treatment of medial-end clavicle fractures is indicated if mediastinal structures are placed at risk because of fracture displacement, in case of soft-tissue compromise, or when multiple trauma and/or “floating shoulder” injuries are present. Closed or open reduction should be performed to reduce the displaced fragment in an emergent fashion. When open reduction is necessary, several techniques have been described for internal fixation of fracture fragments. These include wire or plate fixation and interosseous sutures. Most injuries in children and adolescents involving the medial end of the clavicle consist of physeal separations. This is because the medial epiphysis of the clavicle does not ossify until age 20 years and ossification centers rarely fuse before age 25 years. The results of nonsurgical treatment of fractures of the medial end of the clavicle are in general satisfactory, although the low prevalence of these fractures precludes detailed analysis. Nonsurgical treatment should be the first treatment of choice in the vast majority of patients. However, considering the increased risk for fracture nonunion in case of complete fracture displacement, open reduction and internal plate fixation should be considered in these cases. The goal of clavicle fracture treatment is to achieve bony union while minimizing dysfunction, morbidity, and cosmetic deformity. Historically, the vast majority of clavicle fractures have been treated nonoperatively in the acute setting. This is largely because of reported nonunion rates of less than 1% and separate reports by Neer Nonoperative management remains the treatment of choice for nondisplaced midshaft clavicle fractures (Edinburgh type 2A). Meta-analyses of 1,145 nonoperatively treated midshaft fractures, 986 of which were nondisplaced, showed a nonunion rate of only 5.9%. Definitive indications for acute surgical intervention include skin tenting, open fractures, the presence of neurovascular compromise, multiple trauma, or floating shoulder. Outside of these indications, the management of displaced fractures of the midshaft (Edinburgh type 2B) remains somewhat controversial. Recent literature is challenging the traditional belief that midshaft clavicle fractures uniformly heal without functional deficit. This paradigm shift is supported by several prospective studies by members of the Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Society, who reported higher nonunion rates and functional deficits after nonsurgical treatment of midshaft clavicle fractures when compared with internal fixation. Other authors suggest that specific clavicle fracture types are at higher risk for poor patient-reported outcomes. Therefore, relative indications for acute surgical treatment may include younger, active patients with clavicle shortening greater than 1.5 to 2 cm, significant cosmetic deformity, or multiple-trauma situations. Under these auspices, surgical fixation may provide more optimal outcomes and earlier return to sport. Adequate counseling regarding the risks, benefits, and likely results of treatment should occur in these circumstances. Late intervention should be considered for persistently symptomatic nonunions or malunions or if acromioclavicular arthritic changes occur. Open reduction and internal fixation of clavicle fractures can be performed with either plate or intramedullary pin fixation. Plate fixation can provide immediate rigid fixation, helping to facilitate early mobilization. Antegrade or retrograde intramedullary pin fixation is typically a more cosmetic technique, requiring a smaller incision and less stripping of the clavicle compared with plate fixation. Intramedullary pins frequently cannot be statically locked, thereby providing less rotational and length stability compared with other fixation techniques. The treatment of choice in children and adolescents with midshaft clavicle fractures is less controversial than that in adults. Because of the remodeling capabilities of clavicle fractures in children and adolescents, almost all fractures can be treated nonoperatively with a very low incidence of complications. Supportive treatment with a sling or figure-of-8 brace is used for comfort. Sports participation should be avoided until radiographic evidence of healing is noted, which is typically after a minimum of 6 to 8 weeks. Andersen et al Reported outcomes of surgical treatment of midshaft clavicle fractures have become more favorable over the past 2 decades. A meta-analysis of current data on nondisplaced fractures suggested a relative risk reduction of 72% and 57% for nonunion as compared with nonoperative treatment by use of intramedullary pin fixation and plate fixation, respectively. Patient-reported satisfaction scores may also be superior with early surgical management in some circumstances. A multicenter trial reported better functional outcomes, lower malunion and nonunion rates, and a shorter overall time to union in operatively treated clavicle fractures after plate fixation. The management of midshaft clavicle fractures should be individualized to the patient’s goals and activity level. We generally recommend acute intervention in active patients where displacement of the fracture fragments is greater than 100%, greater than 1.5 to 2 cm of shortening exists, or significant comminution is present. For most midshaft fractures that do not have excessive comminution or obliquity to the fracture planes, it is our preference to use intramedullary pin fixation to minimize fragment stripping, avoid the supraclavicular nerves, achieve relative stability, and improve cosmesis ( Because the majority of fractures of the lateral third of the clavicle are nondisplaced or minimally displaced and extra-articular, nonoperative treatment is typically the treatment of choice. The indication for surgical treatment of lateral-third clavicle fractures is based on the stability of the fracture segments, displacement, and patient age. The integrity of the CC ligaments plays a key role in providing stability to the medial fracture fragment. Displacement of the medial clavicle is seen when the CC ligaments are disrupted (Edinburgh type 3B). It is established that this fracture configuration leads to nonunion rates as high as 28%. Many surgical techniques have been proposed for fixation of lateral-end fractures. These include Kirschner wire fixation, Furthermore, the use of CC screw fixation is limited by the fracture location and extent of comminution. In addition, screws must be routinely removed because they can limit shoulder girdle motion. Some failures noted in patients treated with CC screw fixation are likely due to the combination of rigid (screw) fixation and the motion normally present at this location. Plate fixation can also be used in circumstances where the distal fragment allows sufficient fixation. Finally, suture and graft sling techniques can be used to reconstruct CC ligaments in a manner similar to anatomic acromioclavicular joint reconstruction. These techniques can be used to reinforce other fixation techniques or as the primary mode of reconstruction. The physis of the lateral clavicle fuses around the age of 25 years. Therefore, most injuries to the lateral end of the clavicle result in physeal separation rather than fracture, because the acromioclavicular and CC ligaments are biomechanically more robust than the physis. Because of the physeal injury, a large potential for healing and remodeling exists. Nonoperative management of lateral clavicle fractures results in a good outcome in up to 98% of minimally displaced or nondisplaced fractures. The timing of surgery for lateral-end fractures seems more important for patient outcome when compared with medial-third fractures. Despite the limitations of CC screw fixation, the results of fracture healing and restoration of shoulder function are mostly favorable, although only small cohorts have been reported. Nonoperative treatment is typically successful in cases where minimal to no displacement of the fracture fragments exists. However, when CC ligament injury is present and fracture displacement exists, surgical fixation is typically recommended. If sufficient bone is available laterally for screw purchase, our preference is plate fixation. In cases where this is not possible, we prefer to perform CC ligament fixation to hold the fracture fragments in place while healing occurs. This is typically performed with a CC fixation device with cortical buttons (Tightrope; Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) or suture fixation device. Alternatively, a hook plate can be used, but this requires removal and may increase the risk of traumatic arthrosis of the acromioclavicular joint. Most medial- and lateral-end fractures can be treated nonsurgically if fracture fragments remain stable. Surgical intervention may be required in cases of neurovascular compromise or significant fracture displacement. In children and adolescents, these injuries mostly consist of physeal separations, which have a large healing potential and can therefore be managed conservatively. This research was supported by the Steadman Philippon Research Institute, which is a 501(c)3 nonprofit institution supported financially by private donations and corporate support from the following entities: Smith & Nephew Endoscopy, Arthrex, Arthrocare, Siemens, OrthoRehab, and Ossur Americas. This work was not supported directly by outside funding or grants. Peter J. Millett has received from a commercial entity something of value (exceeding the equivalent of US $500) not related to this manuscript or research from Arthrex. He is a consultant and receives payments from Arthrex and has stock options in Game Ready. Olivier A. van der Meijden has received from a commercial entity something of value (exceeding the equivalent of US $500) not related to this manuscript or research from Arthrex. His position was supported by Arthrex. The other author, his immediate family, and any research foundations with which he is affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.