Through the application of negative reduction potential significant reduction of manganic and iron oxides in the ocean manganese nodules can be achieved, liberating the occluded copper, nickel and cobalt for easy dissolution in an acid medium. Electroleaching and electrobioleaching of ocean manganese nodules in the presence of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans and Thiobacillus thiooxidans at the above negative applied dc potentials resulted in significant dissolution of copper, nickel and cobalt in 1 M H2SO4. The role of galvanic interactions in the bioleaching of ocean manganese nodules in the presence of T. thiooxidans is also discussed.Significant extraction of copper, nickel and cobalt from ocean manganese nodules requires prior reduction of manganic and iron oxides with which most of the above non-ferrous metals are interlocked. Several hydrometallurgical processes such as reduction roasting followed by acid leaching, ammoniacal leaching in the presence of a reductant as well as pressure acid leaching for ocean manganese nodules have been reported ( Ocean manganese nodule samples collected from the Indian Ocean were dried, ground and sieved to obtain −75 to All electrobioleaching experiments were carried out in the electrochemical cell setup ( Dissolved metal ions such as Cu, Ni, Co, Mn and Fe were analysed using ICP spectrophotometer. Bacterial cell numbers were estimated by direct microscopic count using a Petroff–Hausser counter. Chemical leaching of the ocean manganese nodule samples in 1M H Instead of using chemical reducing agents to facilitate the reduction and dissolution of manganese and iron oxides in the ocean manganese nodule, electrochemical reduction based on two approaches, namely, cathodic polarization and galvanic interaction can also be considered as attractive alternatives. Electrodissolution of ocean manganese nodule in 1 M H Results of electrobioleaching study in the presence of metabolite of autotrophic bacteria such as (a) Beneficial effect on bacterial growth and activity. (b) In situ electrochemical reduction of ferric to ferrous ions, generating reducing conditions. (c) Direct reduction of manganic and ferric oxides in the ocean nodule, liberating associated non-ferrous metal values. (d) Electrochemical generation of hydrogen at negative potentials would facilitate reduction. When one compares the relative efficiencies of the various processes discussed in this paper, electrobioleaching stands out as the most promising. The presence of the metabolite at pH 0.5 from the growth of The role of bacterial activity in the form of metabolic products and cells on the galvanic effects observed in the added presence of pyrite is illustrated in The above electrobioleaching process is environmentally benign since there is complete dissolution of all the metal values and practically no toxic residues are left behind. The following major conclusions can be made based on this study: (a) Complete dissolution of non-ferrous metals such as copper, nickel and cobalt from the ocean manganese nodule could be achieved through electrobioleaching in the presence of culture of (b) Efficient dissolution of the valuable metals Cu, Ni, Co, Fe and Mn has been achieved from the ocean manganese nodule during electrobioleaching in the presence of metabolite of (c) Complete recovery of valuable metals from ocean manganese nodule could be achieved in the presence of pyrite at the expense of acidic metabolite of