The surface charge property and chemical composition are important for flotation investigation. First, the mineral phase and morphology of different pyrophyllite samples were analyzed. The isoelectric points of different pyrophyllite particles also were determined. Moreover, the effect of chemical composition on flotation recovery of pyrophyllite particles was studied. The isoelectric point (iep) of pyrophyllite particles shows negative correlation with the mass fractions of SiO2 and Na2O. At the point of zero charge of edge plane of pyrophyllite, the zeta potential of pyrophyllite particles displays negative correlation with mass fraction of SiO2. While it shows positive correlation with mass fraction of CaO and TiO2. Additionally, the flotation experiments of the pyrophyllite particles were conducted and the results showed that the flotation recovery has a positive correlation with mass fraction of SiO2, while negative correlation with mass fraction of Al2O3, TFe, and iep. Therefore, the content of SiO2 is beneficial to the flotation of the pyrophyllite particles.Pyrophyllite is a hydrous layered aluminum silicate [Al This paper is aim to investigate the effect of chemical composition on surface charge properties and flotation behaviors of pyrophyllite particles, which is of significant importance for pyrophyllite particles flotation. Five kinds of pyrophyllite samples were collected from Zhejiang, China. The chemical compositions of the samples are listed in The chemical compositions of the pyrophyllite particles were measured by X-ray fluorescence (Axios max, PANalytical, Netherlands). X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using a DX-2700 instrument (Dandong Haoyuan Instrument Co. Ltd., China) using Cu Kα radiation ( Flotation tests were carried out by using an XFG5-35 flotation machine (mechanical agitation) with a 40 The XRD patterns of the samples are shown in The SEM of the five samples are similar, in the photographs of sample Py-QT1, the particles are in the form of aggregation, and the size of pyrophyllite particles is about 50–100 The zeta potentials of the pyrophyllite samples as a function of pH are shown in     Zeta potential is the electric potential in the interfacial double layer at the location of the slipping plane relative to a point in the bulk fluid away from the interface which is dependent on the pH value of solution, mineral phase, crystal imperfections, chemical compositions, crystal forms and crystal surface structure The mineral phase and chemical composition of the pyrophyllite particles are relatively fixed in a certain ore deposit while they are obviously different from different ore deposits. As shown in The surface zeta potential variations as a function of pH have similar trend of the different pyrophyllite samples. While the iep of different samples varies from 2.35 to 3.46, the iep shows negative correlation with the mass fractions of SiO The authors would like to thank the