Hydrometallurgical leaching process enhanced by electric field coupled with sodium persulfate was developed to improve the leaching efficiency of vanadium. A high vanadium leaching efficiency of 95.64% was achieved under the optimal conditions, including roasting temperature at 650 °C, 5 wt% sodium persulfate, current density of 1000 A/m2, leaching temperature of 60 °C, leaching time of 30 min, liquid-solid ratio of 0.5 mL/g. X-ray diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and scanning electron microscopy were used to characterize the mechanism. Results indicated that the low-temperature roasting changed the phase of vanadium, while O2 produced in electric field promoted the chemical conversion and oxidation process. Meanwhile, electric field expedited the collision among the moving particles, therefore it facilitated the dissolution of wrapped vanadium. It also found that electric field and sodium persulfate had synergetical effect on oxidization of low-valent vanadium to high-valence, which made the leaching efficiency increased by 26.94%. A high selective extraction of vanadium was obtained by electro-oxidation leaching with the characteristic diffraction peak of the main phases disappeared in the XRD pattern, while leaving a residue composed primarily of silicon dioxide and iron oxide. These findings could provide guidance for utilization of vanadium slag.Vanadium is widely used in steel smelting ( Several methods, such as out-field intensification and multi-field coupling, were proposed to improve the resource utilization ( The present work in this study is to enhance oxidation from low-valent vanadium to high-valence by coupling of electric field and sodium persulfate, so as to improve the leaching efficiency of vanadium, which roasted at low temperature. In order to investigate the reaction mechanism, sodium persulfate is discussed first, then the electric field is added for consideration. The converter vanadium slag for this experiment was from Sichuan, China. The main chemical composition was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Shimadzu XRF-1800, Japan) shown in All the reagents for leaching (sodium persulfate) and for determination of vanadium content (sulfuric acid, phosphoric acid, ammonium ferrous sulfate, hexamethylenetetramine, potassium permanganate, All the experiments were conducted with 15 g slag and 3 g Na The concentration of vanadium in filtrate was determined by titration with ferrous ammonium sulfate. The leaching efficiency of vanadium was calculated by using the following Eq. The effect of sodium persulfate dosage on leaching efficiency were carried out under the following conditions: roasting temperature of 650 °C, leaching temperature of 60 °C, current density of 1000 A/m According to the results illustrated in The mechanism of intensification of vanadium extraction from low temperature sodium roasting by sodium persulfate were depicted in The effect of current density on leaching efficiency was discussed while roasting temperature, leaching temperature, sodium persulfate dosage, leaching time and liquid-to-solid ratio were kept constant as 650 °C, 60 °C, 5 wt%, 30 min and 2:1 mL/g. Compared with the results showed in The mechanism of enhanced leaching by electric field were shown in Furtherly, as described in Eq. The effect of roasting temperature on leaching efficiency was investigated from 350 °C to 750 °C at a leaching temperature of 60 °C, a sodium persulfate of 5 wt%, a current density of 1000 A/m As indicated in The olivine was oxidized below 500 °C, and the vanadium spinel began to decompose from 500 °C. Then, the vanadium was gradually oxidized to form water-soluble sodium vanadate with sodium carbonate, as the temperature continued to increase. As a matter of fact, when the roasting temperature was above 650 °C, increasing roasting temperature further had no remarkable effect on leaching efficiency because the silica started to dissolve into a liquid phase, which hindered the diffusion of oxygen, and was not conducive to the progress of the oxidation reaction. Moreover, the high silicon content of the raw materials in this study made the sintering more obvious. This made vanadium to be encapsulated by the liquid, rather than combining with sodium carbonate. Therefore, in this experiment, the roasting temperature was kept constant at 650 °C for the subsequent experiments. Eqs. (6)–(8) depicted the above reactions ( The effect of leaching temperature on leaching efficiency was investigated from 40 °C to 80 °C, and the leaching experiments were carried out under the following conditions: roasting temperature of 650 °C, sodium persulfate of 5 wt%, current density of 1000 A/m  Some experiments were conducted to evaluate an optimal leaching time for high leaching efficiency of vanadium, while the roasting temperature, leaching temperature, sodium persulfate dosage, current density and liquid-to-solid ratio were kept constant as 650 °C, 60 °C, 5 wt%, 1000 A/m In In leaching process, the liquid-to-solid ratio was a significant parameter affected the volume of filtrate and concentration of vanadium. The effect of liquid-to-solid ratio on leaching was studied from 1:1 mL/g to 1:5 mL/g under the optimized conditions: roasting temperature of 650 °C, leaching temperature of 60 °C, sodium persulfate of 5 wt%, current density of 1000 A/m As illustrated in The XRD pattern of raw slag and roasting clinker were presented in The main phases of vanadium slag after leaching measured by XRD were presented in The results obtained in this study showed that the enhancement of leaching efficiency of vanadium was obvious in the presence of electric field coupled with sodium persulfate. The leaching efficiency of vanadium reached 95.64% at the optimum conditions (roasting temperature of 650 °C, leaching temperature of 60 °C, 5 wt% sodium persulfate, current density of 1000 A/m This work was supported by the