For the design and the scale-up of screening processes and the optimization of operating parameters the particle-based discrete element method (DEM) as well as classic phenomenological screening models are available. Phenomenological screening process models are simple to use and require only sparse computational resources, hence providing the possibility to use them efficiently in industrial applications. In this context, a comparative benchmark of numerous kinetic and probabilistic screening models of various complexities has been performed for discontinuous screening, recently. Following the approach of this study, in the investigation here, DEM-simulations applying spherical and non-spherical particles are used to benchmark process models for continuous screening. In the DEM-simulations different particle characteristics such as size, shape and size distribution are taken into account. Screen characteristics such as aperture size, wire shape and inclination angles as well as operational parameters including vibration frequency, amplitude, stroke angle and mass flow rate are varied. Based on the data obtained from the simulations, the overall fraction retained on the screen as well as the selectivity in terms of overflow partition number, the transport velocity and the residence time all in dependence on particle size are investigated. Finally, phenomenological screening process models are adjusted to the outcome of the DEM-simulations in terms of the fraction retained on the screen and overflow separation curves, respectively. The resulting deviations are evaluated and thereby allowing the comparative benchmarking of available process models for continuous screening. Obtained DEM-results indicate a strong dependence of screening on operational parameters and particle shape. Screening process models vary intensively in their ability to represent DEM-results.Screening or sieving is a technical simple, but important process step widely used in industry for the classification of particles. In mechanical process engineering, materials preparation technology or energy technology it is routinely used to separate various bulk materials consisting of particles with sometimes broad size distribution according to desired size class specifications. Such particles are usually of non-spherical shape complicating the separation into homogeneous classes ( To overcome current limitations in the understanding of screening without performing extensive experimental investigations, the discrete element method (DEM) dating back to Documented experimental studies of screening date back to the first part of the last century ( Evident deviations for the stratification and the passage of near mesh sized particles as well as for the particle transport occur if non-spherical bulk material is modeled by spherical particles in simulations ( For screening processes with dry particles, the DEM was validated against experimental data ( In a former publication by the authors ( The article is divided into five sections. Sections Besides spherical particles, the DEM can be applied to systems with non-spherical shaped particles ( The multi-sphere method is a flexible approach to model complex shaped particles in the DEM. Thereby, the desired complex particle shape is resembled with clustered arbitrary sized spheres (  The normal component of the contact forces is obtained from a linear spring damper model which is exemplarily given for the contacting spheres Phenomenological screening process models aim for representing the particle size separation during a screening process. Some process models represent this time resolved while other models do it spatially resolved, dependent on the position along the screen. Separation curves, a second applicable model class (comp. ( Available phenomenological continuous screening models are divided into kinetic ( The first order kinetics provides the basis for kinetic models which can be extended further by a particle passage probability ( In contrast, some phenomenological screening models take concurrent subprocesses into consideration by providing additional input parameters which address e.g. the opposing processes of stratification and particle passage through the sieve openings (  The overall screening efficiency The “first-order rate law” ( It describes the change of mass flow of undersized particles on the screen Besides replacing time Model 9 is used in its original form (as stated in Therein, the particle diameter is calculated as The probabilistic model No. 11 by For the continuous screening investigations in this work, the crowded and the separated screening model equations Both more complex models by Further information, particularly on the more complex models by For screening processes in steady state, separation curves provide information on the separation as a function of the particle size summed up over the whole screen length in a spatially non-resolved form. For known fractional flow rates in the feed and in the overflow which can be obtained from experiments or simulations, overflow separation curves can be derived with In literature, several authors proposed equations to estimate separation curves without performing extensive experiments. Most of these model equations rely on the parameter  Based on the model by Another model equation normally used for air separators, but also applicable for screening processes was derived by In order to provide a better adaptability, based on the model structure by Their additional adjustable parameter Screening of a polydisperse feed material is investigated by the DEM in a continuous screen apparatus as shown in The initial mass flow of the polydisperse feed material amounts to 0.1 Due to the fact that results obtained from DEM simulations largely depend on the used parameters ( The stiffnesses Besides spheres, cylinders and double cones are studied in this investigation (comp. The following variations in operational and screen design parameters (comp. In all performed investigations, the feed consists of one of the particle shapes outlined in Particles are continuously fed onto the vibrated screen in the DEM-simulations well mixed until a steady state is reached in which the inlet flow rate is equal to the sum of overflow and underflow which is then maintained for at least Δ In It can be concluded, that the increased residence time of oversized particles is caused by a slower transport velocity. Primarily for cases in which a thick layer of particles forms out on the screen surface, stratification influences the residence time of the considered particle shapes. The more particles pile up, the longer is the residence time of all particles. To achieve a better comparability for the analysis of the particle passage investigated in the following, the passed mass flow rate is summed up and normalized by the feed mass flow rate for all particle classes with diameters smaller than the apertures. For all shapes the threshold diameter In the base case configuration using spheres (shown in Additionally, data for the overflow separation curves depicted as partition number over the ratio of particle size ( In the first variation performed ( In case of double cones, the separation curve is nearly ideal with only some undersized near mesh particles in the overflow, whereas the separation curve of volume equivalent cylinders reveals an evenly distributed presence of near mesh sized particles in the overflow and in the underflow (typical S-shape). An increased amplitude results in shorter residence times for oversized particles (increased transport velocity), but also in a much stronger reduction of undersized particle residence times and a pronounced increase of respective transport velocities (comp. The second parameter variation ( Initially, a stroke angle of 45° to the horizontal is used in the simulations which is changed according to In case of spheres a lower vertical stroke component (vibration plane tilted by 30°) results in a pronounced piling of particles already on the first parts of the screen because it is less probable for pegged spheres to leave blocked sieve openings. Therefore, the undersized material passes the apertures delayed/shifted along the screen toward its end or it is discharged from the screen as part of the overflow. 60% of the undersized material is released in this way. This additionally results in slower particle transport velocities and longer residence times. Due to the stronger horizontal motion component, oversized particles still need approximately the same time to travel along the screen. Although the support for horizontal transport is lower, a stronger vertical motion component (vibration plane tilted by 60°) accelerates the transport velocity of spheres. It also enhances the particle passage due to a faster removal of pegged particles which leads to shorter residence times for all particles (comp. The fourth variation takes the particle mass flow rate into account ( In the fifth investigation the particle passage through apertures generated by screen wires of rectangular and semicircular profiles is compared ( In the sixth variation the inclination angle of the screen surface is changed from 0° to 19° to the horizontal according to In the last investigation, a decrease of the equivalent particle diameter to The simulation results as outlined in Section The best match of the DEM results is obtained with the model by Soldinger (No. 12) followed by the two models of Grozubinsky et al. (Nos. 5, 7). This is due to the fact that all of them use more than one adjustable parameter to calculate only the lumped undersized fraction in dependence on the screen length. In contrast, a model that accounts for the different particle fractions has to provide information on each fraction which is a far more difficult task. In the latter case, the ratio of the number of model parameters and information provided is less favorable. The best result for such a model is obtained by the model of Standish (No. 4) because each particle class is represented by a single parameter. The model by Ferrara et al. (No. 11) has problems with representing the fraction retained on the first part of the screen (note the discontinuity between crowded and separated screening), but reveals a good match for the middle and end section of the screen. It reaches an overall good result for a model that accounts for the division of undersized particle fractions by only a few adjustable parameters. A comparable model which is easier to adjust, because no iterative procedure is required as in model No. 11, is the one by Subasinghe et al. (No. 8). The models by Nakajima et al. (No. 9) and Deghani et al. (No. 10) reveal larger deviations, however, needing only one adjustable parameter for all particle fractions. Already from this exemplarily selected data set, it can be concluded that spatially resolved screening process model accuracy is not necessarily correlated with the model complexity (number of governing equations), the number of adjustable model parameters and the aspect if undersized material is considered as lumped or in fractions. For the benchmarking of a larger number of investigations an average deviation of the simulated and model predicted fraction retained is calculated for models considering the whole fine material as one lumped undersized fraction by In Independent of shape, the models that do not account for the division of undersized particle fractions (Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 12) are quickest to adjust and obtain low deviations because only the lumped fraction retained curve has to fit to the simulation results (36 data points) instead of the fraction retained curves of all undersized particle classes (36 The initial (base) case with delayed/shifted particle passage and a resulting flat fraction retained curve is comparatively easy to model. This leads to low deviations for most of the investigated models. Furthermore, cases with instant particle passage and strongly decreasing fraction retained curves reveal not much deviation between models and DEM results, likewise. Stronger differences occur if the fraction retained curves are decreasing unevenly or if they stagnate over a certain length of the screen. The models that account for the division of undersized particle fractions, particularly models Nos. 8–10, have more problems if the differences between the passage rates of undersized particles are erratic or if the curves of different particle size classes intersect each other. This could be the case, if the particles have a high transport velocity on the screen when e.g. a large amplitude, frequency or inclination angle is applied. In the investigations with double cones ( The models by Grozubinsky et al. (Nos. 5, 7) reveal the least deviations for volume equivalent cylinders ( Some of the investigated models show fewer deviations for simulations with spherical particles. This is easy to explain for kinetic models (Nos. 1–6) without a passage probability and the models by Soldinger (Nos. 12, 13) which all do not take the particle shape into account. Models Nos. 7 and 11 calculate the particle passage probability, but do not account for the particle shape. In contrast, models Nos. 9 and 10 consider the particle shape in the functions for the passage probability (comp. In a second step, the steady state separation curve screening models are benchmarked based on the data shown in Section All models reveal acceptable results with little deviations. There are some differences due to the scattering of the simulation results and for the representation of oversized near mesh particles. Beside the second revised model of Trawinski (No. VI) and the one by Plitt (No. II), the adjusted separation curves are not able to properly represent the values of the partition number slightly above a particle to aperture size ratio of 1. The overall best results in For the benchmarking over a larger number of investigations in case of separation curve models an average deviation of the simulated and model predicted separation curves is calculated by In Besides model No. I by Dehghani et al., the investigated steady state separation curve screening models do not consider the particle shape. Nevertheless, deviations between the adjusted models and the DEM-results remain low due to the fact that the separation curve models are adjusted to each simulation separately as they do not have any predictive capabilities. Separation curve screening models are able to easily represent partition numbers forming an ideal separation curve (unit step function) or a symmetric S-shaped curve. In case of spheres ( The very low deviations are caused by undersized near mesh particles that do not pass the apertures and thereby lead to symmetric separation curves. Geometric scaling (size reduction) or a lower mass flow rate also result in nearly ideal separation curves, leading to low deviations between DEM-results and separation curve models. For cases with a larger transport velocity induced by larger amplitudes, frequencies or inclination angles, the amount of small particles in the overflow increases. The simulation results do not lead to symmetric S-shaped curves due to undersized near mesh particles not passing the screen. This ends up in larger deviations between the separation curve screening models and the simulation results. For the base case configuration or if a semicircular wire profile, a higher mass flow or a stroke angle with a larger horizontal motion component is applied, the near mesh sized particles are intensively pegging the apertures. Therefore, many small and even very small particles are discharged into the overflow. As a consequence, separation curve screening models reveal larger deviations when being adjusted to these simulation results. Non-spherical particles ( Lower deviations for separation curve models are obtained in some cases if double cones are screened instead of spheres ( The summed up deviations for volume equivalent cylinders ( The overall lowest deviations summed up over all investigations can be obtained by the model No. II by Plitt and the first revised model by Trawinski (No. V). In both models, the term Compared with spatially resolved models that do not account for the representation of undersized fractions, the deviations of separation curve models are in the same order of magnitude, because both model classes have to adjust to a set of relevant values of roughly similar number (number of positions on the screen and number of particle size classes). In contrast, the fractioned spatially resolved models which are adjusted to the product of both, positions and particle size classes, obtain much larger deviations. The discrete element method (DEM) has been used to perform continuous screening investigations of a polydisperse particle mixture with particles of predefined shapes (spheres, double cones and volume equivalent cylinders). The particles have been subdivided into 100 size classes consisting of coarse, oversized near mesh, undersized near mesh and fine material represented by particles with diameters of 7.35 Results obtained by the DEM clearly unveil that the screening efficiency in case of a broad particle size distribution including particle sizes close to the aperture dimensions is higher for non-spherical particles than for spheres due to the strong pegging of the latter. The screening efficiency for spheres, but also for non-spherical particles can be increased by enlarging the vibration amplitude and frequency as well as the inclination angle in continuous screening until a threshold is reached. In case of exceeding this threshold amplitude, frequency or inclination angle screening efficiencies decrease. In the investigation here, the initially applied operating configuration (for amplitude, frequency, inclination angle) results in the highest screening efficiency for non-spherical particles. Moreover, a stroke angle with approximately evenly distributed horizontal and vertical motion components leads to the highest screening efficiency for non-spherical particles. This is due to the low pegging tendency of these particles and a sufficiently induced particle transport. In case of spheres, a stroke angle with a larger vertical motion component supports both, the screening efficiency and the particle transport by removing pegged particles from the apertures. The amount of material charged to the screen needs to be adapted to the size of the screening apparatus. Note, that a strongly non-linear relation exists between screening efficiency and the mass flow rate. In case of spheres with the configuration applied here, a reduction of mass flow can prevent the strong accumulation of particles which is observed for enhanced mass flow rates which strongly deteriorates particle passage. In contrast, a larger mass flow rate of non-spherical particles is easily realizable. Using semicircular wires in case of double cones increases the risk of pegging whereas spherical particles and cylinders are nearly unaffected by the chosen wire profile. A reduction of particle and aperture size (geometric scaling) leads to more dynamic particle motion, resulting in less particle passage for non-spherical particles, but in a prevention of pegging and therefore, in a higher screening efficiency for spheres. The screening models by In case of steady state separation curve screening models, the most accurate adjustment can be obtained with the model by All screening models (spatially resolved and separation curve models) are dependent on the screening material and apparatus and rely on one or more adjustable parameters. Therefore, they cannot predict screening processes where they are not adjusted for. Complex screening models ( The DEM-simulations performed here, automatically include the startup phase of the screening process which is not considered in models for continuous screening only modeling the steady state. In further investigations, dynamic changes like the startup or the shutdown phase needing a time resolved representation will be addressed and process parameters like the mass flow rate, the particle distribution or the frequency will be varied during the simulations. Note, that the DEM simulations were not directly benchmarked against experimental investigations in this study. A benchmarking has been exemplarily done for the DEM approach applied here to literature data ( In this work here, complex shaped particles are represented by a small number of clustered spheres. In future work, the shape will be taken into account more accurately by a larger number of clustered spheres and particles represented by polyhedra, respectively. Another task in the future will be the study of screen performance linked to moisture content. The resulting liquid bridges will influence the transport velocity and behavior of particles along the screen. Therefore, the residence time and passage of particles through the particle bed and apertures will be influenced. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support by