The operation of mineral processing units or plants is related to the mineral composition of the ore. However, unit performances are usually characterized in terms of metal content or recovery as this data is easier to be obtained rather than the mineral content. This paper presents a data reconciliation method that combines material balancing calculations and mineral stoichiometric information to estimate balanced mineral composition, chemical assays and flow rates in various streams of a mineral processing plant. The advantage of this method is evaluated by comparing the variance of the reconciled variables from this method to those obtained from usual data reconciliation methods. The estimated mineral composition leads to improved process performance evaluation.Number of measured elements ( Value of Intermediate calculation matrices Vector of solids flow rates Relative flow rates vector Diagonal matrix of relative flow rates Block diagonal matrix of the relative flow rates Vector of independent relative solids flow rates ( Number of available information pieces or identity matrix depending on the context Maximum likelihood criterion Number of plant streams Lagrange associated to a constrained LQ problem Number of selected ore minerals Network matrix Block diagonal matrix of Number of selected ore chemical elements Number of nodes in the plant Number of measured mineral mass fractions ( Variance-covariance matrix Generic notation for any element mass fraction Vector of Generic notation for any mineral mass fraction Vector of Vector of Total number of variables to be estimated Index for a matrix related to chemical elements Index for a matrix related to mineral phases Index for a matrix related to flow rates Index for chemical elements Index for plant streams Index for minerals Lower index indicating either the removed mineral in the conservation constraint or the reference flow rate Upper index indicating measurement values of any measured variable Accentuation for an estimated or reconciled value of any variable Upper index for any mineral content in a set of Matrices used for expressing the network flow rates from the independent ones Lagrange multiplier Matrix containing the mass fraction coefficients corresponding to the chemical stoichiometry of the minerals ( Matrix pointing at the measured variables Modified Block matrix of Data reconciliation procedure using respectively raw data, balanced data and including mineral constraints Optimization of a quadratic function under linear constraints Maximum Likelihood estimation method Non-linear programming for optimization of a function under non-linear constraints Relative standard deviation The ore that is feeding a concentrator is made of minerals that condition the energy requirements for the ore comminution and the performance of the subsequent separation circuit. Indeed, a change in the mineral composition of the ore may affect grinding mill throughput as well as the recovery or grade of the economical products. Despite this recognized relationships, the mineral composition of the ore is seldom measured or estimated to provide regular information for plant performance evaluation. Some methods such as QEM-SCAN are available to measure the concentration of the minerals in the ore samples ( Samples of the streams of mineral processing plants are collected on a daily basis to be assayed for the strategic elements. The measurements are reconciled to produce coherent data based on the material conservation concept ( The objectives of this study are: (1) to propose a more efficient data reconciliation calculation algorithm for large size data set based on a hierarchical structure allowing an analytical solution for the ore mineral and/or chemical composition; (2) to apply the method to a simulated complex sulfide Pb-Zn-Cu-Ag ore flotation plant; (3) to compare the reconciled process variables and performance indices reliability of the proposed method to the conventional ones that do not make use of the mineral stoichiometric constraints. The paper consists of four sections. The first section presents the formulation of the data reconciliation and mineral reconstruction problem involving flow rates, chemical elements and mineral composition measurements. The second section proposes a method that simultaneously estimates the mineral composition from the chemical assays and balances this data with the estimated flow rates in the streams of a circuit. The third section describes the simulated mineral processing plant (a complex sulfides flotation plant) and the related data used to test the method. The fourth section discusses the data reconciliation results and compares the reliability of the variable estimates and metal recoveries to the reliability of those obtained through two other sub-optimal methods. A data reconciliation problem of a single process or a plant is usually defined as a statistical procedure that allows the estimation of measured and unmeasured process variables submitted to physicochemical constraints. Usually the main considered constraints are the laws of mass and energy conservation. In the most frequent cases, one considers the total mass conservation of one phase and of the chemical species it is composed of, thus leading to a set of bilinear constraints ( The plant is assumed to operate in permanent regime (steady-state reconciliation). The plant is a The flowing material is the ore solid phase characterized by its Two ore properties are considered: the chemical composition The mineral compositions are known through a stoichiometric matrix The measurements are unbiased and their random errors follow Gaussian distribution without error correlation between the three measurement levels (flow rates, chemical elements and mineral mass fractions), but allowing error correlation within each of the three levels. All the selected process variables are estimable. The variable estimation problem is redundant, a necessary condition being that there are more measurements and non-redundant constraints than process variables to be estimated. The addition of the mineral stoichiometric compositions and possibly measured mass fractions add redundancy to the overall variable estimation process. The ML estimation scheme is applied using the following three sets of quadratic criterion for the three types of variables for the ore:  for the chemical elements:  for the mineral phases: When either the chemical elements or the mineral phases composition is exhaustive in the plant streams, the following additional constraints must be considered: When a data reconciliation problem involves simultaneously chemical elements and mineral phase variables, the known stoichiometry of the mineral imposes additional constraints which may create additional redundancy to the overall estimation problem. For any stream  The The information in Eq. In order to solve Eq. The selection of the strategy to reduce the size of The An example of the The The estimation problem of Eqs. After some simplifications the Lagrange is rewritten as: The data reconciliation problem is solved by zeroing the Lagrange equation derivatives with respect to This solution is valid for the assumptions made on the measurement and constraints structure, but for other redundancy patterns of the data reconciliation problem, another structure of the search variables and constraints might be required for solving the minimization problem. At the upper level of the ML criterion minimization Then the optimal value In parallel the The proposed method does not require strong programming skills and can be implemented in spreadsheet softwares such as Excel-Microsoft The method is illustrated with simulated data from a complex sulfide flotation circuit. The circuit is described with a brief presentation of the simulator used to generate data to test the data reconciliation method. The considered flotation circuit has been inspired from the Brunswick Mining complex sulfide flotation circuit ( A simplified flow sheet of the flotation circuit is shown in The ore processing follows the conventional route of grinding and flotation. The ground ore is processed in a Cu-Pb flotation circuit that produces a bulk concentrate of copper and lead minerals. The reject of the Cu-Pb flotation circuit is processed in a zinc circuit to recover the zinc mineral. The galena recovered in the bulk Cu-Pb concentrate is depressed allowing the flotation of a copper concentrate in the copper separation circuit. The copper flotation reject is conditioned to activate pyrite that is floated in a reverse circuit leaving zinc and lead minerals in the reject that is processed to obtain a Pb and a Pb-Zn concentrate in the bulk Pb-Zn flotation circuits. The simulated ore feed is assumed to be composed of the minerals identified in The flotation circuit is simulated using the six minerals identified in An example of a simulated set of data is shown in The simulated data of The simulator is used to generate 50 sampling campaigns of the same ‘real state’ of The data reconciliation method estimating mineral mass fractions described in Section The circuit is composed of eight nodes and fifteen streams. The DR3 data reconciliation algorithm selects six independent relative flow rates, e.g. streams 3, 4, 6, 9, 14 and 15, as Nine elemental assays (Cu, Pb, Zn, Fe, S, Ag, Al, Mg, SiO   DR1 uses raw values of the measured variables, and calculates directly the values of unmeasured variables, such as the flow rates 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14 and 15, the plant recoveries of Cu, Zn and Pb in their respective concentrates, the recoveries of Pb and Zn in the Pb-Zn concentrate, the recoveries of pyrite, chlorite and quartz in the plant tailing, and the recovery of Ag in the Pb concentrate, where Ag recovery is maximum. The mineral mass fractions DR2 minimizes the ML criterion The DR1 algorithm does not allow mass conservation constraints to be obeyed. In the particular flow rate measurement strategy selected here, however, the calculated ore flow rates verify the ore conservation since the measurements are made on an independent set of streams, thus allowing a unique estimate for all the flow rates. The DR2 algorithm warrants the conservation of the ore and the chemical elements, but the reconstructed minerals do not obey the constraints of their conservation along the plant network. Given a set of either measured The comparison between the results of the three estimation methods provides a way of assessing the contribution of the constraints, generated by the knowledge about the minerals present in the ore, to the performance of the data reconciliation procedure. The results from the three estimation methods are compared using the relative standard deviation (RSTDEV) of the estimated    It is important to underline that the recovery reliabilities are considerably improved by the reconciliation procedure. This is related to the fact that data reconciliation not only decreases the estimate standard deviations of Finally, In general, the degree of redundancy would grow while the ratio The conversion stoichiometric matrix Applying mineral reconstruction method on the data reconciliation procedure improves the estimation of chemical element mass fractions and flow rates, and the reliability of performance indicators such as recoveries of valuable metals. Only the ore mineral information has been added to the classical two level data reconciliation method. If data concerning particle size distribution, either the size-wise mineral mass fractions or size-wise minerals liberation degree, the species transfer between a liquid and a solid phase, etc is added to the data reconciliation problem, the structure complexity of the problem would significantly increase. In addition, the coupling of data reconciliation with plant optimal conception or tuning, plant monitoring and control or real-time optimization is to be evaluated to determine the advantage of using advanced data filtering methods in terms of process performance improvement measured through metallurgical or economic criteria. As mineral processing plants treat minerals rather than elements, it is of great importance to apply data reconciliation methods that simultaneously estimate mass fractions of mineral phases and elements, and flow rates. Since the measurement methods of minerals content are not used for regular or daily sample analysis, process operators evaluate the plant performance using only chemical assays of metals or elements that are readily measured. Using only chemical measurements can be confusing, because some elements are carried by different minerals in the ore that respond differently to a given method of separation. The hierarchical data reconciliation method presented in this paper provides mineral mass fractions using chemical assays and solids flow rates of a mineral processing circuit. The method combines material conservation and completeness concepts to return a set of precise estimated mineral content. It is clearly shown on the studied case study that plant performance can be evaluated more accurately using estimated minerals content. The plant performance indicators, e.g. metal and mineral recoveries and concentrate grades, are much more reliable using this method than usual reconciliation procedures. The feasibility of the method depends strongly on the structure of the available mineral phase information. Concepts such as the mineral information uncertainties and problem redundancy have to be carefully investigated prior the implementation of the method. It is reasonable to think that data reconciliation methods including mineral information would allow better maintenance, optimization and control of mineral processing units. The authors acknowledge the financial support from FRQNT, MITACs, COREM and ArcelorMittal Exploitation Canada. If some (or all) mass fractions of minerals on some of the streams are measured, the redundancy of the estimation problem is increased. In this case, the additional term After some simplifications the Lagrange is rewritten as: The data reconciliation problem is solved by zeroing the Lagrangian derivatives with respect to The chemical composition of the ore in any plant stream can be calculated through the stoichiometric matrix When the mineral composition is exhaustive the chemical composition can be calculated for some or all the elements The mineral composition can be reconstructed if the number of assayed elements is In the case where the mineral reconstruction is performed on only one stream at a time, without considering the material balance constraints with the other plant streams, the ML solution is written as: