The influence of surfactants: anionic SDS, nonionic Triton-100 and their mixture (SDS/TX-100) on the structure of the adsorption layer in the system: carboxymethylcellulose (CMC)/alumina (Al2O3) was measured. The surface charge density of alumina and its zeta potential were determined in the presence of the CMC macromolecules and the surfactant particles. In order to gain more information about the structure of adsorption layer the amount of CMC adsorption in the presence of surfactants as well as the thickness of the CMC adsorption layer were determined. It was proved that in the presence of surfactants mixture (SDS/TX-100) the amount of adsorption of CMC is the highest and the obtained adsorption layer is the thickest. On the other hand, when Triton X-100 is added to the measured system the polysaccharide conformation is closely packed. The amount of adsorption is large but the thickness of the adsorption layer is relatively low. In the presence of SDS macromolecules of CMC form conformation expanded towards the bulk solution. Such a conformation is characterized by the smaller amount of adsorption of polymer but the larger thickness of the adsorption layer.Understanding the behaviour of polyelectrolyte/surfactant mixtures at the interface is very important because of their widespread industrial applications such as painting, detergency, water treatment, and oil recovery only one of these two adsorbates has the affinity to the surface but they cannot bind to each other; only one of these two adsorbates has the affinity to the surface but they also can bind to each other; both the polymer and the surfactant have affinity to the surface but not to each other; both the polymer and the surfactant have the affinity to the surface and to each other. The adsorption of polyelectrolyte or polyelectrolyte/surfactant mixture at the surface of the solid causes significant changes in the structure and properties of the electric double layer (edl). There are two major parameters characterizing the edl between the solid surface and the solution. The first one, the surface charge density, refers to the compact part of edl whereas the second one, the zeta potential, characterizes the diffused part of edl. There are two reasons responsible for changes in the surface charge density of the adsorbent in the presence of polyelectrolyte or surfactant. Firstly, an adsorbing polymer blocks a fraction of charged groups of the solid which leads to changes in the surface charge density of the solid. Secondly the adsorption of ionic polymer or polymer/surfactant mixture at the surface sometimes causes that the majority of its charged groups remains in the compact layer of the edl. Such a situation also leads to changes in the surface charge density. As far as the influence of polymer or polymer/surfactant mixtures on the zeta potential is concerned, there are three possible effects that influence changes in the zeta potential The amount of adsorbed polymer as well as the thickness of the polymer adsorption layer is very important parameters characterizing the structure of the adsorption layer in the system: polymer/metal oxide. The adsorption of polymer on the metal oxide surface is determined by many factors. Among them the most important ones are: (i) surface properties (the surface charge density, the surface energy), (ii) polymer properties (the charge density of the polyelectrolyte, molecular weight and its concentration), (iii) solution properties (pH, kind of background electrolyte and its concentration), and (iv) other properties (the addition of surfactant or polyvalent cation) The aim of this paper was to investigate the influence of surfactants (SDS, Triton X-100 and their mixture) on the structure of the adsorption layer in the system: carboxymethylcellulose/alumina concerning the surface charge density of alumina, the zeta potential of this oxide, the adsorbed amount of CMC and the thickness of polysaccharide adsorption layer. The chosen systems attracted much attention owing to their applications in mineral processing Al Sodium salt of carboxymethylcellulose was obtained from Sigma–Aldrich. The viscosity average molecular weight measured using a rotary rheometer CVO 50 (Bohlin Instruments) was found to be 22,000. This value was calculated using Mark-Houwink equation SDS, Triton X-100 was purchased from Fluka. The concentrations of used surfactants and their mixture in all measured systems equalled 10 The surface charge on the metal oxide is formed as a result of reactions between the surface hydroxyl groups and electrolyte ions In classic theories of the electric double layer, background electrolyte ions are assumed to adsorb nonspecifically, but in modern models these ions undergo also the specific adsorption. A comparison between titration curves of electrolyte with a titration curve of the metal oxide suspension both the same ionic strength is used to determination of the surface charge density of metal oxide. The surface charge density is calculated from the dependence between volumes of acid/base added to the suspension in order to obtain desired pH value: Al The data obtained from the surface charge density measurements were adapted to the evaluation of changes in the concentration of various surface groups of metal oxide using computer program, written by Janusz. This program uses numerical optimization of the model of electrical triple layer 0.05 0.2 The thickness of the polysaccharide adsorption layer ( The Einstein equation connects the volume fraction of dispersed solid with the suspension viscosity in the following way: The volumetric fraction ( Intrinsic viscosity measurements were carried out using a rheometer (CVO 50, Bohlin Instruments). CMC samples were dissolved in electrolyte (NaCl) and allowed to stand overnight to fully hydrate. Then they were diluted to the required concentration and surfactants were added. Typically five concentrations were measured to yield the regression line of the reduced viscosity versus concentration from which intrinsic viscosity was extracted by extrapolation to zero concentration.    As one can see, the increase of carboxymethylcellulose adsorption accompanies the presence of surfactants in every measured adsorption system ( In order to investigate the influence of the surfactants on the conformation of the CMC macromolecules the intrinsic viscosity [ The presence of surfactants has a great influence on the structure the adsorption layer in the system: carboxymethylcellulose/alumina. It was proved that the presence of anionic SDS, nonionic TX-100 and their mixture causes the decrease of the surface charge density of Al Author wishes to thank Prof. S. Chibowski for helpful discussions and stimulating critics, as well as Prof. W. Janusz and Dr. E. Skwarek for helping with the evaluation of changes in the concentration of various surface groups of alumina.