Purpose
                  Current guidelines recommend that open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) for distal radius fractures (DRFs) be performed within 4 weeks of injury. Delayed DRF management (4 weeks or more) is traditionally subject to corrective osteotomy. We report a 5-year single-surgeon series of delayed DRFs that were treated by ORIF rather than osteotomy.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a retrospective review on all patients admitted to a single tertiary care center with a DRF requiring ORIF (2007–2012). Institutional review board approval was obtained. Patients were divided into an early group (EG) (surgery less than 4 weeks after injury) and delayed group (DG) (surgery after 4 or more weeks). Data collected included demographics, injury pattern, intraoperative parameters, and pre- and postoperative x-ray findings. Subjective and objective functional data were determined using a Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand questionnaire score and Mayo Wrist Score.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 171 patients (EG = 54; DG = 117) underwent ORIF from 2007 to 2012 and met inclusion criteria. Both groups had similar age, gender, and racial demographics. Of these, 117 patients in the delayed group underwent ORIFs at 40 ± 13.9 days (range, 28–146 days) after injury. Preoperative fracture patterns were radiographically equivalent. A dorsal approach was required more frequently in the EG (7.4%) compared with DG (1.1%). The Orbay maneuver was performed at a significantly higher rate in the DG (55.8%) compared with the EG (38.8%). Blood loss, tourniquet times, intraoperative complications, radiographic parameters, articular incongruency rates, and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score, and Mayo Wrist Score were not statistically significant between groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  No significant differences were found in intraoperative technique, operative time, postoperative radiographs, and subjective outcome measures in patients treated with early versus late ORIF. Despite the current belief that primary ORIF in delayed DRF is technically impossible and warrants an osteotomy, our series indicates that ORIF is indeed a viable option in DRFs as late as 5 months after injury.
               
                  Type of study/level of evidence
                  Therapeutic IVDistal radius fractures (DRFs) are the most common fractures presenting to the emergency department worldwide and comprise almost one-sixth of all fracture cases. Hand clinics at county hospitals are frequently inundated with delayed presentations of DRFs (greater than 4 weeks) owing to innate difficulties within the county hospital system, lack of medical insurance and access to care, and patient population characteristics. These delayed DRFs are traditionally subject to corrective osteotomy with bone grafting resulting from inherent technical difficulties in recreating the fracture lines caused by callus formation. In contrast, this article a 5-year case series from a single surgeon’s experience of delayed DRFs treated with primary ORIF. To differentiate primary ORIF from corrective osteotomy, we defined osteotomy as a new bone cut made through a nonfracture plane. We therefore present the operative technique and outcomes of primary ORIF in treating delayed DRF compared with early DRF. We obtained institutional review board approval. A retrospective chart review was conducted on all patients with DRFs evaluated at a single tertiary care center from January, 2007 to December, 2012. All patients underwent a trial of closed reduction and casting in the emergency department. The decision to operate was made by the senior surgeon based on clinical and radiographic features of instability, displacement, degree of impaction or shortening, intra-articular incongruity, and/or impending malunion. As previously described, In addition, we assessed the degree of healing on preoperative radiographs. However, the decision to attempt ORIF was made during surgery, based on unique fracture and callus characteristics and whether the fracture was able to be mobilized to permit anatomic reduction. Patients requiring operative intervention were included in the study. Patients were divided into an early group (EG) (surgery performed less than 4 weeks after injury) and delayed group (DG) (surgery performed 4 or more weeks after injury). Demographic data collected included age, gender, race, hand dominance, side of injury, mechanism of injury, time to presentation, and time to surgery. All procedures were performed by one surgeon (P.B.), who is a hand fellowship–trained senior faculty member at a Level 1 tertiary referral research institution. At the initiation of data collection, P.B. had 15 years of hand surgery experience. Under axillary nerve block and monitored anesthesia care, closed reduction and percutaneous pinning under fluoroscopic guidance was first attempted in appropriate EG candidates, based on acceptable parameters. Closed reduction with pinning was not attempted in the DG patients. If it was impossible to perform closed reduction with percutaneous pinning, an ORIF through a standard volar approach through the subsheath of the flexor carpi radialis tendon was used. Radiographic evaluation was conducted using standard measurements as described by Kreder et al Radiographs taken at the early time point (early postoperative period, at least 1 week after the operation) and the late time point (late postoperative period, at least 5 weeks after the operation) were analyzed. Radiographic features recorded were fracture union rates, radial tilt, volar tilt, ulnar variance, and articular congruency rates. To determine articular congruency, we looked at anterior-posterior, lateral, and oblique images, and if any step-off or gap was noted, this was delineated to be articular incongruity. We did not include measures for specific articular congruity, because inter- and intra-observer reliability in measuring the numeric value of intra-articular displacement has been shown to be poor.  Data were collected and basic descriptive statistics were used to summarize study sample demographics. The preoperative and postoperative radiographic data and the outcome data analyses were conducted using SigmaPlot 12 statistics software (Systat Software, Inc, San Jose, CA). Data were initially tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Data sets that passed the normality test were tested using the paired or unpaired A total of 198 patients with DRF required ORIF from 2007 to 2012. Of these, 173 patients (EG = 54; DG = 119) underwent ORIF by the senior author. The remaining 25 patients were treated by another surgeon. Because of the large difference in numbers of patients treated by each surgeon (25 vs 173), we thought that adding this small group of patients would introduce variability and bias while not notably contributing to the statistical analyses, and thus we excluded it. Of the 119 patients in the DG, 2 required corrective osteotomies and were excluded from subsequent data analysis. The remaining 117 patients underwent ORIF at 40 ± 9.9 days (range, 28–146 days) after injury. The patient who underwent ORIF at 146 days was an isolated case differing markedly from the remaining group, and thus was excluded from analyses. Demographically, both groups were similar in terms of age, gender, and race ( Preoperative fracture and injury patterns were radiographically similar; there were no statistical differences in characteristics ( During surgery, both groups had minimal (< 10-mL) blood loss, no intraoperative complications, similar tourniquet times (EG = 91.6 ± 23.1 minutes; DG = 98.6 ± 23.2 minutes), and infrequent use of the dorsal approach (EG 7.4%, DG 1.1%; Radiographic measures of fracture sites in both groups were conducted in the early postoperative period (EG = 15 ± 7.9 days; DG = 18 ± 8.2 days) and at least 5 weeks after surgery (EG = 92 ± 43.6 days; DG= 82 ± 46.2 days). Patients who were lost to follow-up were excluded from the final analysis (EG = 2; DG = 7). No statistical differences were noted in either volar tilt angle or ulnar variance measurements; however, radial tilt was statistically smaller in the EG, but by only 1.5° ( We recorded Distal radius fracture management continues to generate considerable interest and debate. The approach to DRFs with delayed presentation (> 4 weeks) with impending malunion, the so called nascent malunion, is not straightforward and no agreement exists about treatment modality. Our experience contrasts with these guidelines. Corrective osteotomy was required for only 2 of the 119 patients in the DG. The callus was debrided and the fracture lines were recreated in the remaining 117 patients, enabling primary ORIF. We performed ORIF successfully in patients 4 to 11 weeks after injury (moreover, this author [P.B.] performed primary ORIF as far out as 5 months in one patient [data not reported here]). One possible reason for success in debriding callus and achieving primary reduction and fixation at time points far from injury may be related to the patient population. It is well-established Because age, gender, and osteoporosis are well-known to affect fracture healing and therefore outcomes from DRF, During surgery, there were no differences in blood loss or complications between the treatment groups ( Surgical correction of distal radius malunions can be technically difficult. Functional results were considered stable 6 months after the operation. Limitations of this study included a retrospective design with inherent informational and temporal bias. In addition, Mayo Wrist Scores (based on hand therapist discharge notes) and Despite the current conviction that ORIFs in delayed DRFs are technically impossible and merit an osteotomy, this series indicates that ORIFs are a viable and reliable option in DRFs as late as 11 weeks after injury, assuming incomplete healing on preoperative radiographs. Further studies are warranted to determine the quality of long-term outcomes in this patient population.