Closed-wedge valgus high tibial osteotomy (HTO) has been reported to be an effective procedure for the treatment of medial compartment osteoarthritis of the knee. It requires shortening the fibula, for which many techniques have been described. Dislocation of the proximal tibiofibular joint limits the correction angle of the procedure and the osteotomy of the fibular head runs the rare but dramatic risk of common fibular nerve palsy, which is why many surgeons perform the osteotomy more distally at the shaft. However, the potential complications of fibula shaft osteotomy in closed-wedge proximal tibial osteotomy have been poorly reported. The purpose of this study is to accurately define the incidence and risk of fibular complications.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  One hundred and eight patients (59 men, 49 women, 53±10years old, preoperative varus: 6.7°±4°) underwent a closed-wedge HTO with fibular shaft osteotomy between 1999 and 2004. They were followed up prospectively for clinical and radiological evaluation (2years of follow-up). The main evaluation criterion was the presence of fibular nonunion.
               
                  Results
                  Eighteen knees (16.6%) underwent fibular complications: 15 nonunions were indexed (13.9%); 11 of them (10.1%) required surgical revision. Three knees had nerve injury, with spontaneous recovery for two of them.
               
                  Discussion
                  Fibular nonunion is the most frequent complication, which often leads to revision procedures. Nonunion was correlated to the preoperative body mass index, the obliquity of the osteotomy plane, and the fragmentary contact. No nonunion was reported when the obliquity of the osteotomy plane was above 50° or the fragment contact greater than 50%.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, therapeutic study.High tibial osteotomy is an effective procedure for the treatment of medial compartment osteoarthritis of the knee However, to our knowledge, the specific risks of fibular shaft osteotomy in closed-wedge proximal tibial osteotomy have been poorly reported A retrospective study on 108 closed-wedge HTOs in 97 patients (mean age, 53 The hip-knee angle (HKA) was The patients, all active, presented beginning and painful medial femorotibial arthrosis. All surgical procedures were performed by a senior surgeon. The closed-wedge fixation was implemented using a “swan neck” blade plate (Medicalex-France Fibular osteotomy was associated with tibial osteotomy in all cases. This was done at the junction of the middle third and distal third with a chisel or an oscillating saw depending on the operator ( The usual radiological follow-up included immediate postoperative AP and lateral X-rays of the leg and a long-leg film at 3 union: union in less than 3 delayed union: union in 3–12 nonunion requiring surgical revision: patients who underwent a second surgical intervention between 6 permanent fibular nonunion still present 2 Other than the union process, several radiological criteria were studied: the fibular osteotomy level calculated by the ratio between the distance from the head of the fibula and the total length of the fibula; the type of osteotomy plane: lateromedial or anteroposterior; the angle of the osteotomy plane with the horizontal line – if the osteotomy was oriented in the coronal plane, the angle between the osteotomy plane and the fibular axis on the lateral leg X-ray was measured; if the osteotomy was oriented in the sagittal plane, the angle was measured on the AP X-ray; the percentage of contact at the fibular osteotomy site (also on the AP or lateral X-ray depending on the osteotomy plane); and the correction resulting from the valgus tibial osteotomy by comparing the pre- and postoperative long-leg films. All the results were analyzed using SPSS 10.0 software with a 5% significance threshold. The relation between the following variables and the onset of fibular pseudarthrosis was analyzed using the chi-square test and different ANOVAs: age at surgery, sex, body mass index (BMI), the degree of tibial correction resulting from the osteotomy, the fibular osteotomy location, the percentage of contact at the osteotomy line, the angle of the line with the horizontal line, the main orientation of the line (lateromedial or anteroposterior), the presence or absence of a comminution, and the osteotomy modality (oscillating saw or chisel). The mean postoperative HKA angle was 183.1° (SD, 3.9°) with a correction angle of 10.8° (SD, 3.5°). The mean ratio between the distance from the fibula head to the osteotomy site and the total length of the fibula was 0.6 (SD, 0.09). The fibular osteotomy was in the sagittal plane in 23 cases (21.3%) and in the frontal plane in 85 cases (78.7%). The mean angle of the osteotomy plane was 46° (SD, 17.2°). The percentage of contact between the osteotomy surfaces was on average 53.2% (SD 32.6%). The mean postoperative HSS score was 89.4 points (SD, 9.2 points) at 2 The results as well as the existence of fibular nonunion are summarized in Eighteen knees (16.6%) presented a fibular complication: three knees (2.7%) had nerve lesions, two of which resolved spontaneously. One patient had permanent hypoesthesia of the dorsal and plantar aspects of the foot. Fifteen cases of fibular nonunion (13.8%) were observed, 11 of which (10.1%) required surgical revision (bone graft decortication and plate fixation) performed a mean 9.4 The occurrence of nonunion was statistically related to preoperative BMI ( No significant difference was observed on the other criteria between the “union” and “nonunion” groups ( Three patients developed compartment syndrome (two cases of anterior and lateral compartment aponeurotomy). Other complications related to the tibial osteotomy were encountered: one case of excessive tibial valgus requiring surgical correction, three tibial fractures (one surgically revised), and one hematoma. HTO is a reproducible technique Osteotomy of the fibula head is a frequent source of common fibular nerve lesions. In a study on nerve conduction involving 11 patients, Aydogdu et al. Nerve lesions are fully described in the literature In the present series, the valgus angle of the tibial osteotomy was not correlated with the occurrence of nonunion. This displacement also caused traction and compression of the surrounding soft tissues, most particularly in the middle and distal thirds of the fibula, where the fibular artery and vein are in close contact with the medial cortex. The nonunion rate is correlated with a high BMI as well as with two technical criteria: obliquity of the osteotomy plane and the contact surface area of the fragments. A large contact surface area (> The limitations of this retrospective study most particularly involve the evaluation of the contact surface of the osteotomy fragments, which are estimated on X-rays; its precision is therefore probably moderate. Fibular diaphyseal nonunion is a frequent complication affecting the clinical results of HTO and leading to surgical revision. The nonunion rate is correlated with high preoperative BMI, low obliquity of the osteotomy plane, and a low fragment contact area. No nonunion was reported when the obliquity of the osteotomy plane was greater than 50° or when the fragment contact area was greater than 50%. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.