The effect of high-energy milling on the surface properties of quartz is examined with regard to its preg-robbing behavior towards gold. A standard ring mill is used to process dry quartz samples, and the changes in the morphology of the particles, structural deformations and surface chemistry are investigated to explain the increased preg-robbing ability of quartz in acidic chloride solutions. The transition from fine grinding to mechanochemical activation of quartz can be observed from changes in the morphology of the particles, as well as the types of structural deformations. The transition occurs between 1 and 5min of grinding in the mill used, corresponding to particle sizes around 0.55μm. Structural studies differentiate two stages of fine grinding: particle breakage with limited structural disruption, and structural disturbance by mechanochemical alteration, which occurs after particles reach their grinding limits. Quartz keeps its structural order to some degree even after 30min of aggressive grinding. The surface chemistry of ground quartz demonstrates generation of point defects including low valence silicon and non-bridging oxygen centers. These defect sites play an important role in the surface reactivity of the quartz, and influence the extent of gold loss during preg-robbing.Grinding is an essential procedure used in almost every mineral processing operation to reduce particle size, and to liberate or expose the valuable minerals ( There are a number of reports in the literature describing utilization of the effects of mechanochemical activation in metallurgical processing of minerals ( In nature, gold ores almost always contain large amounts of silicates, mainly quartz, and these are commonly regarded as chemically very inert mineral species ( Mechanochemical activation of silicates has been extensively studied for the last few decades (  This study compares the preg-robbing ability of quartz as a model framework silicate, through the investigation of freshly ground and aged surfaces. To gain further insight into the nature of mechanical activation and surface modification by fine grinding, the as-received and ground samples are characterized using nitrogen sorption with Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area calculation, dynamic light scattering (DLS), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometry, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) with depth profiling. The results are compared with previous studies, and the implications regarding the role of the mechanically activated components are discussed in a mineral processing context. Quartz, initially in the size range 0.1–2.5 Preg-robbing experiments were carried out at room temperature and pressure, using an acidic chloride solution with 50 To investigate the nature of surface alteration by grinding, samples were characterized using a Malvern HTTP dynamic light scattering (DLS) instrument equipped with a He–Ne laser operating at a wavelength of 633  The existence of a grinding limit is known to be inherent within the process of fine grinding ( One explanation for the transition of fine grinding to mechanical activation is that in reducing particle size, the original defects in the bulk of the material become fracture sites, and milling resistance is increased ( The preg-robbing power of quartz for gold chlorocomplexes has been reported to be about 0.04–0.28 Comparing the adsorption results with the particle characterization data in In the first minute of grinding, the main mechanism of grinding is particle breakage, and the size and surface area of the particles change significantly. However, the increased amount of adsorption per unit surface area reveals that the effect of mechanochemical activation of surfaces dominates the effect of surface area. In this phase of fine grinding, the total effect of preg-robbing is significant, as both surface reactivity and surface area increase. The considerable surface reactivity in this early stage of grinding may relate to original defect sites of quartz being exposed by breakage of the particles. From 1 to 5 In the last stage of grinding, there is transition from breakage to surface activation in the mechanism of fine grinding, resulting in a dramatic increase in gold adsorption per surface area. The experimental adsorption results clearly show surface modification of the ground quartz samples. However, to gain further insight into the type of surface alteration, the samples have also been characterized using FTIR, XRD and XPS, as discussed below.  As reported by Quantitative analysis of quartz by infrared spectroscopy has been published by several workers (  In addition to changes in peak intensity, we also observe a significant (and reproducible) shift in the position of peaks located at 460 and 1084 It is notable that the 1084 At higher wavenumbers, the quartz system shows a weak band at 2900 The amorphization and structural modification of quartz during grinding have been investigated further by X-ray diffractometry, as shown in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy as a surface sensitive technique has been used extensively for characterization of minerals including silicates (  Each set of Si 2p and O 1s spectra was deconvoluted using Gaussian peak shapes. Compositional profiling as a function of depth can also be performed ( The XPS results confirm that structural modification via grinding produces point defects such as low valence silicon and non-bridging oxygen centers. The emergent formation of Si The covalent bond between Si and O fractures, and Si-centered radicals and non-bridging oxygen vacancies form. These defect sites play an important role in the surface reactivity of silicates and are responsible for reduction and deposition of gold from leaching solution on the surface of silicate ( These results, in combination with our previous studies ( Our experimental results show that several types of physical as well as chemical alteration take place during the grinding process of quartz, as a model silicate mineral. These include particle breakage and surface area increase, agglomeration, amorphization of the surface, lattice distortions and finally defect formation. The extent and type of the alterations are strongly dependent upon grinding conditions. Grinding of the material consists of two distinct mechanisms: fine grinding and mechanical activation. The transition from fine grinding to mechanical activation takes place because, with reduction of particle size, the defects within the mineral structure are consumed, and milling resistance is increased. Consequently, the mode of mechanical energy relaxation in the particles changes from breakage to plastic flow, causing dislocations and distortion of the crystal structure to produce new defect sites. These defect sites can significantly change the chemical behavior of the ground material. The fine grinding–mechanochemical activation model has been elucidated here via spectroscopic methods. The extent of preg-robbing increases significantly in the early stages of grinding as both surface area and surface reactivity increase. The higher surface reactivity in this stage of grinding may be the result of exposure of original defect sites in the fractures by breakage. This positive trend slows down or even changes to negative while particles reach their grinding limit. In this intermediate stage, the effect of particle breakage is compensated by agglomeration while the formation of new defect sites is still not significant. Finally, in the last stages there is a dramatic increase in the extent of preg-robbing as the result of breakage of the covalent bonds between Si and O and formation of Si-centered radicals and non-bridging oxygen vacancies. These defect sites are responsible for reactivity of the quartz and cause significant gold loss during preg-robbing in chloride medium. This work was funded through an Australian Research Council Discovery Project grant, as well as partial funding through the Particulate Fluids Processing Centre, a Special Research Centre of the Australian Research Council.