Background
                  To compare 30-day outcomes in patients treated for a distal femur (DF) fracture with plate fixation (PF) or intramedullary nail (IMN).
               
                  Methods
                  Differences in rates of any adverse events (AAE), serious adverse events (SAE), infectious complications, and mortality were explored between groups in the ACS-NSQIP database.
               
                  Results
                  There were 511 PF and 44 IMN patients. The PF group and IMN groups had similar rates of AAEs (p
                     =0.35), SAEs (p
                     =0.46), infectious complications (p
                     =1.00), and mortality (p
                     =0.39).
               
                  Conclusions
                  DF fractures treated with IMN have equivalent short-term outcomes compared to those treated with PF.Distal femur (DF) fractures are severe lower extremity injuries that present several challenges to orthopedic surgeons with regard to implant choice and postoperative management. Several fixation methods are available for treatment of these fractures, including plate fixation (PF) that includes blade plates, dynamic condylar screws, and locking plates or intramedullary nails (IMN). The American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) is a multi-institutional outcomes database that presents a unique opportunity to better elucidate factors contributing to adverse events in the perioperative period with increasing use in the field of orthopedics. The ACS-NSQIP database has been described in several publications in detail. A defined set of patient demographics, medical history, as well as adverse events are collected prospectively in a standardized manner across numerous hospital sites. Over 150 variables are collected and over 350 hospitals participate with site visits and system auditing implemented to ensure integrity and validity of data. The NSQIP database was queried initially for DF fractures using the postoperative diagnosis variable (International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision [ICD-9] codes 821.20–821.39). Patients with DF fractures were then cross-referenced to concomitant primary Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes 27509, 27511, 27513, 27514 for the PF group, and with primary CPT code 27506 for the IMN group. A comorbidity score was calculated with a modified Charlson comorbidity index (CCI) calculated to fit available data as previously described by Bohl et al. A serious adverse event (SAE) included any of the following: death, a coma for more than twenty-four hours, ventilator for more than forty-eight hours, unplanned intubation, stroke/cerebrovascular accident, pulmonary embolism, cardiac arrest, myocardial infarction, acute renal failure, sepsis, septic shock, or return to the operating room. Infectious complications were defined as occurrence of superficial surgical site infection, deep surgical site infection, organ space infection, sepsis, or septic shock. Remaining NSQIP adverse events were combined with the SAE and infectious complications to comprise the any adverse event (AAE) category. This categorization of adverse events and infectious complications was consistent with methods used in similar previous studies utilizing the NSQIP database. Differences between treatment groups for complication categories were explored using Pearson's chi-square tests and Fisher's exact test. Multivariate logistic regression analyses comparing SAEs, AAEs, infectious complication rates, and mortality were performed controlling for patient characteristics. A post hoc separate analysis of pulmonary embolism rates between the PF and IMN groups was performed using multivariate logistic regression as well. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) are presented for multivariate analyses. All statistical tests were carried out using SPSS software version 20.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). A total of 555 patients met inclusion criteria for this study. In this cohort, 511 (92%) were treated with PF and 44 (8%) were treated with IMN. There were no significant differences between PF and IMN cohorts with regards to age (71.22 The PF group and IMN group had similar rates of SAEs (11.55% vs. 6.82%, Multivariate analyses revealed PF versus IMN did not impact SAE rates ( Univariate analyses for the overall group indicated history of smoking had no impact on SAE ( The characterization of risk factors for complications in DF fractures is particularly important for orthopedic trauma surgeons. Our goal was to assess complication rates following DF PF versus IMN ORIF and determine which patient factors may predict postoperative complications. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the largest study to date to assess complication rates in DF stratified by PF versus IMN fixation method. In this study, we have demonstrated that DF fractures treated with IMN and PF have very high rates of overall adverse events though the two treatments did not differ statistically from one another with regard to perioperative outcomes. Few studies are available for direct comparison. Because complications recorded and assessed between studies of DF fractures vary, it is difficult to contrast these results to previous findings. The AAE rates of 44% in PF and 50% in IMN are higher than those cited by other investigators. Demirtaş et al. in a series of 32 patients found no difference in complications, duration of union, and functional results between retrograde IMN and bridge plating for extra-articular DF fractures. However, their study did not report on incidence of early postoperative adverse events in the groups and the reported complications included implant failure and malunion, which are not included in the ACS-NSQIP database. The VTE rate of 2.7% in the PF group is comparable to the 2.3% rate cited by Kammerlander et al. in a study of 43 geriatric patients with DF fracture. This study was limited by several characteristics inherent to the ACS NSQIP database. Outcomes are only measured within the 30-day period and the database does not report outcomes specific to orthopedics, such as functional status, patient satisfaction, pain, or more detailed fracture pattern information. The small number of IMN cases in this study makes it difficult to draw final conclusions about the observed differences between treatment groups. The classification of DF fractures in NSQIP based on ICD-9 codes cross-referenced with CPT codes impeded a larger selection of cases. Although DF fractures included were limited to ICD-9 codes 821.20–821.39, some DF cases undergoing treatment with IMN may be coded as femoral shaft fractures (812.01). Despite reducing study size, this strategy was implemented to ensure the integrity of case selection and allow more valid conclusions to be drawn from statistical comparison. Other studies utilizing NSQIP have relied on CPT codes to classify cases, which may not only capture more patients, but also may confound the validity of results. Of interest, patient factors, such as smoking and obesity, did not impact rates of complications in this study. Smoking and obesity should however not be discounted as risk factors given previous studies finding an increased risk of infection for patients with these characteristics, including those sustaining DF fractures treated with locking plates. This study's findings support the findings of other studies that no major differences in overall postoperative course have been seen in DF fractures treated with IMN versus PF. An increased ASA class and age were independently associated with higher AAE rate, SAE rate, infectious complications, mortality and SAE rates and mortality, respectively. Though not significant in the multivariate analysis, patients treated with IMN were seen to have higher rates of VTE and should be monitored closely for development of this complication postoperatively. IMN patients also had longer operative times but equivalent hospital length of stay compared to the PF group. Despite limitations, the multicentered nationwide nature of NSQIP data makes these results more generalizable to practice patterns of U.S. medical centers than those in other studies. We believe this study provides the most comprehensive information on comparative rates of postoperative complications and assessment of risk factors for DF fractures treated with IMN versus PF to date. Orthopedic surgeons can factor these findings into their clinical decision-making process and to inform patient-centered family discussions when preparing for surgical management of DF fractures. The authors have none to declare.