This paper presents a new formulation to investigate the effects of floating ice blocks on seismically-excited rectangular water-containing structures. The proposed method is based on a sub-structuring approach, where the flexible containing structure and ice-added mass are modeled using finite elements, while hydrodynamic effects are modeled analytically through interaction forces at the water–structure and water–ice interfaces, thus eliminating the need for reservoir finite element discretization. In addition to accounting for the influence of floating ice blocks and container walls' flexibility, the developed frequency- and time-domain techniques also include the effects of container geometrical or material asymmetry as well as the coupling between convective and impulsive components of hydrodynamic pressure. The proposed formulation is illustrated through a numerical example illustrating the dynamic response of symmetric and asymmetric water-containing structures covered with floating ice blocks. Obtained time- and frequency-domain responses are successfully validated against advanced finite element analyses including fluid–structure interaction capabilities. For the water-containing structures studied, the results show that the presence of floating ice blocks affects the frequency content and amplitudes of the dynamic responses corresponding to convective and impulsive modes.The dynamic behavior of water-containing structures has been widely studied in the last five decades to predict their response to seismic excitations and prevent heavy damage as observed during the 1960 Chilean Earthquakes ( In earlier analytical work, the containing structure was assumed rigid and the studies mainly focused on the dynamic behavior of the contained liquid ( The work of In cold climates, water-containing structures such as dams, tanks or navigation locks are generally covered with 1 to 2 In this paper, we investigate the effect of floating ice blocks on the dynamic characteristics and seismic response of rectangular water-containing structures such as the one illustrated in We consider a rectangular water-containing structure as the one depicted in The reservoir has a length The hydrodynamic pressure Using a modal superposition analysis, the FRFs for structural displacements and accelerations can be expressed as The boundary conditions to be satisfied by FRFs    The FRF Solutions for FRFs We also show in In this work, we consider rectangular water-containing structures that can be geometrically or materially asymmetric, i.e. with different lateral walls. As a consequence, the horizontal accelerations at wall–water interfaces on each side of the reservoir can be different and thus generate both symmetric and asymmetric hydrodynamic pressure waves. To account for this behavior, the FRF for convective hydrodynamic pressure FRFs Considering a unit horizontal ground acceleration The natural convective symmetric and antisymmetric frequencies correspond to the frequencies The natural convective symmetric and antisymmetric frequencies The generalized coordinate vector The time-history response for total hydrodynamic pressure Based on the above relations, other quantities of interest such as shear forces or overturning moments, can also be determined. In the coupled systems studied, two types of damping should be accounted for to model the dissipation of energy in the solid containing structure and in the contained fluid. A viscous damping has to be applied to represent energy dissipation in the vibrating structure and associated impulsive modes. A damping for convective modes is introduced to mainly account for energy dissipation within the contained fluid, and is generally assumed to be less than 0.5% for light viscosity liquids without dissipative devices. Various design codes like the In the analytical formulation, damping for impulsive modes is represented by a hysteretic damping factor The proposed method is validated in the next section through a numerical example illustrating the dynamic response symmetric and asymmetric water-containing structures covered with floating ice blocks. We consider the geometrically asymmetric wall–water system illustrated in The application of the proposed method first requires the determination of the mode shapes To validate the proposed formulation, we build a coupled fluid–structure finite element model where both the walls and the reservoir are modeled using 4-node plane strain and 4-node potential-based finite elements programmed in The frequency- and time-domain dynamic responses of the wall–water system are investigated next using the previously described analytical and finite element models shown in  The techniques described previously are applied next to determine convective and impulsive hydrodynamic pressure profiles corresponding to frequencies In this section, we investigate the performance of the proposed method in assessing the seismic response of the previously described wall-water system. The horizontal acceleration component of Imperial Valley earthquake (1940) at El Centro is selected to conduct the analyses using the proposed and finite element techniques described above. We observe that the amplitudes of all the quantities studied increase with the presence of floating ice blocks. This effect is maximum for the vertical displacements Finally, the proposed formulation is used to illustrate the effect of asymmetry of the previous ice-covered water-containing structure on its dynamic response. For this purpose, we consider a symmetric rectangular water-containing structure made by replacing the right wall of the asymmetric structure in This paper presented a new formulation to investigate the effects of floating ice blocks on seismically-excited rectangular water-containing structures. The proposed method is based on a sub-structuring approach, where the flexible containing structure and ice-added mass are modeled using finite elements, while hydrodynamic effects are modeled analytically through interaction forces at the water–structure and water–ice interfaces, thus eliminating the need for reservoir finite element discretization. In addition to accounting for the influence of floating ice blocks and container walls' flexibility, the developed frequency- and time-domain techniques also include the effects of container asymmetry as well as the coupling between convective and impulsive components of hydrodynamic pressure. The application of the proposed formulation is illustrated through a numerical example illustrating the dynamic response of an asymmetric water-containing structure covered with floating ice blocks, as well as that of an equivalent symmetric structure containing a reservoir with the same dimensions. The obtained time- and frequency-domain responses showed that the proposed formulation yields excellent results when compared to those from coupled fluid–structure finite element modeling either with or without the presence of floating ice blocks. For the water-containing structures studied, we observed that the presence of floating ice blocks mainly affects dynamic responses corresponding to convective and impulsive modes as follows: (i) a slight decrease of convective frequencies and a more important decrease of impulsive ones, mainly due to the added mass from the floating ice blocks; (ii) a slight decrease of the amplitude of convective hydrodynamic pressure along the height of the reservoir; (iii) an increase of the amplitude of impulsive hydrodynamic pressure, with maximum amplification observed at reservoir surface; (iv) an increase of the amplitudes of displacements, shear forces and, in particular, vertical sloshing displacements at reservoir surface.  frequency response function  coefficients used for mathematical derivations in coefficients used for mathematical derivations in amplitude of harmonic ground acceleration Fourier transform of ground acceleration half-length of the reservoir compression wave velocity within the reservoir index referring to rigid body motion effects when modulus of elasticity of the containing structure hydrostatic force acceleration due to gravity average thickness of the floating ice blocks height of the reservoir parameters given by Eq. parameters given by Eqs. length of the reservoir mass matrix of the ice–container system number of reservoir convective modes number of impulsive pressure reservoir modes included in the analysis number of structural mode shapes included in the analysis hydrodynamic pressure and corresponding FRF, respectively FRF for hydrodynamic pressure due to rigid body motion of the containing structure subjected to ground acceleration FRF for hydrodynamic pressure due to horizontal ground accelerations impulsive and convective components of hydrodynamic pressure FRF impulsive and convective components of hydrodynamic pressure FRF impulsive and convective components of hydrodynamic pressure FRF symmetric and antisymmetric components of convective hydrodynamic pressure FRF symmetric and antisymmetric components of convective hydrodynamic pressure FRF symmetric and antisymmetric components of convective hydrodynamic pressure FRF vector in Eq. matrix in Eq. time variable time duration of the applied accelerogram horizontal and vertical axes of Cartesian coordinate system, respectively parameters given by Eq. time-history response of horizontal and vertical structural displacements, respectively lateral static displacement under the effect of hydrostatic pressure FRFs of horizontal and vertical structural displacements, respectively time-history of ground acceleration FRFs of horizontal and the vertical structural accelerations, respectively shear force vector of generalized coordinates and column-vector with the same dimension as the vector of nodal relative displacements, containing zeros except along horizontal degrees of freedom which correspond to the direction of earthquake excitation parameter given by Eq. parameters given by Eq. Kronecker symbol vertical displacement at reservoir surface structural hysteretic damping factor parameter given by Eq. parameters given by Eq. eigenvalue given by Eq. eigenvalues given by Eq. parameters given by Eqs. Laplace differential operator Poisson's ratio of the containing structure viscous damping associated with convective modes mass density of floating ice blocks mass density of water mass density of the containing structure  parameters given by Eq.  exciting frequency vibration frequency corresponding to structural mode shape   The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Using Eqs. Substitution of Eqs. Multiplying Eqs. Substituting Eqs. Using Eqs. Substitution of Eqs. Multiplying Eqs.