The largest waste water stream from oil and gas production wells is referred to as produced water (PW). One way of treating PW to limits acceptable for discharge into sea is by the use of compact flotation units (CFU). Currently, CFUs' are operated manually due to lack of advanced monitoring solutions. The main areas of interest in the current operation of the flotation unit are to provide online measurements of both liquid and gas flow rates through the reject stream of the flotation unit. A full scale feasibility study on the application of acoustic measurements and partial least squares regression as a tool for online estimation of the reject gas flow rate was investigated. From the experiments conducted to determine the optimal sensor location, it was concluded that there were no significant differences between the four sensor locations investigated. Several reject gas flow rate models were calibrated and validated with fully independent data. The average root mean square error of prediction (RMSEP) was 7.5% within the experimental range (0.07–2.5 Sm3/h). The RMSEP for experiments with varying salt concentration was 0.25% (within the range of 0–5.5%) whilst that for varying temperature was 1.8°C (within the range of 30–60°C). The model for reject liquid flow rates through the CFU had a RMSEP of 16.86l/h (within the range of 225–485l/h). These promising results will form the basis for further development and implementation of the technique in flotation units.The largest waste water stream from oil and gas production wells is referred to as Produced Water (PW) Szép et al. Compact flotation units (CFU) are one of several ways of treating PW to limits acceptable for discharge into sea on the Norwegian continental shelf. M-I Swaco is the supplier of the EPCON CFU to offshore oil and gas producing companies. The purpose of this unit is to efficiently clean PW based on the principle of flotation of oil with minimal waste stream (reject) generation and utility consumption (flotation gas) rates. These flotation units are currently manually tuned by adjustment of valves and the efficiency is verified with samples taken from the inlet, outlet and the reject stream. Results from laboratory analysis, as well as visual inspection of the samples are presently being used to determine the cleaning efficiency. These laboratory tests are not only expensive but also time consuming. In the past years there has been effort by equipment suppliers to move away from traditional manual operation method to a more user friendly automated system. The slug flow regime through these reject line add to the complexities for accurate and reliable measurement principles. Multiphase flow characterisation has been and continues to be one of the areas of interest in the oil industry. As of today, there is still no reliable and accurate measurement technique in the characterisation of multiphase flow. Even though there are a number of sophisticated and expensive instruments on the market, the accuracy and reliability of such instruments are sometimes questionable. There is increasing interest from researchers in this industry to develop a more advanced monitoring principle. Considerable research in the application of non-intrusive measurements techniques has increased since there is no need to modify the existing process. The developed acoustic chemometrics technique was adapted in an attempt to address some of the difficulties in characterising the slug flow regime of the CFU reject. Acoustic chemometrics is a general on-line/in-line process monitoring technique. There are several publications in literature on acoustic chemometrics as a tool for process monitoring from the last decade. With respect to multiphase flow characterisation, there is no literature on the adaptation of this technique. One of the objectives of this feasibility study was to investigate the potential of applying acoustic measurements combined with partial least squares regression (PLS-R) as a tool for online monitoring of specific process parameters. The other is to present results on the adaptation of this technique for flow characterisation in the oil industry as a basis for further research in the acoustic chemometric community. The reject gas flow rate was the focal point in the study. Nevertheless, in one of the presented results, both the reject gas and liquid flow rates were investigated. An acoustic spectrum obtained from accelerometers contains/reflects the process state which means that a change in one process parameter can be observed in the acoustic spectra. This can be an advantage and a disadvantage. In that, changes in any process parameters can be detected from the accelerometer signals and thus lead to a more complex monitoring principle since all changes in the process condition will affect the signals from the accelerometers. The effect of temperature changes and salt concentration variations on the acoustic signal were also investigated and reported. The results from this feasibility study will form the basis for further adaptation of this technique for online estimation of both the reject gas and liquid flow rates through flotation units. The industrial scale CFU used in this study is a vertical flotation vessel separating oil from water aided by flotation gas. The CFU has smaller volume and shorter retention time as compared to traditional flotation units. Acoustic chemometrics was one of the techniques considered as a tool for monitoring the reject flow rate along with the coriolis flow meters. The advantages that this technique possesses over traditional measurement principles include: Real time predictions Online Easily clamp on sensors Non invasive and non intrusive Empirical model The cost of adapting the acoustic chemometric technique as compared to purchasing a coriolis flow meter is very low. Moreover, the coriolis flow meters only provide information on the mixture density and the mixture mass flow rate but do not provide any information on the individual (gas and liquid) flow rates. Again, when the process pipe line is enlarged due to increase in PW treatment rates, a new flow meter needs to be purchased with respect to the coriolis, whilst in the case of the acoustic chemometric technique it requires only recalibration of the data. The coriolis flow meters are well known and hence are easy to market as compared to the acoustic chemometric technique in the oil industry. The other drawback with the acoustic chemometric technique as with all PLS-R techniques is the need for a reference data which is not the case for the coriolis flow meter. In all applications of acoustic chemometrics in literature, the conclusions drawn were promising. Wade Application of acoustic chemometrics on two phase (gas/liquid) flow characterisation has not yet been fully investigated and reported in literature. In single phase flow (liquid flow), the optimal location of the acoustic sensors has been identified and reported The test equipment can be divided in two categories ( General equipment needed to simulate offshore conditions (supply of synthesized produced water to the CFU skid). EPCON CFU skid. The Compact flotation unit to be tested and further developed as a product. The test rig consists primarily of a gas saturation skid and a degassing skid ( Automate the CFU operation Optimize the CFU operation with respect to cleaning efficiency, reject gas flow rate and waste stream generation (minimize reject stream) The two objectives above require online, reliable information on the flotation process and must be cost effective. Continuous information on the flow rate of the individual components (gas and liquid) in the reject stream is vital for its smooth operation. The full scale CFU skid is capable of cleaning up to 6 A gas/liquid mixer is located at the vessel inlet flange to provide distribution of the gas. Depending on the amount of residual dissolved gas in the water upstream the CFU, additional flotation gas is injected to maintain the required flotation. Alternatively, flotation gas can be recycled from the top of the de-gassing vessel back to the water inlet by the use of an ejector. In addition to gas distribution in the water, the agglomeration of oil droplets is important for the flotation of oil. This agglomeration may be influenced or interrupted by the use of various chemicals. The reject consists of separated oil along with water and released or added flotation gas. The reject is removed in a continual process via a suspended pipe at the top of the vessel. Flow is controlled by a valve located on the reject outlet pipe. The suspended reject pipe ensures a constant liquid level inside the vessel as long as there is a positive pressure drop across the reject control valve and all gas is evacuated through the reject line. The reject two-phase flow will appear in a slug flow pattern. In slug flow, there is a general gas entrainment in the liquid slug. The liquid slugs block the whole area of the pipe. These slugs result in pressure build up behind the blockage. Slug flows are influenced by pressure drop and the slug velocities. When the pressure pulses (slugs) are high the accuracy of the measurements in traditional flow meters is low. When both CFUs’ are operated in series, the clean PW from the first CFU is used as input to the second unit. Two flow meters are used in monitoring produced water flow rate, one on each CFU outlet whilst another flow meter is mounted on the PW supply line. Thus the reject liquid stream can be calculated by subtracting the measurement from the bottom of the CFU from the total PW flow to the unit. There have been advances in the adaptation of acoustic chemometrics in the area of science and technology The theory of PLS-R, the data analysis technique employed in this study will not be presented here, interested readers are referred to In the experiments to determine the optimal sensor location on the CFU skid, the reject gas flow rate was chosen as the response variable. 10 levels of the input flotation gas rates were chosen from a minimum rate of 0.07 Sm After determining the optimal sensor location, 9 independent sets of experiments were performed. The aim of these experiments was to develop a model capable of online estimation of reject gas flow rate for independent experimental data sets (test set validation). Five of the experimental data was considered as the calibration data whilst the other 4 were used to validate the model. The maximum and minimum gas flow rates selected in earlier investigations were used. The experimental test facility was shut down and restarted between each experiment to stimulate an independent experimental process for experiments performed on the same day. All the process conditions in the experiments for determining the optimal sensor location were maintained in these experiments. It has been documented by Kupyna et al. The concentration of salt in PW varies from oil-well to oil-well hence the need to investigate the effect of salt concentration on the acoustic signal. Three levels of salt concentration were chosen based on experience from the treatment of produced water in the industry. In order to investigate the difference between PW with salt and without salt, one additional level was added. For this level the salt concentration in PW was 0%. The total produced water in the degassing vessel, PW tank and the CFU skid was approximately 8000 Spectral pre-processing is one of the vital techniques applied to the acoustic spectra to increase interpretability/selectivity in the data and thus improve the calibration model. This is a broad topic in the area of multivariate calibration and modelling, interested readers are referred to In multivariate calibration, the acoustic spectra obtained under different process conditions were calibrated against their respective references. The models predictive ability for specific response variables will be the focus. The models were assessed on its root mean squared error of prediction (RMSEP), slope, R    In this project, the objective was to adapt the acoustic chemometric technique for online monitoring. The process operators in this industry understand the time series plot much better that the predicted vs. measured plot. Thus the time series predictions are also shown. Only time duration required for acquiring the acoustic signals and to predict the reject gas flow rate would be shown in the time series plot. The plot ( Two calibrated models (temperature and reject gas flow rate) would be analysed in this section. Three PCs were considered optimum for calibrating the model for reject gas flow rate upon visual inspection of the residual Two PCs were considered optimum for calibration the model for predicting the temperature in the reject ( Four PCs were optimum to calibrate a model to predict the reject gas flow rate ( From the same acoustic signals, a model was calibrated to predict the salt concentration in PW. The RMSEP, slope and R Two PCs were considered to be optimum for the model calibrated against the reject liquid flow rate from the same acoustic spectra. From this model, the RMSEP, slope and R Slug flow regime is associated with the fluid flow in the reject and these slugs' results in less accurate estimation of both reject gas and liquid flow rates in traditional instruments. These slugs have a positive contribution when applying acoustic chemometrics in estimating the reject gas flow rate with respect to generating the required pipe vibrations. In almost all applications of this technique in fluid flow characterisation, the reason behind inserting an orifice plate was to cause a pressure drop thus resulting in turbulence and bubble formation with subsequent increase in amplitude of pipe vibrations. The process investigated in this study generates the required pressure drop and turbulence resulting in significant pipe amplitudes of vibration. It was not possible to visually determine the optimal sensor location from the amplitude of the time domain signals from the four sensor locations considered, hence the need for multivariate calibration modelling. This is partly due to the fact that, the selection of these locations was considered based on previous publications with respect to single phase (liquid) flow T1 vs. U1 ( On the onset, the question that one may ask is, “what is the importance of predicting salt concentration?” The concentration of salt in PW is vital in relation to the cleaning efficiency of the CFUs. The cleaning efficiency of PW increases when the salt concentration is at the required level. Thus adequate information of the salt concentration in PW is necessary bearing in mind that the concentration of salts in PW from different oil wells varies considerably. The ability of the model to accurately predict the salt concentration in PW would subsequently be a savings in relation to the cost of a conductivity instrument to measure the salt concentration, installation cost and man hours. The first two PCs explain the major variations in the acoustic signals whilst the third explains some of the variations that were not captured by the first and second components ( It is first of all important to state here that even though the input PW flow rate was constant, the liquid flow rate through the reject varied from time to time. This was due to the slug flow regime associated with the reject line. The negative loading weight of the first PC ( In all calibrated reject gas models, their respective loading weight plots show that all frequencies were important to the model ( Acoustic chemometrics was implemented as a tool for monitoring the reject gas flow rate in an industrial scale CFU. From the experiments to determine the optimal sensor location, it was concluded from evaluating the PLS model that there were no significant difference between the four sensor locations investigated. Several models were calibrated to estimate the reject gas flow rates. The average RMSEP for all fully independent validated models for online estimation of the reject gas flow rates was 7.5% of the experimental The satisfactory results from the application of acoustic measurements and partial least square regression for online monitoring of the reject gas flow rates will be the basis for future work. In this study only the effect of varying selected process parameters on the reject gas flow rate were investigated. Thus the effect of all process parameters on both the gas and liquid flow rates through the reject stream must also be investigated further. Other process parameters of interest include; CFU pressure Reject valve opening PW flow rates When the effect of these parameters on the acoustic spectra have been investigated, the next step will be to perform experiments to calibrate a model and subsequent implementation of the model for online prediction of reject gas and liquid flow rates in the flotation units. The model needs to be optimized and tested for robustness before implementation.