The impact of the shape and/or anisotropy of particles (in terms of surface energy, surface charge, or wetting) on their flotation separation has been receiving more attention in recent years. The effect of particle surface roughness on interactions with other surfaces or gas bubbles has rarely been studied. The objective of this study was, therefore, to prepare spherical particles of different surface roughness characteristics and test them for their response to flotation separation. Towards this aim, glass particles with a size of 106–150μm were either acid etched or abraded to manipulate their surface roughness. The particles were also methylated using trimethylchlorosilane to enhance their hydrophobicity and interactions with air bubbles. Micro-flotation separations were then carried out with methylated smooth and roughened particles to examine the effect of particle surface nano-roughness on flotation kinetics and their corresponding recoveries. The results confirmed that the flotation rate constants of roughened particles increased consistently with increasing dimensions of surface asperities. To explain the effect of particle surface roughness on flotation, a theoretical model based on the extended-DLVO interactions was formulated and used to quantify the effect of hydrophobic asperities on particle–bubble surface interactions. The theoretical modeling results suggest, for the first time, that the size of nano-sized hydrophobic asperities distributed over spherical microscopic particles dictate the magnitude of the energetic barrier that particles need to overcome in order to attach to bubbles.Flotation is a unit operation applied in mineral processing, and sometimes the only process to separate finely grained minerals ( Flotation processes require a wide range of controllable parameters, typically including at least pH, collector type and dosage, and particle size. Recently, there has also been a surge of interest in understanding the influence of morphological characteristics of mineral particles on interactions with bubbles and other particles in flotation pulps ( As early as in 1977, Anfruns and Kitchener ( Flotation of mineral particles is controlled by particle trajectories in complex suspensions made of an aqueous solution, mineral particles and gas bubbles, and bubble–particle colloidal interactions ( The glass particles used in this study were standard safety glass spheres with the size of 150–106 The roughness of glass particles was changed through either abrading or acid etching. About 50 Another 50 All particles were washed multiple times to remove any organic and inorganic contaminants remaining on the surfaces of original and roughened glass particles. The particles were treated with acidic (2.5 Analytical grade trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) from Aldrich and cyclohexane (as solvent) obtained from Fisher Chemicals were used for the methylation of glass particle surfaces. These chemicals were used as received without further purification. Glass particles, with smooth and rough surfaces, were methylated to enhance their hydrophobicity and affinity for air bubbles in electrolyte solutions. The method used is similar to that reported in the literature ( Glass particles were imaged with a JEOL JSM-6400 scanning electron microscope (JEOL USA, Inc, Peabody, MA) using 20 A Nanoscope III Dimension 3000 atomic force microscope (Digital Instruments, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) was used in a Tapping mode operation for topographical imaging of individual glass particles and determination of their surface roughness. Budget Sensors Tap300Al cantilevers made of silicon with an aluminum reflex coating, and an estimated tip radius of 10 The success of glass methylation via quantification of surface hydrophobicity was determined through advancing contact angle measurements for deionized water. Due to technical challenges associated with direct measurement of contact angles on 106–150 The contact angle measuring technique used here was a sessile-drop method adapted to a curved surface. In this study only advancing (static) contact angles were measured. A water droplet having a ∼1 to 2 The images of at least 6 droplets were captured by Krüss G10 Contact Angle Measurement System within 15–30 Micro-flotation tests were carried out in a homemade 150 Either particles of the same surface roughness characteristics or a mixture of two different ones were used in the experiments. Throughout all micro-flotation tests 10 In this study, the classical first-order rate model was applied to evaluate the flotation kinetics:  Milling of the glass particles with alumina powder increased roughness to  Only particles methylated in 0.0001  The linear correlations between We also found that rough particles preferentially floated from a 1:1 mixture of smooth and rough particles (either abraded or acid etched). After 80 Our results on enhanced flotation of rough particles are in agreement with the results of previous studies. For example, Beside enhanced flotation, we also observed in our experiments that rough particles agglomerated to a larger extent and their dispersion in the electrolyte solution was more difficult than for particles with smooth surfaces. Stability of an aqueous film and associated energy barrier that prevents the particle from attachment with the surface of a gas bubble can dictate the outcome and rate of flotation processes ( Retarded van der Waals, electrical double layer, and hydrophobic interactions were included in our theoretical analysis for rough particle–electrolyte solution–bubble surface system allowing quantify the energy barrier associated with these three interactions. Energy of interactions that combine both retarded van der Waals and electrical double layer contributions (known as DLVO interactions) were calculated according to the model derived earlier (   As shown in The above theoretical findings suggest that asperities of rough particles at a level of only a few nanometers should have a pronounced impact on the probability of particle attachment to gas bubbles, since overcoming a smaller energy barrier should be easier. In fact, any nanoscopic roughness of hydrophobic particle surfaces should enhance flotation; the same should be true regarding coagulation of particles. These findings, in our opinion, indirectly explain the results of micro-flotation discussed in the previous sub-section since the majority of asperities for glass particles used was with dimensions of ∼10 The findings of this research further suggests that designing of crushing and grinding operations that could produce rough particles with sub-microscopic asperities could lead to improvements in flotation separation. This is in addition to previous findings which demonstrated a positive effect of ionic strength in depressing the energetic barrier between hydrophobic coal particles and gas bubbles, important criterion in enhanced flotation of coals ( In this study, 150–106 To explain differences in flotation of spherical particles with smooth and rough surfaces, a theoretical model on DLVO interaction energy for particles decorated with hemispherical nano-asperities and flat surfaces was adopted to this research. Lewis acid–base interaction energy was also incorporated to this model to reflect hydrophobic attractive interactions typical to flotation systems. It was found that hydrophobic asperities with radius as small as 10–70 The authors acknowledge the Modeling of rough particle–flat surface interaction energy included retarded van der Waals ( The equation describing the retarded van der Waals interaction potential between a particle and flat surface is as follows ( for rough spherical particle–flat surface geometry, which reduces for smooth spherical particle–flat surface geometry to the following, Equations describing the electrical double layer interaction potential between a rough sphere and a plate are ( for rough spherical particle–flat surface geometry, which for smooth spherical particle–flat surface geometry becomes, For calculation of hydrophobic interaction potential the Lewis acid–base model was adopted ( In order to calculate the interaction potential between a rough particle and a smooth surface the Derjaguin approximation ( Here the expression on the interaction potential for hydrophobic interactions ( As the result of integrations, the expression on interaction potential for hydrophobic effects operating between a spherical particle having hemispherical asperities and a smooth surface, as derived in this study, is: for rough spherical particle–flat surface geometry, which for smooth spherical particle–flat surface geometry becomes, Eq.