The stability of a slope is subjected to thermal (T), hydraulic (H), and mechanical (M) loadings and their coupling effects. Modeling the coupled THM processes that occur in the slope is important for reliably assessing and predicting the slope performance and stability. Therefore, a numerical model, which can consider the full coupling among the thermal (temperature variation), hydraulic (pore water pressure), and mechanical (stress and displacement) processes, is developed in this study. The developed model is employed to analyze slope stability, and the simulated results are seen to coincide well with the results obtained by traditional limit equilibrium calculation. A comparison of the results verifies the validity of the developed model for slope stability analyses under THM coupled effects. Furthermore, the capability of the developed THM model for predicting the slope performance is validated through comparisons of three case studies in terms of both laboratory experiments and numerical simulations. A favorable agreement between the modeling results and the compared data confirms the capability of the developed model to accurately describe the behavior of a slope affected by THM coupled processes. The modeling results can also contribute to a better understanding of slope failure induced by the THM couplings.Landslide events often occur at roadsides or open pit mines, negatively affecting the traffic and the mining operations, respectively, or even causing the loss of property and human lives ( Changes in temperature lead to the development of thermal stress, and thus, strain in the rock and the soil mass of a slope. The variation in temperature influences the properties (e.g., density and viscosity) of the water flowing through the rock and the soil mass of a slope, and the freezing and thawing of water are also dependent on the environmental temperature. As discussed above, slope stability can be significantly affected by the mechanical, hydraulic, and thermal (T, e.g., temperature variations affected by the seasonal changes) processes and their couplings. In terms of analyzing slope stability, numerous researchers have conducted significant studies. For instance, Basahel and Mitri employed empirical methods based on rock mass classification systems to assess rock slope stability ( Since slope stability can be notably influenced by the THM coupled processes, some studies have been carried out to assess slope stability under multi-field coupling effects. In terms of evaluating the stability of an embankment on a sloping ground under the T-M coupled effects, several researchers have studied sloping embankments in permafrost considering the geo-temperature and deformation ( In general, current studies on slope stability assessments only consider the coupled H-M or T-M effects. To date, few studies have been conducted to evaluate slope stability in consideration of the coupled THM effects, especially those incorporating THM couplings in the development of a numerical model for slope stability assessments. It is vitally important to consider the thermal effect in such slope stability analyses. This is because the instability and failure of a slope are often caused by the changes in temperature that occur during the excavation and maintenance of the slope. For instance, under the long-term effect of thermal expansion and contraction, the seepage water in a slope may cause the breakthrough of the potential slip surface of the slope, which may eventually lead to the instability of the slope. As a result, there was an urgent need to conduct the present study, whose aim is to investigate the evolution of evaluation indicators for slope stability in response to coupled THM processes. This paper is organized as follows: Firstly, a THM coupling model is presented. The model combines equations to describe the thermal, hydraulic, and mechanical processes ( Secondly, the validity of the developed model is verified by comparing the model simulation results with the data of traditional limit equilibrium calculation ( Thirdly, the availability of the developed model is further validated by comparing the model simulation results with the results from other case studies, and the validated model is used for some applications ( Finally, the conclusions are presented ( Before developing the coupled THM model mathematically, the following assumptions should be made: The slope is assumed to be a continuous porous medium in which the solid, water, and dry air are independent of each other and the dry air is regarded as ideal gas. The solid particles are incompressible, but the porous medium skeleton can be deformed. The slope is assumed to be an isotropic elastoplastic structure. The density of the water varies with the temperature, while the viscosity of the water is assumed to be independent of the temperature. The effective stress in an unsaturated and formable porous medium (e.g., a slope) can be expressed as follows ( The thermo-elastic-plastic constitutive equations can be written in the following form: Elasticity matrix D can be expressed in terms of Lamé parameters The thermal strain in the porous medium can be obtained by the following equation: For small deformations, the geometric equation of deformation is expressed as follows: According to the principle of momentum balance, and ignoring the influence of inertia, the following expression can be obtained for the mechanical equilibrium: The densities of liquid water and dry air are temperature-dependent ( Without considering the compressibility of solid particles and liquid water, the modified Richards’ equation is employed to describe the unsaturated-saturated flow of water in the porous medium ( The van Genuchten (VG) equations are used to describe the changes in The heat convection through dry air is insignificant; hence, the heat transfer via dry air is ignored in this study. In addition, the viscous dissipation of the groundwater and the dissipative heat generated by the deformation of the porous medium are also ignored. In consideration of the thermal energy balance between the porous medium and water, and according to Fourier’s law, the following equation can be obtained ( The developed model is implemented into the software COMSOL Multiphysics to carry out the numerical computation, and the simulated results are compared with the results obtained by traditional limit equilibrium calculation in order to verify the validity of the developed model. The input parameters, boundary conditions, and initial values used for the numerical computation are listed in During the analysis of the slope stability by the finite element method (FEM), the technique for the shear strength reduction (SSR) is commonly employed. When performing the analysis of the slope stability with the SSR FEM, each set of shear strength parameters is obtained by dividing the actual strength parameters by trial factor The process for the above trial calculation is continued until the slope reaches the critical limit state, for which the factor of safety (FOS) is just the critical trial factor and can be obtained as follows: In the present study, the critical limit state, which is designated as the deformation break criterion, corresponds to the results of the non-convergence in the FEM calculation. A homogeneous soil slope, with a height of 10 m and a slope angle of 45°, shown in In this section, three schemes are selected for the model prediction of the slope stability: analyses under the mechanical (M) effect, the coupled hydro-mechanical (H-M) effect, and the coupled thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) effect. The mechanical equations of the developed model are implemented into the “Structural Mechanics” module of COMSOL Multiphysics for numerical calculation, and the finite element strength reduction method is used to reduce the soil internal friction angle and cohesion. When the calculation results are not able to converge, It can be noticed from The hydraulic and mechanical equations of the developed model are implemented into the “Structural Mechanics” and the “Fluid Flow” modules of COMSOL, respectively, and a coupling between the two modules is proceeded in COMSOL. The input parameters and corresponding values listed in The thermal, hydraulic, and mechanical equations of the developed model are introduced separately as the “Heat Transfer”, “Structural Mechanics”, and “Fluid Flow” modules of COMSOL Multiphysics, and the linkage of the three sets of equations with a coupling of three modules is fulfilled in COMSOL. After adding all the T, H, and M loads from the moment of t0 for 60 min, the stability of the slope is analyzed using the strength reduction FEM. When the calculation results are not convergent, From A slope stability analysis with the traditional limit equilibrium method is conducted with the help of the software GeoStudio. The SLOPE/W, SEEP/W, and TEMP/W modules of GeoStudio are selected for analyzing the slope stability in the current study. The SLOPE/W module is used for the limit equilibrium analysis of the slope stability under the M effect, and the SEEP/W and SLOPE/W modules are used for that under the coupled H-M effect. The limit equilibrium analysis of the slope stability under the impact of THM couplings is performed with the TEMP/W, SEEP/W, and SLOPE/W modules. The corresponding input parameters and values used for the limit equilibrium calculation can be found in It can be seen in The contrast of the FOS between the model simulation and the limit equilibrium calculation results is demonstrated in  In order to further verify the applicability of the developed THM coupling model, three case studies are selected for the verification. The case studies include numerical studies and laboratory experiments. Case Study 1, which is a numerical study, is used currently for testing the capability of the developed model to describe the H-M coupled processes occurring in a slope. Rabie carried out this numerical study to evaluate a slope stability under the effects of two kinds of infiltrations (saturated and unsaturated) ( The developed model is implemented to predict the total displacements for unsaturated and saturated slopes, respectively, and the simulated results are demonstrated in The maximum total displacement and FOS obtained by the current study are compared with those from Case Study 1, as illustrated in Case Study 2, which is a laboratory experiment, is used for further testing the capability of the developed model to describe the H-M coupled processes in a slope. Kitamura et al. conducted this laboratory experiment to investigate the slope stability under two different conditions: water injection from the top and water injection into the bottom, for simulating the effects of rainfall and the rise in groundwater level, respectively, on the slope stability (   It can be seen in It can also be noticed in Therefore, it can be concluded that, the developed model can effectively evaluate the slope stability by accurately reporting its state.   The above comparison and simulation results indicate that the developed model is able to predict the PWP development, displacement, and plastic strain distributions in a slope, and that it is also capable of assessing slope stability under the coupled H-M effects. Based on a series of physical model tests, Ding et al. investigated the thermal expansion, humidity, and displacement of a soil slope (  without consideration of soil softening consideration of soil softening.   The data on Based on the results obtained in this study, the following conclusions can be drawn. A THM coupled model has been developed to analyze the stability of slopes, and the model prediction results have been compared with the data of traditional limit equilibrium calculation. A good agreement was found between the two sets of outcomes, verifying the validity of the developed model for slope stability analyses. The safety factor of the slope and the critical slip surface distribution within the slope were seen to be significantly influenced by the thermal, hydraulic, and mechanical processes and their couplings. The modeling results coincided with the data from the referred case studies in terms of both numerical simulations and laboratory experiments, demonstrating the capability of the developed model to predict well the evolution of slope behaviors under the THM coupled processes. It was confirmed that the developed model for slopes can provide accurate and abundant prediction results for assessing the slope performance, and thus, can be used to analyze slope stability under THM couplings. In addition, the developed model can also be applied to provide useful information for the design of slope reinforcement and the analyses of landslides. This paper provided model validation with LEM and three case studies. However, only Case Study 3 consisted of THM coupled effects and it had limited results (i.e., only displacement). With the limited slope data from the literature, the authors may consider a future study for validating the THM model with element tests. The authors would like to acknowledge the support from the