This contribution presents an alternative method for the processing of concrete. The stress needed for comminution is generated by high-performance sonic impulses. The separation of the components of concrete aggregates and cement paste can be necessary due to different reasons. On the one hand, an effective but sensitive separation is required as prerequisite of reliable analysis of both cement paste and aggregate in hardened concrete. Then, the reasons of the damages of building materials can be detected better. On the other hand, methods of crushing that allow to remove clean cement paste free aggregates are also desirable for the recycling of concrete debris.
                  The results show that it is possible to use shock waves as a tool for the processing of concrete. By variations of the electrical parameters, the converted energy can be varied widely. The number of impulses and the voltage are the main influences on the particle size reduction and the quality of crushing product. For the examined concrete, with strength of 25 N/mm2, an optimum treatment is possible at an energy input in the range of 44–80 J/g. About 50% of the grains greater than 2 mm are free of cement paste.Concrete is a composite material that consists of about 80% of aggregates and 20% of hydrated cement. During the service life of the concrete, the bond between these components should be as strong as possible. At the end of the life cycle, it would be desirable to solve the bond between the matrix and aggregates completely. Then, its possible to obtain secondary aggregates that the quality agrees with the quality of primary aggregates. The traditional crushing methods based on mechanical stresses are limited with regard to the quality of the produced material. The applied high stresses result in extensive destruction not only of the concrete but also of the aggregates. The new method of crushing that described here allows the removal of clean, unmixed materials. This is the prerequisite of high level recycling of concrete in the future. The comminution with high-performance sonic impulses allows the separation of the aggregates from the composite material without damage of the secondary aggregates. The method is developed for the application on concrete in a joint research project between the Bauhaus-University of Weimar and the Otto-von-Guericke-University of Magdeburg (Germany). The tools of the named crushing method are high-performance sonic impulses. The basic principle is the transformation of electrical energy (stored at a capacitor) into mechanical energy of sonic impulses. These impulses are generated under water by a disruptive electrical discharge. An electrical power flows between two electrodes in a water-filled discharge tank that causes an explosive expansion of the discharge channel. Pressure waves are generated through the surrounding medium. The pressure waves propagate as sonic waves in water containing the concrete. If they come across interfaces of different densities, i.e., water and concrete or aggregates and cement paste, positive and negative interferences occur ( The tensile stresses primarily destroy the bond between the aggregates and the matrix. Cracks mainly go along the density interfaces, like shown in The targets of the research project can be summarized as follows: Investigations of the influences of electrical parameters and inputted electrical energy on the size reduction and the separation of concrete; Investigations of the influences of concrete properties on the separation; Optimisation of the energy balance of the system and the process parameters; Comparison of the crushed product with that of conventional crushing methods. The device used for the experiments is shown in For the verification of the crushing and separation effect, different characteristic values were determined. To evaluate the action of the high-performance sonic impulses as a crushing tool, the reduction of the particle sizes was determined. The particle size distribution of the crushed product was compared with that of the aggregates used in the origin concrete. For the evaluation of the separation effect, additional parameters were used. These parameters describe the amount of cement stone stuck on the surface of the aggregates after crushing and the rate of damage/destruction of aggregates by the forces during the treatment. The content of the cement paste was determined by the hydrochloric acid method according to the German Standard ( In During the first series of experiments, the influence of electrical parameters on the properties of the crushed material was investigated. In a next-step investigation, the relationship of carried out size reduction and the liberation of the components of concrete versus the electrical energy input were examined. Different kinds of concretes were crushed next to find out the influence on the properties of material.  In the next chapters, only the results of the experiments on concrete will be discussed. At the beginning, a short explanation of the energy used for crushing is given. The inputted electrical energy The discharge is divided in the so-called pre- and main discharge. During the predischarge, a small part of the stored energy The first step was to find out the best agreement of the particle size distribution of crushed concrete to the particle size distribution of the original aggregates in the concrete.  From the experiments follow that the mean particle size  The target was also to get the highest liberation of the aggregates (gravel and sand). The degree of liberation The degree of liberation for all fractions 2–16 mm increases with rising energy input. In the fine fraction <2 mm, the content increases against it, because in this fraction, the enrichment of cement paste occurs. In Result of the experiments is an optimum working area in the range of the energy The particle size reduction and the liberation of aggregates depend on the properties of material, especially its strength and elastic behavior. The middle-strength concretes are difficult to crush, because they are stringely. The concretes with high strength are very brittle. The explained method is very good to be used for high-strength concretes. The crushing tests of concretes with systematically varied compressive strength but constant raw materials confirm this result ( The conclusion of these investigations is that the quality of the interfacial transition zone between aggregates and cement paste is very important for the crushing by high-performance sonic impulses. This fact will be investigated more in detail in the next chapter and in further works. The quality of the interfacial transition zone is among other things influenced by the type of the used cement. For the investigations, concretes with different types of concrete were produced and crushed by high-performance sonic impulses. The conductivity of the water has a significant influence on the process of the discharge under water. With increasing electrical conductivity, the losses in the predischarge are getting higher, and the energy input in the under water spark gap decreases. The increase of electrical conductivity of the process water is attributed in the main to a growth of the hydroxide (OH For concretes with portland cement or with portland cement with inert additionals, the electrical conductivity of water can be used as the degree of the quality of crushing. A high conductivity implies low ratios of crushing and low content of liberated aggregates. This results cannot be generalized without further ado. The boundary layer is influenced not only of the cement, but also by the water to cement ratio, the type and the particle size distribution of the aggregates, the use of additionals and the age means the degree of hydration. Further investigations to this circumstances are in planning. The concrete with blast furnace cement (CEM III) showed the highest effectivity at the crushing by high-performance sonic impulses. It contains the quantitative (particle size distribution, mean particle size, degree of crushing) and also the qualitative (degree of liberation) point of view ( In The comparison of the degree of liberation of the aggregates (means the aggregates without cement paste on the surface) in dependence from the particle size is really interesting ( The results show that it is possible to use shock waves as a tool for the processing of concrete. By variations of the electrical parameters, the converted energy can be varied widely. The number of impulses and the voltage are the main influences on the particle size reduction and the quality of crushing product. For the examined concrete with strength of 25 N/mm Secondary aggregates obtained from the new method show clearly lower content of cement paste in the coarse fractions compared with secondary aggregates crushed in an impact or jaw crusher. The influence of the conductivity of water is important for the efficiency of this method. One main factor influencing the conductivity is the type of cement used in concrete. It was examined that a cement with a low content of calcium hydroxide like blast furnace cement or composite cements can be crushed more effectively. A comparison of energy consumption with conventional crushing methods cannot be seriously done, because the described method is still in a laboratory scale. The used equipment was made for experiments with samples with not more than 5 kg in weight. Hence, a real statement to the energy in kWh/ton cannot be given. A projection of the experimental results gives an energy consumption of 12 kWh/ton. But this value had to be seen in relation to the quality of crushing product, which is much cleaner than products of conventional crushing machines. Topics of the further research will be the investigation of the process parameters, the optimisation of the energy input and the influence of more concrete properties on separation.