The application of flotation for the separation of plastic mixtures derived from post-consumer waste is relatively new, the earliest publications on this subject date back to the late seventies. Flotation was originally developed for ore separation about a century ago. Early research studies on plastics flotation were concerned with testing surfactants known from ore flotation. While searching for suitable wetting agents has been the principal research subject in this field, it became clear later that other surface treatments can also be utilised.
                  This paper is the first part of a critical review on available literature data of plastic flotation research from the last three decades. It is felt that there is a need for such a review, because there is still considerable interest for this technique to separate plastics but literature data are often presented in the light of conflicting theories. Part I gives a brief overview of suitable methods to obtain selective flotation of different kinds of plastic and discusses the liquid–vapour surface tension control method in detail.The idea to apply flotation to separate plastics was a logical step as ore flotation research has demonstrated that the surface properties of different materials can be altered selectively by surfactant adsorption. Early studies on plastics flotation were concerned with testing depressants used in ore flotation or with optimizing the hydrodynamics of the flotation device used ( Unfortunately, there is some mismatch between the current need of industry for flotation research and the actual academic work in this field. This is partly because in the majority of scientific research studies, samples of untreated virgin plastics are used and the obtained results are seldom compared with results on actual industrial samples. On the other hand, the need for industrial separation mainly concerns the treatment of post-consumer plastics, the surface properties of which can be strongly altered in comparison with virgin resins of the same type ( This paper is the first part of a critical review on available literature data in plastics flotation. Part I mainly discusses liquid–vapour surface tension control (gamma flotation), whereas part II will concentrate on surfactant adsorption. There are basically two approaches to effect separation of shredded plastic particles by flotation. First, as virgin resins of virtually all major plastic types are hydrophobic by nature, separation can be obtained by selective wetting of the components (see Sink–float separation in water requires the particles be well wetted to avoid misplacement due to attaching air bubbles and non-selective clustering (flocculation). A frequently used method to obtain wetting of plastic particles in recycling is friction washing, in which the plastic particles are exposed to high shear forces in a stirred vessel or tube. A similar effect is obtained by wet grinding of plastics in a cutting mill. As a result of the above treatments, the plastic particles lose a great deal of their natural hydrophobicity making the mixture unsuitable for separation by froth flotation using the selective-wetting approach. In addition, the hydrophobicity of plastics from durable consumer goods, such as automotive parts, may be affected due to ageing. It appears therefore, that the application of the selective-wetting method is restricted to the separation of virgin plastic scrap and post-consumer scrap in which the natural hydrophobicity of the components is still sufficient. Silbermann reported about an industrial operation that failed to separate PVC and PET flakes originating from post-consumer bottles ( In fact, a combination of the selective-wetting method with the selective hydrophobization technique might yield best results in many practical applications. The only known plant successfully applying the froth flotation method for the separation of PVC and PET flakes from post-consumer bottles is based on such a combined technique ( The crucial point in achieving separation by flotation lies in defining a suitable surface treatment method to obtain selective bubble attachment on the components to be separated. As bubble attachment is a dynamic process, the question arises, which physical parameters can be used to evaluate the floatability of the particles? In the majority of studies on plastics flotation, either flotation recovery or contact angle data are used to this end ( One could argue that flotation recovery is the only true indicator of floatability, because it is determined by the simultaneous influence of the hydrophobicity and specific surface area of the particles in terms of m Measuring the contact angle of particles is, on the other hand, a relatively quick procedure, if appropriate samples are available. However, there are several drawbacks attached to this method, too, in addition to the above mentioned problems. First, the results depend on whether the advancing or the receding contact angle is measured. Le Guern found that the receding contact angle reflects the flotation response of mixtures of PVC and PET flakes treated in a surfactant solution better than the advancing contact angle ( Vogt proposed to measure the adhesion force of a bubble attaching onto the surface of a plastic particle in an aqueous solution of the same composition as the actual flotation liquid ( The wettability of hydrophobic (low energy) surfaces can be enhanced by depressants commonly used in ore flotation. However, suggested mechanisms in the literature for the adsorption of these substances on ores do not allow explaining the phenomena observed in plastics flotation ( Although numerous research projects have been initiated on plastics flotation during the past two decades, fundamental studies published on this subject are scarce. Early attempts to disclose the interaction forces that govern adsorption on polymer surfaces are rather hypothetical, but there has been a major progress in the understanding of the involved adsorption phenomena in recent years ( The wettability of plastic surfaces by water can be increased by grafting hydrophilic functionalities, such as O, OH and COOH onto the polymer chains located on the surface. A number of methods are available to achieve surface oxidation of plastics, e.g., wet oxidative chemical reactions, plasma treatment, corona discharge and photografting methods ( A widely applied treatment in the recycling of post-consumer bottles is washing of the shredded flakes in a hot caustic soda solution (NaOH). Since PET is an ester-type polymer, caustic soda breaks up the ester links located at the solid surface. This process is the reverse reaction of esterification. The caustic soda treatment is applied to clean the PET flakes and to remove labels and glue from their surface. This treatment also serves to wet the PET flakes for the subsequent sink–float separation in water, in which the PET flakes are separated from PE and PP. A complete wetting of the PET flakes, which report to the sink fraction, is important here to avoid bubble attachment and an unselective clustering of the particles. It is less known that a number of plastic types can be selectively oxidized in a similar way. For example, polycarbonates are destructed by aqueous ammonia solutions. Therefore, polycarbonates can be selectively wetted by applying an ammonia-treatment and separated by flotation from a number of plastics that are not sensitive to ammonia ( Stückrad proposed a method applying a plasma treatment to achieve selective wetting of plastic particles ( The explanation for the selective influence of time on the floatability of different plasma-treated plastics has to be traced in a difference in the molecular mobility of polymer chains. It can be stated that the surface of a condensed phase is always more hydrophobic in the direction of the air than in its interior. This is because even the molecules of the most hydrophobic compounds can undergo more intense interactions with each other in the bulk phase than with air. Hydrophobic, i.e. apolar, molecular parts suffer less from being exposed at the surface than hydrophilic, i.e. polar, ones. The total free energy of a polymer matrix is, therefore, lowest when the apolar fragments are oriented towards the surface, whereas the polar segments are facing the bulk phase. As a result, the hydrophilic functionalities of a plasma-treated polymeric substrate will tend to turn away from the surface through local rotational rearrangements minimizing the surface free energy ( Molecular rearrangement is influenced by a number of factors, such as the temperature, the polarity of the medium being in contact with the surface (e.g. air or water), crystallinity of the plasma-treated substrate, etc. ( Kobler described a method for the separation of mixtures of PVC and PET flakes in which the floatability of PVC is selectively enhanced in addition to a selective wet oxidation of PET ( Differences in the tendency of different plastic types to absorb water can also be utilized to increase the selectivity of wetting in flotation. For instance, polyamides absorb significant amounts of water, whereas other plastic types absorb much less ( If a sufficient difference exists between the critical surface tensions In gamma flotation, an appropriate organic liquid, such as aqueous solutions of methanol, is commonly used to control the surface tension of the flotation liquid ( According to  Further, one should distinguish between the critical surface tension of a given solid  One could argue that heteropolar surfactants could also be used to reduce the surface tension of the flotation liquid to the required values in the range of 30–40 mN/m. Fraunholcz suggested that surfactants suited to such a radical reduction of  It is remarkable that C Note that the results displayed in It is clear from the above sections that heteropolar surfactants are capable of effecting wetting of plastic particles in flotation through adsorption. The question remains, however, whether the reduced liquid surface tension contributes to this depressant effect at appropriate concentrations of the surfactant. Literature data are scarce on this matter, but we have at least some clue to give an answer. Fraunholcz suggested that due to the low diffusion rate of heteropolar surfactants in water, their depressant effect through reduced Surface tension measurements on aqueous solutions of an aliphatic polyglycol ether (C Hence, The work of Schöne on bench-scale flotation tests using crystalline PET with a number of heteropolar surfactants provides some support for the above arguments. An important difficulty in evaluating the flotation recovery data shown in It is clear from literature data that if gamma flotation is carried out in a true liquid, such as an aqueous solution of methanol, wetting of a given plastic type with zero contact angle is not necessary to suppress flotation. Hence, the condition From the available data we can conclude that there are strong indications that the depressant effect of heteropolar surfactants is mainly based on adsorption at the solid–liquid interface, but there are insufficient data to unambiguously exclude a contribution of the reduced liquid surface tension.