This paper aims at describing the use of two well-known techniques, i.e. expert systems and soft sensors in order to develop a prevention method for the froth collapse problem. This will be achieved by monitoring concentrate froth solid-to-liquids ratio. This scheme is outlined like an alternative solution to artificial vision based methods, and it was tested by simulation under several perturbations affecting the metallurgical performance.Froth collapse is a serious trouble in column flotation. Not only virtual sensors, which are also called soft sensing, but also expert systems have widely been used so as to solve such a problem. Both technologies are combined in this work to prevent froth overloading and the subsequent froth collapse. The expert system has been designed based on a multivariable predictive control ( In order to avoid the froth collapse, expert systems usually use image processing, measuring several physical variables of the froth like colorimetric, geometric and dynamic information. See In simple terms, the operators’ compiled experience leads to a froth classification intuitively related to density. The most interesting fuzzy froth defined categories are dry, wet, and stiff. Wet froth typically has “empty bubbles”, i.e., the concentrate load being low. When the optimal froth is rather dry, bubbles are loaded with mineral, but froth still floats out from the cell. The most critical case is the extremely stiff froth. This pathological situation may result in the collapse of the froth surface; no concentrate flows out. This practical criterion agrees with the definition of froth overloading phenomenon used by some authors, which has been traditionally characterized by the maximum possible solids content in the froth product. Practical considerations indicate that when froth solid-to-liquid ratio by volume is higher than 0.4, froth gets so thick that it tends to collapse ( Bearing this idea in mind, froth collapse prevention has been implemented within the expert system proposed in this paper using a solid-to-liquid ratio soft measure. The expert system also considers concentrate grade and recovery optimization. In the last few years the following solutions have been proposed:    Generally, optimization is carried out by modifying control loops set points implemented on the column, such as froth depth, gas holdup and bias rate. It will be shown that an efficient expert control system with easy re-calibration can be achieved just setting up the first two above mentioned parameters, applying occasional changes to the wash water rate and defining adequate supervising policies. Reagents flows are held constant. Some system outputs are either difficult to measure or inaccessible. Sometimes sensors are also too expensive or sensing systems have intolerable pure delays. Soft-sensors ( Froth solid-to-liquid ratio direct sensing is a very difficult task. A soft-sensor is a good choice. Deviations from real value are no relevant because this measure is applied to a prevention system rather than to a local control. Recent implementations of soft sensors use neural networks or fuzzy computing. Besides, well-known algorithms can be seen as soft sensors, e.g. Kalman filters or ARMAX models. Here, an estimation based on a dynamic-minerallurgical model is used as a soft sensor. The froth solid-to-liquid ratio estimation and the minerallurgical indexes behavior analysis has been carried out using a column model developed in two sections: the dynamic and minerallurgical ones. Both are briefly described below. Froth depth has been modeled as  Tails rate has also been described as the addition of its hydrostatic and gas influences: Calculations start obtaining the particle–bubble collision probability. The overall probability of collection is Therefore for the valued mineral (fluorite in this case) the overall probability is Once For recovery calculation, the The mean residence time of the slurry within the column can be obtained from The particle residence time is  With these previous calculations, the collection zone fluorite recovery can be predicted using the  As is known, there is a gas holdup profile If Following simplicity, all these influences have been combined in a single linear expression: It is worthy to notice that the minerallurgical model is a steady state one, linked to the dynamic model in order to describe the process changes with time. Here, there is an assumption that metallurgical changes occur faster than hydrodynamic changes, which is not exactly true. However, the global model behavior responds to the reality if minerallurgical disturbances changes are slower than hydrodynamic time constants. The sensitivity analysis allows to observe the influence of the different plant variables affecting the three minerallurgical indicators already mentioned: Input variables are divided into two groups, i.e., operative variables, used to control the plant performance, and system disturbances. Froth depth Gas holdup Wash water rate Feed rate Feed grade Particle diameter Feed solid-to-liquid ratio Although there are some other disturbances, the ones under consideration affect outputs to a great extent.  It can be seen that grade and recovery are mutually excluding objectives. Generally, if one of them increases, the other diminishes. It is worthy to notice that every disturbance under consideration may cause a froth solid-to-liquid ratio increase and a subsequent danger of overloading. This value is diminished by both a gas holdup increment and a wash water increase and such a feature will be used profitably by the expert system. Some authors, like In order to define a strategy for the expert system decisions, three errors related to the minerallurgical indicators under study are defined as inputs, since they show the distance as regards a critical value which should not be broken. For An When working with the optimization mode it is necessary to bear in mind that the objective is to keep quality and production. The focus is to preserve the concentrate grade and recovery over the minimum values Taking benefit of the well-known grade-froth depth relation and of the recovery-gas holdup one, the operators’ reasoning is moved, linguistically speaking, to fuzzy inference system logical rules, as follows:    This kind of reasoning gives way to two distinctive Mamdani type fuzzy inference systems acting at the same time. One of them modifies the froth depth set point and the other, the gas holdup. Both systems inputs, the Triangular membership functions and minimum inference have been used. When the protection mode works, grade and recovery values are acceptable and it is required not to exceed the As it has already been noticed, a gas holdup increase will reduce the froth solid-to-liquid ratio. At the same time, as the gas holdup has a strong effect on recovery, this variable should be included in the system. In this way, a main fuzzy system—Fuzzy System 1—is defined. Under certain conditions, a high froth solid-to-liquid ratio and low grade may occur. A froth depth increase in optimization mode would still cause a higher increase in Some simulated tests in which the objective is to keep grade above a minimum of  An increase in Finally, a combination of the optimization mode that restores the grade and the protection mode, reducing the froth solid-to-liquid ratio is depicted in A simple and effective expert system has been developed, using a froth solid-to-liquid ratio model based soft sensing. It is able to solve minerallurgical indexes falls and different froth density risk situations caused by common parameters variations in a column flotation plant. At this stage, the effectiveness of the expert system has been verified by simulation. The expert system based on the use of the grade vs. recovery plane has a reduced quantity of rules. This makes recalibration easier, when necessary. The various membership functions concerning fuzzy inference systems are expressed in minerallurgical indexes units. The authors specially thank to Dr. Juan Yianatos his permanent support and advice to make this research possible. The authors would like to thank Prof. Nora Muñoz for the English translation of this paper.