Background
                  Previous studies have shown good clinical results in patients with proximal humeral fractures (PHFs) treated with locking intramedullary nails or locking plates. Our study compared the clinical and radiographic outcomes in patients with 2- and 3-part surgical neck fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  In this prospective, randomized controlled trial, 72 patients with 2- or 3-part surgical neck PHFs were randomly assigned to receive fixation with locking intramedullary nails (nail group) or locking plates (plate group). The primary outcome was the 12-month Constant-Murley score. The secondary outcomes included the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score, the visual analog scale pain score, the shoulder passive range of motion, the neck-shaft angle, and complication rates.
               
                  Results
                  There was no significant mean treatment group difference in the Constant-Murley score at 12 months (70.3 points for the nail group vs. 71.5 points for the plate group; P = .750) or at individual follow-up assessments. There were no differences in the 3-, 6- and 12-month Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand scores, visual analog scale scores, and range of motion, except for the medial rotation at 6 months. The neck-shaft angle was equivalent between the groups at 12 months. There were significant differences over 12 months in total complication rates (P = .002) and reoperation rates (P = .041). There were no significant differences for the rotator cuff tear rate (P = .672).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fixation of PHFs with locking plates or locking intramedullary nails produces similar clinical and radiologic results. Nevertheless, the complication and reoperation rates were higher in the nail group.Proximal humeral fractures (PHFs) are the third-most common type of fractures among older adults. Locking plate osteosynthesis is considered the gold standard treatment for these fractures. Different studies have compared these 2 approaches to fixation. The primary aim of the present study was to compare 2 methods of osteosynthesis of 2- and 3-part PHFs: locking plates and locking intramedullary nails. The primary outcome was the Constant-Murley score at 12 months after surgery. Our hypothesis was that no difference would be observed between the groups regarding the primary outcome. This study was a single-center, prospective, randomized controlled trial. All patients provided written informed consent to participate. The study was registered at The inclusion criteria were an age between 50 and 85 years and a PHF with displacement ≥1 cm or ≥45° of angulation between the head and diaphysis of the humerus, with or without involvement of the greater tuberosity, and treated surgically ≤21 days after the injury. The exclusion criteria were isolated tuberosity fractures, articular split, fracture dislocation, open fractures, neurologic injury, previous surgery on the affected shoulder, associated fractures in the ipsilateral limb, pathologic fractures, psychiatric diseases, inability to understand the questionnaires, active or previous infection in the shoulder, irreparable tendon tears of the rotator cuff, and loss to follow-up before the first clinical assessment at 3 months. Radiographs were obtained with 3 views: anteroposterior in the scapular plane, a lateral view of the scapula, and a supine axillary view. We assessed the Neer All surgical procedures were done by the principal investigator (M.E.C.G.). Surgery was performed with the patient under general anesthesia combined with an interscalene brachial plexus block and in dorsal decubitus with 30° of elevation. We used the Centronail (Orthofix, Verona, Italy) intramedullary nail with 3 proximal locking screws, which was introduced via a longitudinal anterolateral transdeltoid approach. The supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons were identified and sutured with nonabsorbable sutures. When present, greater tuberosity fractures were reduced before the intramedullary nail was inserted. The humeral head was reduced and provisionally fixed with Kirschner wires. For the entry point, a guidewire was placed 1 cm posterior to the intertubercular groove and 1 cm medial to the transition between the head and the greater tuberosity. A longitudinal 1.5-cm incision was made in the supraspinatus tendon. The nail was placed 5 mm below the cartilage and proximally fixed with 3 screws and distally fixed with 2 screws. An end cap was screwed in to lock the 2 most proximal screws, and tension-band sutures were placed around the proximal screws, with nonabsorbable sutures passed through the rotator cuff tendons. The supraspinatus tendon was repaired with nonabsorbable suture (see We used the PHILOS (DePuy-Synthes, Solothurn, Switzerland) stainless steel plate, with 3 holes for the diaphysis, which was introduced via the deltopectoral approach. The plate was placed 1 cm inferior to the upper portion of the greater tuberosity and 1 cm lateral to the long head of the biceps tendon. Three guidewires were inserted through the plate proximal holes, followed by distal fixation with a cortical or locking screw under radioscopic imaging. At least 5 locking screws were inserted proximally, followed by 2 more distal locking screws, with a minimum of 3 distal screws. Tension-band sutures were placed in the proximal plate holes, with nonabsorbable sutures passed through the rotator cuff tendons. Slings were used for 4 weeks. Physical therapy with passive and active assisted exercises was started 14 days after surgery. Active and active resisted exercises were started 30 and 60 days after surgery, respectively. The patients were evaluated by the Constant-Murley score, Radiographs were obtained immediately after surgery, at 6 weeks, and at 3, 6, and 12 months in 4 views: anteroposterior in the scapular plane with the shoulder in 30° external rotation and in internal rotation, a lateral view of the scapula, and a supine axillary view. The characteristics evaluated were fracture consolidation, neck-shaft angle (NSA), and the presence of complications ( The complications were assessed as a binary variable (present or absent) and included varus malunion (NSA ≤110°), osteonecrosis, nonunion, hardware problems, loss of reduction of humeral head (≥10° of the NSA), loss of reduction of the greater tuberosity (≥0.5 cm), insufficient reduction (NSA ≤120° or tuberosity displacement >0.5 cm), refracture, shoulder stiffness, infection, neurologic injury, and rotator cuff tendon tears. Ultrasound imaging was performed by the same group of skeletal radiologists at 6 months to evaluate the rotator cuff, using a Logiq E9 device (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) with an 6- to 15-MHz ML6-15 linear transducer (GE Healthcare). The sample size was calculated based on the Constant-Murley score, assuming a 12-point difference, according to the minimal clinically significant difference. Randomization was generated on the website “ Outcome evaluations were performed by a physical therapist who did not participate in the rehabilitation of patients and who was blinded to their allocation. The evaluations were performed with the patients wearing clothes to preclude the visualization of the surgical wound. Continuous data are presented as means and standard deviations, and categoric data are presented as absolute numbers and percentages. Continuous variables were analyzed using the Student From May 2011 to March 2014, 123 individuals were assessed for eligibility. Fifty-one individuals (41%) did not meet the inclusion criteria; the most common reason was displacement of <45° or 1 cm, and thereby acceptable for conservative treatment (24%). Three participants in the nail group and 1 patient in the plate group did not undergo the 12-month assessment but were included in the final analysis. One participant in the nail group underwent reoperation with placement of a locking plate and was analyzed within the group to which he had been originally allocated. The analysis included 65 patients, 32 in the nail group and 33 in the plate group ( The baseline characteristics for randomized patients were well balanced between the groups ( There were no statistically significant differences between treatment groups for the clinical outcomes at the 12-month evaluation or at individual assessments ( The mean IRC values after 12 months of follow-up were 81% ± 18.0% in the nail group and 85% ± 12.4% in the plate group ( Significant differences were not found in the secondary clinical outcomes (VAS and DASH scores) at any assessment. The groups did not differ significantly with regard to the shoulder passive range of motion, except for internal rotation at the 6-month assessment, which was 2 points higher in the nail group ( The mean NSAs at the end of the follow-up period were 133.7° ± 7.3° in the nail group and 131.5° ± 6.5° in the plate group; the difference between the means was 2.2° (95% confidence interval, −1.2 to 5.6), which was not significant ( A total of 38 complications were recorded, 28 in the nail group and 10 in the plate group ( Seven patients (11%) underwent reoperations, 6 (19%) from the nail group and 1 (3%) from the plate group; this difference was significant ( The Neer classification, coronal displacement (varus or valgus), and the presence of metaphyseal comminution did not significantly differ between the groups on subgroup analysis. Our findings showed that intramedullary nailing and locking plate fixation yielded similar functional results in patients with 2- and 3-part PHFs. In addition, we did not find any differences between the groups regarding pain, fracture healing, and the NSA. The differences in the Constant-Murley scores were not statistically significant; in absolute terms, they were less than 7 points at all assessment times but were better for the nail group at 3 months. The study sample was chosen on the basis of the power analysis to find differences of 12 points on the Constant-Murley, based on the concept of minimal clinically significant difference. Smaller differences might indicate false-negative results. The clinical results of the patients treated with locking plates were similar to those reported in 2 systematic reviews. The total number of complications was significantly higher in the nail group, with 28 different adverse events compared with 10 in the plate group. More patients exhibited complications in the nail group (34%) than in the plate group (21%); however, this difference was not significant. Our results conflict with those reported by Zhu et al Few studies have evaluated rotator cuff tears after treatment of PHF. The currently available locking intramedullary nail models have different characteristics. The most recently developed nails allow fixation of the humeral head with a larger number of locking screws in different positions, which is better for areas with denser bone in addition to enabling the fixation of the tuberosities. Our study had some limitations. The difference between the approaches may be an independent factor that influenced the results; thus, the implant type may not be the single influencing variable. Not all types of Neer 2- and 3-part fractures were included in the study, which might be considered a limitation of the external validity. We did not include patients with the fracture line between the greater and lesser tuberosities independent from the displacement. We excluded such patients due to their poorer prognosis and the difficulty of measuring the tuberosity displacement in the Neer classification. The 12-month follow-up is another limitation and might lead to an underestimation of the rate of long-term complications, mainly osteonecrosis. One further limitation is that we did not include a group that received nonsurgical treatment. The decision about surgical treatment has become a controversial subject, and recent studies have not demonstrated differences between surgical and conservative treatment independent from the surgical technique used. This study is the second randomized trial to compare locking plates with locking intramedullary nails but is the first to evaluate 2- and 3-part PHFs. We believe our results could contribute to the practical decision making, because nails might yield a higher complication rate, without any clinical benefit, compared with plates. Our study shows that fixation of PHFs with locking plates or locking intramedullary nails produces similar clinical and radiologic results. Nevertheless, the complication and reoperation rates were higher in the group treated with locking intramedullary nails. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated did not receive any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article: