Introduction
                  A minimal invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) has an advantage of biological soft tissue preservation that consists of preserving bony blood supply, fracture hematoma and less soft tissue damage which leads to decreasing of infection rate and rapid bone healing. However, the radiation exposure is still a disadvantage of this technique. A sonography that provides dynamic real time imaging may be used as an alternative technique for assisting MIPO. The aim of this study was to compare the effectiveness of MIPO in femoral shaft fracture between the sonography assisted and the fluoroscopy assisted.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-eight cadaveric limbs were subjected to create femoral shaft fracture. Then, sonography assisted reduction with temporary external fixation and MIPO were performed. Images of the sonography and the fluoroscopy were recorded including before reduction, after reduction and after MIPO in order to identify fracture displacements in anteroposterior and mediolateral directions. Moreover, the anterior and posterior distances from edge of the bone to the plate were measured to confirm plate position. The effectiveness of this technique was defined as the proper plate position and acceptable alignment after fixation. All distances from the sonography and the fluoroscopy were also analyzed and compared using Pearson correlation and Bland-Altman method to assess the agreements between two tests.
               
                  Result
                  All of the subjects were met the criteria for acceptable alignment. We found only three femoral shaft fracture (11%) operated with MIPO by sonography assisted that showed slipped plate off femoral bones. According to Pearson correlation, there were good to excellent agreements in term of measuring fracture displacement before (Pearson Correlation >0.7) and after reduction (Pearson Correlation >0.7) between these two tests. There was moderate agreement regarding to evaluation of plate position (Pearson Correlation 03.–0.7). When we compared two methods of measurement using Bland-Altman plot, there were no statistical significant difference (P<0.05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Images from the sonography could provide visualization of the fracture during reduction and MIPO as accurately as the radiography. Thus, the sonography assisted MIPO in femoral shaft fracture can be done effectively comparing with radiographic assisted.The plate fixation technique for treatment of long bone fractures has become popular and is widely used. Over the past decade, however, a new percutaneous plate and screw fixation technique has been developed called minimal invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO). This technique can be used to treat long bone fractures at various sites with excellent clinical outcomes, e.g., femoral shaft fractures MIPO has the advantages of biological soft tissue preservation including preservation of the bone blood supply and fracture hematoma, less soft tissue damage which leads to a decrease in infection rates and more rapid bone healing. For femoral shaft fractures, intramedullary nailing is still a standard treatment. Nevertheless, MIPO is an alternative treatment in patients where intramedullary nailing is contraindicated, including patients with an extremely narrow medullary canal, patients with malunion bone, patients with periprosthetic or peri-implant fractures, and patients with skeletal immaturity. With MIPO, however, fluoroscopic examination is necessary for checking the bony alignment after reduction and the plate position. The accompanying radiation exposure of the surgical team and the patient is a disadvantage of this technique as that exposure can cause health problems such as cancer, cataracts and genetic mutations Ultrasonography, which is currently well developed, is another option for assisting surgery. Advances in ultrasound imaging have permitted more accurate, dynamic, multiple plane, and real time images which are helpful for assisting surgery. In addition, using ultrasonography to assist surgery can avoid exposure to radiation Many recent studies of ultrasound assisted procedures and surgeries, including in the field of orthopedics, have found satisfactory clinical outcomes comparable to standard radiographic assistance, e.g., ultrasound assistance in intramedullary nailing of femoral shaft fractures The objective of this study was to determine the effectiveness of sonography assisted MIPO in femoral shaft fractures compared with radiographic assisted MIPO, and to investigate the feasibility of using this alternative technique in actual clinical situations. This research was performed on twenty-eight fresh cadaveric limbs at Maharaj Nakhorn Chiang Mai University hospital between January 2012 and December 2013. The fresh cadavers, nine males and five females, were obtained within 72 After the fracture sites had been prepared, an ultrasound study was done at the fracture site to obtain images for measuring displacement in the AP and medial-lateral directions (0.00 To measure the fracture displacement in the anteroposterior direction, an ultrasound probe was placed perpendicularly to the anterior cortex of the femur at the level of the fracture site and the probe orientation should be parallel to the longitudinal axis of femoral bone with marker on probe point proximally ( A fluoroscope was then used to collect radiographic images for measuring displacement in AP and lateral views (0.00 After measurement, closed reduction and temporary fixation with external fixator was performed with sonographic assistance. Data on fracture displacement after reduction with both the sonographic and the fluoroscopic studies was obtained in the manner described above. Next, MIPO with anatomical femoral locking compression plate was performed. We used sonography to locate the position of the plate and to confirm that overall the plate was lying on the bone. Using that method, we also measured the distance from the plate to the anterior and posterior cortex of the bone at the level of the fracture sites as well as 3 Success of the MIPO fixation was evaluated using fluoroscopic still images based on the following parameters: femoral shortening or distraction less than 2.5 Finally, all the sonography and the radiography distances measurements were analyzed and compared. Inter- and intra-observer reliability from two operators (J.S. and N.P.) were calculated. The Pearson correlation coefficient was used to assess agreement between sonography and radiography. Correlation values of 0.7–1.0 represents high agreement, 0.3–0.69 represent moderate agreement and 0–0.29 represent low agreement. We also used the Bland-Altman plot method to analyze the agreement between the two different methods of measurement. The primary outcome for evaluating the effectiveness of sonography assisted MIPO surgery were the percentage of successfully fixated femoral fractures as indicated by good alignment of the fixated fracture and the achievement of proper plate position. In addition, we compared and assessed the agreement between all distances measured by our sonography assisted technique and the standard fluoroscopy assisted technique. This study included twenty-eight fresh cadaveric limbs with an artificially produced femoral shaft fracture and some cortical comminution. Only three femoral shaft fractures with sonography assisted MIPO (11%) showed a plate which had slipped off the femoral bone and none had unacceptable final alignments of the femoral shaft fracture (evaluated using the criteria described above). Femoral shortening or distraction was less than 25 The variability between measurement operators was excellent agreement on both inter-observer (r We also compared these two methods using the Bland-Altman plot method and found no statistically significant differences in distance measurements (P This is a pioneer study of a new assistance technique in MIPO of femoral shaft fractures. A review of the literature found no previous studies evaluating sonography assisted MIPO. In this study we attempted to demonstrate that sonography, which is now well developed and becoming increasingly popular, can be used instead of the standard fluoroscopic assistance technique which results in potential damage from radiation. Based on our study, sonography assisted MIPO in femoral shaft fractures appears to be a feasible alternative to fluoroscopy, providing equally acceptable operative results without radiation exposure. The effectiveness of our new technique was defined as achievement of good alignment of the fixated fracture including shortening of less than 25 Assessment of the images from sonography and fluoroscopy using a comparison of measurements of fracture displacement either pre-reduction or post-reduction found high levels of agreement in the Pearson correlation analysis and no statistically significant difference in the Bland-Altman plots. These results suggest that sonographic images are comparable to the standard fluoroscopic technique in evaluating fracture displacement and assisting in reduction surgery. These results are consistent with evaluations in previous studies of the feasibility and efficacy of sonography to assist in other types of orthopedic surgery, for example in reduction of distal radius fractures and in intramedullary nailing of femoral shaft fractures. In terms of plate position, there was moderate agreement between the two methods based on Pearson correlation analysis and there was no statistically significant difference in the methods as assed by Bland-Altman plots. In addition, the mean difference between the two methods was less than 1 Sonography, unlike standard fluoroscopy, can provide real time, dynamic imaging and multiplanar views. It can be used to assist in many procedures and operations without any radiation exposure, a main concern. However, there was minimal difference between the distance of the ultrasound image compared to the fluoroscopy. While ultrasound images provide an actual size of objects (bone, femur), the measurement of distance on fluoroscopic images is increased by magnification factor. In this study, the distance between X-ray tube and image detector was set at 100 centimeters and the cadaver was placed on the image detector. In reviewing of ultrasound images, thickness soft tissue of around the mid-thigh in our specimens was appropriately 5 centimeters. This lead to 1.05 magnification factor or 5% increase of the distance Medical ultrasound devices use sound waves in the range of 1–20 One limitation is that our study was performed with cadavers, so soft tissue condition might be different from that of living patients. That difference could potentially affect surgical procedures as well as the accuracy of measurements. Although there are many advantages to sonography, there are also some limitations. One is that image quality and thus efficacy is operator dependent. In the hands of an experienced operator, sonographic images can provide useful information. Because sonography is a skill that involves a learning process, operators need time to practice. However, in hand of surgeons who understand the anatomy of the bone may not spend too much time in practice and using the simple technique as us describes is not difficult in learning process. In addition, sonography has limitations in terms of assessment of length and rotation. The mainly purpose of the ultrasound assisted surgery is only assess the focal cortical bone approximation and plate position. For that reason, the technique should be supplemented by another anatomic reference in order to achieve more precise alignment, e.g., the length and rotation of the contralateral limb. Fractures which are appropriate for the technique are those with comminution that have some intact bony cortex to act as a reference point for sonographic assisted reduction.  Identify the level of the fracture site. Place one Schanz pin at the proximal fragment and another at the distal fragment. Attach a clamp and bar to the Schanz pins. Place the ultrasound probe perpendicular to the fracture site with the marker point proximally parallel to the bone axis. Place the probe on the anterior aspect of the thigh to detect displacement in the AP direction. Place the probe on the lateral or medial aspects of the thigh to detect displacement in the mediolateral direction. Perform reduction using Schanz pins as a joystick to assist reduction. Tighten the external fixator frame to temporarily maintain position after satisfactory reduction has been achieved. Perform the MIPO procedure.  Place the ultrasound probe perpendicular to the fracture site with the marker pointing up. Place the probe on the lateral aspect of the thigh to obtain a cross-sectional view of the plate which is attached to the bone. Move the probe proximally and distally along the axis of the bone to confirm the entire plate attachment position on the lateral cortex of the bone. To reduce radiation from fluoroscopy, sonography can be used with satisfactory results to assist MIPO repair of femoral shaft fractures. Fractures which are candidates for this new technique include comminuted fractures which have some intact cortical bone. We have no conflict of interest. We would like to thank