Objectives
                  To review a case series of patients with posterior pilon variant fracture using a novel approach, focusing on demographic data, injury pattern, surgical results based on computed tomography (CT) scan, and short-term complications.
               
                  Design
                  Consecutive case series.
               
                  Setting
                  Level I trauma center.
               
                  Patients/participants
                  Twenty-five patients with posterior pilon fracture.
               
                  Intervention
                  Posterior pilon fracture open reduction and internal fixation.
               
                  Main Outcome Measurements
                  Parameters measured included age, sex, type of fracture, surgical technique, anatomical reduction, and complications.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-five patients sustained a posterior pilon fracture, accounting for 13.4% of all operatively treated ankle fractures with median follow-up of 21.7 months. The average age of patients was 42 years (22–62); 19/25 (76%) were female, and 6/25 (24%) were male. A modified posteromedial approach was used in 18/25 (72%) patients. Persistent syndesmotic instability was present in 11/25 (44%) patients after posterior malleolar stabilization. Quality of reduction was assessed under CT scan in 19 patients, with 15/19 (78.9%) having anatomic reduction. We report 2/25 (8%) patients with early wound problems and 7/25 (20%) with short-term complications during follow-up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Posterior pilon variant fracture appears to be less common than previously reported. Most fractures can be satisfactorily treated through a modified posteromedial approach. Albeit obtaining posterior malleolar fracture rigid fixation, syndesmotic instability was more prevalent than expected. The short-term complication rate was low.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Therapeutic level IV.Posterior malleolar fracture in the setting of rotational ankle fractures is a common pattern, with a reported incidence from 7% to 44% Syndesmotic stability may be jeopardized as the posterior tibiofibular ligament is attached to the posterolateral malleolar fragment Our objective is to describe a posterior pilon fracture consecutive case series and analyze patient and injury pattern characteristics, surgical technique, radiological results, and complications during follow-up. After obtaining IRB approval, a consecutive case series study was conducted. We retrospectively reviewed 187 operatively treated ankle fractures at a level I trauma center from January 2013 to February 2015. We identified 70 trimalleolar fractures, of which 25 presented a fracture pattern compatible with posterior pilon fracture on preoperative 3-view x-rays. This fracture pattern presented a double contour above the medial malleolus, sagittal metaphyseal split, double articular surface or articular impaction. A CT scan demonstrating posterior tibial rim fracture extension from the fibular notch of the tibia to the medial malleolus confirmed the diagnosis. Patients were excluded from our study if they had previous ankle surgery, neuroarthropathic disease, incomplete imaging study or if they refused to participate. A patient chart review was conducted to collect basic demographic data, injury mechanism and fracture status (open vs closed fracture). Using preoperative radiographs, two senior foot and ankle surgeons classified fractures according to Lauge-Hansen and OTA classification. We documented surgical data, namely, surgical approach, posterior malleolar fixation and residual syndesmotic instability after posterior malleolar fixation. At the immediate postoperative period, reduction quality was evaluated by CT scan. Anatomic reduction was defined as any displacement (step or gap) less than 2 mm. If more displacement was observed, the case was classified as insufficiently reduced. We recorded any complication appearing during immediate or short-term follow-up (up to 1 year). Descriptive analysis was conducted, data is summarized in median and frequency, and range is used as dispersion measurement. Radiographic analysis showed 70/187 (37.4%) trimalleolar fractures, of which 25/187 (13.4%) patients met the inclusion and exclusion criteria, with a mean age of 42 years (22–62 A direct lateral approach over lateral malleolus was made in the first place in order to regain length and anatomically reduce and fix fibula in a standard fashion with an interfragmentary screw in amenable fractures and a posterolateral 1/3 tubular plate. In order to access the posterior malleolar fragment, a modified posteromedial approach was used in 18/25 (72%) patients, through which the entire posterior plafond was visualized. The patient is positioned supine with hip flexed and abducted, knee fully flexed. A posteromedial incision is made curved anteriorly at the posterior third of the medial malleolus extending proximally 1 cm behind the posteromedial tibial border ( Syndesmotic stability was tested after osseous fixation via Cotton test Reduction quality was assessed under CT scan in 19/25 (76%) patients. In this subgroup, 15/19 (78.9%) patients were anatomically reduced, while in 4/19 (21.1%), reduction was considered to be non-anatomic ( Overall, our complication rate was 28% (7/25). Superficial infection developed in 2/25 (8%) patients, healing uneventfully with oral antibiotics and dressing changes. In the short term, 5/25 (20%) patients presented with complications: two patients developed osteoarthritis, with one of them undergoing ankle arthrodesis. We observed two cases of posterior pilon nonunion, one of them was the patient who required an ankle arthrodesis and the other underwent revision surgery due to persistent pain. One patient presented with syndesmotic malreduction requiring syndesmotic fusion. One patient presented with complex regional pain syndrome. Posterior malleolar fracture frequency varies from 7% to 44% among all ankle fractures Posterior pilon fracture is hard to recognize on conventional radiographs. Surgeons must keep a high index of suspicion in the presence of a medial double contour There is limited evidence describing the relationship between ankle fracture patterns and posterior malleolar fracture occurrence. Switaj et al. Several approaches for posterior pilon fracture fixation can be attempted Posterior fragment fixation in trimalleolar ankle fractures can be accomplished with buttress plates or lag screws. Indirect reduction and fixation with an AP screw is not always feasible due to periosteal or hematoma interposition and/or fracture callus formation on delayed treatment The posterolateral fragment is attached to the posterior tibiofibular ligament. Therefore, reduction and rigid fixation should indirectly result in syndesmotic stabilization The major limitations of this study include the retrospective and descriptive nature of our study, which prevent us to draw any definitive conclusion. There were also multiple surgeons involved in patient care, wherein the surgical strategy was at the surgeon's discretion. Functional outcomes were not assessed, and a longer follow-up is needed to seek for post-traumatic degenerative changes. The strengths of this study is that it is one of the largest posterior pilon series published, with a detailed demographic and fracture type analysis, didactic surgical procedure description and postoperative CT-scan in a large group of patients which allowed us to recognize mal-reduction and most typical fragments responsible for it. In conclusion, posterior pilon variant represents a distinct entity when compared to ankle fractures. We found a relative frequency of 13.3%, lower than was previously described. Surgeons must keep a high index of suspicion in the presence of suggestive radiographic signs or female patients. Most fractures can be anatomically reduced thorough a modified posteromedial approach. Attention must be paid to anatomic posterolateral fragment reduction and syndesmotic residual instability, which are intimately related and we found to be elements frequently found during this type of fracture management. We believe surgical strategies must attempt direct visualization, reduction, and fixation of posteromedial fragment due to absence of ligamentous attachments, making ligamentotaxis impossible. Significant short-term complications are to be expected, but longer follow-up is needed to better understand posterior pilon prognosis. None of the authors received payments or services, either directly or indirectly (i.e., via his or her institution), from a third party in support of any aspect of this work