Background/Aims
                  The purpose of this study is to evaluate risk factors of deep infection following pilon fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  This investigation was performed after gathering a six-year retrospective database from a single academic trauma center.
               
                  Results
                  These include an overall incidence of deep infection of 16.1% (57/355). Deep infection was diagnosed at an average of 88 days (±64 days) from initial injury with a range of 10–281 days. Development of deep infection occurred in 23.2% (33/142) of open fractures, vs 11.3% (24/213) of closed fractures.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Open fractures, hypertension and male gender were associated with an increased risk of developing deep infection. In addition, even optimal surgical management may not significantly modify rates of deep surgical site infection.Pilon fractures encompass a spectrum of combined osseous and soft tissue injuries that present unique challenges to orthopaedic trauma surgeons. The result of an axial load to the foot, these articular fractures of the distal tibia occur following high energy mechanisms, such as motor vehicle collisions and falls from height. Early reports of high complication rates associated with immediate open reduction and internal fixation Several literature reports have identified smoking, diabetes, duration of surgery, and/or open injuries to be risk factors for infection in operatively treated rotational ankle fractures. Institutional review board approval was obtained for this study. All patients fifteen years or older treated definitively with ORIF of pilon fractures at our institution between January 1, 2006 and December 31, 2011 were identified from an institutional billing database. A search of Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes for pilon fractures (27827, 27826 and 27828) using the above criteria. Radiographic confirmation of all injuries was performed by the study team using the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) classification of tibial pilon fractures (43A, 43B, 43C). Patient variables, including Age, sex, race, body mass index (BMI), past medical history (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, substance abuse, psychiatric disorder), smoking status, and injury variables, including AO/OTA classification, open vs. closed, Gustilo and Anderson classification. Additionally the use of staged treatment and days from injury to definitive fixation were recorded for each injury. The primary outcome measure was the diagnosis of deep surgical site infection. Classification of deep surgical site infection was performed utilizing the criteria defined by the Center for Disease and Control National Healthcare Surveillance Network. Statistical analysis was performed using deep infection as the dependent variable. Pearson chi-square analysis and Fisher exact test were used for dichotomous variables to identify association of deep infection with potential risk factors. Wilcoxon Rank–Sum test was used for continuous variables with abnormal distribution. Two variables, BMI and days to definitive fixation in patients treated with external fixation, were analyzed as continuous and dichotomous variables (BMI ≤30 vs. >30; Days to definitive fixation ≤14 days vs. >14 days). Bivariate logistic regression analysis was performed on all statistically significant associations identified (p < 0.05). Furthermore, bivariate analysis and a multivariate regression model were performed. Spearman correlation was used to identify association between time to definitive fixation and time to diagnosis of deep infection. A total of 408 pilon fractures were identified in 400 patients. Of those, 355 had more than 6 months follow-up, or had healed at last follow-up, and were included in the final analysis of this study. Thirty-six fractures were excluded after being identified as either tibia shaft fracture or rotational ankle fracture pattern. The average follow up time was 12.8 months. Other patient and injury characteristics of this study population are seen in The overall incidence of deep infection in the study population was 16.1% (57/355). Deep infection was diagnosed at an average of 88 days (±64 days) from initial injury with a range of 10–281 days. Additional results show a statistically significant concomitant comminution in open fractures. The majority of open fractures, 91.6% (130/142), demonstrated some degree of comminution (AO/OTA: 43A3, 43B3, 43C2 and 43C3) compared to closed fractures, 78.9% (168/213), The majority of fractures in the study group, 73.5% (261/355), were AO/OTA: 43C. Thirty nine fractures were classified as 43A and the remaining injuries were classified as 43B (n = 55). There was no statistically significant difference in deep infection rates between non-comminuted fractures vs. comminuted fractures (43A3, 43B3, 43C2 and 43C3, External fixation was performed in 64.2% (228/355) of fractures. The average time to definitive fixation for this study subgroup (n = 228) was 20.7 days (±12 days). The deep infection rate was 24.7% in those receiving definitive fixation within the first 14 days vs. 13.4% (11/82) in those definitively fixed after 14 days. This difference is statistically significant, (p = Development of deep infection occurred in 23.2% (33/142) of open fractures, vs 11.3% of closed fractures, Hypertension remained a risk factor for deep infection (OR: 2.76; 95% CI = 1.20–6.32) among patients with open pilon fractures. No other variables were found to be significantly associated with deep infection in this group. Higher infection rates were seen in active smokers (20.1% vs. 13.1%, A 30.5% (21/69) infection rate was found among patients with open fractures who underwent definitive fixation after 14 days from initial injury. The infection rate for open fractures definitively fixed before this time frame was 16.4% (12/73), The incidence of deep infection in a closed pilon fracture was 11.2% (24/213). Comminuted fractures (AO/OTA: 43A3, 43B3, 43C2 and 43C3) compose 78.9% (168/213) of this subset. The rate of deep infection in closed comminuted fractures was 14.3% (24/168) versus a 0% (0/45) rate of deep infection in non-comminuted closed injuries ( BMI was calculated for 316 patients with a mean value of 28.0 ± 6.4 kg/m The rate of deep infection in patients undergoing staging with the use of external fixation was 20.6% (47/228). Patients undergoing primary ORIF or staged treatment with a splint, 7.9% (10/127) The average number of days to diagnosis of deep infection in the 57 patients was 88.0 ± 64.5. The majority of patients, 89.5% (51/57), were diagnosed with deep infection after definitive fixation with average days to infection of 95.7 ± 63.6 post injury. In addition to these factors, the average number of days from injury to open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) was shown to be significantly different between the groups. Patients diagnosed with deep infection had an average number of 20.9 ± 15.5 days to ORIF versus an average of 13.6 ± 12.7 days in the non-infected group (p = A sub-analysis was performed to determine if a higher period of time in external fixation was associated with an increased risk of developing deep infection in patients diagnosed with deep infection after definitive treatment. The results were indifferent with an OR of 1.009 (95% CI = .98, 1.04), ( The purpose of this study was to determine which commonly encountered patient and injury characteristics could be identified as independent risk factors for development of deep infection. Multivariate logistic regression analysis of our retrospective series identifies male gender, hypertension, and open fractures are independent risk factors for deep infection in operatively treated pilon fractures. Our series overall incidence of deep infection is 16.1%, which is higher than most previous reports utilizing modern treatment protocols including the use of staging and respect for the soft tissue injury. Recent literature reports show deep infection rates ranging from 2 to 4.5%. Several studies have identified obesity as a contributor to development of wound complications in the orthopaedic population. Open fractures were identified as a risk factor for deep infection, with a deep infection rate of 23.2%, compared to 11.3% in closed injuries. Infection rates by Gustilo-Anderson classification were 8% in Type 1, 21.9% in Type 2 and 32% in Type 3. This suggests that any soft tissue disruption, independent of severity, increases the risk of deep infection in operatively treated pilon fractures. Additionally, this trend is consistent with the concept that increasing severity of soft tissue injury impacts complication rates. Although we did not account for specific mechanism of injury, the fact that 73.5% (261/355) of all fractures in this study were classified as being AO/OTA 43C may indicate they were the result of a high-energy axial mechanism. Presence of comminution was found to be a risk factor for deep infection in closed fractures with comminuted fractures showing a 14.3% infection rate vs. 0% in non-comminuted fractures. This may be partially explained by the high-energy nature required to produce a comminuted injury. Known diagnosis of hypertension was identified as a risk factor for infection. It has been identified that the relationship between blood pressure and cardiovascular risk is not only strong but continuous, independent, and highly predictive of risk for adults of all ages up to 89 years. While hypertension remained an independent risk factor on multivariate analysis, presence of diabetes did not. While several studies have identified an association between diabetes and deep infection in operatively treated ankle fractures, Previous reports have identified an association between smoking and surgical site infection after operative treatment of ankle fractures. The limitations of this study are the same as for any other retrospective study design. Another limitation was that we did not account for the number of surgeons performing the procedures. Surgical years of experience ranged from 1 year to 25 years among the treating surgeons in this study. This could have allowed controlling for surgical experience among participating surgeons. On the contrary, generalizability of these results may be facilitated as most academic trauma centers have a similar surgical years of experience distribution among their faculty. The main strengths of this study are the large number of operatively treated pilon fractures at a single institution and the quality of charting in the electronic medical record, which allowed for identification of a large number of variables to be used for our analysis. This study represents the single largest series of operatively treated pilon fractures in the current literature as well as the first to identify risk factors of deep infection. The results of this study reiterate the morbidity represented by pilon fractures and how even optimal surgical management may not significantly modify rates of deep surgical site infection. The future focus of our group is to further analyze the subset patients diagnosed with deep infection and evaluate the rate of successful salvage as well as quantify the morbidity for these patients in the form of additional debridements or reconstructive procedures. We strongly believe this information will improve patient-physician communication and expectations. All authors have none to declare.