A novel technique is described that achieves particle concentration using inclined sedimentation via sludge accumulation and removal (CISSAR
                        1
                     
                     
                        1
                        CISSAR—concentration using inclined sedimentation via sludge accumulation and recovery.
                     ). In contrast to a continuous inclined sedimentation process, in which clarification via sedimentation and recovery via sediment or sludge flow occur simultaneously, the CISSAR process consists of a long, particle-deposition and fluid-clarification step, followed by a short, sludge-resuspension and sludge-recovery step. The separation of the clarification and sludge-recovery processes removes design limitations necessary for sludge flow, enabling optimization of the clarification process. While commercial settlers are typically operated at about 55° from the horizontal to ensure sludge flow, the CISSAR process is operated at a shallow angle, resulting in 70% faster clarification per plate area. Using a high-aspect-ratio inclined settler (L/b=500) with the CISSAR process, a∼0.7g/L, unflocculated algal suspension was concentrated over 80-fold to 59g/L at a bulk-average clarification velocity of nearly 500-fold greater than the algal terminal settling velocity. The extent of concentration (below a maximum value) was shown to be proportional to the settling rate and the duration of clarification, inversely proportional to the plate spacing, and independent of settling area.In this paper, we describe a novel technique used for particle Furthermore, the CISSAR process overcomes a tradeoff observed for conventional inclined settlers. While continuous sludge recovery typically requires a steep inclination angle, clarification on the other hand is optimized at shallow angles approaching horizontal. Because the CISSAR process relies on shallow-angle clarification without sludge flow, large enhancements to the clarification flow rate can be achieved per plate area or per settler volume. The CISSAR process may be used to address the challenge of harvesting microalgae. Due to high autotrophic productivity ( Among primary harvesting techniques, sedimentation is a low-energy process that is often used as the base-case technique in techno-economic analyses. However, the microscopic size of individual algal cells, generally 5–20 Inclined settlers may be used to increase clarification flow rates and achieve clarification velocities many times greater than the single-particle terminal settling velocity without flocculation, by increasing the available settling area. They are used for a variety of processes, including sewage treatment ( In a continuous inclined sedimentation process, harvesting occurs via particle deposition on the settler's plates during clarification, followed by downward sludge flow of the particles out of the settler. The critical bulk-average velocity of clarified flow, The retention of particles within the settler is described by the retention factor, Due to the dilute nature of the sludge and negligible sediment or sludge flow, the overflow velocity is approximately equal to the feed velocity. By definition from Eq. For feed velocities greater than the clarification velocity, the overflow concentration, It is useful to consider the clarification flux, By substituting Eqs. For feed rates below the clarification velocity, the clarification flux is limited by the feed flow rate, while the clarification flux is maximized and bounded by the clarification velocity for feed rates greater than or equal to the clarification velocity. Note that the retention and deposition behavior is more complicated for a polydisperse suspension, but it can be calculated using the appropriate equation for each particle species for dilute suspensions or with multi-species, hindered-settling equations for non-dilute suspensions ( While the PNK model suggests that the clarification velocity can be enhanced without bound by using a large Despite model predictions of low-angle sludge flow, practical experience suggests that much steeper angles are required for many suspensions. For flow of clay sludge after batch sedimentation, Alternatively, harvesting and concentration may be achieved using the CISSAR process with clarification and particle deposition at a shallow angle in the absence of sludge flow, followed by resuspension. This two-step process may offer several advantages for the primary concentration of dilute, slow-settling particles and cells. The primary advantage of the shallow-angle operation for slow-settling particles is that it increases the available clarification area and rate for fixed settler dimensions. Compared to the industrial-standard 55° inclination, a settler with the same plate area operated at a shallow angle of less than 10° could clarify fluid approximately 70% faster, assuming In the proposed process, the suspension is concentrated in an inclined settler by cell deposition onto the plates followed by resuspension of the fluid and deposited sludge within the settler. By mass balance, the suspension concentrations of the feed, In practice, this resuspension would be achieved by pumping and recycling the algal suspension contained within the lamellar settler from the overflow back to the feed inlet. Note that recycling of the fluid contained within a multi-plate settler could simultaneously resuspend the sludge from the Thus, the concentration factor is initially proportional to time, and the proportionality constant is given by the ratio of the particle terminal settling velocity to the plate spacing. Eq. A non-motile green algae, Algal concentrations were quantified in terms of mass and volume concentration and light attenuation. Mass concentrations were obtained from measurements of dry mass after drying at 95 The vertical sedimentation velocity of an individual algal cell is a necessary parameter for calculating the PNK clarification rate (Eq. Vertical sedimentation experiments were also performed to determine the packing fraction of settled algal cells. The packing concentration, To confirm that the PNK equation can be used to describe clarification in high-aspect-ratio settlers at shallow angles, the clarification of algal suspensions was performed in a settler made of rectangular glass tubing with a single channel of dimensions The CISSAR concentration process was tested in three rectangular, single-channel inclined settlers constructed from rectangular glass tubing with different plate spacings. The corresponding dimensions for the settlers are Clarification experiments with negligible sludge accumulation were performed using multiple samples from a single batch of cultured algae to confirm PNK-predicted retention and deposition behavior, and the retention data along with the PNK model are plotted in Since the goal of clarification in this process is rapid deposition, the data can also be viewed in terms of the clarification flux as a function of the feed velocity, as shown in The retention data demonstrate that inclined settling in high-aspect-ratio settlers can be used to achieve bulk-average clarification velocities many-fold higher than the particle's terminal settling velocity, as seen in Algae were concentrated via resuspension of the settled-cell sludge in one settler volume following the clarification of many settler volumes of feed suspension. While short-time clarification experiments demonstrated particle retention and deposition at high feed velocities, longer-duration experiments were necessary to demonstrate stable performance in the presence of accumulated sludge. The retention factor was found to be constant, despite the accumulated sludge, and no sludge flow was observed at the shallow angle (8°) employed. The bulk sludge was easily resuspended by the recirculation process described in The clarification velocity, Several different batches of algal culture were employed in these experiments, with modest variations in the cell settling velocities observed from batch to batch. Since the average feed velocity varied run-to-run, depending on the suspension's settling velocity and the drift in the pumping rate, the duration of each experiment was adjusted to an effective time based on the processed volume loaded through the settler and the clarification velocity, using the lowest terminal velocity, Aside from the limitations of deposition time within the settler (e.g., particle degradation, temporal changes to cell biology), the final concentration is ultimately limited by stable sludge deposition and the volume fraction of sludge within the settler. Assuming a fixed feed algal concentration of In practice, the sludge can be loaded until shear-induced erosion occurs or flow instabilities result in the propagation of channeling through the sludge. Channeling causes a dramatic reduction in clarification performance, since the flow and effective settling area become restricted to the narrow channeled area, as shown in This work presents a novel demonstration of inclined settlers as a concentration technique via deposition and resuspension, referred to as the CISSAR process. Because the CISSAR process does not require continuous sludge flow down the inclined wall, it avoids undesirable resuspension of sludge that may occur in a continuous sludge flow process as the sludge exits from the parallel plates ( The concentration factors and fluid velocities achieved are technically reasonable for a large-scale, primary harvesting process, and the CISSAR process is suggested as a potential option for the harvest of dilute, slow-settling particles such as microalgae. Conversely, the process is not suited for non-dilute suspensions, because it is limited by the sludge volume within the settler. Similarly, flocculation is not desired for this process, except perhaps for flocculation processes that produce small, dense flocs with low void fractions. Future work should be focused on the engineering and economics of high-aspect-ratio incliner settlers with shallow inclination angles. In particular, the engineering challenges are expected to center on achieving equal flow distribution among the numerous and narrow lamellar plates, which can be optimized using computational fluid dynamics ( This research was funded by a grant from Phillips 66 through the