The extraction of zinc from a sphalerite concentrate using sodium chlorate as an oxidant in hydrochloric acid solutions was examined. It was determined that stirring speed did not significantly affect zinc extraction compared with other experimental parameters. The dissolution rate increased with increasing sodium chlorate and hydrochloric acid concentrations and temperature, but decreased with increasing particle size. The kinetic study showed that the dissolution of zinc could be represented by a shrinking core model with surface chemical reaction. The activation energy (Ea) for the dissolution reaction was calculated as 41.1 kJ/mol.Sphalerite is the principal zinc mineral that produces zinc from sulfide ores. It is often associated with other sulphide minerals, such as galena (PbS), chalcopyrite (CuFeS  Chloride systems in hydrometallurgy have been used for the treatment and recovery of precious metals for a number of years. The leaching of sulphide minerals in chloride media is a subject of considerable interest and has been studied by many researchers ( Various reagents can be used in the dissolution of sphalerite including chlorine. In this paper, the dissolution of sphalerite was carried out with sodium chlorate in hydrochloric acid solution. The purpose was to study the kinetics of sphalerite oxidation by chlorate (ClO When chlorate is combined with strong acid chloride medium, it can produce chlorine as follows: In this experimental study on dissolution of zinc from sphalerite, the effects of stirring speed, hydrochloric acid and sodium chlorate concentration, temperature and particle size were investigated and the kinetic control mechanism determined. Sphalerite concentrate was enriched thorough flotation of a CuFeS Experiments were carried out by agitation leaching using a covered 1 L pyrex beaker in a water bath and mechanically stirred with a Teflon impeller at 0–2000 rpm. Typically, sphalerite concentrate (0.5 g) was added to acidic sodium chlorate solution (250 mL) and 1 mL samples were withdrawn at various time intervals for analysis. For calculation of the fraction of zinc leached, an equation developed by The oxidation and dissolution mechanism of sphalerite in chlorine systems still remains uncertain and a wide variety of possible mechanisms have been proposed in the literature. Dissolution of sphalerite in acidic FeCl In this study, elemental sulphur was observed by naked eye at the end of leaching process but the exact amount was not measured or quantified. After 60 min of leaching, the microscope photo of the leach residues show elemental sulphur completely covering the particle surface ( Some of the sulphur was converted sulphate in presence of dissolved chlorine or chlorate ion in the solution. Sodium chlorate (NaClO After leaching, the solution was analyzed for SO The effect of stirring speed on the dissolution of sphalerite was investigated in the range of 100 –600 rpm at 333 K in solution containing 1.0 M NaClO The effect of temperature on sphalerite dissolution was studied in the range 313 to 343 K under constant conditions. Not surprisingly, the leaching rate increased with temperature but as shown in To resolve the effect of NaClO The experiments were then carried out with various HCl concentrations in the range 0.25 to 1.25 M. As seen from Understanding the mechanism of a leaching system is the main consideration. Leaching of mineral particle may be described by a number of reaction models already proposed in the literature. Reactions involved in this process are heterogeneous in nature involving mass transport reactant and product ions. In an acid leaching process, most sulfides follow a kinetic model known as the shrinking core model. This model has a reaction zone that originates from the outside layer of unreacted core ( The fraction of any zinc at any time It is generally accepted that a chemically controlled process is strongly dependent on temperature. The rate constant, Eq. In order to decide the order of reaction with respect to reagent concentration, the results on the effect of NaClO Finally, the effect of particle size on the rate of sphalerite dissolution was examined by measuring the reaction rates for three different size fractions (0.045–0.075, 0.075–0.106 and 0.106–0.212 mm) at 333 K in solutions containing 1.0 M NaClO The dissolution kinetics of sphalerite concentrate increases with increasing hydrochloric acid and sodium chlorate concentrations and temperature, and with decreasing particle size. However, stirring speed > This study was supported by The Research Foundation of Selcuk University.