Prediction of the tool wear and life, as well as secondary wear on machine components, in soft ground tunneling using shielded machines with a pressurized face has been a difficult task due to the lack of a universally accepted measurement system for soil abrasion. While some existing abrasion tests have been adopted in recent years to measure soil abrasion, these systems have inherent mismatches with the actual working conditions at the tunnel face. This paper reviews some of the background studies in this area and introduces the initial steps towards the development of a new soil abrasion testing system. The design and operational parameters for a proposed device that is under development for measuring a soil abrasion index are discussed and the preliminary results of testing on various soil samples are presented.Mechanized excavation methods are becoming more popular in tunnel construction because of the many advantages that they offer over conventional methods. Tunnel Boring Machines (TBMs) are often used for excavation of long tunnels in variety of geological conditions. In particular, shielded TBMs have almost become the exclusive tunneling method in soft grounds and soil. A variety of machines have been introduced in the past couple of decades for soft ground applications. These include the slurry shields and earth pressure balance (EPM) machines. While the area of applications of these machines, as well as their size, has expanded very rapidly, especially in the past decade, the issue of tool wear in soils has not been fully addressed. This issue can become very crucial, particularly for pressurized faces, since in many cases tool inspection, maintenance, and replacement are carried out under extremely difficult conditions while active groundwater pressure is present at the face. In soft ground tunneling, cutterhead inspection and tool maintenance are performed under pressurized conditions or “hyperbaric interventions” when the tunnel is under the groundwater table. This involves creating a plug at the face, removing the spoils (muck), applying compressed air, and allowing the crew into the cutting chamber via an air lock. This entire process can take days to complete. Consequently, the tool inspection and maintenance in soft ground tunneling is a time consuming, dangerous and costly step. Despite the widespread use of soil excavation tools, there is no universally accepted method for measurement of soil abrasivity for practical or scientific purposes. In general, what is currently known about the impact of soil composition and ground conditions (pressure, presence of water, etc.) on the interaction between the soil and cutting tools is very limited. Therefore a collaborative effort is needed to develop a new testing system to allow for quantitative and reliable measurement of soil abrasivity for use in the tunnel industry for excavation, design, and preparation of related contract documents for soft ground tunnels. The ultimate goal of this study is a systematic procedure for the measurement of soil abrasive properties with preliminary models and formulas for prediction of the tool life under certain tunneling conditions. This will primarily require a simple, reliable and repeatable testing method for measuring soil abrasivity that adequately simulates the field conditions. The test should also result in a quantitative distinction between different soil types. The next step is to compile and analyze field data to develop tool life models with the participation of tool manufacturers, machine manufacturers, engineers/designers, and/or contractors. Once such a measurement or index is developed, it can lead to: (1) establishing a quantitative method to compare different soil types and be able to estimate wear rate and life of cutting tools and other machine parts, (2) use of better and more suitable materials for these tools and wear surfaces, (3) use of soil additives and conditioners that can prevent excessive wear of the tools in crucial applications, and (4) development of better material/design of the cutting tools and objectively measurable improvement. In summary, this study will lead to a better understanding of the tool surface–soil interaction and wear process, and ultimately can be used in the development of longer lasting cutting tools. A preliminary literature survey shows that the amount of work in this field is very limited and only recently, due to the need in several pertinent industries, has some attention been paid to the issue of soil abrasivity. Related published work in the soil mechanics literature generally focuses on studies of soil-structure interaction and interface friction ( Abrasion is the major means of wear that takes place on the cutters, cutterhead, excavation chamber, and conveyance systems of a soft ground shielded TBM. This is because of the slow turning speed of the cutterhead and thus the cutting tools, and the high contact pressure between the tool (or wear surfaces) and the soil. One of the risks often overlooked by engineers and contractors in the tunneling industry is the effect of abrasive soil on the costs and schedule of a given project ( Wear in mechanized tunneling can be classified into two categories: primary wear and secondary wear. Primary wear refers to the expected wear on the excavation tools and surfaces such as drag bits, disc cutters, scrapers and buckets, etc. which are designed for excavation and require “normal” replacement at appropriate intervals. Secondary wear, on the other hand, occurs when soil comes into contact with various components of the machine, particularly when the primary wear on the cutting tools described above is excessive. Secondary wear can lead to wear of the structures designed to hold in place or support the cutting tools, such as the cutting head spokes or cutter mounting saddles, as well as wear on other surfaces not anticipated by the designers and TBM manufacturers (Nilsen et al., 2007). If primary wear remains undetected, subsequent secondary wear on the cutterhead structure itself can develop rapidly as observed in many tunneling projects using shielded machines. Many factors influence the soil abrasivity such as in situ soil conditions (inhomogenity, density, and porosity), sedimentary conditions (mineral composition, roundness) and mechanical properties (uniaxial compressive strength and abrasivity of the individual grains). To date, there is no universally accepted test or suggested method nor any national or international standard for soil abrasivity testing (Thuro et al., 2007). There are few available tests that measure the abrasiveness of the minerals, but they do not consider mechanical properties of the mixtures nor the related other factors including grain size and shape, water, or stress conditions in the soil or in the interface with the tool. To define the hardness, the Moh’s hardness scale is most commonly used. The scale is divided into ten increments, ranging from talc, with a hardness of 1, as the softest to diamond (hardness 10) as the hardest. Cutter life can be estimated from the relative percentage of minerals of different Moh’s hardness classes (>7, 6, 4–5 and <4). The higher the percentage of hard minerals found at the face, the more abrasive the soil (or rock), and the shorter the cutter life (Nilsen et al., 2007). As there are many different parameters affecting tool wear, the use of Moh’s hardness is restricted mainly to preliminary estimates of cutter wear. There are some other testing methods that describe the abrasive characteristic of soils. Typically, tests are limited to describe the hardness of minerals, such as the Vickers Hardness Number (VHN), quartz content and abrasive mineral content (AMC), but grain size and shape of the soil are not taken into account (Nilsen et al., 2007). Existing abrasion model tests for soils include the Los Angeles Abrasion Test, the Nordic Ball Mill Test (NBMT) and Dorry’s Abrasion Test, which were developed to study the abrasion of aggregates to be used in road pavements. In these tests, the main target is the grain–grain abrasion and potential for decomposition and degradation of the aggregate materials. These tests have not been validated to determine the abrasion of steel induced by soil, which is the case in TBM tunneling. As will be described in the following sections, new attempts have been made for an abrasion test for soils. Currently, there are two different test methods used to determine soil abrasivity. Both tests are modifications of the corresponding rock abrasiveness tests and are currently in their first stages of development and require further improvement for widespread application. They are the NTNU Soil Abrasion Test (SAT) and LCPC test. The new NTNU Soil Abrasion Test (SAT) is a further development of the existing NTNU abrasion tests for rock which produces the Abrasion Value – AV/AVS. The Abrasion Values AV/AVS represent the time dependent abrasion of tungsten carbide/cutter steel caused by crushed rock powder. The two tests are defined as follows. The Abrasion Value (AV) is the mean value of the measured weight loss in milligrams of 2–4 tungsten carbide test bits after 5 LCPC abrasivity test introduced by the Labratorie Central des Ponts et Chaussees (Normalisation Francaise P18–579, 1990) were evaluated for rock and soil abrasivity testing. The abrasimeter uses a 750 Testing the entire soil sample, which leads to obtaining a representative value for all grain sizes, or testing of soil sample fractions, e.g. 4–8, 8–16, 16–32, 32–64, and The LCPC Abrasivity Coefficent (LAC) is calculated as the mass loss of the impeller divided by the same mass (500 As the SAT test and the LCPC test follow different approaches, While SAT can be compared with the database on hard rock TBM projects, it is not directly designed for soft ground tunneling. Furthermore, there is no data on tool wear of various shield operations in soil to allow for development of predictive model for estimation of tool wear based on this test. Meanwhile, the LCPC test has a very high rotation speed which is not comparable to the operational conditions of tunneling or similar excavation machines in soil. Consequently, LCPC results are not representative of abrasiveness measurements pertinent to soft ground tunneling since the wear can result from impacts between the impeller and soil grains. Nonetheless, some of the factors that are neglected by existing methods but can have an impact on the results are as follows: The tests are performed in dry conditions, whereas the field conditions are in variable moisture conditions, most often saturated soils. In-situ soil conditions, including grain size distribution, are altered during the test. Some types of minerals and grains are omitted or altered in the current testing systems. Grain shapes are also disturbed during the preparation. The tool and the soil pressure/contact stress are not comparable between the field conditions and the test conditions. Other parameters such as the presence of high pressure water (which could reach up to 8 bars) are not accounted for. Both tests are limited by the size of the largest grain that the testing equipment can handle (4 Tunnel practitioners often utilize various types of soil conditioners to improve cutting efficiency. The existing tests cannot measure such effects. Therefore, a number of important parameters affecting soil abrasivity in tunneling applications and issues related to tool life are ignored in existing tests. Also, mechanical properties of soils, such as cohesion, friction angle, compaction and consolidation behavior, and similar factors are not addressed in the current tests. Overall, it can be stated that there is no fully developed test method for the evaluation of soil abrasiveness for application in pressurized face shield tunneling. A limited study on soil abrasion and its impact on soft ground tunneling equipment have been performed at the Pennsylvania State University (PSU) in collaboration with Camp Dresser McKee (CDM). Based on the initial studies and evaluation of available literature and testing apparatus, a series of tests were performed to examine the possibility of using any of the existing rock abrasion tests as a potential replacement or representative indicator/identifier of soil abrasivity and offer a decisive trend or a reliable quantitative measure of soil abrasivity. A total of 6 soil samples from the Brightwater tunnel project in King County (Seattle area), Washington were selected by the CDM staff and sent to PSU for testing. Two categories of tests were considered for these samples. One set of tests consisted of placing a soil sample in a ball mill to evaluate the particle abrasion on the steel balls. The second group of tests consisted of solidifying/casting the samples for Cerchar and ASTM C-241 abrasion testing. The PVC resin-casted samples were subjected to Cerchar Abrasion index (CAI) testing, and a wear resistance test using ASTM-C241 for measurement of abrasion resistance for flooring with heavy foot traffic (typically used for flooring material). While neither one of these tests was developed for use on soil samples, the purpose of the initial testing was to explore the possibility of using one of the common/standard tests or a modified version of it for quantification of soil abrasivity. Results of the testing program are shown in A new method for obtaining a representative soil abrasivity index is proposed. This index will be obtained using a new device with the capability of testing a broad range of soil types, including mineralogy and gradation, as well as a broad range of soil conditions. This testing device will include a test chamber where the in situ conditions of the soil can be simulated and the wear on the cutting tools can be observed. This will be accomplished by measuring the weight loss of the wear material as a function of various soil types and saturation conditions. A schematic of the proposed testing system is shown in The goals of the experimental program include varying the soil type, addressing dry and wet conditions, varying ambient pressure, varying the rotary speed of propeller, varying the duration of propeller rotation, varying the pitch angle of the propeller, and assessing the impact of soil conditioners. The measured values will include the axial load on the propeller, torque, weight loss of the propeller, constant water pressure and pressure of the mix. The wear material will represent the excavation tools and the amount of weight loss will represent the relative abrasiveness of soils. The test results will be reviewed to select the appropriate range of testing conditions in order to develop the proper index scale for various soil types. An effort will be made to contact some of the ongoing tunneling projects to obtain soil samples for testing and compare the results with the results of machine performance and tool wear in these projects. The proposed test device consists of a cylindrical chamber, a drive shaft with an attached propeller, and the drive unit/gear box. The testing chamber will house the soil sample and its dimensions are such that a wide range of particle sizes can be tested (35 In order to finalize the design of the testing device, several factors impacting the measured soil abrasivity needed to be considered: the propelling force, the propeller driving torque, and the propeller blade pitch. The push down or propelling force is defined as the force generated along the axis of the drive shaft, This push down force represents the pressure between the soil and propeller blades. Another important factor is the amount of torque needed to drive the propeller through the soil as it rotates. Both the propelling force and driving torque are a function of the pitch or the angle of the blade relative to the axis of rotation. In order to investigate the influence of each of these factors, a miniature testing system was designed and some initial testing was performed to measure the magnitude of forces and the torque needed for turning the blade. For this purpose, a 15 Using this miniature testing system, several samples of soil were tested in dry and wet conditions. For preparation of samples, some gravel, sand, and clay samples were obtained and tests were run in pure gravel, pure sand, pure clay as well as several combinations of these components to mimic a range of soil types to be encountered in the field. For each test, the amount of force and torque was measured. The results of testing are shown in In addition to sand and gravel samples, mixtures of gravel and clay, sand and clay, and other combinations were tested under wet conditions. However, the measured amount of force and torque were minimal when clay was present. The presence of the clay material significantly reduced the shear strength of the soil mixture. The water content for the wet samples was subsequently measured. The water content range varied from 10–20%. Choosing an optimum running time for the test is a crucial factor in order to get realistic results because the ultimate goal of testing is to simulate the in situ working condition of an EPB or Slurry TBM and the impact of soil type on tool wear. At the face of the machine, excavation tools are in contact with the soil for a limited time, meaning that the soil that comes to contact with these parts passes through and the tools are exposed to new soil on a continuous basis. Therefore if the particle shape or grain size distribution of the soil were to be altered in the testing, the test results could be unrealistic and the proposed models unsuccessful in predicting tool wear. Altering soil particle characteristics could potentially influence the abrasion characteristics of the soil if longer durations were to be used in testing. For this purpose, the grain size distribution of the soil and the subsequent change in particle shape before and after testing was measured. In order to measure the optimum processing time for testing, various tests were performed on gravel and sand under both dry and wet conditions with different test durations (3, 5, and 10 The grain size distribution curves for gravel, sand and clay before and after testing at different durations are shown in The second potential change of the soil characteristics is particle shape. As particles break, the shape of the particle tends to become more angular. Increasing particle angularity could contribute to increasing abrasivity. One method for quantifying changing particle shape is by measuring sphericity and roundness. Sphericity is the ratio between the surface area of a sphere with equal volume and the surface area of the particle. Roundness is the ratio between the average radius of curvature of the particle surface features and the radius of the maximum sphere that can be inscribed in the particle ( It is concluded that by increasing the processing time the overall sphericity decreases for most of the sizes under both dry and wet conditions. Also, the results of roundness indicate that by increasing the processing time the variation in roundness under dry and wet conditions for most of the size categories is very limited. In addition, the comparison between the samples tested for 3   It is concluded that the wet condition contributes to less particle breakage (less sphericity) than the dry condition, and there is little difference in roundness between wet and dry condition.  One of the main observations during these limited tests on the miniature set up was that some wear was visible on the blades ( The study of soil abrasion and its impact on machine performance and wear of the cutters and other machine components is very important and is increasingly becoming a major contractual issue in tunneling projects. This study indicates that in order to obtain a realistic soil abrasion index, the testing system should be able to mimic the actual working conditions of the machine components (cutters for primary wear and other surfaces for secondary wear) as they encounter soil layers. This includes the actual soil with the original grain size distributions, soil–metal contact pressure, wet/dry conditions, ambient pressures, and possibly application of soil conditioners or slurry. The initial testing shows that such conditions can be created in a test chamber and cause measureable wear on steel or other metallic components. The weight loss on the blade can be used directly or in conjunction with other measured parameters (torque, axial force, grain size distribution, grain shape and possible changes in the angularity of the grains, etc.) to develop a soil abrasion index. This index can be used in comparing various soil types and tunneling conditions, and can be used as a basis for estimation of the cutter wear for pressurized TBM applications and for contractual purposes. The future application of such an index could also be for use in development or evaluation of the abrasion resisting material.