Curve squeal is the result of the lateral force in rolling contact of rail and wheels along curves. Recently, field measurements of wheel squeal occurrences at a site in Australia showed an increasing possibility for a squeal event to occur as the relative humidity increases. To verify these results, a new method to measure the lateral and normal force simultaneously was developed on a test rig, so as to determine the friction-creep curves. To investigate the effect of relative humidity on squeal and friction creep curves, the relative humidity inside the acoustic enclosure of test rig was adjusted under controlled conditions of 50%, 70% and 90%. The test rig results show that the lateral adhesion ratio decreases slightly with the increase of relative humidity and that squeal is more likely in high relative humidity. The modelling analysis shows that the critical creepage decreases with the increase of the relative humidity, which means negative damping occurs for lower angle of attack.Railway transportation is developing fast nowadays, especially in populated countries. One side-effect of this, railway noise, affects residents living near the track. The railway noise is comprised of ground-borne vibrations, impact noise, rolling noise, squeal noise and flange noise. The frequency ranges of these kinds of noise are listed in Ground-borne noise is a kind of low frequency noise to which the human ear is insensitive. Impact noise, occurring due to rail section connections/welds, has been reduced gradually with the extensive application of seamless rail. Flange noise is due to flange contact and rolling noise is generated from wheel/rail roughness; both are broadband noise. Squeal noise tends to be of great concern due to its distinct tonal characteristic and high sound pressure level up to 100 In the field tests As to the effect of relative humidity on adhesion ratio, it was found that friction coefficient at the contact surface decreases with increasing relative humidity as reported in Up to now, models of curve squeal are mostly based on the squeal mechanism described by Rudd The experimental methods are introduced in this section. The rolling contact two disc test rig used in the test is shown in The upper wheel and lower wheel are driven by a vector controlled constant speed motor and a constant torque motor, respectively. In the tests, only the upper wheel was driven with the constant speed motor, so the longitudinal creepage is negligible when the test rig is rotating stably. The lower wheel can be rotated along with its motor with respect to the upper wheel, introducing a yaw angle between two wheels as illustrated in The yaw angle can be measured using a digital laser distance meter, and the method to measure the angle of attack was introduced in To investigate the effect of humidity on wheel squeal, a humidity control and measurement system was set up in the acoustic enclosure of the test rig. It consists of an atomiser used as a humidifier to increase the humidity by releasing a fine aerosol mist of evaporated water particles, a dehumidifier with a built-in humidistat to control humidity, and a logger to record the humidity level and temperature (cf. The atomiser and dehumidifier were placed in two corners of the chamber, while the logger was placed on the top of the frame of the test rig. A fan was placed underneath the atomiser to mix the moisture evenly inside the chamber. During the test, the angle of attack was set from 0 to 26 To determine friction creep curves in various conditions, a new measurement method for lateral force and normal force using strain gauges was developed. The finite element model below simulates the test rig structure, which is fixed at both ends of leafsprings and the end of rubber coupling, as illustrated in Full Wheatstone bridge configuration was applied to resolve the normal and lateral force The lateral force is The vibration of the lower wheel has been investigated initially in In order to compare with experimental results, the lateral adhesion ratio was modelled analytically, integrating the effect of angle of attack, rolling speed, material and geometric characteristics, based on models developed in The test results of contact force measurement, modal testing as well as sound analysis are presented and discussed in this section. To determine the source of the squeal noise, both upper wheel and lower wheel were modelled and analysed using FEM. For the upper wheel, the first dominant frequency is 4867 As the first mode is an in-plane mode, which is more likely contributing rolling noise rather than squeal noise. The second mode has an out-of-plane vibration, but its resonant frequency exceeds the frequency range listed in Results of impact hammer tests on the upper wheel demonstrated that no resonant peak exists in the interested frequency range; whereas, the resonance of the lower wheel is relatively evident as plotted in the receptance spectrum of The value of modal damping for the lower wheel can be curve fitted from Squeal noise can be generated at a high yaw angle and rolling speed. For example, the sound spectrum at 20 In  This phenomenon is explained in the following sections, with reference to how humidity changes the creep curve. The measurement of contact forces in rolling contact and angle of attack makes it possible to validate Rudd's model for the prediction of curve squeal  Adhesion ratios in different relative humidity were measured using the methodology described in In addition, Eq.  In the laboratory test, the sound pressure levels in the relative humidity of 50%, 70% and 90% at the rolling speed of 800 and 600 Therefore, humidity may have a substantial effect on the occurrence of squeal as found in This research has developed a new method to measure contact forces, and the results show that the lateral adhesion ratio decreases with the increase of relative humidity. The friction-creep curves in different relative humidity were determined, and the analysis results show that the critical creepage decreases with the increase of relative humidity. FEM analyses were employed to isolate the dominant frequencies of the upper and lower wheels and corresponding mode shapes. The effect of relative humidity on squeal and effective contact damping was experimentally determined by adjusting the relative humidity inside the acoustic enclosure of test rig under controlled conditions of 50%, 70% and 90%. Results show that squeal is more likely to occur under higher relative humidity as found in recent field tests. It was also found that squeal events are triggered when the structural damping is overcome by the negative lateral rolling contact damping as consistent with conventional theory of squeal from Rudd and previous field results The authors are grateful to the CRC for Rail Innovation (established and supported under the When a range of lateral forces from 0 It is noticed that the strain of the outer and inner leafsprings is unequal, which is due to the connection of this structure with a rubber coupling at the end of the shaft, resulting in the asymmetry of this structure. Due to the asymmetry, there is also a difference in the strain of outer and inner leafspring when applying a normal force to the upper wheel, as plotted in Comparing Based on the results obtained with FEM, the lateral force and the normal force can be determined concisely. For the normal force described in Eq. The uncertainty of lateral force For the strain gauge bridges on the leafsprings of the test rig, the sensitivity is 0.02 The uncertainty of the measured adhesion ratio is Therefore, the measurement accuracy of the lateral adhesion ratio is about 0.01.