Karst aquifers have very high spatial heterogeneity. Essentially, they comprise a system of pipes (i.e., the network of conduits) superimposed on rock porosity and on a network of stratigraphic surfaces and fractures. This heterogeneity strongly influences the hydraulic behavior of the karst and it must be reproduced in any realistic numerical model of the karst system that is used as input to flow and transport modeling. However, the directly observed karst conduits are only a small part of the complete karst conduit system and knowledge of the complete conduit geometry and topology remains spatially limited and uncertain. Thus, there is a special interest in the stochastic simulation of networks of conduits that can be combined with fracture and rock porosity models to provide a realistic numerical model of the karst system. Furthermore, the simulated model may be of interest per se and other uses could be envisaged. The purpose of this paper is to present an efficient method for conditional and non-conditional stochastic simulation of karst conduit networks. The method comprises two stages: generation of conduit geometry and generation of topology. The approach adopted is a combination of a resampling method for generating conduit geometries from templates and a modified diffusion-limited aggregation method for generating the network topology. The authors show that the 3D karst conduit networks generated by the proposed method are statistically similar to observed karst conduit networks or to a hypothesized network model. The statistical similarity is in the sense of reproducing the tortuosity index of conduits, the fractal dimension of the network, the direction rose of directions, the Z-histogram and Ripley’s K-function of the bifurcation points (which differs from a random allocation of those bifurcation points). The proposed method (1) is very flexible, (2) incorporates any experimental data (conditioning information) and (3) can easily be modified when implemented in a hydraulic inverse modeling procedure. Several synthetic examples are given to illustrate the methodology and real conduit network data are used to generate simulated networks that mimic real geometries and topology.Karst aquifers are of significant importance both as renewable water resources and as valuable land environmental resources (surface and underground) that are highly vulnerable to contamination. Although the spatial heterogeneity of karst systems is widely recognized, most of the published methods for characterizing their hydraulic behavior are limited to global models. This is particularly the case for methods based on the study of spring hydrograms. In some cases the spatial characterization of karst aquifers using mathematical models, mainly equivalent porous media models, has yielded reasonable results for regional groundwater flow even in highly karstified aquifers We acknowledge that flow simulation in the resulting karst models remains a challenge (for example, meshing problems, turbulent flow and flow in partially saturated conduits) and will not be addressed in this paper. Inverse modeling is an iterative process in which the simulated network is adjusted in order to minimize an objective function that describes the error of a given state of the simulated system and further research may be required to provide fast algorithms of network adjustment. From the review by Koltermann and Gorelick Other structure-imitating approaches include fractals The method proposed in this paper is a new structure-imitating approach that has two parts: (i) generation of conduit geometry by simulating realistic conduits and (ii) generation of network topology, that is, connecting the conduits in order to have a realistic karst network. The details of the methodology are explained in the following section. A karst conduit network is defined by the geometry of the conduits and by their topology. The most appropriate way of describing these two aspects of a karst network is by conduit mapping in speleological exploration. The usual speleological practice is to work with series. A series is a continuous survey line through several survey stations. Between two consecutive topographic stations, the data collected are the distance, azimuth and dip of the line joining both stations, defining a basic conduit. A series or conduit is then defined by a given number of basic conduits. From this information it is possible to obtain the coordinates { It can be seen from Geometrical information about a conduit section at each survey station is very variable ranging from none to a high-resolution section using modern methods of cave surveying Known conduits (from speleological exploration) are used as templates, or models, for the generation of new conduits. In the unusual case in which there has been no speleological exploration, conduit templates could be generated by, for example, assuming preferential karst directions or extrapolating from similar karst systems. The procedure for generating a population of Select a conduit at random from the set of From the selected conduit, the basic conduits are sampled with replacement and the sampled basic conduits are added in order to form the simulated conduit. The cross-sectional conduit widths and heights are attached to the basic conduits. The conduit can be stopped when a given number of stations or a given total length is reached. Go to step (I) and repeat the procedure. Stop when  In step (II), given a station { The process of conduit generation can be repeated for a given number of conduits or for a total length of conduits. The topology is generated in a second stage of the methodology by using a modified 3D diffusion-limited aggregation (DLA) process. The original use of DLA was to simulate the growth of aggregates of molecules and colloids The standard DLA procedure consists of the following steps: At the start of the procedure the fragments of conduits are distributed roughly uniformly and are unconnected ( The conduits are then allowed to migrate randomly using a multi-dimensional random walk. The model is an off-lattice DLA and thus does not rely on a lattice. When single conduits meet each other, they join together to form an aggregate and each cluster continues migrating randomly. The agglomeration process continues until desired or until a unique cluster is formed. This standard DLA procedure has been modified as follows to give a realistic topology for karst networks: In step (II) the conduits can migrate randomly in In step (III) the only stations allowed to join clusters together are the first and last stations of conduits. This methodology can be used to generate non-conditional simulations and conditional simulations. A non-conditional simulation conforms statistically with the experimental information while in a conditional simulation, in addition to replicating the observed statistics, the simulated network incorporates all known, or specified, conduits. In other words, the conditional simulation can be considered as a simulation of the extension of an existing network. The modification of the methodology to generate conditional simulations is straightforward: in the DLA process the conditioning conduits do not move and any simulated conduit or cluster that meets them becomes fixed. A karst network simulated by this method incorporates the following characteristics. The Z-histogram The fractal character of the geometry of karst conduits The conduit direction rose is reproduced in the simulation and thus the preferential directions of the karst development are replicated. The bifurcation stations, or locations at which two conduits meet, are treated as a spatial point process characterized by the K-function The simulation of conduit sections is implicit in the methodology as the conduits are generated with their widths and heights at the simulated stations. The complex geometry of the system is described by the joint use of conduit tortuosity, fractal dimension (which depends on both, tortuosity and ramification) and the K-function (which describes the spatial distribution of bifurcation points). Any other relevant information could be used to condition the simulated network. Such information includes the presence of an epikarst, presence of a paleokarst, areas of preferential infiltration at the surface (e.g., sinkholes, blind valleys, dolines, karren fields, poljes, doline fields), density of conduits, and average values of cave porosity. The Shuanghe karst network in the southwest of China is used to illustrate the methodology. The Shuanghe cave system is situated in Suiyang County, north of Guizhou, 250 The two stages of network simulation are:   The morphometric parameters of the simulated networks can be estimated and compared with those of the experimental network.  Finally, the points or stations at which two conduits join (i.e. branching, or bifurcation, locations) are considered to be a point field, the spatial distribution of which is statistically described by the Ripley K-function. The K-function is defined as As an example of conditional simulation, two conduits ( Inverse modeling in karst hydrogeology requires numerical models of the karst media with the following characteristics: In addition to fracture network porosity and matrix porosity, the geometries of karst conduit networks must be included in order to simulate the conduit flow component of karst spring discharges. The model must be realistic and easily modifiable in order to facilitate the optimization of the inverse modeling. A methodology of simulating realistic 3D geometries of karst conduits and network topology has been proposed in this paper. The methodology comprises two stages. In the first stage, conduit geometries are simulated by sampling with replacement from known conduits (conduit templates). These simulated conduits also have simulated cross-sections from the templates. In the second stage, the topology, or connectivity between the conduits generated in the first stage, is generated by using a modified diffusion-limited aggregation method. Statistics provided by a direction rose, histograms of conduit density along the vertical, as well as the fractal dimension, are automatically reproduced by the simulated karst networks generated by the proposed method. The K-function is not imposed but it does show that the simulated realizations are not pure random patterns. Non-conditional simulated networks are statistically similar to experimental networks or conceptual models while conditional simulations extend a pre-existing network. Flow modeling on the simulated systems is a challenging task which has not been addressed in this paper but it is left open for further research. We wish to thank Jean Bottazi (Plongée Spéléo Club Jeunes Années, PSCJA) for providing the data for the Shuanghe cave system. This work has been supported by research project CGL2010-15498 from the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación of Spain. The authors acknowledge the funding provided by the