As a simple supporting structure, rockbolts are responsible for maintaining the integrity and stability as well as controlling the deformation, displacement, and crack development in the surrounding rock mass. Knowledge of rockbolt load-transfer behaviors constitutes valuable information, as the rockbolt functionality is affected by load-transfer processes. A series of pullout tests was conducted on a rockbolt with a long embedment length (1500 mm). The critical rockbolt embedment length at which yielding or necking occurs together with the friction coefficient at the residual axial stress was analyzed numerically. Additionally, the failure modes of rockbolt-grouted systems and the effects of several parameters, including the rockbolt diameter (18, 20, and 25 mm) and cement mortar strength, were assessed. The rockbolt strain and energy absorption during the pullout process were also investigated. The identified rockbolt failure modes, which are dependent on the cement mortar strength and rockbolt diameter, include pullout accompanied by partial concrete splitting failure parallel to the rockbolt. Under the same cement mortar strength, the maximum load increases and the rockbolt displacement at the maximum load decreases as the rockbolt diameter increases. When diameter is held constant, the maximum load and corresponding displacement increase as the cement mortar strength increases, but the residual load is irregular. The energy absorbed by the rockbolt in the pullout test is related to the cement mortar strength and failure mode. With an increasing embedment length, the failure process is converted from a completely damaged interface with little simultaneous damage to the cement mortar at the free end to the expansion of the cracks at the loaded and free ends toward each other. The interface is completely damaged when the cracks at both ends become connected.In civil and mining engineering, fully grouted ribbed rockbolts are widely used to stabilize underground excavation operations ( Rockbolt load-transfer behaviors play an important role in rockbolt-grouted systems. Many previous researchers have conducted laboratory tests to investigate these behaviors. The load-transfer behavior of a rockbolt is influenced by stress changes ( The embedment length constitutes another key factor affecting the rockbolt bond strength. The stress state and failure mode of a rockbolt with a long embedment length markedly differs from those of a rockbolt with a short embedment length. In the present study, we focused on rockbolts with longer embedment lengths to assess their load-transfer behaviors during practical applications. A longer embedment length is also necessary to accurately measure the propagation of stress waves during pullout tests and thus define such propagation in rockbolt-grouted systems under different stress states. It is worth mentioning that our assessment of the propagation of stress waves is not discussed at length here but rather presented in its entirety in another paper. The stress conditions encountered during the failure of a rockbolt-grouted system in laboratory tests are very difficult to record with a sufficient accuracy. Several analytical models have been developed to examine the rockbolt failure process ( The aim of this study was to investigate the load-transfer behaviors of fully grouted ribbed rockbolts with a long embedment length. We tested rockbolts with an embedment length of 1500 mm having various diameters and cement mortar curing times to determine the strain, energy absorption during pullout, and failure modes of the system. We also conducted numerical simulations of the load-transfer behavior of the same system with a surface-based cohesive interface model to clarify the stress-transfer mechanism during the pullout test. Ribbed rockbolts with three different diameters, 18, 20, and 25 mm, were embedded in concrete that was adopted to simulate a rock mass. The diameter and length of the concrete specimens were 150 and 1500 mm, respectively. The total length of the rockbolt was 2500 mm, of which only 1500 mm was grouted in the concrete specimen. The surrounding rock was simulated using C40 concrete. The raw materials for the specimens included (1) ordinary Portland cement with a standard 28-day compressive strength of 42.5 MPa, (2) tap water, (3) fine aggregate composed of natural river sand ranging in diameter from 0.3 to 1.18 mm, and (4) coarse aggregate consisting of cobblestones with diameters ranging from 5 to 20 mm. The mixing proportions of the concrete specimens were cement:water:fine aggregate:coarse aggregate = 1:0.47:1.3:3.02. We also used cement mortar as an anchorage agent; the raw materials for the cement mortar included (1) ordinary Portland cement with a standard 28-day compressive strength of 42.5 MPa, (2) tap water, and (3) fine aggregate composed of natural river sand with diameters ranging from 0.3 to 0.6 mm. A pre-investigation pullout test showed that the bolts failed initially at the bolt shank with the high-strength cement mortar. We consequently established the mixing proportions of the cement mortar as cement:water:fine aggregate = 1:1:3.2 to ensure that slip occurred before the bolt shank failed and to make it easier to pour the cement mortar into the boreholes. The mixing proportions of the cement mortar and concrete are listed in Field test specimens were prepared as follows. First, a plain round bar with a diameter of 33, 35, or 40 mm was placed centrally in a cylindrical steel mold. Then, the concrete was cast and vibrated using a poker vibrator. After a 48-h curing period, the plain round bar was pulled from the concrete, and the concrete specimen was taken out of the mold and cured for 28 days in the same room. Next, rockbolts were grouted centrally in the hole with the cement mortar, and pullout tests were carried out after 7, 14, and 28 days. The values of the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of the cement mortar with curing times of 7, 14 and 28 days were 15.2 MPa, 19.1 MPa and 22 MPa, respectively. The details of the labeled rockbolt specimens are shown in We attached seven strain gauges (labeled SG1, SG2, SG3, SG4, SG5, SG6 and SG7) to the surface of the rockbolt along the axial direction to monitor the variations in the rockbolt strain along the anchor length according to the design requirements, as shown in We designed and manufactured a pullout testing machine (PTM) to conduct the rockbolt pullout tests, during which the propagation of stress waves within the rockbolt was also monitored. A schematic diagram and photograph of the PTM are shown in The failure modes of the rockbolts with the same diameter are shown in A splitting failure mode is induced by wedge action in the ribs. When a ribbed rockbolt is loaded and placed in tension, the ribs experience dilation, thereby inducing a radial outward displacement acting on the cement mortar ( The load-transfer behaviors of the rockbolts with different diameters are shown in The rockbolt displacement at the maximum load point decreases as the rockbolt diameter increases, namely, the displacement of specimen D18-22 is larger than that of specimen D25-22. This is logical because larger-diameter rockbolts provide a larger surface area with which to resist the pullout load applied on the cement mortar, thereby preventing free-end slippage better than smaller-diameter rockbolts ( We apply cement mortars with three different strengths for the sake of comparison. The pullout test results are shown in The maximum load increases with the cement mortar strength, but the residual load of specimen D25-22 is lower than those of specimens D25-15.2 and D25-19.1. The residual load of specimen D25-15.2 is also lower than that of specimen D25-19.1. This phenomenon is related to the cement mortar strength and specimen failure modes. The failure modes of specimens D25-15.2 and D25-19.1 are both completely composed of rockbolt pullout failure. The cement mortar strength after 14 days of curing is greater than that after 7 days and tends to feature better chemical adhesion and mechanical interlocking. The bond between the rockbolt and the cement mortar is tighter after 14 days of curing, and the friction force is greater; thus, the residual load is greater. The residual load of specimen D25-22 is lower than those of specimens D25-15.2 and D25-19.1 because the failure modes of specimen D25-22 are partial concrete splitting failure and rockbolt pullout failure. In the splitting area, the contact area between the rockbolt and cement mortar shrinks and exerts a negative effect on the bond behavior ( The magnitudes of the strain in the rockbolt at specific sections are recorded by strain gauges ( Rockbolt pullout is an energy absorption process. The quantity of observable energy absorption reflects all of the mechanical properties of the rockbolt. Energy loss can be omitted during the loading process. According to the first law of thermodynamics, all of the work performed by external forces during the pullout process is used to induce a change in the internal energy, that is, the work performed by external forces is converted to the amount of change in the interface through the rockbolt ( The energy absorbed by the 25-mm-diameter rockbolt during the pullout process with displacements ranging from 0 to 140 mm is shown in The above phenomenon can be attributed to the strength of the cement mortar and the failure mode of the specimen. Before the rockbolt was pulled out, an increase in the cement mortar strength creates a closer bond between the rockbolt and cement mortar interface; thus, a greater amount of energy is necessary to debond the interface. The failure modes of specimens D25-15.2 and D25-19.1 are rockbolt pullout failure, but the failure modes of specimen D25-22 are partial concrete splitting failure and rockbolt pullout failure. In the splitting area, the reduced contact area between the rockbolt and cement mortar exerts negative effects on the bond behavior and diminishes the amount of absorbed energy. The energy absorption values of specimens D25-15.2, D25-19.1, and D25-22 are 3.35 kJ, 3.64 kJ, and 1.53 kJ, respectively, after rockbolt pullout. In summary, the total absorption energy of specimen D25-22 is limited. The concrete damage plasticity model (CDPM) used herein to simulate the mechanical behavior of quasi-brittle materials (i.e., the concrete and cement mortar) was proposed for ABAQUS by We introduced a damage variable into the CDPM and used the damage plasticity to determine the uniaxial tension and compression constitutive relationships of our concrete specimens. The concrete elastic modulus was reduced to simulate the degradation of the concrete unloading stiffness under elevated levels of strain. The CDPM assumes that concrete failure results from tensile cracking and crushing. The evolution of both the yield surface and the failure surface is governed by the hardening variables In In the CDPM, the stress-strain relationship under uniaxial compression is linearly elastic before the stress reaches the initial yield stress. The stress-strain relationship hardens after yielding and then enters a strain-softening stage beyond the ultimate stress. These phenomena are expressed as follows: The inelastic strain can be transformed into the equivalent plastic strain according to the compression and damage curves: When subjected to tensile stress, the stress-strain relationship of concrete is linear before it reaches the cracking load. Upon exceeding the cracking load, concrete enters a softening stage. As with compression, the tensile stress and effective tensile stress can be determined as follows: According to the test results reported in The interfacial bond behavior can be modeled by cohesive elements ( The damage processes for cohesive behavior in the shear directions ( The uncoupled constitutive relationship of the traction-separation behavior as expressed in ABAQUS is as follows: The stress components of the traction-separation model are affected by damage per the following numerical relationships: An axisymmetric model and four-node bilinear axisymmetric quadrilateral elements with reduced integration and hourglass control (CAX4R) are adopted for our rockbolt-grouted system, as shown in In the numerical model, the stiffness matrix is singular when the damage value, namely, the scalar stiffness degradation (SDEG), is equal to 1. Therefore, the maximum damage value is limited to 0.9998 to avoid the occurrence of a singular stiffness matrix ( The failure processes of the rockbolt-grouted system under various embedment lengths are shown in Many factors affect the abovementioned load-transfer behavior, but few researchers have studied the influence of the critical embedment length on the yielding or necking of rockbolts. The load is influenced by friction between the rockbolt and grout at the residual stage; therefore, the critical embedment length and the friction coefficient inherently affect the rockbolt load-transfer behavior. We attempt to account for this in our numerical simulations. The geometric parameters of our model (except the embedment length) and the material properties are consistent with those of specimen D25-22 discussed in The critical embedment length, which is defined when the rockbolt exhibits obvious yielding or necking, is a key factor affecting the stability of rockbolt-grouted systems. As shown in Load transfer between the rockbolt and the surrounding rock mass occurs through interfacial shear resistance. In the residual stage, interfacial shear stress is induced by friction between the rockbolt and grout. In other words, the friction coefficient is significant in terms of the residual load. In our numerical model, the embedment length is 750 mm, and the friction coefficient is set to 0, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 while other parameters are kept consistent with those of specimen D25-22 ( In this study, we evaluated the load-transfer behaviors of fully grouted ribbed rockbolts by experimental and numerical analyses. The results can be summarized as follows. Specimens D25-15.2 and D25-19.1 failed by rockbolt pullout, whereas specimen D25-22 failed by rockbolt pullout accompanied by partial splitting failure of the concrete parallel to the rockbolt. The failure mode appeared to be dependent on the cement mortar strength. The splitting failure mode was induced by the wedge action of the ribs. The maximum load increases and the displacement of the rockbolt at the maximum load point decreases as the rockbolt diameter increases because larger-diameter rockbolts provide a larger surface area with which to resist the pullout load applied on the cement mortar. The maximum rockbolt load and the energy absorption increase as the UCS of the cement mortar increases, whereas the residual load is irregular. These phenomena are related to the cement mortar strength and failure mode of the specimen. In the initial loading stage, regardless of the embedment length, damage occurs first at the interface of the loaded end and then expands toward the free end along the interface between the rockbolt and cement mortar and is accompanied by damage to the cement mortar. With an increasing embedment length, the failure process is converted from a completely damaged interface with little simultaneous damage to the cement mortar at the free end to the expansion of the cracks at the loaded and free ends toward each other. The interface is completely damaged when the cracks at both ends become connected. With the increase in the embedment length, the contact area between the rockbolt and the cement mortar increases, the bond is enhanced, the rockbolt pullout load increases. We found that 860 mm and 1600 mm constitute the critical embedment lengths for rockbolt yielding and necking, respectively. There is no point in continuing to increase the embedment length when the rockbolt exhibits necking. Furthermore, improving the friction coefficient can enhance the residual support capacity of the rockbolt-grouted system. This work is funded by the