Screened multiwire, PVC insulated tinned copper cable was gasified with steam at high temperature (HTSG) under atmospheric pressure for recovery of cooper. Gases from the process were additionally equilibrated at 850°C on the bed of calcined clay granules and more than 98% of C+H content in the cable was transformed to non-condensing species. Granules prepared from local clay were generally resistant for chlorination, there was also almost no deposition of metals, Cu and Sn, on the catalytic bed. It was found that 28% of chlorine reacted to form CaCl2, 71% was retained in aqueous condensate and only 0.6% was absorbed in alkaline scrubber. More than 99% of calcium existed in the process solid residue as a mixture of calcium chloride and calcium oxide/hydroxide. PVC and other hydrocarbon constituents were completely removed from the cable sample. Copper was preserved in original form and volatilization of copper species appeared insignificant. Tin was alloying with copper and its volatilization was less than 1%. Fractionation and speciation of metals, chlorine and calcium were discussed on the basis of equilibrium model calculated with HSC Chemistry software. High temperature steam gasification prevents direct use of the air and steam/water is in the process simultaneously gaseous carrier and reagent, which may be recycled together with hydrocarbon condensates.Processing of electrical cable wastes is usually set to recovery of metals, in the first place of copper, although recycling of polymers is also being developed ( Considering high temperature (800–1000 Steam gasification of PVC was suggested as an alternative processing of waste PVC ( The use of catalyst for high gas efficiency in the process of gasification with steam is obvious. For example, pyrolysis followed by steam catalytic (Ni–Mg–Al catalyst) gasification at 800 Processing of the electrical and electronic waste, including recycling of plastics ( The intention of the experiment was the transformation of plastic/polymer elements of the cable sample into gaseous species and the separation of metallic elements preserved in the original form. The catalyst is necessary for high level transformation of oils and tars into non-condensing volatiles, e.g. ( Screened multiwire, PVC insulated tinned copper cable used in the experiment was a commercial product. It is consisted of two copper cords (PVC shielded) in polyester foil and tinned copper braid in the center of the cable. The next three PVC shielded copper cords were coupled with central structure with two thin cotton cords and surrounded by polyester foil. The final shielding was the combination of tinned copper braid and polyvinyl chloride protection cover. PVC insulation was a typical plasticized polyvinyl chloride. Mass of the cable sample was equal to 63.544 The composition of the cable components is presented in Catalyst granules were prepared from local clay (deposit of The experiment of gasification was performed under atmospheric pressure in a simple quartz reactor, consisted of three tubes of 22, 30 and 38 The steam was generated at the bottom part of the reactor in a quartz tube of 17 Before the experiment was started, the reactor and condensing line were flushed for 1 Volatile products of gasification leaving reactor were cooled down and condensing components were deposited in the cooling line. Following parts of the cooling line were taken into account: the reactor outlet (layer of mineral wool and curved glass tube), the Liebig condenser with ground glass joints, the container for aqueous condensate and the scrubber with alkaline solution. Greasy deposits were quantitatively removed with small pieces of cotton wool (diameter of few millimeters) and together with mineral wool were leached with 0.5 Metallic copper and non-metallic phase were manually separated by: (1) thoroughly washing of copper elements with warm distilled water to neutral pH (initial pH was equal to ∼10–11) followed by slow evaporation, (2) careful hammering of washed with acetone and dried copper elements and (3) gentle scraping of deposits on quartz tubes. Non-metallic residue was leached with warm 1.0    Supplementary porous texture tests were performed with PASCAL 440 porosimeter (CE Instruments) at pressure ranges from 0.003      The course of the gasification process should be discussed on the basis of PVC decomposition. Pyrolysis of PVC goes according to ‘phase chain radical mechanism’ at temperatures above 200 The mechanism of PCV decomposition determines temperature profile of the experiment, namely rather slow heating to the temperature of complete dehydrochlorination and hydrocarbons release (above 500 Gasification of the cable proceeds in three general phases: (1) Pyrolysis and dehydrochlorination of PVC, plasticizer, polyester and cotton. Pyrolytic gases exit the sample and mix with steam in reactor. (2) Equilibration. Mixture of gases and steam stay in contact with clay granules at high temperature in the next section of the reactor. (3) Oxidation of chars. Pyrolytic chars react with steam and the final metallic/inorganic residue is formed. It was assumed that dehydrochlorination/pyrolysis of PVC started at ∼200 Calculations, as helpful in interpretation of analytical findings, were performed in order to recognize theoretical chemical speciation and fractionation of tin and copper at equilibrium of the system at three formal situations: (1) the decomposition of the sample (pyrolysis and dechlorination), (2) the contact of the pyrolytic residue with steam and (3) high temperature cracking of gases from pyrolytic phase. Calculations were performed with HSC Chemistry 5.11 software ( It was assumed that the system was consisted of: (a) gaseous phase (elements: H, O, C, Cl, Sn and Cu in 47 species, including H For the first (1) formal situation it was assumed that there was no external steam involved in the processes inside the cable sample in the pyrolytic step. Results of calculations are presented in For the second (2) formal situation it was assumed that composition of the sample corresponded to equilibrium of pyrolysis, therefore the sample was composed of copper, calcium chloride, elemental carbon and tin in the alloy with copper. It was assumed that the sample was equilibrated with the volume of steam equal to the volume of the reaction space (a part of the reactor with the sample) at 650 For the third (3) formal situation it was assumed that the composition of the gaseous emission from the cable sample was equal to the one calculated for 400 Only metallic copper elements and solidified (remelted) non-metallic residue were found in the gasification section of the reactor. Copper was slightly corroded but preserved original form of cords and braids. These parts were joined by crusty non-metallic phase. The non-metallic phase also formed a thin layer on the top of the quartz tube below a perforated steel plate, evidently percolated down through the perforation. Shares of non-metallic residue and metallic copper were equal to 6.26% and 54.0%, respectively. Mass balance of these phases is given in There was found that acid soluble non-metallic residue was composed of 1.20% Cu, 0.013% Sn, 34.7% Cl and 46.5% Ca, the rest was assumed to be oxide/hydroxide species. Non-metallic residue was dominated by calcium compounds. Taking content of chlorides and calcium into account, it was evaluated that ∼42% of calcium was in a form of calcium chloride, whereas the remaining part was calcium oxide/hydroxide. Content of tin in the non-metallic residue appeared to be negligible. The distribution of non-alloyed metals and chlorides in the experimental arrangement are given in The distribution of elements was analyzed in: (a) reaction area, (b) catalytic area, (c) outlet from reactor, (d) Liebig condenser, (e) condensate and (f) scrubber with alkaline solution. Distribution balance is presented in Copper was preserved in the original form, although slightly corroded. The volatilization of copper species was negligible, less than 0.01% of this metal was found in the line from catalytic area to alkaline scrubber. Most of copper balanced in non-metal phases, i.e. 0.14% of the total Cu, was found in the residue collected in the reaction area. Tin appeared more volatile – 0.57% of initial Sn amount was found from catalytic area to alkaline scrubber and it was more uniformly distributed in this line. Also the only 0.25% of initial Sn was in the residue collected in the reaction area. However, Sn content in the copper ingot after remelting at 1200 More than 99% of calcium was in the reaction section of which 42% was in a form of CaCl Chlorine was found in two products of the process: 28% as CaCl There was 6.64 Practical lack of volatility of cooper stays in agreement with results of equilibrium modeling. There is also no dissolution of copper in molten calcium chloride. On the other hand, according to the model, tin should vaporize as tin chloride. The experiment did not confirm it. It may be noticed from Although most of carbon was catalytically converted into the gaseous products, the formation of tar and oil was observed during the gasification process of waste cable. Yellow–brown droplets of oil and brown greasy sediments were collected from condensation line. Aqueous condensate was rather colorless but there were brownish strips of deposits on the container walls and few droplets of oil on the condensate surface. It was acidic (pH ∼1.0) and had a strong odor that smelled like tar (or mothballs). Results of GC/MS analysis are given in Mass of species listed in Allothermal steam gasification was proposed for processing of the screened multiwire, PVC insulated tinned copper cable as an effective method of copper recovery and conversion of organic part of waste. Gasification prevents direct use of the air and steam/water is in the process simultaneously gaseous carrier and reagent which may be recycled together with hydrocarbon condensates. A laboratory scale gasification experiment demonstrated that: (a) PVC and other hydrocarbon components could be completely converted. (b) Copper was preserved in original slightly corroded form and there was almost no volatilization of this metal. Balance efficiency of copper recovery was equal to 99.85%. (c) Tin was alloyed with copper and its volatilization was less than 1%. (d) More than 99% of calcium was retained as a non-volatile mixture of calcium chloride and calcium oxide/hydroxide. (e) 28% of chlorine reacted to form CaCl Although the recovery of cooper was the aim of the process, the gas cooled to ambient temperature is the second product, which comprises energy value of the waste plus energy from reacted water. This energy should be recovered keeping in mind that quality of the gas should be thoroughly investigated, in the first place for chlorinated species. Scale-up of the process still remains to be solved. The idea was to gasify the waste “as it is” for further mechanical/chemical processing of a solid residue. Therefore a fixed bed similar to the one presented here seems to be more practical in comparison with fluidized bed. Also the raise of the process temperature should be moderate for better penetration of each element by steam and equilibration of the system. The work was financed by statutory activity subsidies from the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education for the Faculty of Chemistry of Wrocław University of Technology.