Iron cobaltite (FeCo2O4) has been successfully prepared via a conventional facile solvothermal reaction, followed by a calcination step. The as-prepared material exhibits a 2D-nanosheets morphology, which expected to provide better electronic transportation as compared to zero-dimensional nanomaterials. FeCo2O4 nanosheets were tested as an electrode material for supercapacitor applications. The as-prepared material showed an excellent electrochemical performance on Ni foam substrate. It exhibited high charge storage property with a specific capacitance value of 853.8 F g−1 at 5 A g−1 and also a remarkable cycling stability with 87.5% capacitance retention being stable after 3000 cycles. It also showed a superior rate capability with (73%) from 5 to 25 A g−1. The excellent electrochemical performance of FeCo2O4 nanosheets is related to its high conductivity, high porosity, and the fast electrons/ions transportation.Supercapacitors (SCs) are considered to be promising candidates for next generation power storage devices Faradic-type supercapacitive-oxides of transition metals have been widely explored as active materials for SCs applications based on their fast-reversible faradic reactions at the electrode surface Herein, we report a facile synthetic method for the preparation of FeCo All chemical reagents were analytical grade and used without further purification. A solution contains 1 mmol FeCl The prepared sample was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) instrument (Bruker AXS-D8 X-ray diffractometer, ADVANCE, Germany) with a Cu K The electrochemical experiments were performed in a three-electrode configuration in 6 M KOH solution as the electrolyte. The working electrode was prepared using suspended solution of the active material (FCONS), conducting additives (Super P), and poly (vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF) as a binder in N-Methylpyrrolidine (NMP) in a weight ratio of 80:10:10. Then the prepared solution was coated onto a piece of nickel foam (1 cm × 1 cm, 1.6 mm thickness, Xiamen Tob New Energy Technology Co. LTD, China) and was dried at 80 °C overnight. The mass loading of the sample for SCs tests was 3 ± 0.5 mg cm Where I is the discharging current (A), Δt is the discharging time (s), ΔV is the discharging potential range (V), and m is the mass of active material (g). The solvothermal reaction between metal cations and urea, which decomposes releasing ammonia and OH At the same time, a great amount of carbon dioxide bubbles were generated in the reaction medium due to the presence of ethylene glycol, which functioned as in situ soft template for the aggregation centers. The viscosity of ethylene glycol plays an important role to stabilize and reinforce these bubbles. Then small nanoparticles could aggregate around the gas-liquid interface and finally results in the porous features of the 2D-nanosheets arrays The XRD patterns of the as-prepared FCONS after heat treatment at 300, 350 and 400 °C for 3 h are demonstrated in The EDX analysis, Elemental composition, surface analysis and the oxidation states of FeCo The BET specific surface area of the as-prepared sample is a significant parameter to evaluate the electrochemical behavior of FCONS. The electrochemical behavior of the as-prepared sample as an electrode material for SCs applications was examined using CV, GCD, and EIS measurements. By increasing the scan rate from 1 to 50 mV s   The cycling life was evaluated by GCD measurements, The excellent electrochemical performance of the FCONS electrode can be ascribed to the mesoporous characteristics of the nanosheets which give a high surface area, providing numerous electroactive sites for redox reactions. Furthermore, the open space between the nanosheets layers could serve as a sink for ions and improves the electrolyte penetration within the electrode. Nyquist plots of the as-prepared sample before and after 3000 cycles in the frequency ranging from 100 K Hz to 0.01 Hz are shown in In conclusion, FeCo