Laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICPMS) has recently emerged as a powerful in situ microanalytical technique for major to trace elements in heterogeneous samples such as fluid and melt inclusions. Here, a rigorous comparison of melt inclusion (MI) data acquired by electron microprobe (EMP), ion microprobe (the secondary ion mass spectrometry, SIMS) and LA-ICPMS is used to evaluate the applicability and advantages/drawbacks of these approaches. We are specifically interested in determining if LA-ICPMS data on entire, unexposed, crystallized MI that cannot be homogenized in the lab are accurate and of a useful precision.
                  Quantification of LA-ICPMS MI signals requires the use of an internal standard, i.e., the concentration of one element, or an element ratio, at the time of MI entrapment must be known independently, in order to derive the pure MI composition from the MI plus host mixed signal. Analysis of plagioclase-hosted glassy MI of a mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB) sample from the East Pacific Rise illustrates that melt inclusion chemistry can be accurately quantified by LA-ICPMS, including the correction for postentrapment sidewall crystallisation of the host mineral without prior reheating in the lab.
                  The LA-ICPMS data obtained on crystallized MI demonstrate agreement with the EMP and SIMS data on exposed glassy MI at the 1 standard deviation uncertainty level except for a few elements close to their limits of detection. LA-ICPMS data reduction schemes include the quantification of analytical uncertainty on each element of single MI. Therefore, weighted average element concentrations can be obtained for MI assemblages, at precisions that compare well with those of average element concentrations obtained by EMP and SIMS.
                  Simple sample preparation minimizing inclusion loss through polishing combined with the analytical efficiency of 50 inclusions plus neighbouring host mineral at up to 40 elements per day enable the collection of statistically relevant datasets by LA-ICPMS. These allow to recognize nonrepresentative MI (e.g., heterogeneous entrapment). Application to individual clinopyroxene crystals from the AD79 pumice horizon of Mt. Somma-Vesuvius reveals chemical variability that exceeds the analytical precision on single melt inclusions. This variability was not obvious from the limited data set obtained by SIMS and EMP.
                  The largest source of nonquantifiable error for EMP and SIMS data stems from the requirement of reheating the melt inclusions in the lab in order to reverse postentrapment crystallisation onto inclusion walls or growth of crystallites. For LA-ICPMS analysis of unexposed MI, the reliability with which the internal standard (IS) element concentration is known determines the quality of the data. LA-ICPMS, however, cannot analyse H2O, F, S and Cl reliably, has higher limits of detection (LODs) than SIMS for some elements for MI below ∼25 μm, has lower spatial resolution than both EMP and SIMS and consumes much more sample per analysis. Therefore, EMP, SIMS and LA-ICPMS are complementary in MI research, and the type of application will determine the analytical method or methods of choice.Melt inclusions (MI) offer direct insight into the chemistry of the liquid phase present in a variety of igneous processes, including magma generation and crystallisation, provided that no postentrapment loss or gain of components has occurred. Moreover, MI can be trapped in various host minerals at successive stages of igneous evolution; hence, MI can monitor the chemical evolution of the magmatic liquid with time. It is thus not surprising that the chemical analysis of MI is continuously drawing much attention (e.g., The reliable chemical analysis of MI is a nontrivial task, however. The size of most MI commonly does not exceed a few tens of micrometers, so in situ analysis by a microbeam technique is required. Electron microprobe (EMP) is routinely used to analyse major element compositions of MI. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) has been employed in the past for trace elements, as it has been the only in situ analytical technique with limits of detection in the sub-μg/g range for heavy trace elements (e.g., Laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICPMS) is a rapidly evolving in situ microanalytical technique, which allows the determination of most elements of the periodic table with limits of detection (LODs) that are comparable to those obtained by SIMS. This paper presents a rigorous test of the accuracy of the mathematical deconvolution procedure of analytical data for MI included in chemically complex host minerals obtained by LA-ICPMS. It is our aim to show that heterogeneous unexposed MI that cannot be homogenized in the lab can be analysed accurately for their major to trace element contents and to define the uncertainties on such concentration data. Our accuracy test is based on a methods comparison between LA-ICPMS, SIMS and EMP, applied to three different types of MI, namely, (i) natural glassy untreated, (ii) natural crystallized untreated and (iii) natural crystallized but reheated to a homogeneous glass. The petrologic interpretation and significance of the MI data presented here are beyond the scope of this paper. Some of the MI data have been interpreted previously ( Two sample types that are representative of most of the MI analytical work to date were chosen for this investigation. We have analysed glassy MI hosted in plagioclase from a mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB) collected by the submersible Alvin. We have also studied crystallized MI in clinopyroxene, both as untreated and reheated (i.e., homogenized to a glass), that are typical of volcanic rocks associated with volcano-plutonic centres at convergent margins. We make a strict distinction between MI populations and MI assemblages throughout this manuscript. MI assemblages define a series of individual MI trapped coevally along a petrographically defined growth zone of the host mineral. Provided that no boundary layer phenomena during entrapment and no postentrapment modifications occurred, MI belonging to one assemblage are thus chemically identical samples entrapped at a specific stage of host phenocryst growth. MI populations, on the other hand, comprise all MI trapped in a specific host mineral of a sample, e.g., plagioclase or in clinopyroxene. One MI population may thus comprise a series of MI assemblages successively entrapped while the host phenocryst grew and the residual melt evolved; hence, MI of a population can be chemically heterogeneous. Sample ALV-3352-7, dredged from the southern East Pacific Rise, 17–19°S (STOWA cruise; Sample S19(2)b-201 is from the AD79 pumice horizon of Mt. Somma-Vesuvius, Italy. Prior work on these tephriphonolitic, clinopyroxene-hosted MI has suggested that the concentrations of major and trace elements are remarkably reproducible from MI in a single sample (  Analyses were performed in sequence, and each ablation was stored individually as transient (i.e., time resolved) signal acquired in peak-hopping mode ( Data reduction of MI LA-ICPMS analyses is documented in great detail in Chronologically, a single shot analytical signal consists of a gas background, followed by a signal section of pure host, then the host+MI mixed signal and, finally, the pure host signal again ( Limits of detection (LOD) for each signal interval were calculated for each element, for individual analyses, as three times the standard deviation of the gas background signal divided by the element sensitivity ( The concentrations of H All constituents were analysed as high-energy ions to minimize the effects of mass interferences and reduce matrix effects, and only secondary ions with excess kinetic energies in the 78±20 eV range were recorded. These analytical conditions have been carefully evaluated to confirm that potentially interfering masses of light and middle REE oxides on the masses of measured HREE are minimized, following the extensive prior work of The counts for each positive ion of interest (X Based on counting statistics and these analytical conditions, the 1-sigma uncertainties (reported as percent relative one standard deviation, RSD) for each element in the Mt. Somma-Vesuvius MI are as follows: 5% to 10% RSD for Li, Be, B, Zr, Ce and Sr; 15% to 25% RSD for Rb, Y, Nb and Sm; approximately 50% RSD for Cs; and 75% to 100% RSD for Yb, Th and U. The reported water concentrations are reproducible to ±0.3 wt.%. The reproducibility values reported herein are a function of the total counts for each ion, which in turn vary with the maximum current of the primary ion beam and the counting times for the secondary ions. Low beam currents, like that used in this study, result in small primary beam sizes that permit analysis of small MI having diameters of 10 to 15 μm. However, such low beam currents also mean that the number of secondary ions collected for analysis is comparatively low and the limit of detection for some trace elements is correspondingly high. Conversely, higher primary beam currents consume a larger volume of glass, generate a larger secondary ion signal and decrease the limit of detection for trace element analysis, but higher currents also involve larger primary beam sizes and preclude the analysis of relatively small MI. In other applications of SIMS, the analysis of larger MI may permit the use of comparatively larger primary currents, which involve more total counts for the secondary ions and improved counting statistics. Moreover, the counting statistics for secondary trace element ions can be increased, and the LOD decreased, by increasing the counting times. For sample S19(2)b-201: the concentrations of P For sample ALV-3352-7: major and minor elements were analysed with a Cameca SX-100 electron microprobe (Institute of Petrology, University of Vienna), which uses a 4-WDS with 1-EDS spectrometer combination. Analyses were done at 15 kV accelerating potential. For glass analysis the beam current was set to 10 nA (20 nA for minerals), defocused to 10-μm diameter—1 μm for all other phases and for profiles to check for variations. Counting times for all phases were 20 s on peak and 10 s on background, except for Na and K in glass (10 s/5 s) and Fe, Mg, Ti and Mn in plagioclase—from 20 up to 50 s on peak, in order to improve the counting statistics, resulting in 1–3% RSD. Calibrations were performed using different natural and synthetic phases as standards for both minerals and glasses. A natural augite crystal was measured as a running standard, with 1 standard deviations of 0.26 (SiO The data obtained in this study by LA-ICPMS, SIMS and EMP are reported in various ways. Single MI analyses are reported for the LA-ICPMS data ( The results on natural glassy, crystallized and reheated MI, their host plagioclase and clinopyroxene and the matrix glass of the MORB sample obtained by LA-ICPMS, SIMS and EMP are given in This sample was analysed for matrix glass, plagioclase and unheated glassy MI in it ( EMP data of exposed MI ( It is well known from the literature that MI trapped in phenocrysts typically crystallise a rim of host mineral onto the inclusion walls after entrapment (e.g., The choice of the appropriate IS for quantification of LA-ICPMS data of unexposed MI can mathematically correct for postentrapment crystallisation of host mineral onto the MI walls, irrespective of equilibrium or disequilibrium crystallisation, because during ablation of the entire MI the host mineral rim around the inclusion is analysed as well. The most reliable internal standard for this MORB sample is derived from petrologic model calculations, assuming that the MORB crystallized along the olivine–plagioclase cotectic. The intersection of the line of the reverse of olivine–plagioclase cotectic crystallisation with that of the reverse of plagioclase crystallisation onto MI walls after entrapment provides MgO=8.48 wt.% at the time of MI entrapment ( The following calculations shall illustrate other approaches to defining an internal standard for quantification of the LA-ICPMS data and their relevance. It can be assumed that the melt trapped in inclusions is chemically identical to the matrix glass. This approach obviously corresponds to a minimal correction of postentrapment sidewall crystallisation because it assumes that crystallisation of the magma stopped immediately after the time of MI entrapment. In this case, any matrix glass element concentration can be used as an IS to calculate the chemical composition of the MI. If we now use the MgO composition of the matrix glass from EMP as an IS for the calculation of the chemical composition of the MI analysed by LA-ICPMS and compare these data with the EMP and LA-ICPMS analyses of the matrix glass, they are identical within uncertainty except for TiO Boundary layer effects at the time of MI entrapment cannot be resolved for the MORB, plagioclase-hosted MI (sample ALV-3352-7) that are larger than 15 μm, since element concentrations do not vary significantly as a function of the size of MI (15–35 μm; Previously published results of 9 crystallized and reheated MI trapped in clinopyroxene phenocrysts from the AD79 pumice horizon of Mt. Somma-Vesuvius by EMP and SIMS ( For this study, 12 different clinopyroxene grains of sample S19 were selected for analysis. Four grains containing crystallized MI were analysed by LA-ICPMS without prior homogenisation, and eight grains were thermally homogenized for EMP and SIMS measurements. Seven MI of one of these reheated grains were then analysed by LA-ICPMS, five entirely included in the host clinopyroxene and two exposed MI previously measured by EMP and SIMS. For quantification of the LA-ICPMS signals of all MI, a volatile content of 5 wt.% (sum of H The LA-ICPMS major and trace element data are reported together with the EMP/SIMS results in Comparison of the LA-ICPMS MI data with those obtained by EMP and SIMS is shown in The reproducibility for large analyte signals (i.e., signals not limited by counting statistics) in LA-ICPMS is limited by sequential recording of a fluctuating signal. This arises from the overlay of low-frequency laser ablation induced fluctuations (dependent on the aerosol transport system) on high-frequency plasma flicker and can, in the worst case, lead to nonrepresentative sampling ( The data of the MI assemblage in MORB plagioclase are now used to illustrate the various analytical precisions for different data sets obtained by the three analytical techniques. For single MI drilled out of the host mineral by LA-ICPMS, the analytical uncertainty on their element composition is considerably larger than that estimated for EMP analysis of exposed glassy MI ( Uncertainty-weighted averages provide the most accurate definition of the composition of a MI assemblage, at precisions that compare well with those obtained on average compositions calculated from EMP and SIMS data. This is because precise analyses exert a larger influence on the weighted average value than do imprecise data. This has a large effect especially for elements with concentrations close to their LOD (recall that the LOD obtained by LA-ICPMS and by SIMS is lower for larger MI because a larger volume of sample is analysed per unit time) or for scattering results such as Sc or Cr of the reheated grain ( Due to the statistically large number of analyses obtained by LA-ICPMS within one analytical session, it is easier to recognize and discard nonrepresentative MI ( Tiny daughter crystals may contain a large proportion of some trace elements that produce a signal of 1 to 2 s only during laser ablation analysis. The highly transient nature of such signals may not be properly recorded in cases where the sequential measurement routine contains more than ∼20 isotopes (elements). This is, however, the common case in bulk MI LA-ICPMS analysis. Therefore, even only partially homogenized MI should provide more reproducible analytical LA-ICPMS signals than do completely crystallized MI. Remelting redistributes the trace element content of such tiny daughter crystals across the MI, which results in longer, less variable signals, ensuring representative sampling (compare LA-ICPMS MI data for Zr of the Mt. Somma-Vesuvius sample have significantly larger uncertainties for grain 1 when compared to grain 2 ( Two types of chemical postentrapment modifications of MI need clear distinction, namely, crystallisation of host mineral onto the inclusion walls and diffusive reequilibration with the host mineral at elevated temperatures. The former, but not the latter, is reversible through proper reheating of the MI (e.g., The parameter with the most nonquantifiable uncertainty, in homogenisation experiments of MI in the lab, is the amount of host mineral to be remelted into the inclusion in order to obtain the melt composition at the time of entrapment. LA-ICPMS analysis of unexposed MI does not require this sample preparation step, because the entire MI plus any rim of host mineral crystallized onto the inclusion wall are accurately analysed during a single laser shot. However, the accurate quantification of the MI chemistry by LA-ICPMS relies on the availability of a correct internal standard, the determination of which is also a very delicate issue as illustrated here based on the MORB sample. If one chooses the approach to characterize the melt evolution of a given system by using the chemical composition of successively entrapped MI assemblages, analytical precisions are comparable between LA-ICPMS, EMP and SIMS data sets. Therefore, the analyst has to choose between the uncertainties inherent in homogenizing MI in the lab and in deriving the IS element concentration, except for MI that cannot be homogenized in the lab. LA-ICPMS analysis of unexposed MI should also be considered as a check on the quality of the data obtained by EMP and SIMS on remelted MI. LA-ICPMS is a cost and time efficient analytical method. Fifty MI plus host mineral pairs can be analysed in one analytical day for a very large number of major to trace elements down to sub-μg/g concentrations (depending on MI size). It was demonstrated that the extensive LA-ICPMS data set of MI and host clinopyroxene measured in one analytical day allows resolution of sample heterogeneities that were not apparent from the limited trace element data set obtained by SIMS, because SIMS cannot match this analytical efficiency. While EMP can match it from the point of view of analysis time, it is limited by the number of exposed MI available per sample for analysis and to element concentrations exceeding ∼50 to 100 μg/g. Each host mineral is measured adjacent to the MI under identical analytical conditions (i.e., within one recorded shot), allowing direct determination of apparent partition coefficients for major to trace elements. Loss through polishing is also minimized in case of LA-ICPMS analysis of unexposed MI. This is particularly important for a statistically significant characterisation of MI assemblages, e.g., MI trapped in a primary growth zone of a phenocryst. The obvious drawback of LA-ICPMS is that the entire MI is consumed during analysis rendering a revisit impossible. Matrix-matching standardisation at similar concentration levels (mandatory for SIMS and recommended for EMP) is not required for the LA-ICPMS setup employed here. Therefore, extremely well characterized and widely used certified glass standards such as the NBS series from the US-NIST can be used for the quantification of silicate (and sulphide; SIMS and EMP also have distinct advantages over LA-ICPMS. Species such as H The chemical analysis of MI requires in situ microanalytical techniques of which the EMP and SIMS have widely been used. The most recent progress in LA-ICPMS analysis has prompted an evaluation of its accuracy for the analysis of heterogeneous (i.e., crystallized) bulk MI from beneath the sample surface. Such inclusions could so far not be analysed reliably except for cases where they could be reheated to a homogeneous glass. Bulk MI are accurately analysed for major to trace element concentrations with LA-ICPMS, be they crystallized or glassy and be they exposed or beneath the sample surface. The precisions on average element concentrations of MI assemblages sensu stricto are comparable between the three analytical methods when error-weighted averages as obtained by LA-ICPMS ( The requirement of an independently known internal standard for the quantification of MI measurements by LA-ICPMS may be considered the single most important limitation of this approach—or it may be understood as the key to obtaining accurate results from possibly heterogeneous MI analysed in bulk. The choice of an internal standard element is delicate and currently suffers most from the limited knowledge of the existence and extent of postentrapment diffusional reequilibration of potential IS elements between the MI and host mineral; processes that need a better understanding for MI research in general. Currently, the analyst has to choose between the ambiguities inherent in the thermal homogenisation procedures (e.g., LA-ICPMS is inferior to EMP and SIMS concerning the spatial resolution, the LOD for some trace elements in MI<10 μm in diameter and, to date, cannot analyse H We predict that the analysis of heterogeneous (i.e., crystallized) MI will become a main domain of future LA-ICPMS MI applications, and that this approach can be expanded to the analysis of heterogeneous mineral inclusions, e.g., those that suffer from postentrapment exsolution of one phase from another. It will cover most MI studies dealing with hydrous volcano-plutonic centres and volatile-rich plutonic magmas genetically associated with mineralisation. The reliable characterisation of sulphide MI may only now have become possible, because sulphide melts rarely quench to a homogeneous glass. We acknowledge N. Shimizu and G. Layne for helping with the SIMS measurements (sample ALV-3352-7) at WHOI, T. Ntaflos from the University of Vienna for support with the EMPA analysis (sample ALV-3352-7), and the assistance of Christine Tappen in the electron microprobe analyses of Mt. Somma-Vesuvius melt inclusions and host grains (sample S19). M.A.T. kindly thanks J. Sinton for providing the samples from the R/V Atlantis cruise 3-31. The very insightful reviews of L. Danyushevsky, R.L. Hervig and M. Tiepolo, and the comments by Editor in Chief S. Foley helped to considerably improve the focus of the manuscript. Partial support for this study was provided by the Swiss National Science Foundation to C.A.H.  