Drilling is an important engineering operation with extensive application in many fields of industry including mining engineering, oil and gas exploration and exploitation, civil engineering, groundwater management, etc. Drill bits must be able to endure enormous stresses that gradually wear them down during the drilling operation. In rock drilling, wear resistance is a key determinant of the drill bit lifetime and hence the drilling cost, thus basically affecting the choice of drilling method for any given rock type. With the advent of new wear-resistant materials, they can be used to improve the resistance of drill bits against wear and erosion. This study investigated the wear resistance of drill bits with tungsten carbide (WC) coating, DLC-Diamond coating, and titanium-silica‑aluminum (TiAlSi) coating when drilling in three types of hard rock, namely Khoshtinat Granite (A1), White Natanz Granite (A2) and Nehbandan Granite (A3). The drilling tests were performed on cuboid specimens using a drilling machine at rotation speeds of 850, 900 and 950 rpm and penetration rates of 12, 18 and 24 mm/min. The results showed that for any fixed drilling conditions, the wear rates of the TiAlSi drill bit in A1, A2, and A3 were respectively 48%, 52%, and 60% lower than those of the WC drill bit. In the same rocks, the Diamond-DLC drill bit also showed 42%, 44.25%, and 55% lower wear rates than the WC drill bit. in addition to the observed changes in wear rate of the drill bits, the surface roughness created by these drills represents the optimum performance of the TiAlSi drill bit. It was observed that, as the mechanical properties of the rock (uniaxial compressive strength, Mohs hardness, Schimazek's abrasivity index and Young's Modulus) increased, the tested drill bits showed wider differences in terms of wear resistance. As the TiAlSi drill bit had the lowest wear rate (27%) and after that, the Diamond-DLC drill bit showed a better wear (30%) performance than the WC drill bit (60%).Drilling is an unavoidable part of many large-scale industrial activities, most notably mining, construction, and oil and water extraction [ Since wear can significantly shorten the lifespan of drill bits, a substantial cost saving can be made by assuming effective control over this aspect of the drilling operation. The wear of drill bits can be examined both microscopically and macroscopically. The drilling/cutting ability of a drill bit cannot be predicted without a good understanding about the mechanism of drilling/cutting, the type of wear involved, and the interaction between the rock type and properties, the state of wear, penetration rate, and drill bit lifetime [  As the above summary suggests, most (about 46.2%) of the studies in this area have investigated the effect of mechanical properties of rocks, most notably their abrasiveness, on the drill wear. In comparison, the effects of tool specifications and operating parameters have been studied in, respectively, 29.4% and 24.4% of these works. Also, while reviewing the literature about the coating of drilling tools, it was observed that most of these studies are about cutting As mentioned, wear behavior of drill bit and abrasion behavior of rock have been investigated in many studies. One of the most effective methods to increase the wear resistance of a drill bit is to cover it with a carefully chosen layer of resistant coating. The effect of coating material on the drill bit wear, however, has not been extensively studied. This study aimed to investigate the simultaneous effect of mechanical properties of the rock (compressive strength, Young's modulus, Mohs hardness, and Schimazek's abrasivity index) and tool specifications (coating material) on the wear of This study was performed in two phases. The first phase involved field and laboratory work with the aim of forming a proper statistical sample for the rocks of interest. In the second phase, the effect of mechanical properties of the studied rocks and tool specifications on the wear of drill bits was investigated by the use of weight method and SEM images. In the first step of the field work, the rock samples were selected and collected and then cut into identical cuboid specimens. Cylindrical specimens and thin sections were also prepared for physical and mechanical tests. Cuboid specimens were subjected to drilling tests performed by a laboratory-scale drilling machine. After the drilling tests, SEM images were taken from the used drill bits and the state of wear in TiAlSi and diamond-DLC drill bits were compared with the wear of WC drill bits. The flowchart of the procedure followed in this study is presented in The tests of this study were performed on three types of hard rock collected from Iran: Khoshtinat Granite (A To prepare the specimens needed for laboratory tests, block samples were collected from the mines. Standard tests were then performed to measure the four main mechanical properties of the collected rocks. These properties are as follows: Schimazek's abrasivity index (SF-a) Uniaxial Compressive Strength (UCS) Mohs Hardness (MH) Young's Modulus (YM) When collecting samples for laboratory tests, rock blocks were selected large enough to allow all tests to be conducted on the same block. All blocks were inspected for macroscopic defects to make sure that the specimens would be free of fracture and alteration. After cutting the test specimens from blocks, standard tests for measuring the properties of interest were performed as instructed in ISRM [ Uniaxial compressive strength is the stone bearing capacity against direct axial compressive forces. For uniaxial compressive strength measurement, a diamond core drill was used to cut out five (per block) standard specimens with length to diameter ratio of 2.5:1. After cutting, the end surfaces of these specimens were completely polished and smoothed. These specimens were subjected to a standard test of uniaxial compressive strength under a load of 1 MPa. Ultimately, the test results were used to calculate the uniaxial compressive strength each rock specimen. The amount of rock abrasivity is a very important and determinant parameter in the choice of drilling system, type and geometry of drill bit. So far, four methods for assessing the amount of wear stone have been presented. In this study, the wear of three types of stones were studied using Schimazek's abrasivity index. The Schimazek's abrasivity index can be calculated by Eq. Rock hardness can be considered as rock or mineral resistance, against the cutter, or any other object in which it penetrates.The Mean hardness of the rocks can be calculated based on the hardness of the forming minerals using Eq. The ability to change, shape and type of failure of stones depend on the elasticity and plasticity of the stones. Most of the minerals in the stone are elastic, crisp. Elastic properties are determined by the modulus of elasticity. The modulus of elasticity is the ratio of vertical stress to the relative variation caused by it. Moreover, an additional test is developed to measure the tangent Young's modulus at a stress level of 50% of the ultimate uniaxial compressive strength in this study. As shown in The drill bit used in this research was of blade type. The tip of this drill was made of tungsten carbide and had a diamond blade designed for drilling in hard rocks like granite. The original diameter of the drill bit, over which the coatings were created, was 10 mm, on them. For Diamond-DLC coating, drill bits were placed inside a PACVD device, and after optimizing device configurations including temperature, time, voltage, frequency, etc., the coating was produced by about 120 min of treatment at a temperature of approximately 150  C. To create the Diamond-DLC coating, argon, methane and hydrogen gases were pumped into the device chamber. The substrate was HSS drill bit (steel). Prior to coating, plasma nitriding was performed. The multi-layered AlTiSi coating was created in the PVD device, which, after optimization, produced this coating over a period of 240–300 min at a temperature of about 300 °C. Given the type of coating needed, a number of targets (with the same material as the desired coating) were placed on the substrate. The substrate of this process was also HSS drill bit (steel). After producing the coatings on the bits, they were analyzed in terms of thickness, structure, abrasion, hardness, etc. These analyses showed that the DLC coating and the multi-layered AlTiSi coating had a thickness of 1–3 μm and 4–8 μm, respectively. It was also found that the WC, TiSiAl, and DLC coatings had a Vickers hardness number of 1570, 3750 and 3100, respectively. For drilling test, cuboid specimens with approximate dimensions of 10 × 10 × 15 and 10 × 10 × 20 were cut out of the blocks. The cuboid specimens were firmly secured by the clips positioned on the front of the machine to prevent movement and vibration during drilling. Since the rotation speed and penetration rate were adjustable and the load behind the drill could be defined as a percentage of the final load applied by the drilling machine, several tests (by trial and error) were performed to find a good configuration. In these trials, initially, the rotation speed was set to 300 rpm the load was set to 100% of the final load, but this configuration produced unacceptable results and even caused the drill to stuck and break. At the speeds of 800, 850, and 900 rpm, however, setting the load to 65% of the final load produced good results. Therefore, the tests were performed at three speeds of 800, 850 and 900 rpm and three penetration rates of 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4 mm/s. In the end, the torque and the load behind the drill were measured. As mentioned earlier, the wear of drill bit is a key determinant of drill bit lifetime and therefore the cost of rock drilling operations. Hence, the available options in terms of the drill bit can affect the choice of drilling method for any given rock type. In this study, the wear rate was determined by the weight method. To establish the validity of this method, the state of wear after drilling in one of the rocks was studied by the use of SEM images. In the weight method, the wear rate of the drill bit is calculated by Eq. Where W is the wear rate (gr/cm Where n is the number of holes created by the drill bit, r is the radius of the drilled hole, and h is the depth of the drilled holes. In this study, The wear rates calculated To assess the validity of the method, a scanning electron microscope was used to take the image of drill bits before and after drilling in the rock A Drilling in hard rocks involves slow penetration and extensive crushing and scratching which increase the thermal stress and the friction coefficient at the drill-rock contact, thereby leading to wear flat formation. Also, given that the slow rate of penetration, drilling requires a larger force and pressure behind the drill, which accelerates the micro-cracking of the drill bit, eventually leading to its fracture. As illustrated in Drill bit wear causes changes in drilling performance. One of these changes is the roughness of the drilled surface In this research, the surface roughness created by different drill bits in three different rock samples was measured by a roughing machine and the results are compared with According to the results, the average surface roughness created by WC, Diamond-DLC and TiAlSi drill bits is 1.452, 0.760 and 0.702 μm, respectively. Thus, in addition to the observed changes in wear rate of the drill bits, the surface roughness created by these drills represents the optimum performance of the TiAlSi drill bit. The relationship between the wear of drill bit and mechanical properties of the rocks was investigated by linear regression. For each parameter, linear, quadratic, exponential, and logarithmic equations were tested and the equation producing the highest correlation coefficient was selected. A strong correlation was found between the wear of the drill bit and the uniaxial compressive strength of the rock that it penetrates. This relationship can be expressed as the exponential function plotted in In this equation, UCS is the uniaxial compressive strength of the rock (MPa), W There was also a good correlation between the wear of drill bits and the hardness of the rock. This relationship is in the form of the linear function depicted in Also, a very strong relationship was found between the wear of the drill bit and Schimazek's wear index, as they were found to increase and decrease together. The quadratic function derived for this relationship is presented below and illustrated in The Young's modulus of the rock also showed a fairly good relationship with the drill bit wear. The relationship between these parameters is in the form of the quadratic function displayed in As observed with increasing rock mechanical parameters (including UCS, MH, SF-a and YM), TiAlSi drill bit has better performance and lower wear rate than other drill bits.  As The results show that as the compressive strength and hardness of the rocks increases, the TiAlSi and Diamond-DLC drill bits perform progressively better than the WC drill bit. Ultimately, this difference in wear rate maximizes in the hardest tested rock, that is, A As Since wear can significantly shorten the lifespan of drill bits, a substantial cost saving can be made by assuming effective control over this aspect of the drilling operation. In this study investigated the wear resistance of drill bits with tungsten carbide (WC) coating, DLC-Diamond coating, and titanium-silica‑aluminum (TiAlSi) coating. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present investigation. Among the studied mechanical properties, compressive strength, hardness, and abrasiveness are of the greatest importance for the drill bit wear, as they are related to both macroscopic and microscopic aspects of the discussion. The higher the compressive strength, hardness, and abrasiveness of the rock are, the lower will be the rate of penetration into the rock and the higher will be the friction and thermal stress created at the drill-rock contact, which all result in faster wear of the drill bit. After comparing the effect of each mechanical property on the wear rate of drill bits, it was found that UCS, SF-a, and MH, in that order, had the greatest impacts on this rate. The Young's modulus was not as much impactful on the wear rate as other properties were. Among the studied drill bits, the TiAlSi drill bit had the lowest wear rate and after that, the Diamond-DLC drill bit showed a better wear performance than the WC drill bit when tested on the rocks with the same physical and mechanical specifications. As shown in As shown in This study was focused on the effect of mechanical properties of hard rocks on the wear of drill bits. Future studies are therefore suggested to study the same effect for drilling in soft rocks. As it was shown in None.