Use and management of organic waste/residues is currently an important global issue for attaining sustainability in agricultural production. However, knowledge about the decomposition characteristics and nutrient release pattern of added organic materials in subtropical soils and their interaction with inherent soil properties are lacking. Thus, laboratory incubation studies were carried out under aerobic conditions with crop residues and chicken manure (1%) applied to six contrasting soils. In all cases, CO2–C effluxes peaked by day 9 and the active C release phase persisted until day 25, indicating that priming effects might have occurred. The high pH and non-calcareous soils had higher CO2 effluxes than the acidic soils. The relative loss of added C differed between soils and its magnitude depended on the decomposable characteristics of the added organic materials, with chicken manure>mungbean residue>wheat residue. Rapid ammonification with presumed immobilization occurred up to day 15. Thereafter, 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              4
                              +
                           
                        
                      oxidation took place in the high pH and non-calcareous soils, with chicken manure exhibiting the greatest nitrification. By contrast, the acidic soils predominantly accumulated 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              4
                              +
                           
                        
                     , thereby showing higher net N mineralization. In the acidic soils, nitrification was either small or stable, with the process being limited by the addition of organic materials with a high C/N ratio. Some disappearances of 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NO
                              
                              3
                              −
                           
                        
                      also indicated that N immobilization and/or denitrification had taken place. As such, the decomposition rate constant (k) correlated well either with pH alone (R
                     2=0.59***) or coupled with C/N ratio (R
                     2=0.61***) of the organic materials. The net N mineralization and nitrification showed a similar trend (R
                     2=0.26–0.42*), although these processes were mostly regulated by the different soil factors. Our results reveal that the parameters pH and C/N ratio of organic materials should be included in equations to calculate the quality of added organic matter. Our newly proposed equations, incorporated as the organic matter quality index (OMQI), can predict k, net N mineralization and nitrification in different soil types under aerobic conditions, and it could be further improved by also considering inherent soil factors.Organic matter, as one of the main keys to soil productivity, has received global attention recently. In particular, an appropriate management strategy towards carbon sequestration can improve soil productivity and crop production as well as help to reduce the atmospheric build-up of carbon dioxide (CO Soil properties, and particle size fractions in particular, influence the stability of the microbial biomass and products, the degree to which depends on the type of organic substrate added ( The incorporation of organic materials into microbial-deficient soil results in N immobilization and may bring about N limitation of the microbial biomass ( As such, information on the timing and method of adding organic matter, particularly with respect to its decomposition and nutrient release pattern for a specific soil is vital towards generating effective management strategies. These may reduce the use of chemical fertilizers while offering better crop return and less environmental degradation. Yet, detailed information on the variable responses of organic additives in contrasting upland soils of the subtropics is lacking. Instead, it is generally believed that the decomposition of organic materials is rapid in the tropics due to the high temperatures and favourable environmental conditions. This effect is perhaps greatest in upland situations, where the soil water contents are usually near to field capacity. To meet this goal in general, and for subtropical upland soils in particular, methods for evaluating the soil-specific quality of organic materials and their influence on C and nutrient release are key. Recently, Six contrasting upland soils from different regions of Bangladesh, a subtropical country, were collected from a depth of 0–15 The experiment comprised four treatments in total: For the incubation, the organic materials were applied to the soils as for the treatments and mixed thoroughly. Deionized water was added to reach 60% WFPS. Various C and N properties were determined at days 0, 2, 5, 9, 15, 25, 40, 60 and 90. Triplicate samples were taken for each treatment and day of determination. The amount of water lost through evaporation was corrected at an interval of 2–3 days and all jars were kept open in an incubation room at 27±1 Mineral N ( An The plant residue quality index (PRQI) as defined by CO The relative loss of SOC also varied significantly ( The decomposition rate constants ( Initial ammonification took place in all soils until day 15 of the incubation, together with generally probable concurrent immobilization ( Both the soils and organic amendments had a remarkable effect on the accumulation of The total CO The biochemical properties of the organic materials did not influence the total CO Because both crop and animal residues were examined in this study, we have suggested a modification of Our results indicate that soils with low C and N content influenced C mineralization, even with the addition of organic materials ( The added organic materials regulated the CO The decomposition rate constant ( Ammonification and C mineralization were closely coupled in all soils and were predominant until day 15 of the incubation period, a finding that is in agreement with those of many researchers ( The magnitude of nitrification depended mostly on the soil type. The high pH and non-calcareous soils displayed higher net nitrification than the acidic soils. The salinity level (6.6 Our findings indicate small response differences between the chicken manure treated calcareous and non-calcareous soils, and the other soils receiving mungbean and wheat residues. Similarly, the saline soil responded equally with both chicken manure and mungbean residue, indicating the impact of high N content and low C/N ratio ( The soil factors examined did not have a significant effect on either C mineralization or nitrification, probably because of the soil heterogeneity However, soils with high sand, high CEC and low clay contents might stimulate the N mineralization process. Generally, high clay content in a soil temporarily limits microbial activities due to sorption of the decomposition products/residue substrate onto mineral particles and incorporation of them into soil aggregates ( Our study emphasizes the utility of the pH and C/N ratio of the organic materials to predict In conclusion, our results reveal that the decomposition of the added organic materials was soil specific and largely related to their chemical composition. The high pH and microbiologically active soils stimulated C and N transformations. The release of active pools of added C continued up to 25 days. A similar pattern was noted for N mineralization, but immobilization and/or denitrification seemed to have a lesser contribution. The acidic soils showed significant ammonification; nitrification was either small or stable and the addition of organic matter with larger C/N ratios further slowed the process. The soil properties pH, CEC and texture could influence C and N mineralization, although the pH and C/N ratio of the added organic materials played a more important role in the regulation of these two processes. Our proposed equations for indexing organic material quality and for the subsequent estimation of The Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA) and Ministry of Agriculture, Government of Bangladesh under its Soil Fertility and Fertilizers Management Project jointly funded this research. The technical assistance of Mr M.A. Wahab Mia, Ms Kamrun Nahar and Mr Jahangir Alam is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks to the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, Germany for awarding a fellowship that facilitated the writing up the results of this study by the senior author.