The fracture behaviour and crack propagation features of coal under coupled static-dynamic loading conditions are important when evaluating the dynamic failure of coal. In this study, coupled static-dynamic loading tests are conducted on Brazilian disc (BD) coal specimens using a modified split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB). The effects of the static axial pre-stress and loading rate on the dynamic tensile strength and crack propagation characteristics of BD coal specimens are studied. The average dynamic indirect tensile strength of coal specimens increases first and then decreases with the static axial pre-stress increasing. When no static axial pre-stress is applied, or the static axial pre-stress is 30% of the static tensile strength, the dynamic indirect tensile strength of coal specimens shows an increase trend as the loading rate increases. When the static axial pre-stress is 60% of the static tensile strength, the dynamic indirect tensile strength shows a fluctuant trend as the loading rate increases. According to the crack propagation process of coal specimens recorded by high-speed camera, the impact velocity influences the mode of crack propagation, while the static axial pre-stress influences the direction of crack propagation. The failure of coal specimens is a coupled tensile-shear failure under high impact velocity. When there is no static axial pre-stress, tensile cracks occur in the vertical loading direction. When the static axial pre-stress is applied, the number of cracks perpendicular to the loading direction decreases, and more cracks occur in the parallel loading direction.The study of the dynamic mechanical properties of rock is a key topic in rock mechanics research, and is significant to those interested in underground excavation engineering Many scholars focus on the dynamic compressive properties of rock at first. Shan et al. Scholars have done a lot of research on the mechanical properties of rocks under dynamic loading, which promoted the understanding of the dynamic mechanical properties of rocks. As a kind of rock between hard and soft rocks, coal has its special mechanical properties. Whether the mechanical properties of coal under dynamic loading are the same with that of other hard rocks needs further study. As a rock material that provides energy, coal has certain dynamic mechanical properties attracting a number of researchers. In terms of the compressive mechanical properties of coal, Li et al. Scholars have conducted extensive research on the mechanical properties of coal under purely dynamic loading. However, when researchers study the dynamic mechanical properties of coal, the dynamic load is mainly considered as the main factor, while the influence of the static load is ignored. However, both dynamic and static loads play important roles in deep rock dynamic disasters. Many studies have shown that a violent failure process would occur in the coal-rock-strata system under the superimposed effect of dynamic and static load As the SHPB is one of the most effective methods of obtaining the dynamic mechanical properties of rock and rock-like materials The SHPB device is used when studying the mechanical properties of materials at high strain rates. It is an important means to conduct explosion and impact mechanics experiments Under impact pressure, the bullet hits the incident bar with an impact velocity. The generated stress wave pushes forward at the speed of The stress signal cannot be recorded directly by the experimental system. The incident strain The incident bar and transmitted bar should be flexible throughout the experiment. According to the one-dimensional stress wave hypothesis, the specimen and two bars are always in a one-dimensional stress state, and the stress is only axial. The problem can be analyzed by one-dimensional elastic wave theory. In the Brazilian experiment, the indirect tensile strength of the specimen is To investigate the fracture behaviour of coal under coupled static-dynamic loading, an SHPB loading system in the North China University of Technology is used to load BD coal specimens. The size of the BD specimens is the general size of the rock specimens for the Brazilian split tests, with the diameter of 50 mm and height of 25 mm. The loading device for axial pressure is added to the end of the original SHPB experiment system, which provides a static axial pressure (see The experimental operation is as follows. First, a static load is applied to the specimen by the static axial pre-stress system. Then the nitrogen valve is opened, and the gas released from the cylinder makes the bullet hit the incident bar, generating a stress wave of sinusoidal shape. The stress wave propagates along the incident bar and divides into two parts (i.e. the reflected stress wave and transmitted stress wave) at the interface between the specimen and incident bar. The reflected stress wave returns to the incident bar, while the transmitted stress waves enter the transmitted bar. The signals are collected through strain gauges attached to the incident bar and transmitted bar. The strain gauges output the signals to obtain various parameters of the specimen. The bullet selected in the experiment is spindle-shaped. The semi-sinusoidal stress wave formed by the impact can realize constant strain rate loading. The typical impact stress wave signal is illustrated in The purpose of this experiment is to study the dynamic fracture mechanical characteristics of coal specimens under coupled static-dynamic loading conditions. The specimens ( To obtain the tensile mechanical properties of coal specimens under the coupled static-dynamic loading conditions, the static tensile mechanical properties of these specimens selected for the Brazilian test should first be measured. These disk specimens are labeled S-1, S-2, and S-3. During the coupled static-dynamic loading process, the different static axial pre-stress is applied on the specimens. As explained, dynamic disasters that occur in the deep coal mines are based on high static load and triggered by a dynamic load, so the static load should be high enough to simulate the real failure state of a coal block in a typical mining project. Li et al. In SHPB tests, the bullet is pushed by the suddenly released liquid nitrogen to obtain an impact velocity. The impact velocity of the bullet is affected by many factors, the most important of which is the pressure of liquid nitrogen. The greater the pressure of the released liquid nitrogen is, the greater the impact velocity of the bullet is. But in addition to this factor, man-made operating factors also affect the impact velocity of the bullet. So the speed of the bullet cannot be controlled precisely. The final impact velocity of the bullet can only be measured after experimental process. Therefore, the impact velocity of each specimen is different, which is selected as the other factor. The WDW-100E microcomputer-controlled electronic universal testing machine is used to conduct the Brazilian test. The displacement control mode is selected as the loading mode, and the loading rate is 0.02 mm/min. The uniaxial tensile strengths of the three specimens are 0.78, 0.85, and 1.26 MPa, respectively. The average tensile strength is 0.96 MPa. According to the results of the static Brazilian tests, 30% of the static load strength, i.e. 0.289 MPa, and 60% of the static load strength, i.e. 0.578 MPa, are taken as the experimental static axial pre-stress variables. That is, the specimens in group A are tested without static axial pre-stress, the static axial pre-stress on specimens in group B is 0.289 MPa, and the static axial pre-stress on specimens in group C is 0.578 MPa. To study the crack propagation during the loading process, a high-speed camera Fast-cam-SA5 (16G) is used to record the fracture process of the specimens. The high-speed camera can continuously take 16 photos, with a frame rate of 75000 fps. The operation process of SHPB tests is omitted, and those interested in the operation can refer to some previous studies 12 sets of valid data are obtained from 21 experimental specimens, and four sets of valid data are acquired for each set of static axial pre-stress. Since the coupled static-dynamic loading test involves many test factors, the strain gauges are easy to break under the action of high-speed impact. During the tests in this study, some specimens failed to obtain experimental results due to the strain gauge breakage. Although there were seven specimens in each group, only the experimental results of four specimens were obtained. In this section, the crack propagation and the dynamic indirect tensile strength of coal specimens under coupled static-dynamic loading are analyzed. During the tests, the crack propagation of the specimens during the whole process is photographed synchronously by the high-speed camera. During the experimental process, the broken pieces of coal damaged the camera lens, which led to the failure process of the specimens, A-6 and A-7, being not captured successfully. Although the dynamic fracture processes of A-6 and A-7 were not captured, the SHPB experimental process was normal, and the stress waves obtained by SHPB were reliable. Firstly, the general rule of crack propagation of coal specimens under coupled static-dynamic loading is analyzed. The stress and crack propagation characteristics of coal specimen A-3 are shown in To demonstrate the crack propagation process of the specimens, each specimen is displayed with eight images. The specimen before the impact of the incident bar is displayed in the first image. The crack propagation process of the specimen is displayed in the second to fifth images. The evolution of failure and final damage results of the specimen is shown in images six to eight. It can be found that the time for crack propagation from initiation to failure of the specimen captured by the high-speed camera is longer than the time to onset of damage of the specimen on the stress–strain curve.   Based on the results captured by the high-speed camera, the length of each crack on the specimen surface at a certain time was measured. All the measured crack lengths are added to obtain the actual total crack length on the specimen at a certain time, as shown in (1) Compaction stage (0–100 μs, section (2) Crack derivation stage (100–200 μs, section (3) Crack propagation stage (200–500 μs, section (4) Complete failure stage (>500 μs, section 12 sets of valid data are obtained from 21 experimental specimens, and four sets of valid data are acquired for each set of static axial pre-stress. The dynamic stress and force balance are verified. The relationship between the tensile stress and loading time of the specimen can be obtained by Eqs. The dynamic indirect tensile strength of coal specimens is affected by the loading rate and impact velocity, as shown in The influence of the impact velocity on the dynamic indirect tensile strength of the specimens is also presented in Compared with the average tensile strength of specimens in Group A, Group B, and Group C, the average dynamic tensile strength is 4.35, 6.28, and 3.65 MPa, respectively. Therefore, as the static axial pre-stress increases, the average dynamic indirect tensile strength of the specimens increases first and then decreases. To quantitatively explain the combined effects of dynamic and static factors, a functional relationship between the dynamic indirect tensile strength, loading rate, and static pre-stress is fitted as Eq. For most specimens in the coupled static-dynamic tests, To explain the effect of the static axial pre-stress on the tensile mechanical properties of coal specimens under coupled static-dynamic loading, the diameter of coal fragments after tests is analyzed. The coal fragments are screened using sieves with a square aperture of side-length of 10, 3, and 0.6 mm, respectively ( From According to some studies, a certain static axial pre-stress can play a role in inhibiting rock crack propagation The crack propagation process further verifies the rationality of the aforementioned discussion. For specimens in Group A, reflective stress waves increase the number of tensile cracks in the direction normal to the applied loading direction (see A-3 in Coupled static-dynamic loading tests are conducted on BD coal specimens using a modified SHPB instrument. The effects of the loading rate, static axial pre-stress and impact velocity on the dynamic tensile properties and crack propagation characteristics of the specimens are studied. The conclusions are as follows. With the increase in the static axial pre-stress, the dynamic indirect tensile strength of the specimen first increases, and then decreases. When no static axial pre-stress is applied, or the static axial pre-stress is 30% of the static tensile strength, the dynamic indirect tensile strength of coal specimens shows an increase trend as the loading rate increases. When the static axial pre-stress is 60% of the static tensile strength, the dynamic indirect tensile strength shows a fluctuant trend as the loading rate increases. The influence of the impact velocity on the indirect tensile strength is not obvious. The static axial pre-stress influences the direction of crack propagation. When there is no axial compression, tensile cracks develop normally to the applied loading direction. When the static axial pre-stress is applied to the specimens, the number of cracks in the loading direction decreases, and more cracks occur parallel to the loading direction. The impact velocity influences the mode of crack propagation. The failure of coal specimens is a coupled tensile-shear failure at high impact velocity. As a typical rock material, coal has strong anisotropy characteristics due to the existence of bedding and cleats, so the anisotropy of the dynamic tensile mechanical properties of coal under coupled static-dynamic loading needs further discussion. In addition, water–rock interaction is another factor worth considering, especially in the construction of ground reservoirs in coal mines. The dynamic mechanical properties of coal under water–rock interaction are also a subject worthy of study. This article is supported by the