In order to study the deformation behavior of fine-grained sandstone subjected to cyclic loading, a series of triaxial cyclic compression tests were performed under different confining pressures in the laboratory. Each of the tests combined constant-amplitude cyclic loading and increasing-amplitude cyclic loading. The experimental results showed that the evolutions of the elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio with cycles had 3 variation modes according to the applied deviatoric stress. Within a given stress level, the axial and lateral irreversible strain initially increased with a decreasing rate, followed by steady-state increases before failure. When the specimens approached failure, an accelerated increase in the irreversible strain occurred. Under lower stress levels, the volumetric strain was characterized by compaction-dominated behavior. However, it changed from compaction to dilation within each loading cycle under higher stress levels. SEM (scanning electron microscope) tests were conducted on unruptured specimens to study the deformation mechanism of the fine-grained sandstone during cyclic loading. This marks the beginning of a study that aims to provide a reference to the design, construction, and operation of hydropower stations in China.Rock serves as building material in many engineering applications, such as hydropower engineering, mining engineering, petroleum engineering, road engineering and other engineering applications In the past few decades, extensive work has been carried out to study the response of rock to cyclic loading. In general, 2 types of experiments are performed: the constant-amplitude cyclic loading experiment and the increasing-amplitude cyclic loading experiment. Research that leverages constant-amplitude cyclic loading experiments have shown that the fatigue strength and deformation behavior of rock typically depends on the amplitudes Sandstone is a clastic sedimentary rock that has been widely used in many engineering applications The previous works cited above primarily focused on the deformation properties of sandstone subjected to uniaxial cyclic loading. Rock materials encountered in applied engineering are typically in a triaxial cyclic loading state. Moreover, sandstones can be divided into coarse sandstone 2–0.5 mm), medium sandstone 0.5–0.25 mm) and fine-grained sandstone 0.25–0.0625 mm) according to the grain size, and could have different of sand size sediments. The grain size of sandstone has been proven to affect the mechanical properties significantly Therefore, in this paper, we reported the results of a series of triaxial cyclic compression tests on fine-grained sandstone. The triaxial cyclic loading and unloading path is a combination of constant-amplitude cyclic loading and increasing-amplitude cyclic loading. Before the cyclic loading tests, monotonic loading tests were performed to obtain the static mechanical properties of sandstone. Finally, SEM tests were conducted on the specimens from the cyclic loading tests in order to discuss the mechanism of irreversible deformation. The overall goal of this study was to determine the deformation evolution process of fine-grained sandstone. The experimental results could provide important reference for the design, construction and operation of hydropower stations. The specimens used in this test included compact sandstone collected from a dam site in the Yunnan province of China. The sandstone was an off-white fine-grained (average grain size was 0.23 mm) rock material with an average connected porosity of 2.21% and a bulk density of 2608 kg/m The joint surface of the sandstone was quite clear and the angle between the horizontal planes was approximately 25°–30°. The sandstone was drilled from an ancient river covering layer which was located 50 m underground. After polishing and cutting, the cylindrical specimens with 50 mm in diameters and 100 mm in lengths were prepared according to the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM). A servo-controlled rock mechanics experimental system was used to complete all the experiments. Both the deviatoric stress and confining pressure were loaded by 2 separated servo-controlled pumps, which had maximum loading capacities of 375 MPa and 60 MPa, respectively. Axial strain ε In order to investigate the deformation behavior of sandstone, 2 types of triaxial tests were carried out. The first was the monotonic loading test which is the conventional triaxial compression test, and the second was a cyclic loading test. These tests were performed under the confining pressures of 1, 3, and 5 MPa. To perform the monotonic triaxial tests, the confining pressure was loaded to the desired value at a rate of 0.5 MPa/s. After that, deviatoric stress was applied to the top end of the specimen with a constant loading rate of 7.5 MPa/min until failure was reached in order to obtain the critical stress points of the sandstone under different confining pressures. The specific cyclic loading path, shown in The confining pressure was loaded to the desired value at a controlled rate of 0.5 MPa/s. The specimens were loaded to the first level of deviatoric stress at a rate of 7.5 MPa/min, and then the deviatoric stress was unloaded to approximately 10% of the peak stress at the same strain rate. In each subsequent loading-unloading cycle, the maximum and minimum stresses were the same as the previous cycle. Each stress level was repeated thirty times. The deviatoric stress was increased to the second stress level, while each stress level was increased by 20 MPa. The cyclic loading of the deviatoric stress was carried out in the same fashion as step 2 with thirty cyclic loads. The third and next level of deviatoric stress was applied the same as step three. The conventional triaxial compression tests were carried out to obtain the critical stress points of the sandstone specimens and to determine the test parameters for the cyclic loading tests. The test conditions of the triaxial cyclic compression tests, which were determined from the conventional triaxial compression tests, are given in The elastic modulus reflects the related stress to strain. It is susceptible to crack initiation, propagation, and coalescence. Therefore, the quantification of changes in the elastic modulus facilitates understanding of how cyclic loading affects rock material deformation. In this paper, the elastic modulus for each loading and unloading cycle was calculated from the following: The evolution of the elastic modulus with increasing cycles under different confining pressures is plotted in The influence of the stress level on the elastic modulus under the confining pressure of 5 MPa is given in The evolution of Poisson’s ratio with increasing cycles under different confining pressures is plotted in The deformation parameters, with respect to the cycle number, have been extensively studied. In summary, the performed experiments could be characterized into increasing-amplitude cyclic loading tests and constant-amplitude cyclic loading tests. For instance, Ma et al. The irreversible strain is defined as the strain at which the deviatoric stress reduces to the minimum stress. Based on the experimental results, in this section we will discuss the evolution of the irreversible strain with respect to the cycle number and stress level. The changes of irreversible axial strains as a function of the number of loading cycles are presented in The evolution of irreversible strains at the end of each stress level with respect to axial strain is given in In summary, the irreversible strain tended to increase steadily after the attenuation increase. In order to discuss the effect of the stress level on the irreversible strain, the relationship between the steady increases of the axial irreversible strain rate and stress level is presented in Therefore, we concluded that both cycle number and stress level have significant effects on irreversible axial strain. The irreversible strain initially increased with a decreasing rate and then increased steadily. Finally, the increasing rate became faster before failure. It is well established that rock materials experience attenuation creep, steady state creep and tertiary creep stage during multi-stage creep tests The typical evolution curve of the volumetric strain with deviatoric stress is shown in The inflection point where the deformation of the specimen switched from compaction-dominated to dilation-dominated, and was characterized by crack damage stress The evolution of the irreversible volumetric strain with respect to cycle number is presented in In order to investigate the micromechanics of damage, SEM imaging was used to examine the thin section specimens prepared from the shear surface of the specimens tested under cyclic loading. The microstructure of fine-grained sandstone is shown in From the microstructural observations, it is assumed that the process of crack growth induced by cyclic loading is irreversible. In macro-scale mechanics, the specimen revealed the accumulation of irreversible strains. After the deformation exceeded the threshold, the specimen failed quickly. The bonds between the grains and the matrix as well as the loose mineral structure were responsible for the decrease in the elastic modulus during cyclic loading. With the development of China’s economy, a huge demand for electricity has resulted in the construction of many hydraulic engineering applications in Southwest China in recent decades. In particular, some of the projects are just outside cities and towns. In general, the discharged water of hydropower stations implies enormous energy use. In addition, the energy is different according to the outlet pores of the structures and the flood. The energy is applied by cyclic loading at the dam foundation, underground powerhouse and surrounding constructions. This has a huge impact on the safety of the engineering buildings, production, and life of the residents. Therefore, this paper designed a test procedure to combine the constant-amplitude cyclic loading and increasing-amplitude cyclic loading to reveal the development of deformation behavior of fine-grained sandstone with respect to cycle number and applied stress. Even though only a limited number of tests (three cyclic tests) were conducted on the fine-grained sandstone specimens, the experimental results could provide a reference for engineering applications. The results showed that when the applied stress was higher than the critical value ( However, it should be noted that our experiments were conducted on intact sandstone. Natural rock masses always have heterogeneities because they are broken by joints, fractures, bedding planes, rock cleavage, foliation, shear zones, and faults In this study, a series of triaxial cyclic compression tests were carried out on fine-grained sandstone under different confining pressures. The test procedure is a combination of the constant-amplitude cyclic loading and increasing-amplitude cyclic loading tests. According to the experimental results, the evolution of the deformation parameters with respect to cycle number depends on applied stress. There were 2 levels of critical stresses. When the stress was less than Within a given stress level, the axial and lateral irreversible strains experienced attenuated increases, and the subsequent steady state increased before failure. When the specimens approached failure, accelerated increases in the irreversible strains occurred. An exponential equation could be used to describe the relationship between the steady increase of the irreversible axial strain rate and applied stress level, while an empirical model was proposed to characterize the irreversible axial strain during cyclic loading. In this model, the effects of the stress level and the number of cycles are taken into account. Under lower stress levels, the volumetric strain was characterized by compaction-dominated behavior. However, it changed from compaction to dilation within each cycle loading under higher stress levels. The inflection point, which revealed the transition of volumetric strain from compaction to dilation, decreased with the cycle number. Additionally, the irreversible volumetric strain changed non-monotonically with the cycle number. SEM tests were conducted on unruptured specimens to study the deformation mechanism of fine-grained sandstone during cyclic loading. The results demonstrated that cracks initiated and propagated in the matrix, and the structure became looser during cyclic loading, even though the specimens did not fail. The work presented in this paper was financially supported by the