As a separation process, a paste thickener produces underflow with a high solids concentration. Such underflow leads to a high rake torque which could cause serious operational problems such as underflow blockage, pumping problems and potential donut formation. In this work, a model predictive control approach has been developed to control the underflow solids concentration subject to operational constraints. State observers including linear and extended Kalman filters are studied to determine a cost-effective approach to estimating the solids concentration profile in the paste thickener, which is important for thickener control. A rake torque model is validated with industrial plant data. By utilising the monotonic property of the rake torque model, a linear model predictive control (MPC) approach is developed to deal with the nonlinear constrained control problem. Using an industrial paste thickener as a case study, simulation results demonstrates that the proposed control approach, including an extended Kalman filter, can effectively regulate the underflow solids concentration within permissible operating windows, preventing rake lifting and pumping problems.bed volume disturbance diameter of particle consolidation function Kynch batch flux density function Engquist-Osher numerical function gravitational acceleration compressibility parameter Kalman filter gain steady state Kalman filter gain number of states parameter related to particle shape prediction horizon compressive yield stress function constant in underflow removal rate feed flow rate cross-sectional area torque time control trajectory input variable/control action measurement noise settling velocity volume of discretised cell solids inventory plant noise weight percent output variable the height from the bottom of the thickener thickener height density difference time interval height of discretised cell slack variable used for soft constraints viscosity solids concentration (volume fraction) critical concentration underflow solids concentration desired solids concentration feed solids concentration “composite” solids concentration maximum solids concentration density of fluid density of particle yield stress optimal upper bound of constrained variable lower bound of constrained variable  estimated variable Minerals and coal processing plants generate an enormous amount of waste and they are regarded as the world’s largest waste producers ( Among several dewatering techniques, thickening is the most commonly applied as it is the most economical method (as compared to other dewatering techniques, e.g., filtration In the past few decades, thickeners have been undergoing technological changes and innovations in harmony with the advances in flocculant chemistry ( Nevertheless, the operation of paste thickeners also poses several practical challenges. One of these challenges is the tight operating window as a small change in the underflow solids concentration can have a major impact on the properties (e.g., pumpability and flowability) of the underflow ( The tight operating window requires a control strategy which can effectively handle operational constraints to ensure that the process variables are regulated within acceptable ranges. The variability in feed properties and changes in operating conditions demand an appropriate control strategy which can mitigate the effects of external disturbances. All of these challenges necessitate an advanced control strategy in paste thickeners to effectively and efficiently control this complex, multivariable process. A number of thickener control approaches have been reported in the literature. For example, Betancourt et al. suggested a feedforward-feedback strategy based on a proportional-integral (PI) controller to provide regulatory control for solids inventory ( The above review shows that most existing thickener control approaches were developed for conventional thickeners using simple proportional control, PI control or fuzzy logic control. The development of advanced control strategies for paste thickeners is still in its infancy. Most current control approaches developed for conventional thickeners do not achieve adequate performance in paste thickeners which involves much tighter operating windows than conventional thickeners. Motivated by this research gap, this article proposes an advanced model-based control approach to regulate underflow solids concentration subject to operational constraints, particularly the rake torque constraint to mitigate the current operational difficulties faced in the industry. A model-based control approach requires a model of rake torque. As limited rake torque models for control purposes have been reported in the literature, a model of rake torque is derived in this work. In computing the rake torque, information on solids concentration profile in paste thickeners is very important. Therefore, linear and extended Kalman filters are developed and studied to determine a cost-effective approach to estimating the solids concentrations in the paste thickener. The rake torque model is then validated with plant data. Using the monotonic property of the rake torque model, the nonlinear constrained MPC problem is reduced to a standard linear constrained MPC problem. An MPC is designed to control the underflow solids concentration subject to the operational constraints, as an effort to improve water recovery without deteriorating the underflow rheological properties. Simulation studies are carried out to investigate the efficacy of the proposed control system. This paper is organised as follows. Section This section presents the mathematical model which is used to describe thickening in paste thickeners. In Section  the clarification zone where the concentration of the suspension is very low and it is essentially free from solids particles; the hindered settling zone. In the hindered settling zone, the solids concentration would have reached a point where solids particles are not free to settle independently due to the presence of other solids particles; the compression zone. At the critical concentration The paste thickening process can be described using the sedimentation-consolidation model as follows ( For control purposes, Incorporating the boundary conditions at the top and bottom of the thickener gives the dynamics at the feed ( With known initial condition Rake torque is closely related to the rheological properties of a suspension. While the mathematical development of thickening based on first principles has been widely studied ( Bojcic proposed a rake torque model which is based on the geometry and dimension of rake arms and scraper blades ( On the other hand, Rudman et al. adopted a different approach to study the rake torque. Instead of focusing on the geometrical rake design, they investigated the relation between rake torque and yield stress on a pilot scale thickener. Based on the experimental results, a linear relation between rake torque and yield stress of the underflow was proposed ( The model in In this work, we derived a rake torque model as a function of solids concentration. The model requires the measurement of underflow solids concentration and hence does not suffer from the above shortcomings. Nevertheless, it should be emphasised that effects such as aggregate densification ( As the solids concentration of a suspension increases, the property of the thickened suspension proceeds from being Newtonian to non-Newtonian. This marks the formation of a network within the suspension. There are two types of yield stress, i.e., the compressive yield stress and the shear yield stress. The compressive yield stress, The compressive yield stress is closely related to the yield stress since both properties depend on the ability of a suspension to accommodate stress ( Moreover, under the condition of constant flocculant addition, it has been suggested that these two properties can be approximated by a linear relationship ( Using the linear relation presented in Section Consider an industrial paste thickener operated in New South Wales, Australia with a rake design as shown in As solids concentrations in the rake section cannot be readily measured, a state observer is required to estimate these solids concentrations. The state observer uses the process model and the available output measurement to retrieve the desired state information. In this case study, solids concentrations in the rake section are critical for the following reasons: The rake torque is determined by the “composite” solids concentration. This concentration dictates the rheological properties, and hence the pumpability of the underflow; and The knowledge of these solids concentrations can improve the control system in regulating the process such that to prevent the possibility of donut formation, which happens in the rake section. In this work, we investigate the applications of different Kalman filters (i.e., state observers) to determine a cost-effective approach to estimating the solids concentration profile (i.e., the state variables): the linear and extended Kalman filters. A linear Kalman filter applies to linear process models. For this application, a linear time-invariant model can be obtained by linearising In the study of the extended Kalman filter ( The difference between the linear and extended Kalman filters lies in the computational complexity and the estimation accuracy. While plant data of the feed solids concentration, feed flowrate, bed volume, rake torque and underflow rate and solids concentration are available, the concentration profile in the paste thickener is not available. Therefore, a simulation study was carried out to determine which type of Kalman filter is required for paste thickener control (e.g., whether the linear Kalman filter is sufficient to deal with the nonlinearity of the paste thickener). In this simulation study, the nonlinear model in  Although implementation of a linear Kalman filter requires much less computational power than an extended Kalman filter (as observed from the normalised execution time, which is calculated by taking the execution time of the linear Kalman filter as the basis), the linear Kalman filter gives completely unrealistic values of the solids concentrations due to the nonlinear dynamics of the state variables, as shown in In this simulation, the following plant data are used as inputs to the dynamic model: feed flow rate The estimated solids concentrations in the rake section is shown in With the state information, we can calculate the rake torque (as a percentage of the maximum allowable) and compare it with the measured torque. From In this work, an MPC approach is developed for paste thickeners. In MPC, the controller computes an optimal control trajectory by solving a constrained finite horizon optimisation problem ( The desired solids concentration can be achieved by minimising the following cost function: The MPC is subject to the dynamic constraint (i.e., the process model): According to the rake torque model  As Eqs. As the aim of the MPC controller is to find the optimal control action, the minimisation of cost function The solution to This section presents a case study using an industrially operated paste thickener with a diameter of 18 To illustrate the effect of rake torque constraint on the control performance, two cases are investigated: (1) control system with rake torque constraint and (2) control system without the rake torque constraint.   The control study presented in this article assumed constant flocculation. However, chemistry-related operating parameters, e.g., flocculant addition of different ionic natures can have an effect on the settling velocity and compression characteristics, hence affecting the rake torque. For example, low anionic flocculants with high molecular weight provide high settling rates at lower dosages compared to nonionic and cationic flocculants ( In this work, an MPC control strategy is developed for paste thickeners which controls the underflow solids concentration subject to operational constraints, particularly the rake torque constraint. Computation of the rake torque requires accurate estimation of the solids concentration profile. Studies were carried out on (1) a linear Kalman filter and (2) an extended Kalman filter. Our results show that the nonlinearity of the paste thickener dynamics warrants the implementation of the extended Kalman filter as the linear Kalman filter produces poor state estimation that is unusable for control purposes. By utilising the monotonic property of the rake torque model, the nonlinear rake torque constrained control problem is solved using a linear constrained MPC approach, which can be implemented in real-time control systems due to its low computational complexity. Simulation studies have shown that the proposed approach can effectively control the rake torque within operating windows. Future work includes the development of a flocculation model which can be integrated into the proposed control system to control the flocculant addition rate while constraining the rake torque within permissible operating windows, thus providing a more comprehensive control system. Another possible future work includes two-dimensional modelling which considers solids concentration variations in the radial direction. This will help gain a better insight on the process dynamics and accurately predicting the abnormality occurring in the operation of paste thickeners. This is a follow-up research from the project funded by In the linear Kalman filter, The covariance The Kalman gain matrix usually experiences a transient and then approach to a steady-state value. To simplify the analysis, a constant steady state gain as in In extended Kalman filter, a time-varying Kalman filter gain