Metatarsal fractures represent a significant proportion of all foot injuries. Patients present with pain and difficulty with ambulation either after a traumatic insult or an increase in activity level. Diagnosis requires a foot X-ray series and tarsometatarsal injuries may need to be excluded with a CT. Management is determined by patient factors and fracture pattern. The aim of treatment is to preserve the longitudinal and transverse arches of the forefoot and restore the alignment of the metatarsals to achieve normal weight distribution. Open fractures, fractures with sagittal plane displacement more than 10° or with 3–4 mm displacement in any other plane may benefit from surgical intervention. The majority are minimally displaced and can be treated with a walking boot or hard-soled shoe with arch support or non-weight bearing in a short leg cast for 6–8 weeks. Any suggestion of instability or displacement for the first metatatarsal will require surgical treatment. Proximal fifth metatarsal fractures have differing treatments depending on the location of the fracture.The aim of this article is to summarize the decision-making and management for metatarsal fractures. Metatarsal fractures are relatively common and can be a source of pain and disability in cases of malunion and non-union. These fractures are easy to treat with a positive prognosis. The overall aim of treatment is to restore the alignment of the metatarsals thereby maintaining the longitudinal and transverse arches of the forefoot. This allows normal weight distribution under the metatarsal heads. Non-displaced fractures and fractures of the second to fourth metatarsals with displacement in the axial plane can be treated conservatively with protected weight bearing in a hard-soled shoe or boot for 4–6 weeks. The fifth metatarsal is involved in up to 70% of metatarsal fractures and approximately 80% of these are proximal. The metatarsals are also a common site for stress fractures. Metatarsal fractures are one of the most common foot injuries, second only to toe fractures. They are ten times more common than metatarsal fracture-dislocations. In adults metatarsal fractures accounts for 35% of all foot fractures. Metatarsal fractures account for 61% of all foot fractures in children. The highest incidence of fracture in childhood involves the fifth metatarsal (45%) and the lowest incidence of fracture is the first metatarsal (22%). The range of injury to the metatarsals can be from an isolated simple metatarsal fracture to a crush injury with several comminuted fractures with or without joint involvement and severe soft tissue loss. These injuries can result from direct or indirect trauma. An example of direct trauma wound be a heavy object falling on the foot and an example of indirect trauma would be the result from twisting the leg and hindfoot with a fixed forefoot. They typically are the results of low-energy trauma. It has been proposed that avulsion fractures of the fifth metatarsal result from the pull of peroneus brevis during rapid inversion, but this has not been reproduced in cadaveric studies. It is thought that the cause of fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures is due to the lateral band of the plantar aponeurosis as it inserts on the tip of the tuberosity. Stress fractures result from repetitive microtrauma, which is seen in athletes, dancers and soldiers. Hence the historical term ‘march fracture’. There are risk factors associated with stress fractures of the second metatarsal including Morton's foot, amenorrhoea, anorexia nervosa and prolonged hypoestrogenism which cause a hyperloading syndrome. A study by Clutton et al showed that hypovitaminosis D was common in patients with fifth metatarsal fractures and therefore it should be part of regular practice to check for vitamin D levels in these patients and treat accordingly. The forefoot has two major purposes during gait. The first is that the five metatarsals and two sesamoids provide a broad plantar surface for load sharing. The second is that the mobile forefoot allows the metatarsal heads to maintain even load distribution on uneven ground. Therefore, displaced metatarsal fractures disrupt the weight-bearing complex of the foot and can lead to metatarsalgia due to excessive pressure on the metatarsal heads. The first metatarsal is the thickest, shortest and widest metatarsal. The base of the first metatarsal articulates with the medial cuneiform and is kidney-shaped. Two muscles attach to the base including the tibialis anterior at the plantar medial aspect, dorsiflexing the first ray, and the peroneus longus inserting onto the plantar lateral aspect causing plantarflexion of the first ray. No ligaments connect the base of the first and second ray, which allows for increase movement to deal with change in terrain during gait. The sesamoid bones are two of the six contact points of the forefoot. The dorsal metatarsal artery, first plantar metatarsal artery and superficial branch of the medial plantar artery serve as the blood supply. In addition to these vessels there is a nutrient artery, arising from the first dorsal artery, that enters the distal one third of the metatarsal. The base of the second metatarsal articulates with all three cuneiforms. The third metatarsal articulates with the lateral cuneiform and the fourth metatarsal articulates with the cuboid. In contrast to there being no connection between the bases of the first and second metatarsals, the second to fourth metatarsals have a series of three ligaments stabilizing each metatarsal to its neighbours ( Peroneus brevis inserts onto the proximal tuberosity of the fifth metatarsal along with the lateral slip of plantar fascia. Peroneus tertius inserts at the dorsal aspect of the proximal metaphyseal- diaphyseal junction. It balances the forefoot in dorsiflexion by counteracting the inverting force of tibialis anterior. Peroneus brevis with its everting force antagonises the inversion from tibialis posterior. The fifth metatarsal has strong ligamentous attachments to both the cuboid and lateral base of the fourth metatarsal. Medially, dorsal and plantar interossei arise and flexor digiti minimi arises at the base from the plantar aspect. A nutrient artery enters the medial cortex at the junction of the diaphyseal proximal and middle thirds. The base and tuberosity are supplied by secondary epiphyseal and metatarsal arteries (metaphyseal perforators). The dorsal and plantar metatarsal arteries supply the metatarsal head. A watershed area exists between the supply of the nutrient artery and the metaphyseal perforators which correlates to the area of poor healing in the clinical setting. AO (also known as the Association of the Study of Internal Fixation (ASIF)) gives the metatarsal fractures the number 83. The AO classification divides the fractures into extra-articular fractures (Type A), intraarticular fracture (Type B), fracture-dislocations (Type C) and pure dislocations (type D). AO further divides fractures into those involving the first metatarsal, second to fourth and fifth metatarsals. The first metatarsal fractures are subdivided into head, shaft and base. The second to fourth metatarsal fractures are divided into proximal metaphyseal, diaphyseal and subcapital. The fifth metatarsal fractures are divided into base (Jones fracture), base (metaphyseal avulsion), long oblique diaphyseal and multifragmentary diaphyseal. Distal metatarsal fractures are defined as fractures occurring distal to the mid-diaphyseal junction. The fifth metatarsal fracture was first described by Sir Robert Jones in 1902 in four cases including his own foot after suffering the fracture himself sustained while dancing. The term ‘Jones fracture’ is considered imprecise. It was later described by Stewart as a transverse fracture at the metaphyseal/diaphyseal junction which highlights a watershed in blood supply. Lawrence and Botte classified fifth metatarsal fractures as tuberosity avulsion fractures (zone 1), metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction fractures/Jones fractures (zone 2) and proximal shaft stress fractures (zone 3) ( A more recent critical evaluation of the evidence by Polzer et al proposed to classify acute fractures of the proximal fifth metatarsal into either metaphyseal fractures not extending beyond the distal end of the fourth to fifth intermetatarsal junction which should be treated functionally and meta-diaphyseal fractures located at the distal end of the fourth to fifth intermetatarsal articulation that require early intramedullary screw fixation. Their review suggested that zone 1 and zone 2 fractures regardless of displacement and comminution healed well with functional treatment but zone 3 fractures have a higher rate of failure when treated non-operatively in a non-weight bearing short leg cast. They advocated that early intramedullary screw fixation leads to a significantly shorter time to bone healing. A useful classification by Torg et al classifies proximal diaphyseal fifth metatarsal fractures into three types based on their healing potential and radiographic appearance. Torg et al distinguished between acute fractures without signs of intramedullary sclerosis, delayed fracture healing with a widened fracture line and intramedullary sclerosis and non-union with obliteration of the intramedullary canal. Soave et al have developed a novel classification system for distal shaft fractures ( Depending on the number of metatarsals involved and the aetiology a patient can complain of a mild ache on ambulating to an inability to weight bear. Frequently the forefoot is swollen, bruised and tender to palpation. You will only see gross foot deformity in severe injuries. Skin integrity should be assessed to rule out an open fracture and a crush injury may result in an internal degloving injury. It is important to examine the contralateral uninjured side first. Following this, start on the injured side away from the zone of most likely injury, so the patient is not guarded throughout the examination. It is important to record a neurovascular examination. In instances of a crush injury have a clinical suspicion for foot compartment syndrome. Fractures at the base of the second metatarsal should raise a suspicion of a Lisfranc injury. Stress fractures, commonly occurring at the second and third metatarsal necks and fifth metatarsal shaft, are a result of repetitive forefoot stresses. Patient with high arched feet are predisposed to stress fractures of the fifth metatarsal due to increased load on the lateral aspect of the foot. Initially stress fractures are diagnosed clinically. There is no history of trauma but often an increase in activity level. Physical examination reveals pinpoint tenderness over the stress fracture site. Typically, the pain is exacerbated with activity and alleviates with rest. You will not necessarily see a fracture on the plain film X-rays, but callus formation presents in the third to fourth weeks. The Ottawa Ankle and Foot rules should be applied to ordering a foot X-ray. A foot X-ray series is only required if there is pain in the midfoot zone and bone tenderness at the base of the fifth metatarsal or bone tenderness at the navicular or inability to bear weight both immediately and in the emergency department for four steps. Clinical judgement should prevail over these rules if the patient is intoxicated, uncooperative, has other distracting injuries, has diminished sensation in their legs or has gross swelling which prevents palpation of bony tenderness. The basic radiographic assessment includes the minimum of three views of the foot including anteroposterior (AP), 45° oblique and lateral. These images should include the whole foot. Acute stress fractures are commonly not identified on plain film. In these circumstances it is useful to get repeat X-rays in 10–14 days’ time when the radiolucent resorption line should be visible. MRI and CT are generally not necessary, but if a stress fracture is suspected in an athlete and not identifiable on plain X-ray an MRI remains the gold standard. When multiple metatarsals are fractured and there is a suspicion of a tarsometatarsal joint involvement, it is prudent to obtain a CT. Generally, all closed non-displaced metatarsal fractures can be treated non-operatively. Elite athletes have a tailored approach to treatment with the potential for surgery to reduce the time of immobility. Displacement in the sagittal plane can lead to altered weight distribution under the metatarsal heads which can result in painful callosities, mechanical metatarsalgia and neuroma formation so should be treated surgically. It is recommended by Shereff et al that reduction of a fracture with more then 3–4 mm of displacement and angulation of more than 10°. Initial management includes immobilization in a backslab plaster of Paris, crutches and non-weight bearing followed by a fracture clinic review within a week. Instruction for rest, ice, elevation and analgesia should be given. At fracture clinic repeat X-rays should be performed to confirm the level of displacement that is acceptable for nonoperative management. If the fracture is considered minimally displaced and stable the patient can be changed into a short leg walking cast or boot. The choice of immobilization depends on the patient's ability to ambulate with minimal pain. There is evidence which shows transitioning to a rigid-soled shoe or walking boot at 4–6 weeks with weight bearing as tolerated results in improved functional outcomes with no differences in healing time or pain. The first metatarsal supports roughly one-third of body weight and as such the maintenance of alignment is very important. Displacement in the axial plane should be corrected to avoid secondary deformities with altered load distribution such as post-traumatic hallux valgus. Weight bearing X-rays may be helpful to determine stability. Non-displaced stable fractures can be managed in a boot or hard-soled shoe weight bearing as tolerated, or in a more conservative approach non-weight bearing in a short leg cast for 4–6 weeks followed by protective weight bearing in a boot until radiographic or clinical evidence of union. Any suggestion of instability or displacement of first metatarsal fractures will require surgical treatment followed by a non-weight-bearing cast. The majority are minimally displaced and can be treated with a walking boot or hard soled shoe with arch support or non-weight bearing in a short leg cast for 6–8 weeks. A hard-soled shoe has the advantage of sparing the ankle joint from immobilization. Isolated fractures are considered stable secondary to the intermetatarsal ligaments present at the base and the neck to prevent displacement. Surgical treatment is recommended in any fracture with greater than 10° of angulation or greater than 3–4 mm of displacement in any plane. Displacement in the sagittal plane can lead to pain on loading and displacement in the transverse plane can lead to irritation of the inter-metatarsal nerve bundles.    A more recent critical evaluation of the evidence by Polzer et al proposed to classify acute fractures of the proximal fifth metatarsal into either metaphyseal fractures not extending beyond the distal end of the fourth to fifth intermetatarsal junction which should be treated functionally and meta-diaphyseal fractures located at the distal end of the fourth to fifth intermetatarsal articulation that require early intramedullary screw fixation ( It is becoming more common for orthopaedic services at hospitals in the UK to manage these fractures through the use of virtual fracture clinics. One centre in Scotland allows zone 1 and zone 2 (Jones) fractures to be mobilized as pain allows in a walker boot and are not followed up in fracture clinic. The patients are given an information leaflet to contact the fracture clinic if pain persists beyond 2 months and may need an operation at this stage if they are in the minority of patients that go on to a non-union. Metatarsal stress fractures are managed in a walking boot weight bearing as pain allows. A gradual return to previous level of activity is recommended to begin after resolution of painful symptoms. Athletes should be encouraged to maintain fitness levels by engaging in non-painful activities such as cycling, swimming and pool running. If a secondary causes of stress fracture is suspected additional blood tests and specialist referral may be indicated. Options for treating non-displaced metatarsal fractures include adhesive strapping/compressive dressing in combination with a stiff soled shoe/boot for 3–5 weeks, weight bearing as tolerated with medial longitudinal arch support to unload the metatarsal heads, a short leg walking cast for 4–6 weeks or a non-weight bearing cast for 3 weeks followed by a walking cast/boot for a further 3 weeks. The goals of surgery are to restore proper alignment of the metatarsal heads to restore the biomechanics of the forefoot. On the AP view there should be a normal curved ‘cascade’ (Lelièvre's parabola) appearance which should be symmetric with the other foot. Reconstructing this cascade ensures that the normal length of the metatarsals are restored. It is critical to restore the metatarsal heads to the same level by correcting deformity in the axial plane (    In cases of delayed union or non-union of zone 2 Jones fractures an intramedullary screw with or without bone grafting is recommended. If there is strong periosteal reaction screw or plate fixation will be satisfactory, but if there is intramedullary sclerosis and minimal periosteal reaction curettage and bone grafting will be needed. Screw fixation with a 4.5 mm partially threaded cancellous screw has been shown to be superior to tension band wiring. However, sometimes there is just too much comminution for screw fixation. The use of a cannulated screw has the advantage of ease of screw placement over a guidewire. A cadaver model comparing 4.5 mm cortical screws to 4.5 mm partially threaded cancellous cannulated screws in a simulated zone 2 fracture showed no difference from a biomechanical point of view. All non-displaced fractures and stress fractures can be managed non-operatively. The choice of treatment varies depending on number of metatarsal fractures involved, degree of displacement, patient history and radiological findings. There is no definitive literature that describes the exact amount of acceptable angulation and translation of neck and shaft fractures. The guidelines often sited are more than 10° of displacement in the sagittal plane and 3–4 mm of translation in any plane. Current literature supports less rigid immobilization and shorter period of time non-weight bearing to achieve a better functional outcome. The lack of randomized control trials comparing treatment options in the evidence base make it hard to set standardized evidence-based treatment algorithms. It is therefore important to take a patient centred approach to care. When dealing with an athlete, operative and non-operative treatment should be outlined, and the treatment course should be the patients’ preference. A study by Bigsby et al looking at the functional outcome of fifth metatarsal fractures found that while most patients see a steady improvement in their pain and function following their injury, 25–33% of patients continue to experience pain at 1 year. Less than 10% experience any limitation of their activities; however, patients should be advised about this at the time of injury. All figures were created by Alicja Moore.