The blends of carboxylated acrylonitrile butadiene rubber (XNBR), styrene-butadiene rubber with high styrene content (SBR) and natural rubber (NR) were prepared with different types of carbon black. The effect of filler on morphological and wear characteristics was studied. Intermediate super abrasion furnace (ISAF) carbon black showed improve result on curing study and mechanical properties by reacting at the interface between XNBR, SBR and NR matrix. Blends containing ISAF carbon black showed high abrasion resistant properties against Du-Pont abrader, DIN abrader and different mining rock surfaces and also was found to be the toughest rubber against all types of rock.Polymer blends are being used extensively in numerous applications; this statement is also true with rubber blends, especially in tyre manufacture. Apart from blends of common rubbers, specialty rubber is also being utilized, depending on service demands and components of the tyre There are several types of damage occurred in the dump-truck tyre such as tread detachment, sidewall cuts, impact ruptures, bead damage, etc. The wear of rubber is a complex phenomenon and dependent on a combination of processes such as Mechanical, Mechano-Chemical and Thermo-Chemical, etc. Schallamach The effort towards improving the efficiency of such transportation system is essential for reduce running costs and cutting down the end cost figures by using the XNBR, SBR and NR rubber blends. In this study, the cure characteristics, dynamic, morphological and mechanical properties of carbon black filled blends of NR, styrene-butadiene rubber with high styrene content (SBR) and carboxylated acrylonitrile butadiene rubber (XNBR) were investigated. These rubber compounds were examined in a specially fabricated experimental set-up for evaluating their wear resistance properties when abraded against various rock types. The parameters such as influence of composition of rubber vulcanizates on wear characteristics and the mechanism of wear of these compounds against different rocks were reported. A literature search shows a lack of studies about wear of XNBR, SBR with NR blends alone. With this work, we attempt to partially fill this gap. The acrylonitrile butadiene rubber used was Nipol N-34 grade, of Nippon Zeon Co. Ltd., Japan. Its specific gravity is 0.98, Mooney viscosity at 100 The compounding formulation for the XNBR, SBR and NR blends with its various ingredients were mixed in a two roll mill at a friction ratio of 1:2 following standard mixing sequence. Compounding formulations based on changing of the carboxylated acrylonitrile butadiene rubber (XNBR), styrene-butadiene rubber with high styrene content (SBR), and natural rubber (NR) contents were shown in The cure characteristics of the rubber compound were studied with the help of a Monsanto Oscillating Disc Rheometer (ODR–100 The crosslink density was determined by immersing a small amount (known mass) of sample in 100 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy was performed using a NEXUS 870 FT-IR (Thermo Nicolet) instrument in dry air at room temperature. Spectra were taken in the range of 4000–500 Vulcanized slabs were prepared by compression molding, and the dumb-bell shaped specimens were punched out from a molded sheet by using ASTM Die C. The tests were done by means of a universal tensile testing machine (Hounsfield H10KS) under ambient condition (25±2 Five samples were tested for each set of conditions, at the same elongation rate. The values of the tensile strength, modulus at 100% elongation, 300% elongation and elongation at break were averaged. The relative error was below 5%. The hardness was measured by Shore A hardness tester followed by ASTM D2240-05. DSC measurements were carried out using a Perkin-Elmer PYRIS Diamond DSC instrument. The samples (≤10 TGA studies were carried out Shimadzu-DT-40 instrument in presence of air at a rate of 10 The tensile fracture surface of the samples were studied in a scanning electron microscope (JSM-5800 of JEOL Co.; Acceleration voltage: 20 Heat build up study was carried out using Goodrich Flexometer for the selective compounds having higher tensile strength. The test pieces were prepared in cylindrical shape having diameter 17.8±0.15 DIN abrasion test was done by the DIN abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber recommended by the Indian Standards Institution vide IS:3400 (Part 3)—1987. For this test, a cylindrical elastomer sample was mounted in a rotating holder and abraded across the surface of a rotating abrasive drum for a distance of 40 The indigenous experimental set up was specially fabricated in our lab and the full arrangement of the experimental set up, preparation of rubber specimen and rock sample were already discussed in our earlier literature Total weight of 450, 900 and 1350 The optimum cure time for ‘B’, ‘E’ and ‘H’ rubber sample is higher than other rubber vulcanizates due to the mixing of ISAF N234 carbon black with XNBR, SBR and NR is shown in The torque difference ( Faster cure rate index is observed in The IR spectra of the different samples are shown in Similarly, a distinct peak at frequency 2920 Another important observation is that unlike Padella et al. Tensile strength, modulus, elongation at break, tear strength for all the compounds are shown in The mechanical property of rubber vulcanizates markedly depended on the number of conjugate double bonds and it is found for the sample ‘G’, ‘H’ and ‘I’. These observations suggest that more SBR and XNBR react with the carbon-carbon double bonds of ISAF N231 and slower the reversion reaction rate and hence increases the mechanical properties of the vulcanizates While for other blend types, mainly where XNBR percentage increased and SBR percentage decreased (Samples A to F), the tensile and tear strength is decreased, may be due to the effect of carbon black which suppresses the XNBR and SBR effect in the system and the filler is uniformly dispersed in the natural rubber matrix that can be attributed to the aggregation of XNBR and SBR To study the thermal response of the blends Differential Scanning Calorimetry has been performed. The DSC curves for all rubber vulcanizates are shown in In High temperature TGA (50–650 It is observed that the onset degradation temperature is higher for samples containing carbon black ISAF N231. The onset degradation temperature thereby probably decreased in the case of other rubber samples due to a decrease in cross link density. Cross linking increased the rigidity of the system, which in turn increased the thermal stability The tensile fracture samples are scanned after gold coating, and are represented in    This may be due to the effect of XNBR which is very much well known highly abrasion resistant elastomers. Hence, 20 and 15 The values of heat buildup for the compounds, those are having the tensile strength of more than 18 Since the low thermal conductivity of rubbers can result in a very high temperature at the interface, it is important to investigate the effects of frictional heating on the sliding friction of rubbers  Preparation of abrasion resistant tyre tread rubber with the help of an open two-roll-mixing mill represents a novel method for making cost effective rubber products. The NR with addition of XNBR and SBR obtained from this process has very good mechanical properties which can be withstand the rugged working condition of dump truck tyre. The optimum cure time for rubber sample mixing of ISAF N234 carbon black with XNBR, SBR and NR is higher than other rubber vulcanizates. In this blend system, faster cure rate index is observed for the compounds containing SAF N110 and ISAF N234 type carbon black may be due to the rise in temperature at the time of mixing. Tensile strength increases with carbon black ISAF N231, may be due to the outstanding reactivity of the carbon black acting as filler, increases the properties of the samples with 70 The authors are deeply grateful to I-Cube Centre, Gyeongsang National University, South Korea and Coal India Limited, Kolkata for their kind assistance. Also, special thanks to the members of the project and key laboratory of Materials Science Centre and Central Research Facility at IIT, Kharagpur.