Negative emissions technologies (NETs), which result in the removal of CO2 from the atmosphere, will be necessary to limit global warming to 2 °C. Unlike point-source CO2 capture, NETs are agnostic to the emission source, and reduce the existing atmospheric CO2 concentration. This enables NETs to address distributed emissions from transportation and past emissions that have led to existing atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Despite their critical necessity, there are relatively few NETs that have been developed, and existing technologies do not have sufficiently detailed techno-economic analyses to allow comparison for the purpose of strategic investment and policy decisions. An analysis was performed of the economic feasibility of a novel platform of candidate NETs – indirect ocean capture (IOC) – through industry-validated economic and chemical process modeling supported by inputs from a prototype system. This manuscript details the development of a high-fidelity estimate of the cost of avoided CO2 emissions from this NET by coupling scaled experiments to economic analyses. For the lowest-cost scenario of co-location with a desalination plant, a likely cost of $604 per metric ton of avoided CO2 (tCO2) was found, and a best-case cost of $373/tCO2. Through improvements to unit processes, creative process optimization, and reduced carbon-neutral electricity prices, the cost of IOC negative emissions may be reduced in the future. Although NETs won’t likely require deployment for several years in order to limit warming to 2 °C, an objective techno-economic assessment of the options on the table will ensure that the best technology is developed and ready when deployment is required.Climate models indicate that to limit global warming to 2 °C, negative emissions technologies (NETs) must be deployed as early as 2020 ( Various NETs have been explored ( Herein is presented an economic evaluation of a new NET platform (Indirect Ocean Capture, IOC) using inputs from our custom-built prototype system. Our work quantitatively assesses the cost of IOC and includes realistic, present-day costs for all input parameters. The IOC system is a platform of ocean-chemistry approaches to negative emissions, and its design and performance characterization is described in a concurrently published article in this issue ( Below is presented an integrated process design and cost analysis of IOC, enabling the analysis and understanding of synergies, sensitivities, and opportunities for future cost reduction. Two possible IOC process flows are considered – one that extracts carbon as CO In the first stage of the acid process, hollow-fiber membrane contactors (not shown in In the base process ( A fully integrated techno-economic model for IOC was developed to quantify the interplay between technical performance, system design, location, and cost ( The process scale was based on a plant that could extract 20 kmol(CO The following describes the sequence of operations involved in calculating the CO       There are synergies between IOC and both desalination plants and seawater-cooled power plants that make co-location attractive for process intensification savings. At coastal power plants, ocean intake and outfall already exists, and pumping energy and infrastructure is already constructed and maintained. Additionally, the minerals in the used cooling water are typically more concentrated than seawater, resulting in a more capital-efficient extraction of CO A best-case economic scenario is one in which co-location with a desalination plant assumes that the costs of pumping, pretreatment, and intake/outfall piping and permitting are already paid for by the desalination plant. For the “best-case’ cost assessment, these costs are not included in the total cost of CO For the base process, an alternative to using desalination brine as input as shown in A full cost breakdown was performed for both the acid and base processes, considering three possible scenarios: IOC co-location with a desalination plant, IOC co-location with a power plant, and a stand-alone IOC plant. For all calculations, the energy inputs into the IOC process are assumed to be carbon-free, meaning that the volume of avoided CO  Co-location with related processes does improve the economics of IOC, but also limits the total available capacity for CO For power plants, approximately 927 million m To ultimately have an impact on the scale of ∼ 1 GtCO Other variations on these processes can be imagined that may significantly reduce the cost. For example, looking at the costs for the ED subsystem alone in A sensitivity analysis was performed on the model to identify opportunities for improvement. The results in As shown in To reduce costs, systems engineering and membrane development for the electrodialysis and gas extraction sub-systems are needed. For example, a much less expensive gas removal system, either cheaper membrane contactors or a different system altogether, could significantly reduce the cost of the acid process. Future costs may also be reduced via synergies with other processes that have not been discussed in detail, such as mineral extraction from seawater, or forward osmosis, which would create a brine solution with a very high DIC concentration as input to the IOC process. Whether IOC represents the most competitive economic case for negative emissions is an open question until comparable studies are presented on other NETs, and further investigation is made into cost reduction measures for IOC. A comparison of the costs of avoided CO Since NETs must begin deployment as soon as 2020 to prevent warming beyond 2 °C, the costs of all candidate NETs must be comparably assessed to identify the most promising R&D path ( M.D.E. and J.L.B.R. contributed equally, leading the writing of the paper, with contributions from all authors in writing the drafts. The cost model was developed by S.D.K., with contributions from M.D.E., J.L.B.R., K.C. and C.-F. de L. The lab prototype was designed and built by J.L.B.R., C.-F. de L., and A. J. Experiments were conducted and experimental data collected by J.L.B.R., C.-F. de L., and A. J. Data was analyzed by M.D.E., J.L.B.R., C.-F. de L., A. J., and S.D.K. Figures were conceptualized and produced by M.D.E. and J.L.B.R. R.W.D. and K.C. managed the project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors, and do not represent those of a particular governmental agency or private company. The authors would like to thank Norine Chang for SEM measurements, Kyoung Jin Lee and Cory Lancaster for system development and operation, many members of the PARC technical staff for lab assistance, Luc Botte for advice and guidance on the electrodialysis system, Mohamad Saad for consultation on desalination technology, and Prof. Wallace Broecker, Prof. Klaus Lackner, Philippe Larochelle, Rohinton Mehta, and Obi Felten for project guidance and suggestions. All authors acknowledge support from X. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: