Background
                  The aim of this study was to systematically evaluate the available literature on technique and outcomes of percutaneous arthroscopic calcaneal osteosynthesis for displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A systematic review of the literature available in MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library database was performed, including studies from January 1985 to august 2018. The literature search, data extraction, and quality assessment were conducted by 2 independent reviewers. The surgical technique and perioperative management, clinical outcomes scores, radiographic outcomes and complication rate were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  Of 66 reviewed articles, 8 studies met the inclusion criteria. The included studies reported on the results of 152 patients. At last follow up the mean American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society ankle-hindfoot was ranging from 72.1 to 94.1. The complication rate was low, including only one superficial infection.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The studies included were of too little level of evidence to allow for data pooling or meta-analysis. However, the percutaneous arthroscopic calcaneal osteosynthesis seems to be a good option for displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures with a low complication rate. Appropriately powered randomized controlled trials with long-term follow up are needed to confirm the efficacy of this technique.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III, systematic review of Level III studies.Calcaneal fractures are uncommon (2% of all fractures) but occur in younger patients with a majority of subtalar intra-articular lesions and thus leading to low functional result [ Common surgical procedure consists in an open reduction in order to restore the height, width, length and joint congruence. However, the complication rate related to soft tissue range from 2.8% to 14.3% and infection from 8% to 25% [ This systematic review aims to assess the surgical technique, outcomes and safety of this for displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures. A systematic review of literature in PubMed (MEDLINE), EMBASE and the Cochrane database was done until august 2018. The search terms used and combined were: “calcaneus”, “fracture”, “percutaneous” and “arthroscopy”. After the initial Medical Subject Headings keyword search, additional manual searches were conducted using the bibliographies of all selected full-text articles. Sixty-six potential titles and abstracts were identified from the electronic database. A time frame for the literature search was set from January 1985 to august 2018. This time frame was chosen regarding the beginning of the practice and research of arthroscopic techniques in foot surgery. So we decided not to include studies published before 1985, year of the first report of subtalar arthroscopy. Included studies fulfilled the following criteria: Investigating humans treated with percutaneous arthroscopic calcaneal osteosynthesis, published papers in English, including at least ten patients followed-up for a minimum of one year, and reporting at least one outcome measure relating to pain or function outcome, radiographic evaluation and complication rates. The percutaneous fixation was defined as the use of mini-incision and direct application of wires or screws from the skin surface. Exclusion criteria included any paper that did not meet the inclusion criteria, as well as those that included patients with extensive lateral approach. For study selection, the titles and abstracts of the identified studies were screened first, and then selected studies were scanned with full text. Two reviewers independently extracted data using a predefined data extraction form (visual human reading of papers). Data included demographic information, methodology, Sander’s classification [ Methodological quality of each study was assessed via the MINORS score, a methodological index for evaluation of non-randomized studies [ The reporting of this systematic review was done in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement [ The results of the search strategy and study selection criteria are shown in The 8 studies reported a total of 152 patients with 155 affected feet. Most of them were male (71%). The mean age range from 39.6 to 52.3 years. The mean follow-up period ranged from 14 to 79.2 month. The mean time from injury to surgery ranged from 3.9 days to 8 days. Five studies [ The assessment of the methodological quality using the MINORS scale resulted in a mean score of 10.4/16 (maximum score of 12/16) for non-comparative studies, and of 14.3/24 (maximum score of 17/24) for comparative studies Surgery was usually performed under general anaesthesia. Patients were in lateral decubitus position (except in case of bilateral fracture). Seven studies described exclusively percutaneous approach and only one author used minimal invasive sinus tarsi approach (4-cm incision was made along the tarsal sinus from the tip of the lateral malleolus to the calcaneo-cuboid joint along the tarsal sinus) [ The subtalar arthroscopy [ A 6.5 mm cancellous Schanz screw with handle was introduced into the fragment from the dorsal direction after mini-incision and drilling to achieve a good reduction of the tuberosity. The screw was placed centrally into the main portion of the fragment parallel to the upper aspect of the tuberosity and directed to the most distal aspect of the displaced posterior facet. Using the Schanz screw as a lever, the tuberosity fragment was reduced. After loosening the impacted fragment with medial/lateral stress, the handle was moved downward in order to bring the tuberosity fragment back into alignment with the main sustentacular fragment. Additional varus misalignment was reduced with lateral movement of the handle, or valgus with medial movement. Reduction was checked with fluoroscopy and arthroscopy and additional Kirschner wires was used on more complex fractures. Percutaneous osteosynthesis was performed with three to six cannulated cortical screws. Mean operative time ranged from 82.6 to 112.9 min. The mean postoperative hospital stay was reported in 3 studies and range from 1.9 to 4 days. An early passive mobilisation was performed on first postoperative day. Partial weight-bearing was allowed during the first six weeks associated to extensive physical therapy program including active ROM exercises and passive mobilization of the midfoot and rearfoot. Some authors reported the use of elastic dressing or aircast boot. Full weight-bearing was generally allowed after 6 weeks. All studies reported AOFAS score. The average ranged from 72.1 to 94.1 at last follow up. Three studies, reporting VAS and SF-36 score, found a mean value ranging from 1.2 to 2.9 and from 57 to 79.2 respectively at last follow up. The mean Bohler’s angle improvement ranged from 11.2 to 16.6°. Only 3 studies had done post-operative radiographic CT scan and 2 studies found that 87 and 100% of patients had posterior facet articular step of <2 mm. None wound dehiscence was described but one superficial infection (manage with oral antibiotic, no bone infection) was reported (0.6%). Five percent of misplaced screws (with hardware removal) were noted (9 patients). Three sural nerve injury (resolved within the 6 month after surgery) and two subfibular pain (due to a prominent screw head that subsided after screw removal) were noted in case of sinus tarsi approach. Four percent of conversion to open surgery after reduction failure was reported (7 patients). None subtalar fusion had been required at the end of studies follow-up period. This review highlight that subtalar arthroscopy during treatment of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures allowed control of reduction before percutaneous fixation, ovoid open techniques with large surgical approaches and decrease wound dehiscence and infection. Most of calcaneus fractures are articular and the prognosis is related to the reduction of posterior facet [ Clinical evaluation showed good satisfaction rate at last follow up. A recent study found at a mean follow up of 79.2 month a mean AOFAS score at 90.3 ± 12.2 [ Some authors insisted on difficulty to manage subtalar arthroscopy without iatrogenic chondral injury [ This procedure was more time consuming on the beginning. Two works reported 165 min on the first case [ In case of percutaneous methods failures or deep impactions, additional portals or conversion to small incision (sinus tarsi approach) can be considered. Only one study reported conversion to open surgery concerning 3 of 21 patients [ Those injuries more adapted to percutaneous fixation with dual modality imaging are tongue-type fractures with limited anterior comminution [ This technique could be used on patient with surgical risk factors such as smokers (54.6% in the review), diabetics and probably open fractures (0.7%). This type of surgical technique has to be proposed early after the injury to allow percutaneous mobilisation of fracture. The mean time from injury to surgery ranged from 3.9 days to 8 days. The mean postoperative stay was 1.9 to 4 days, there were almost no wound complications, this treatment allowed discharge on day 0 or day 1. Use of calcaneal nail with arthroscopic assistance may be a good alternative, giving at the same time a primary stability and a decreased risk of soft tissue complications. In a recent study [ This systematic review study has some limitations. First, except for two prospective study [ The included studies consisted on too low level of evidence for data pooling or meta-analysis. The present systematic review ascertaining the clinical and radiological findings, describing surgical technique, results and limitations of the percutaneous arthroscopic calcaneal osteosynthesis. This technique seems to be a fair option to consider for the treatment of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures and allows a low complication rate. Appropriate powered randomized controlled trials and long-term follow up are necessary to assess the efficacy of this technique versus open reduction and internal fixation. All authors were fully involved in the study and preparation of the manuscript and that the material within has not been and will not be submitted for publication elsewhere. S.M; N.C; R.C; P.K: the conception and design of the study, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data. S.M; N.C; R.C; P.K; O.M: drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content. S.M; N.C; R.C; P.K.: final approval of the version to be submitted. S.M. statistics. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. Apart from this work, N. C. declares to have been consultant for STRYKER. P.K. is an educational consultant for STRYKER, which is not related to this work. No funds were received in support of this study.