CdS nanocrystallites were formed within the LB matrix of cadmium arachidate–arachidic acid composite multilayer by post deposition H2S exposure of precursor cadmium arachidate multilayer. The CdS containing multilayers were subjected to post deposition heat treatment in air in the temperature range of 100–300°C, either directly after the sulphidation process or after being introduced into an aqueous bath. FT-IR spectroscopy was used to study the chemical changes in composite multilayers at different stages of processing. Optical properties of the CdS nanocrystallites were studied by UV–VIS absorption and photoluminescence measurements. A strong enhancement of excitonic emission and suppression of surface states emission from CdS nanocrystallites was observed after heat treatment at 100–150°C in the case of aqueous treated composite multilayer. X ray reflection and atomic force microscopy show that the aqueous treatment results in expulsion of arachidic acid to the surface of the multilayer resulting in its facile removal during heat treatment. These results suggest that the response to heat treatment of the composite multilayer containing CdS nanocrystallites depends critically on the proximity and access of the unreacted cadmium arachidate to CdS nanocrystallites. This in turn, provides Cd ions for the passivation of Cd vacancies on the surface of nanocrystallites resulting in a strong enhancement of excitonic emission. Heat treatment at higher temperatures results in drastic reduction of photoluminescence, due to particle growth as well as removal of organic moieties.CdS is a direct band gap semiconductor, which has been extensively studied in nanocrystalline forms because of the size dependence of its chemical and physical properties The growth of CdS nanocrystallites by exposure of cadmium containing species to H In the present work, CdS nanocrystallite containing CdA/AA composite multilayers have been introduced into an aqueous bath (instead of CdCl LB multilayers of Cadmium arachidate were prepared using a KSV 3000 LB instrument. Aqueous solution of CdCl At different stages of processing, X-ray reflection (XR), FT-IR, UV–VIS absorption, photoluminescence (PL) measurements and atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies were carried out at room temperature. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy was carried out using Perkin Elmer Spectrum One instrument. Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 UV–VIS spectrometer was used for the absorption studies in the range of 200–1100  Chemical changes due to sulphidation and post-sulphidation treatments were monitored through FT-IR spectra of precursor CdA multilayers deposited on CaF  The effect of aqueous treatment and subsequent heat treatments on the photoluminescence of CdS nanocrystallites within the multilayer matrix is shown in In order to understand the effect of heat treatment on the photoluminescence behaviour, the PL spectra were obtained for both the as-sulphided and aqueous treated multilayers after heat treatment at different temperatures and the results are shown in In an earlier work Atomic force microscopy was used to study the changes in surface morphology of the multilayers at different stages of processing. These results are shown in The structural, optical and surface morphological studies described above, indicate that the effect of heat treatment of CdS containing composite CdA-AA multilayer depends critically on whether the multilayer is subjected to the aqueous treatment after the sulphidation process or not. Further, there are two specific observations to be noted in this regard. Firstly, a significantly stronger enhancement of excitonic emission takes place if an incompletely sulphided multilayer is subjected to aqueous treatment prior to heat treatment. Secondly, the aqueous treated multilayer exhibits maximum enhancement of the excitonic emission intensity when heat treated at 150 In order to explain these and other related features, it may be recalled from earlier work The growth of CdS nanocrystallites takes place at room temperature through exposure of H In contrast, the as-sulphided multilayer (without aqueous treatment) after heat treatment at 100 The spectroscopic and microstructural data presented in this work indicate that passivation of Cd vacancies on the surface of CdS nanocrystallites formed within the composite CdA/AA multilayer is significantly affected by the nature of the surrounding organic matrix, its melting and desorption behavior, as well as the agglomeration of nanocrystallites. A strong enhancement of excitonic emission and suppression of surface states emission from CdS nanocrystallites is seen after heat treatment at 100–150 This work is supported by project no. INT/RFBR/P-58 of Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India under the MoU with Russian Foundation for Basic research (RFBR). The authors also thankfully acknowledge FIST (PHYSICS) – IRCC Central SPM Facility of IIT Bombay for AFM measurements.