A complex network approach is proposed for studying the shear behavior of a rough rock joint. Similarities between aperture profiles are established, and a functional complex network—in each shear displacement—is constructed in two directions: parallel and perpendicular to the shear direction. We find that the growth of the clustering coefficient and that of the number of edges are approximately scaled with the development of shear strength and hydraulic conductivity, which could possibly be utilized to estimate and formulate a friction law and the evolution of shear distribution over asperities. Moreover, the frictional interface is mapped in the global–local parameter space of the corresponding functional friction network, showing the evolution path and, eventually, the residual stage. Furthermore, we show that with respect to shear direction, parallel aperture patches are more adaptable to environmental stimuli than perpendicular profiles. We characterize the pure-contact profiles using the same approach. Unlike the first case, the later networks show a growing trend while in the residual stage; a saturation of links is encoded in contact networks.A thorough understanding of the behavior of rock joints or fault surfaces is paramount for the study of abrupt motion, seismicity or flow patterns in geomaterials. The evolution of macroscopic friction in frictional interfaces originates from a sequence of contact area variations When considering the direct relationship between void spaces and contact areas, one may be interested in considering the induced topological complexity of the opening elements (i.e., apertures) in the fracture treatment. Using linear elastic fracture mechanics, we know that aperture patterns generally are the indexes for the available energy in the growth of a rupture and the eventual fracture length. Also, variations of fluid flow features are controlled directly by aperture patterns. Owing to the complexity of aperture patterns, the understanding and characterization of the features of energy release and fluid flow are of primary interest in this study. The current work will elaborate upon the Euclidean measure of an aperture network, addressing new aspects, such as: the resolution effect, the local–global To set up a network on the apertures of a joint–or, more generally an interface, under a certain amount of normal stress–we consider patches (or profiles) of elements where each profile is a line with an extra dimension corresponding to the aperture magnitude (i.e., 2+1D). Each element on the profile is a pixel with a certain dimension, indicating relative contact area or aperture size. For apertures with zero magnitude, the terms contact areas and asperities are used. In the aperture patterns, we consider each aperture profile as a node. We define X-profiles as the aperture profiles perpendicular to the shear direction and Y-profiles as those parallel to the shear direction. To draw an edge between two nodes, a relationship (or, in general, a relationship matrix) should be defined ( One of the main attributes of networks is the clustering coefficient. The clustering coefficient shows the collaboration among the connected nodes. Assume the For In this part, we focus on the experimental results, analyzing the hydro-mechanical properties of the rock joint using the approach described in the previous section. It is recognized that the network anatomy is very important in the characterization of the system’s output (because the structure always affects the function). Our objective is to determine the possible relations between the network properties constructed and the measured mechanical/hydraulic properties of a rock joint. To proceed, the results of several laboratory experiments were used. In the experiments, the geometry of the joint, consisting of two surfaces and the aperture between these two surfaces, was measured. The shear and flow tests were performed later on. The rock was granite with a unit weight of 25.9 kN/m In the experiments, a special hydraulic testing unit is used to allow intermittent linear flow with the shear displacements of the rock joint. The relationship between the hydraulic conductivity and the joint aperture is given by Darcy’s law: The analysis is carried out for the rock joint which is under a constant normal stress and is subjected to translational shear displacement with a constant rate of movement ( A similar procedure is followed for the Y-profile network. It is noticed that the influence distance differs from one profile to another. In other words, in Y-profiles, the influence distance is lower than that of the X-profiles. Also, after a transition stage (near 2 mm), on decreasing the mesh resolution some insignificant features of the variation of the clustering coefficient (scaled with the hydro-mechanical properties) are neglected ( A careful consideration of the changes taking place in the number of edges and the local clustering coefficient during shearing reveals some important properties of the network. Gradual changes of connectivity frequency, either in X-profiles or in Y-profiles, display a similar transitional behavior: a transformation from nearly a single-value function to a semi-stable Gaussian distribution It is noticed that the sensitivity of the clustering coefficients to the scaling is very high. For instance, with an increase to 5–10 times the virtual meshes (1–2 mm), the details of the By introducing a new space associated with The unraveled clustered space can be discretized into three categories ( Next, using a different approach, we constructed a network on the basis of pure-contact profiles. In other words, the role of contact zones is separated from that of non-contact zones. Similarly to the previous measure, the Euclidean distance is utilized, while non-contact zones and contact pixels are transformed into 0 and 1, respectively. In other words, we make a stair-like profile and then identify similar profiles on the basis of their functionality. We notice that the amount of pure contacts per profile indicates the potential energy of that patch. With functional networks, we would probably build a general framework to allow us to understand the flow or entrapping of energy or the trajectory of the system in terms of the energy landscape. In particular, construction of the contact networks reveals a new type of contact profile evolution: growing networks either in X-profiles or Y-profiles ( We presented a novel approach to the evolution of complex patterns of friction which are formed during the evolution of a rock interface. By considering the complicated behavior of a rough rock joint that is subjected to shear displacements, functional networks were associated with similar functional profiles of the interface. Our solid observations showed that the mechanical or hydro-mechanical responses for the interfaces are scaled with the aperture networks’ characteristics. Within the aperture networks, the observed patterns of clustering coefficient evolution, as a local complexity of networks, indicated the interface’s mechanical or hydraulic answer. Since the global collection of aperture profiles and the local topology (i.e. subgraphs or loops) are interdependent, the interface’s large-scale and global reaction to shear forces can be uncovered by analyzing the local subgraph (here, triangle) structures. In addition, to highlight the functionality of contacts, a separate network based on binary profiles was utilized. Analysis of the results through network parameters showed a transition of the contact clusters’ density related to the shear displacement. The formation of similar contact profiles was significant during initial displacements, but, after a certain amount of displacement, similar contact profiles with three district patterns were observed. Our method can be developed to analyze monitored acoustic signals through the evolution of rock joints or faults. Further studies would be essential to present a proper model of complex aperture networks. We have observed that a possible model for describing the evolution of aperture networks generally involves characterizing the evolution of friction on the interface and it can then be related to the friction models over the interfaces. The latter point of view is completely novel, opening new windows to a better understanding of the friction mechanism in dry and rough interfaces. We thank the editor and referees for useful comments and suggestions on the paper. The second author would like to express his sincere thanks to Tetsuro Esaki and Yasuhiro Mitani for giving him the opportunity to do several experimental tests.