Titanium and its alloys are common biomedical materials owing to their combination of mechanical properties, corrosion resistance and biocompatibility. Powder metallurgy (PM) techniques can be used to fabricate biomaterials with tailored properties because changing the processing parameters, such as the sintering temperature, products with different level of porosity and mechanical performances can be obtained. This study addresses the production of the biomedical Ti-6Al-7Nb alloy by means of the master alloy addition variant of the PM blending elemental approach. The sintering parameters investigated guarantee that the complete diffusion of the alloying elements and the homogenization of the microstructure is achieved. The sintering of the Ti-6Al-7Nb alloy induces a total shrinkage between 7.4% and 10.7% and the level of porosity decreases from 6.2% to 4.7% with the increment of the sintering temperature. Vickers hardness (280–300 HV30) and tensile properties (different combination of strength and elongation around 900MPa and 3%) are achieved.Biomaterials are commonly classified as a function of their intrinsic nature as polymeric, ceramics/glasses and metallic biomaterials and, thus, employed to fabricate specific surgical, orthopaedics and dentistry products and prostheses. Specifically, polymeric-based materials are characterised by a high degree of flexibility which permits to tailor their property for particular applications. High compressive strength and wear resistance combined with inert behaviour and pleasing aesthetic appearance are the properties for which biomedical ceramics and glasses are renowned. Relative ease of fabrication as well as high strength and resistance to fracture are the main reasons for which metals continue to be used in biomedical applications ( The processing of titanium and its alloys by means of powder metallurgy (PM) techniques is claimed to be a suitable way to reduce the fabrication cost of titanium products where the master alloy (MA) addition variant of the blending elemental approach has been identified has the cheapest way to obtain titanium alloys with the desired composition ( The starting materials bought for the development of the study are a hydride-dehydride (HDH) elemental titanium powder and a niobium:aluminium:titanium (Nb:Al:Ti) master alloy, both supplied by GfE Gesellschaft für Elektrometallurgie mbH. The Nb:Al:Ti master alloy was in the form of granules (maximum particle size < 800 Basic characteristics of the produced Ti-6Al-7Nb powder were analysed and they included particle size, contents of interstitial elements and morphology/composition. Specifically, the particle size distribution and, hence, the maximum particle size (D The consolidation of the powder was done by means of a uniaxial press combined with a floating die whose walls were lubricated using zinc stearate. It is worth mentioning that, intentionally, no lubricant was added directly to the powder in order to prevent or, at least, limit as much as possible the contamination of the powder. Dogbones samples with standardised dimensions (ASTM: B925) for tensile tests were cold uniaxial pressed setting the compaction pressure to 700 The metallographic route used to prepare the samples for the microstructural analysis included grinding with SiC papers of different granulometry, polishing with an alumina-based solution (1 μm) and fine polishing with silica gel. The microconstituents were revealed by means of chemical etching using Kroll reactant (3 The variation of the dimensions experienced by the samples during the sintering step was considered and estimated because they are important industrial factors to take into account when designing a new component to be produced by means of PM techniques. The values of the density of the sintered samples was measured by means of the water displacement method. The total residual porosity (P It is well known that the amount of interstitials dissolved greatly influence the mechanical properties of titanium ( Regarding to the mechanical characterisation, Vickers hardness measurements were done on the cross section of the samples by means of a Wilson Wolpert Universal Hardness DIGI-TESTOR 930 tester performing HV30 measurements. Ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and elongation at fracture values were obtained using a MicroTest universal machine equipped with a load cell of 50kN and a Hottinger Baldwin Messtechnik, type DD1 extensometer. Tensile tests were performed following the ASTM: E8 standard applying a crosshead speed of 1 Some basic characteristics (i.e. particle size distribution and contents of interstitials) of the powders used in this study are shown in From the particle size distribution data shown in The micrograph shown in The evolution of the microstructure and porosity with the sintering temperature was studied by analysing the microstructural features at the optical microscope. Representative examples of the microstructure of the sintered Ti-6Al-7Nb alloy are shown in Generally, there is a coarsening of the microconstituents with the increment of the sintering temperature due to the higher thermal energy available in the system for grain growth, resulting in an increase in grain size of the sintered Ti-6Al-7Nb alloy. Specifically, the size of the α grains becomes larger as the higher sintering temperature leads to the formation of coarser prior β grains during sintering, β grains from which α grains nucleate (134±17, 147±14 and 165±20 for the materials sintered at 1250 Although the residual porosity could affect negatively the mechanical response of the sintered Ti-6Al-7Nb alloy, these pores are actually beneficial for osteoconduction and the ability to form apatite ( After the shaping of the powder, the components are characterised by a green density of approximately 86.0±1.2%. The variation of the physical properties (i.e. shrinkage, density and residual porosity) of the sintered Ti-6Al-7Nb alloy with the sintering temperature are shown in The sintering of the green components induces a reduction of their dimension and, therefore, the samples undergo shrinkage (  The results of the Vickers hardness measurements of the sintered Ti-6Al-7Nb alloys are shown in From the tensile stress-strain curves presented in The ultimate tensile strength on the sintered components ( Fractographic results ( The study of the mechanical properties of the sintered Ti-6Al-7Nb alloys via quasi-static tensile tests showed that the strength and the fracture mode are similar to those of the wrought Ti-6Al-7Nb alloy but affected by the presence of the residual porosity. Dynamic properties such as fatigue strength of the sintered Ti-6Al-7Nb alloys, which are important for some structural biomedical applications, will also be lowered by the presence of the residual porosity. As indicated in the experimental procedure, the dynamic elastic modulus was considered and measured by means of an ultrasonic transducer. The dynamic elastic modulus measurements carried out on the sintered Ti-6Al-7Nb tensile samples results to be quite similar for the three sintering temperatures. The individual values obtained are in the order of 100 From this study about the production and evaluation of the mechanical properties of powder metallurgy Ti-6Al-7Nb alloy obtained means of the press and sinter route, the following conclusions can be drawn: Irregular hydride-dehydride powders can successfully be shaped into pressed components which can be handled without fracture; The sintering temperatures studied permitted to obtain fully homogeneous microstructures that is paramount as the presence of undissolved particles would affect the biological response of the material; The total shrinkage increases from 7.4% to 10.7% and the porosity levels decreases from 6.2% to 4.7% with the increment of the temperature. The pores left after sintering would be beneficial to promote bone osteointegration; The mechanical behaviour of the sintered alloys is mainly comparable to that of the wrought alloy as Vickers hardness values of 280–300 HV30, elastic modulus of 101 The powder metallurgy master alloy addition approach can successfully be used to process wrought-equivalent titanium biomaterials and therefore is a promising alternative for the manufacturing of non-critical and structural biomedical applications. The authors want to acknowledge the financial support from New Zealand Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (