This paper deals with the recovery of yttrium and europium from waste tube light phosphor powder leach liquor using solvent extraction and chemical reduction route. Hydrochloric acid (2 mol/L) is used as the leachant to generate the leach liquor. From the leach liquor, the separation of Y(III) and Eu(III) is carried out with three types of extractants (acidic, neutral and ionic liquid) with extractant concentration and pH variation. Highest separation factor of 60.6 is achieved with 0.1 mol/L D2EHPA at aqueous phase pH of 2.56. The quantitative extraction of yttrium from the leach liquor is achieved in two counter current stages at O:A ratio of 1:1.5 at pH 2.56. After extraction of yttrium, yttrium oxalate is prepared by precipitation stripping with 0.4 mol/L oxalic acid. The stability and reusability of the extractant is also investigated. The reduction process with zinc helps to reduce 78% of Eu (III) to Eu (II) but 16% Y(III) is precipitated as yttrium sulfate along with Eu(II) precipitation. A tentative flow-sheet is developed for the whole process.The economic importance of rare earths has skyrocketed in the past couple of years because of use of these elements in high technology equipment. They are used in magnets, phosphors, lasers, high temperature super conductors for safe storage of hydrogen. The green energy initiatives depend on RE oxides. Due to over-exploitation, many countries are facing problem for these resources. Hence, there is a boost for recycling the end of life products as in many e-wastes these metals are present. Some wastes include phosphor powder that is present in the inner wall of the exhausted fluorescent lamps, dead batteries like NiMH, SmCO The exhaust tube lights are collected and the inside coatings are removed by a long tail brush. The XRD of the powder sample is taken and then leaching is carried out in a 500 mL double-walled glass reactor (Model KGW-Isotherm, Germany) with provision for circulation of hot water through outside shell of the reactor in order to achieve and maintain the required temperature. The reactor lid has ports for reflux condenser, sample addition cum sampling, stirrer shaft. The stirring is carried out using a Teflon anchor agitator. Dilute hydrochloric acid from a concentrated stock solution (37% Merck Millipore) diluted with double distilled water is used as the leachant. The extractants used for solvent extraction study are di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) and trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bis-2,4,4-(trimethylpentyl) phosphinate (Cyphos IL 104). The first two are supplied by Heavy Water Board, Talcher, Odisha and the last one is the gift sample from Cytec Solvay, Canada. The commercial grade kerosene and AR grade toluene are used as diluents. The extraction experiments are carried out in a 60 mL separatory funnel. All the experiments are carried out at 27 °C ± 1 °C. The equilibration time for each experiment is kept constant at 10 min. After the phase disengagement, the aqueous phase is collected and the equilibrium pH is measured. The analysis of the samples is done with proper dilution using 5% HCl. The metal content in aqueous phase before and after extraction is analyzed using ICP-OES, (Model No. OPTIMA 2100DV, Perkin Elmer). The metal concentration in the organic phase is calculated from the difference between the metal concentration in the aqueous phase before and after extraction. The distribution ratio (D), separation factor (β) and % of extraction were calculated using following equations. The percentage extraction is calculated using the formula given in Eq. reported by previous researchers ( The precipitation stripping of the loaded organic containing 2.83 g/L Y(III) and 0.06 g/L Eu(III) is carried out using 0.4 mol/L oxalic acid with continuous stirring for 30 min. Then the precipitate is filtered, dried in an oven at 60 °C for one hour and weighed. First two sets of experiments are carried out taking 203 mg/L of europium chloride only. After optimizing the best reduction-precipitation experimental condition, the actual leach liquor is treated for reduction. These experiments are carried out following the procedure of The X-ray diffraction patterns of the powdered sample before and after leaching is represented in To obtain better extraction of rare earth elements Y and Eu, the pH of the leach liquor is adjusted to 2.6 using NaOH and the extraction studies are carried out with three types of extractants namely ionic liquid (Cyphos IL 104), acidic (D2EHPA) and neutral (TOPO) using five different concentrations i.e., 0.05, 0.06, 0.075, 0.085 and 0.1 mol/L. The percentage extraction of Y and Eu are plotted against extractant concentration in Association mechanism for Cyphos IL 104 and TOPO Cation exchange mechanism for D2EHPA. With the above extractants of concentration 0.1 mol/L, a pH variation study is also carried out in the initial pH range of 0.98 to 2.9 and presented in A McCabe-Thiele plot is constructed using 0.1 mol/L D2EHPA and the leach liquor to know the no. of stages and O:A ratio for quantitative extraction of metal ion. The O:A ratio is varied within 1:5 to 5:1 keeping the total volume of phases constant and the pH of leach liquor is adjusted to 2.56. The recovery of metal values and reuse of the extractant is the beauty of solvent extraction process. This is also important for the economic point of view as well as for minimization of the waste. The extractant D2EHPA is a well-established commercial solvent and mineral acids are found to be good stripping agents for metal loaded D2EHPA. From the strip solution, the metals are recovered using electro-winning or precipitation technique. As the rare earth oxalates are highly insoluble, a direct precipitation stripping using oxalic acid is used to recover yttrium values as yttrium oxalate. For the stripping study, different concentrations of oxalic acid are used (0.01–0.5 mol/L). The loaded organic (20 mL) D2EHPA containing 2.83 g/L Y, 0.06 g/L Eu is stirred for 30 min in a magnetic stirrer using 20 mL of different concentration of oxalic acid. The experimental results presented in The stability of the extractant D2EHPA with respect to oxalic acid is also tested. For this, 0.1 mol/L D2EHPA is contacted 10 times with fresh 0.5 mol/L oxalic acid and the dissolved phosphorous amount is analyzed in ICP-OES and the results are plotted in Various reductants are used for europium reduction. The collected waste tubelight powder is an alternative source of yttrium and europium as it contains significant amount of these metals. XRD analysis showed that only yttrium and europium are leached using dilute hydrochloric acid (2 mol/L) at moderate temperature (50 °C). Solvent extraction using TOPO is not attractive because of low extraction of both the metals. Highest separation factor of 60.6 is achieved with 0.1 mol/L D2EHPA. Complete removal of yttrium is found at O:A ratio of 1:1.5 in two stages with 60 mg/L europium co-extraction. Precipitate stripping using oxalic acid is opted for yttrium recovery from the loaded organic phase as yttrium oxalate. The dissolved phosphorous content in the aqueous phase illustrate that D2EHPA is not soluble in the aqueous phase during stripping. Reusability test supports the reuse of the extractant again and again. The chemical reduction of Eu(III) to Eu(II) is feasible using Zn metal but the disadvantage is that 16% yttrium (302.4 mg/L) is also precipitated along with europium(II) sulfate. A tentative flow-sheet is developed for the whole process. The authors are thankful to the President, S ‘O’ A [deemed to be university] for his support to carry out the experiment. The authors are also thankful to Cytec Solvay, Canada and Heavy Water Board, Talcher, Odisha, for providing the gift samples of Cyphos IL 104 and D2EHPA, respectively.