In the present study, air dissolution, size distribution and hydrodynamics of microbubbles in a dissolved air flotation system were experimentally investigated. The amount of dissolved air was calculated by Henry’s laws of gas dissolution and compared with measured values from the liquid displacement technique. The measured air concentrations were 23.2 and 10.1 mg/l for freshwater and saline water (30 g/L), respectively, which were much lower than those calculated by Henry’s equations. Shadow imaging technique was applied to measure the size distributions of microbubbles for saline and freshwater. Whilst the size of microbubbles for freshwater were between 40–250 μm, the corresponding values for the saline water were smaller and varied between 20–160 μm. Particle image velocimetry (PIV) was also applied to map flow patterns and velocities of microbubbles for saline and freshwater. The results indicated that the flow patterns were mostly affected by the flow itself rather than the salinity and the presence of microbubbles since there was not a noticeable change between single-phase (flow without microbubbles) and two-phase flows. While the range of the velocities was between 0–64 mm/s for the freshwater, it did not exceed 48 mm/s for the saline water.Separation of suspended particles from the liquid phase is of great importance in water and wastewater treatment. The average size of the suspended particles is one of the factors which determines the appropriate technique for their removal [ DAF is a separation technique in which the flotation process is used for the removal of emulsified particles. For the generation of microbubbles, air and water are mixed in an air saturator under high pressure (300–800 kPa). Then, the supersaturated water is passed through a pressure reduction nozzle which is exposed to atmospheric pressure. Due to the sudden depressurization, the air starts to precipitate and produce microbubbles. Microbubbles collide with suspended particles and adhere to them to form bubble-flocs agglomerates. The buoyancy of microbubbles rise the agglomerates to the surface of the water and gradually form a sludge blanket which is mechanically removed from the surface [ DAF is accounted to be a conventional technique for the removal of suspended particles in drinking water treatment [ Air dissolution is fundamental to the DAF system in two different extents. Firstly, it provides the amount of required air which is then precipitated in the form of microbubbles and collide with suspended particles. Accordingly, the more dissolved air results in more microbubbles which consequently provides more collision opportunities with suspended particles [ The bubble size distribution is another aspect of DAF which is of great importance as smaller size microbubbles provide more collision opportunities with suspended particles. Additionally, the size of microbubbles influence rising velocity which consequently affects retention time of bubbles and therefore the collision rate between bubbles and particles [ Hydrodynamics of the flotation tank is also another aspect of the DAF system which influences the performance of the DAF system. The term of hydrodynamic refers to the bubble rising velocity and flow patterns inside the flotation tank [ Overall, a deeper look at the existing literature unveils the following main research gaps: As for the air dissolution, there is no experimental data to show the effect of salinity on air dissolution in an air saturator [ Most of the previous experimental studies on microbubble size distribution has been conducted in flotation columns which cannot represent the ranges of bubble sizes in different zones of a flotation tank including contact and separation zones. Also, the measurements were mostly implemented by intrusive techniques by measuring the velocity at a single point in the flotation columns [ Techniques for generating microbubble also influence bubble size distribution and hydrodynamics of a DAF system. In most of the studies conducted in flotation columns, the generation technique is not based on cavitation caused by pressure difference [ There have been noticeable discrepancies between CFD and experimental results since some simplifying assumptions have been made such as excluding bubble size distribution or liquid phase characteristics (temperature, salinity, etc) [ Previous studies that have been conducted in flotation columns cannot represent the hydrodynamics of DAF since both external and internal geometry significantly affect the fluid dynamics of the DAF system [ In some studies, it has been assumed that buoyancy is the only driving force of rising velocity and the size of microbubble was obtained by Stoke’s equation ( With regard to the aforementioned research gaps, for the first time, the present study investigates the effects of salinity on air dissolution, microbubble size distribution, and hydrodynamics of a DAF system. The air dissolution was investigated in an unpacked air saturator theoretically and experimentally for different degrees of salinities. To address the shortcomings of the previous measuring techniques, bubble size distribution was measured under the influence of salinity in the contact and separation zones of the flotation tank using shadow imaging technique. Moreover, for the first time, under influence of salinity, particle image velocimetry (PIV) was applied to provide an instantaneous and fully detailed map of the flow patterns and to measure velocities of microbubbles in the contact and separation zones of a DAF system for both fresh and saline water.  The amount of dissolved air was measured by the liquid displacement method. As shown in where C Equilibrium conditions of the air saturator for different flow conditions were estimated from the equation developed by Haarhoff, et al. [  As shown in Through the experiments, it was found that while the effect of salinity on air dissolution is significant, for the size distribution and hydrodynamics of the flotation tank, the effect of salinity can be noticed for higher degrees of salinity. Therefore, for the air dissolution, results are presented for the salinity ranging from 0 to 30 g/L, and for the size distributions and hydrodynamics of the DAF, comparisons are made between freshwater and 30 g/L of salinity.  What is striking about In the design of the DAF system, the amount of required air is determined by the concentration of suspended particles [ The air concentration in the combined flow entering the contact zone (A), the air concentration leaving the air saturator (M), and the recycle ratio (r) can be related by the Eq. 11 [ Haarhoff, et al. [ Increasing saturator pressure is also another option to offset the lack of air, and it is defined as coorected pressure. The theoretical corrected pressure was obtained by Eq. 6 by assuming the same air concentration for both saline and freshwater. As mentioned before, the cavitation caused by sudden pressure drop generates microbubbles. Assuming homogenous nucleation, the critical bubble diameter can be estimated from [ Looking at the flotation tank as a whole shows that the range of the size for saline water is noticeably lower than the freshwater. For the freshwater, the measured range of the size was between 40–180 μm in the contact zone, and 50–250 μm in the separation zone, while the corresponding values for the saline water were between 20–150 μm, and 40–160 μm, respectively. One may expect that microbubbles get larger in saline water due to the increase of surface tension. However, the reduction in the size can be attributed to the increase of disjoining pressure defined as below [ Cain, et al. [ With regards to the data presented in In order to have a clear illustration of flow patterns in the flotation tank, the velocity field of the flotation tank was mapped separately for the contact and separation zones.  With regard to It is mentioned that for hydraulic loading, less than 25 m/h, the flow inside the flotation tank assumed to be laminar and the velocity component caused by turbulence ( Also, the rising velocity by the buoyancy force The wall effect is also one of the factors that might affect the bubble drag and velocity. Clift, et al. [ In the present study, the effect of salinity on air dissolution, the size distribution of microbubbles, and hydrodynamics of the flotation tank were investigated. The amount of dissolved air was quantified by liquid displacement method, and it was observed that as salinity increases, air dissolution decreases significantly which can be attributed to the effect of salinity on diffusivity factor that controls the rate of the gas/liquid mass transfer. Even though in previous studies, Henry’s laws of gas dissolution were suggested to calculate the amount of dissolved air, in the present study, it was observed that experimental values were noticeably lower than theoretical values obtained by Henry’ laws. This was attributed to the non-equilibrium status of the air saturators since, in practice, air saturators rarely attain equilibrium status as they demand a long retention time. Therefore, Henry’s laws of gas dissolution overestimate the amount of the required dissolved air. Accordingly, the amount of dissolved air should be quantified experimentally for each air saturator since not only do the liquid phase characteristics influence the air dissolution, the type of the reactor and its geometry also affect the air dissolution. This is also important for the determination of required recycle ratio and saturator pressure to compensate for the lack of the air caused by salinity as theoretical corrected pressures and recycle ratios cannot provide the required air concentration. As for the size distribution, the growth in the size of microbubbles was more noticeable for freshwater compared to saline water as salinity increases the repulsive hydration force between two adjacent microbubbles, and therefore, delays coalescence phenomenon which results in the smaller size microbubbles Whilst in previous studies, only buoyancy force of microbubbles was considered to be the only driving force, and rising velocity was calculated by Stoke’s law, in the present study, the measured velocity exceeds the range of the velocity calculated by Stoke’s equation as hydraulic flow and turbulence might also contribute the velocity. In addition, salinity does not affect the flow patterns inside the flotation tank; however, it reduces the magnitudes of velocity since salinity decreases the size of microbubbles and increases the viscosity of the liquid phase. We are declaring that both authors have contributed to each section. However, the first author has contacted the experiments and also his contribution to other sections has been 70 %. There is no Declaration of Competing Interest for this manuscript. The uncertainties of the experimental parameters mentioned in the In these equations, n is the error source number and The propagation of errors method was used to estimate the uncertainty of the calculated quantities. According to Holman [ Isdale, et al. [ Range of the validity: 0 < T < 180 °C, 0 < S < 150 g/kg, Accuracy: ± 1.5 %where