In this study, the Cu-BTC and NH2-MIL 101 (Fe)@polypyrrole and polyaniline core–shell particles were prepared by in situ polymerization of pyrrole and aniline monomers on the surface of Cu-BTC and NH2-MIL 101 (Fe) for electromagnetic wave absorption applications. Firstly, the Cu-BTC (1,3,5 benzenetricarboxylic acid, BTC) and NH2-chromium (III) terephthalate (MIL-101) were synthesized by solvothermal method. Secondly, the surface of Cu-BTC and NH2-MIL 101 (Fe) mixtures were coated with polypyrrole (PPy) and polyaniline (PANI) by a polymerization of aniline (An) and pyrrole (Py) monomers and denoted as PP@Fe/Cu. For comparative studies, the aniline (An) and pyrrole (Py) monomers were polymerized in the same condition on the surface of NH2-MIL-101 (Fe) powder without the presence of Cu-BTC and the final powder was denoted as PP@Fe. The morphologies, phase structures and magnetic properties of products were characterized by scanning electron microscope (SEM), X-ray diffractometer (XRD), and vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) machines. The complex permeability and permittivity values of PP@Fe and PP@Cu/Fe were determined in the range of Ku band (12.4–18 GHz). The electromagnetic wave absorption performances were evaluated using obtained permittivity and permeability values. It was observed that PP@Fe and PP@Cu/Fe composites displayed excellent microwave absorption performances. The existence of Cu-BTC into NH2-MIL 101 (Fe) further enhanced the minimum reflection loss from −60 dB to −80 dB.Recently, electromagnetic wave devices have attracted great interest in electromagnetic protection, detection, imaging and antenna due to their large-area adaptive surfaces in the mega and gigahertz frequencies [ As a new class of porous materials, the Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are synthesized by self-assembly of organic ligands and metallic clusters to prepare nanoparticles decorated pores materials [ As mentioned above, there are many reported studies on the different applications of Cu-BTC and NH In a typical synthesis, 1 mmol of copper (II) nitrate trihydrate (Cu(NO Fe-based metal organic frameworks (MOFs) of NH First of all, powder mixture of the Fe based NH In order to measure the microwave absorption properties in ku band 60 wt% of the prepared coated composite was uniformly mixed in molten paraffin matrix. Single layer microwave absorber samples were molded in the dimension of 15.77 × 7.89 × 2 mm (ku band sample). The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, XMD 300, Cu-K The crystal phases of Cu-BTC, NH The SEM morphology of Cu-BTC, NH The field dependence of saturation magnetization values (Ms) of NH The frequency dependence of permittivity, permeability and loss tangents of NH The dielectric ( The three mechanisms i.e. reflection, absorption, and transmission can occur when the electromagnetic (EM) wave interacts with a material. As this incident EM wave passes through the materials the microwave heating is created within the material due to the EM/material interaction. When an incident wave passes through the material, the power of incident wave can be divided into reflection, absorption and transmitted as seen in Fig. 33A.1. However, the incident waves can create microwave heating which determine absorption performance within the material at the atomic level inside the materials during microwave/material interaction. The schematic representation of PP@Fe/Cu composite is given in The EM wave absorption performance of composites was evaluated according to reflection loss (R Here, Z The frequency dependence of reflection loss and matching thicknesses are given in As seen in This relationship between The eddy current loss ( As shown in The Z Based on eq. In summary, the Cu-BTC and NH There is no conflict of interest. Scientific Research Funds of  The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at