A series of Amberlite XAD resins (acrylic ester and styrene–divinylbenzene resins) has been impregnated with Cyphos IL101 ionic liquid (IL: trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride) for Au(III) sorption from HCl solution. The textural characteristics (specific surface area, pore size distribution and pore volume) of the extractant impregnated resins (EIRs) have been determined in function of IL loading. The HCl concentration and the IL loading have a significant impact on Au(III) sorption efficiency: acrylic ester resins can weakly bind Au(III) contrary to styrene–divinylbenzene resins that only extract metal ions through the ion exchange of tetrachloro-anionic species with chloride ions from the IL. Uptake kinetics are strongly controlled by both the IL loading, the textural properties of the resin and, in some cases, by the pre-conditioning of the resin. Though a clear correlation exists between pore size/pore volume and apparent intraparticle diffusion coefficients, some resins showed atypical behavior (having lower relative coefficients of intraparticle diffusion than expected from the textural properties of raw resins, while their De
                      fits better the actual textural properties of impregnated materials). Sorption efficiency increases with IL loading while uptake kinetics is slowed down. A good compromise is obtained in terms of both sorption efficiency and uptake kinetics using XAD-1180 resin impregnated with Cyphos IL101 (with IL loading not exceeding 400mgILg−1
                     EIR).The rarefaction of strategic and/or precious metals has driven the attention of research community to the recycling and recovery of these resources from waste materials, the so-called urban mine. Gold is an emblematic example of this challenge: apart jewelry and coin/medal industry, the metal is used in electronic industry for its high chemical stability and high conductive properties; recovery of gold (and its separation from other base metals) from electronic scraps is thus critical. This may contribute to balance the cost of treatment for electronic wastes, to provide additional incomes, and to supply additional limited resources The present study focuses first on the comparison of the structural properties (specific surface area, pore volume and pore size distribution) for eight different Amberlite XAD resins (i.e., 6 styrene–divinylbenzene and 2 acrylic ester resins) impregnated with different loadings of Cyphos IL101 (i.e., 200 and 400 Cyphos IL101 was kindly supplied by Cytec (Canada). This is a phosphonium salt (trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride, C.A.S. number: 258864-54-9, formula weight: 519.4 Amberlite XAD resins were supplied by Sigma–Aldrich (Saint-Louis, U.S.A.). Resins are generally conditioned with NaCl and Na The IL was immobilized on the resin by the dry impregnation method: 5 In some cases (see For the textural characterization of EIR, nitrogen N Au(III) solutions were prepared in HCl solutions of different concentrations (0.001–8 M) with a metal concentration of 300 mg Uptake kinetics were performed by contact under agitation of a fixed amount of EIR (containing 200 and 400 The morphology and the distribution of elements in the EIRs were determined with a Scanning Electron Microscope coupled with Energy Dispersive X-ray analysis (SEM-EDX). SEM analyses were performed using a Scanning Electron Microscope Zeiss, EVO HD 15 LS (Germany) equipped with a Quantax Bruker Energy Dispersive X-ray microanalysis (EDX) system. The resin particles (before and after gold sorption) were frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to mechanical breaking with a thin slice in order to obtain observable cross-sections. SEM-EDX facilities were used for obtaining the distribution map of gold element as the target metal, and P element as the tracer of the extractant. In some cases new lots of EIRs were re-prepared. For this reason, the IL loading was slightly different in the textural analysis of EIRs and in the sorption study; however, the differences were not sufficient to introduce a bias in the analysis and correlation of sorption performance with textural properties. Given experiments were regularly duplicated in order to verify the reproducibility and the variation was systematically less than 6%; in this case the average value was used. The textural analysis of the EIRs at different loadings was performed by nitrogen adsorption; they showed substantial differences for the different resins. The sorption–desorption curves are characterized by hysteresis loops that are more or less marked depending on the resin ( The results of the textural characterization of the EIRs are summarized in All the resins follow the same trend: (a) drastic decrease of both the specific surface area and the pore volume, and (b) strong increase of the average pore diameter of the EIRs. Apart these general trends it is possible to identify different groups within the eight selected resins. Based on the evolution of average pore diameter, three groups are identified by their similarities: (a) XAD-4 and XAD-2000 (resins characterized by a Type E hysteresis loop and “ink-bottle” pores) show limited variations, (b) XAD-7 and XAD-16 have intermediary behavior, and (c) XAD-2, XAD-8, XAD-1180 and XAD-2010 are characterized by very large increase in the pore size. In terms of pore volume, the three groups are constituted by: (a) XAD-2000, XAD-4, XAD-2 and XAD-8 with low pore volume, (b) XAD-7 with intermediary pore volume, and (c) XAD-16, XAD-1180 and XAD-2010 which are characterized by larger pore volumes. The effect of IL loading on specific surface area appears to vary with the type of resin following the sequence: XAD-16 As expected the analysis of pore distribution ( The IL loading has thus a significant impact on the textural properties, the porosity and specific surface area of EIRs; however, this effect is not expressed on the same manner for the different systems. Based on previous investigation on the sorption of Cd(II) by XAD-7/Cyphos IL101 resin The effect of IL loading (0: non-impregnated, 200 and 400 Based on the speciation of Au(III) ions and the HCl concentration range, the predominant species is expected to be the tetrachloroanionic form: AuCl This mechanism is well documented for the extraction of metal ions in solvent extraction process In Amberlite XAD-7 impregnated with Cyphos IL101 was fully investigated for the sorption of Cd(II), Zn(II), Bi(III), Hg(II), Pd(II) and Au(III) and the plot of maximum sorption capacities (from sorption isotherms)   The uptake kinetic can be controlled by a series of mechanisms including the proper chemical reaction rate but also by diffusion mechanisms (including resistance to film diffusion and to intraparticle diffusion). The identification of the controlling step is important for optimizing the process; this allows selecting best experimental conditions or optimizing the design of the sorbent (for limiting, for example, resistance to intraparticle diffusion). Actually, the modeling of uptake kinetics should take into account all these mechanisms (film diffusion, intraparticle diffusion, reaction rate, equilibrium distribution, etc.) at the expense of using complex numerical analysis systems The apparent intraparticle diffusion coefficient ( The Mathematica™ software was used for the determination of the apparent intraparticle diffusion coefficient, The characteristics of the resin (at least its textural properties) are not expected to have a strong impact on the equilibrium performance for the same content of IL: the sorption capacity being controlled by the stoichiometry of the IL/metal interaction: for a given amount of IL the amount of metal bound will be comparable (at the exception of a different contribution of the passivating effects of interactions of the IL with the surface of the resin). However, as already mentioned in the case of Cd(II) sorption using XAD-7/Cyphos IL101, the control of uptake kinetics by the IL loading and its effect on specific surface area, pore size and pore volume let anticipate that significant differences could appear in the kinetic profiles. Since some impregnated resins tended to float at the surface of the solution at least at the beginning of the kinetics, a pre-conditioning of the EIRs was operated.  It is noteworthy that for some of these EIRs (especially for XAD-2 and XAD-2010) resin flotation was observed at the surface of the mixed reactor: this means that the mass transfer properties are not optimized and additional resistance to mass transfer may be part of the control of uptake kinetics. In the case of XAD-2, surprisingly, despite the flotation phenomenon the uptake kinetics was quite fast: the apparent equilibrium was reached within 6 The filling of the porous network is a critical parameter: complete filling of the pores with the IL means that the metal ions will have to diffuse in a medium with lower diffusion properties than water: for example, for Dy(III) The flotation was equally observed in the case of different resins prepared with IL loadings of either 200 or 400 XAD-1180 In an attempt to correlate the diffusion properties of the EIRs with their textural properties the apparent intraparticle diffusion coefficient (  From these correlations it appears that the best resin is XAD-1180. The intraparticle diffusion is enhanced by increasing the pore volume and the pore size of the raw resin. These criteria are not absolute since for materials (for example XAD-16) with characteristics close to those of the best resin the apparent intraparticle diffusion coefficient may be significantly lower than expected. However, the diffusion properties of EIRs are much better correlated to the actual textural properties of the resins after impregnation. The impregnation of Amberlite XAD resins with Cyphos IL101 allows preparing new sorbents very efficient for recovery of Au(III) from HCl solutions. The concentration of acid has a limited impact on sorption efficiency. While styrene–divinylbenzene-based resins are not able to bind Au(III) in HCl solutions, acrylic ester-based resin can bind the metal to some extent; however, the impregnation of the resins with the ionic liquid strongly improves sorption efficiency. The mechanism involved in metal binding consists of the ion exchange of chloride ions (bound to phosphonium cation) with AuCl The impregnation of the resins significantly changes their textural properties, including specific surface area, pore diameter and pore volume. These changes are correlated to the amount of IL immobilized in the porous network. At high IL loading, some of the tested resins were fully saturated making difficult the mass transfer of metal ions (or making slower the uptake kinetics). The comparison of kinetic profiles and the determination of the apparent intraparticle diffusion coefficients are correlated to the textural properties of the EIRs: increasing the size of the pores and the porous volume of the resin allows enhancing the mass transfer properties of the EIR. Hence, Amberlite XAD-1180 impregnated with Cyphos IL101 (to a loading that does not exceed 400 The authors acknowledge the financial support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 