The increasingly automated industrial processes are responsible for a large part of the generation of oily effluents, which present great difficulty of treatment due to the complexity of removal of fine particles of oil. The application of biosurfactants and the dimensionless number of Damköhler (Da) in a prototype of dissolved air flotation (DAF) allowed predictions of efficiency of oil removal in oily waters. Two different biosurfactants were used in order to confirm a first-order kinetic law for the DAF process in the water-oil separation. The kinetic behavior of the DAF process was associated by analogy with a perfect blending reactor (Continued Stirred Tank Reactor – CSTR). In this way, a laboratory float was used in order to allow experiments with the biosurfactants produced by the bacteria Bacillus sp. and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. A first-order kinetic model was fitted to the experimental data, using Quasi-Newton numerical optimization methods The application of the dimensionless number of Damköhler, together with the use of the biosurfactants, allowed prediction of the oil removal efficiency, around 90%. It has been observed that it is also possible to predict the flotation chamber volume based on a desired value of removal efficiency.The development of the world industry in the last hundred years, including the production of noble metals, phosphate for agriculture, among others, would not have been possible without the flotation process discovery. The conventional physical processes of centrifugation and decantation are not efficient in the removal of fine particles. However, techniques such as dissolved air flotation (DAF) allow the appropriate treatment of difficult-to-remove contaminants such as oil-contaminated water, besides of being clean and very efficient technologies [ DAF is an important water-oil separation method based on surface physico-chemical mechanisms. This process basically depends on the creation of an air/liquid/liquid interface, where a part of “oil” binds to gas (air) microbubbles, mainly due to the hydrophobicity of its surface [ In relation of chemical reagents, these are composed, for the most part, of surfactants compounds derived from petroleum [ In practice, the kinetics of the DAF process is used to study several industrial processes, that from experimental data, can convert the measured time in laboratory, in a non-stationary state, for continuous operations. Kinetic study is a very useful tool to analyze various variables involved in a process, as well as assist the development of industrial projects and equipment design [ Among other benefits, the kinetics knowledge of a vessel that behaves as a reaction system allows a correlation application aiming a reactor or pseudo-reactor scaling, in this case an DAF chamber [ In the present work, the kinetic characteristics were investigated in a flotation chamber, where the water-oil emulsified mixture was separated in a benchtop prototype. In this way, volume predictions were tested for a pilot plant of DAF applied in a water-oil separation in the presence of biosurfactants. The microorganisms The microorganisms were maintained in Nutrient Agar (NA), within 0.5% meat extract, 1% peptone, 0.5% NaCl and 0.5% Agar. For inoculum growth, the nutrient broth medium (NB) was used, with the following composition: 0.5% meat extract, 1.5% peptone, 0.5% NaCl and 0.5% K The biosurfactants production was carried out in mineral medium formulated with 0.1% de K For Young cultures of the bacteria obtained after 24 h in nutrient agar medium were transferred to an Erlenmeyer containing 50 mL nutrient broth, which was maintained under orbital shaking at 150 rpm for 24 h at 28° C to obtain na O.D. (Optical Density) of 0.7 (corresponding to an inoculum of 10 The production of biosurfactants was carried out in Erlenmeyer flasks of 500 mL capacity, containing 100 mL of production medium and incubated with 2% of the pre-inoculum. The flasks were maintained under 200 rpm in orbital shaking for 120 h for The surface tension was measured in the cell-free metabolic broth in a KSV Sigma 700 (Finland) tensiometer using the NUOY ring. The platinum ring was immersed in the metabolic fluid, recording the force required to pull it through the air/liquid interface, presenting 29 mN/m for It is known that the principle of the flotation phenomenon for effluent treatment is based on contaminant removal, that is, in this case, oil. Thus, the kinetic model attributed to this phenomenon, by analogy with a mixing reactor (CSTR type), must be associated to the decay of oil concentration as a function of flotation time. For this, the expression that represent the reaction velocity is given by:  k – Oil removal speed constant, min n – pseudo kinetic order of oil removal in DAF process, - Lubricating oil was selected as the contaminant oil that is commercially available for use in flex engines (gasoline, VNG and alcohol), type SAE 20W-50, with synthetic guard (Petrobras, Brazil). It consists of a paraffinic base lubricating oil (a complex mixture of hydrocarbons) and performance enhancing additives. The dimensionless number of Damköhler ( In which:   V – Float volume, L It is important to know that values from the Damköhler number correspond to high and low conversion values [ A 15L laboratory-scale dissolved air float was built, applying scale-down laws to the prototype used by Rocha e Silva et al. [ The oily effluent used in the float was produced in a water-oil mixing tank, shaken for 40 min, before entering DAF chamber. The effluent inlet was adjusted to a flow of 3.0 L/min and the air inlet to microbubbles was maintained at 6.5 L/min. The oil concentration in the synthetic effluent was maintained at 500 ppm and monitored with the aid of a samples absorbance calibration. Distilled water was used to carry out the tests in the DAF bench prototype. Initially, tests were performed on the float without biosurfactants presence, where five samples were collected for each sample withdrawal time (0; 5; 10; 15; 20; 25 min). Similar assays were performed separately on the bench float after 1L addition of the biosurfactants. In each set of 25 runs, Then, using a chloroform/methanol solution (1:1 v/v), the samples were shaken for 5 min in a separatory funnel. After complete phases separation, aqueous phase was discarded and organic phase was transferred for further reading in a spectrophotometer (Biospectro SP-22). The results were submitted to statistical analyzes of ANOVA and Tukey's test using Statistica The analyzes of the samples of the water treated by the bench float were performed with the aid of absorbance and related as a function of time according to From the Tukey test it was possible to verify that the treatments (without and with biosurfactants) have significantly different means, except for the tests performed with the biosurfactants Subsequently, the experimental data were illustrated with the help of the graph shown by A simple inspection shows a similar increase in the average gain of the oil removal rate, motivated by the presence of both biosurfactants. The numerical results that generated the oil concentration curves as a function of time gave rise to third order polynomial models. These regression models were obtained using the Quasi-Newton numerical optimization method and are shown in Again, the Quasi-Newton numerical optimization method was used to adjust the experimental data and to define the kinetic constants of the DAF process, with and without addition of biosurfactants. Eqs.  The polynomial mathematical models of oil concentration in the synthetic effluent obtained from Eqs. Starting from a transformation following a first-order kinetics, in a continuously operating vessel and containing a liquid phase medium, i.e., of almost constant volume, concentration and conversion may be related as: By CSTR analogy the volume of a float can be estimated as: Dividing both sides of Eq. Combining now Eqs. Being able to rewrite it as: Or, in terms of Damköhler's number, In this way,  Rocha e Silva et al. [ Eq. The DAF process is effective with or without the use of biosurfactant for the treatment of oily waters. The use of biosurfactants increased the efficiency of the small scale DAF prototype and allowed the estimation of kinetic parameters, velocity constant (k) and reaction order (n). The determined kinetic parameters confirmed a first-order kinetics for dissolved air flotation, without and with the use of biosurfactant. With the use of a biosurfactant, the prediction of oil removal efficiency and the corresponding volume of the float can be favorably predicted, with aid of the dimensionless number of Damköhler, for first order chemical reactions or systems of similar behavior. The theme of this work can be expanded to various engineering sectors that aim to optimize commercial DAF systems. The experimental evidence obtained, that a FAD chamber operates similar to a mixing reactor, shows that its operational conditions can be associated with its dimensions, as provided by Eq. This study was funded by the Foundation for the Support of Science and Technology of the State of Pernambuco (FACEPE), the Research and Development Program from National Agency of Electrical Energy (ANEEL), the Candeias Energy Company (CEC) from Global Group, through the Project code PD-06961-0005/2016, the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) and the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Level Education Personnel (CAPES).