Equal channel angular pressing was used to consolidate commercially pure titanium chips into fully dense bulk material with high strength (up to 650MPa), due to an ultrafine grain size as low as 0.8μm, and good ductility (∼16%). Electron backscattered diffraction was employed to reveal low-angle grain boundaries (LAGBs), enabling a modified Hall–Petch relationship to be analyzed in consideration of strengthening contributions from LAGBs in particular, but also interstitial solutes, high-angle grain boundaries and potential oxide dispersion. In addition, up to 80% of the raw material may be removed in the form of chips during the machining of titanium. Remelting and casting to recycle are widely conducted in order to reduce waste, despite of their high energy consumption. Meanwhile, equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) is effective in preparing bulk ultrafine-grained material Motivated by an improved understanding of the strengthening achieved in solid-state recycled Ti, high-resolution electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) was employed in this study to reveal the ultrafine grain structure (<1 Commercially pure (CP) Ti (ASTM grade 2) chips were obtained by dry milling. The two channels of the ECAP die intersect at 90°, and have round cross-sections 11 Full density (4.50–4.52 The experimentally determined 0.2% proof stress ( σ EBSD analysis also enables an evaluation of the contribution of LAGBs to the strength. This can be treated as dislocation (Taylor) strengthening: In addition, the contribution from HAGBs follows the Hall–Petch strengthening: One can obtain the strength contributing factors ( In addition to the grain structure, the potential strengthening contribution from oxide dispersion due to its presence on chip surfaces should be considered. A TEM microstructure of the chip interface after ECAP at 590 The TEM microstructure of the sample ( The calculated contributions from each component are listed in In addition, the acquisition of the structural parameters is assumed to be affected by the selected section plane; nevertheless, it is understood that the linear intercept method seems to favor the adaptability of the strengthening model to analyze both equiaxed and elongated grains because of the statistical intercepts related directly to the obstacles to dislocations by the boundaries in either shape. On the other hand, one uses an aspect ratio in conjunction with lamellar spacing to analyze the elongated grain most likely appearing in the longitudinal plane after a single ECAP pass. A considerably smaller aspect ratio was reported with the subsequent annealing after ECAP of Al–3Mg alloy Finally, the good quality of the consolidated Ti manifested itself in a good ductility of ∼16% ( In summary, strengthening is derived primarily from an ultrafine grain structure (LAGBs in particular, but also HAGBs) and the significant existence of interstitials in Ti. A theoretical model for recycled CP Ti compared well with the experimental results, suggesting a very important role of LAGBs in strengthening. 