The diamond cutting tools (DCTs) find vast applications in the stone cutting industries. The properties of marbles/stones vary from mine to mine. The main factor judging the performance of the tool is its wear resistance which is primarily affected by materials/process variables and unpredictable working conditions. The DCTs having composition (by wt.%) of 13.5% Cu, 20% Co, 10% FTC, 6% Al, and 1% Mg and balance thermally reduced electrolytic iron powder were blended in a mixer with ball to powder ratio of 10:1 (by wt.%) for 2h. Then this blended powder is mixed manually with synthetic diamonds (2.88%) and 2% paraffin wax. The blended powder was green compacted to size 20mm×10mm×4.5mm in hot-pressed sintering furnace. The sintering response of DCT was studied and it was correlated with its wear performance in dry sliding Pin-On-Disc wear test machine having sintered alumina as the counterface. These specimens were subjected to varying loads (2, 6, 10, and 12kg) and varying velocities (1, 2, 3, and 4m/s) for wear test. The 2D contour was drawn to establish transition in wear modes from adhesive wear to abrasive wear.Primarily diamond cutting tools (DCTs) are traditionally manufactured using carbonyl iron as one of the main constituents of the matrix. However, in light of the cost, the manufacturers are increasingly trying for thermally reduced electrolytic iron powder without compromising on the quality of the product. Number of operating conditions such as feed rate, depth of cut, peripheral speed, load, pressure, velocity, cutting mode, properties of rock, working conditions etc. governs the wear rate of DCT There are inadequate literatures on wear mechanism of diamond cutting tools especially application of electrolytic iron powder as the principal matrix. In the proposed work, the attempt is made to correlate the dry sliding wear of DCTs with the elevated temperature stability of diamonds at varied sintering temperatures. The proposed work helps to improve our understanding on wear mechanism of diamond cutting tools. The major principal powder was thermally reduced (TR) electrolytic iron powder supplied by Industrial Metal Powder Pune. Initial blending was carried out by mixing powders except diamonds as indicated in The fabricated DCTs were characterized for hardness, density and wear rates. The hardness was measured on Rockwell B-scale (HRB). The density was calculated by Archimedes' principle. The dry sliding wear tests of DCTs were undertaken on Pin-on-Disc wear test machine (M/s Magnum Engineers, Bangalore) integrated with MAGVIEW-2009 software for acquisition of wear data. Sliding pin of DCT having a cross sectional area of 45 During wear test, sliding pin of DCT encounters a rise in sliding surface temperature which leads to the oxidation and softening of the matrix. Such interfacial rise in temperature is responsible for altering wear mechanism by way of loosening and fracturing of diamonds either. Thus increase in sliding surface temperature can be correlated with sintering temperature of DCT. It may be noted that diamonds in the matrix experience temperature fluctuation both in sintering and wear test. In nut shell, diamond in the matrix is sensitive to temperature. The sintering temperature was varied in steps to correlate the effect on properties of DCT. The maximum hardness is observed at 900 Based on the sinterability of DCTs at various temperatures, an optimum sintering temperature of 850 The effect of varying loads on wear rate at constant velocity is shown in The effect of varying velocities on wear rate was studied keeping load constant is shown in The combined effect of load and sliding speed is realized by plotting 3D surface response and the 2D contour is shown in Brief description of stages: [I] diamond particle embedded in the matrix; [II] diamond particle is just exposed due to wear loss of the surrounding matrix; [III] advanced stage at which the maximum portion of the particle is exposed to wear loss of the surrounding matrix; [IVa] diamond is dislodged due to weakening of particle–matrix interface leaving cavity; [IVb] diamond particle shows fracture due to nucleation of microcrack in the particle; and [IVc] one corner of the particle is thrown out in the direction of sliding (v) due to heavy tangential frictional forces. The diamond cutting tools analyzed for wear test were studied for all the possible load and speed combinations. Based on the analysis, the following conclusions can be drawn, The stability of diamonds at sintering temperature and its performance in dry sliding wear is established. The 2D contour plotted delineates adhesive wear mode and abrasive wear mode in wear map. It means the DCTs can show satisfactory performance at low loads and low sliding speed. The wear mechanism changes from two body wear to three body wear with simultaneous increase of load and sliding speed. The loss of diamonds by way of fracturing and dislodgement during wear accelerates the process of wear has been investigated. The authors are grateful to