The Cu–Fe-based coating was produced on copper alloy substrate by laser induction hybrid rapid cladding (LIHRC). The results showed that the maximum laser scanning speed and the maximum powder feeding rate can be increased to 3200mm/min and 110g/min, respectively. The coating was mainly composed of α-Fe and ε-Cu phases. At the bottom of coating, Cu-rich matrix took on planar growth and columnar dendritic morphology. In the center of coating, Fe-rich spherical particles containing a supersaturated Cu were embedded in Cu-rich matrix and many fine Cu-rich grains were precipitated inside the Fe-rich spherical particles. However, at the top of coating, the smaller Fe-rich spherical particles were embedded inside the larger Cu-rich spherical particles which were embedded in the dendritic Fe-rich matrix. The microhardness of coating was much three times higher than that of substrate.As well known, the copper alloys had many favorable properties such as high thermal and electric conductivity, outstanding plasticity and toughness. However, the copper alloys had poor wear resistance and oxidation resistance, which made the service life of copper alloys decreased markedly Laser cladding can produce the coatings with dense microstructure, low dilution and metallurgical bonding to substrate In our previous works, laser induction hybrid rapid cladding (LIHRC) has been well developed, because it can produce the crack-free Ni- and Fe-based WC coatings with high hardness and good wear resistance on steel when the efficiency of LIHRC is four times higher than that of individual laser cladding The substrate material used was copper alloy cut from continuous casting mould with a composition of Cu–0.85Cr–0.3Zr (wt%). The copper-based alloy powder was used as cladding material in the size range of 20–50 The experimental apparatus used has been described in detail in our previous paper The microstructure was examined under an optical microscope and an environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM). Dye penetrant testing was used to detect the cracks of Cu–Fe-based coatings. Energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) was performed to measure the average composition of coating. X' Pert Pro X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to analyze the phases (target: Cu, 40 It was difficult to successfully produce the defect-free coatings on copper alloy by laser cladding, due to good conductivity and high reflectivity to laser beam during laser processing The definition of the critical state of coatings by LIHRC have been given in detail in Ref.    According to above-mentioned results, the liquid phase separation took place during LIHRC. This was because LIHRC was still a rapid solidification. The laser scanning speed increased to 3200 Moreover, the second spherical droplet can also make Stokes movement in gravity field. The velocity of Stokes movement can be estimated as follows According to Eq. According to rapid solidification theory, the microstructure characteristics of Cu-rich melt at the bottom of molten pool, as major phase, were related to the degree of constitutional supercooling ahead of the solidification interface. The degree of constitutional supercooling depended on the ratio of the temperature gradient ( At the top of molten pool, when the Fe-rich melt as major phase was supercooled below the melting point, the supercooled γ-Fe was first solidified and grew into dendritic α-Fe, instead of martensitic transformation. This lack of martensitic phase may be attributed to an enhanced Cu solubility in γ-Fe, which can result in the precipitation of massive Cu-rich phases in the interdendritic ( Obviously, when the diameter of Cu-rich droplet was larger than the critical value, the second Cu-rich droplet moved toward the surface of molten pool. However, when the diameter of Cu-rich droplet was smaller than the critical value, the second Cu-rich droplet moved toward the bottom of molten pool. At the beginning of nucleation and growth for the second Cu-rich droplets at the top of molten pool, their diameters were smaller than the critical value. The main movement of the second Cu-rich droplets was from Marangoni movement. In the course of movement towards the top of molten pool, the Cu-rich droplets can collide and merge reciprocally, resulting in the growth of Cu-rich droplets. During the rapid solidification, the grown Cu-rich droplets were solidified and took on the planar growth at the interface of the dendritic Fe-rich matrix, discharging the excessive Fe content and releasing the latent heat. With advancing of solid–liquid interface toward the center of the grown Cu-rich droplet, the front of solid–liquid interface also became a Cu-rich melt containing a high concentration of Fe, leading to a significant decrease of its critical supercooling. This gave rise to the occurrence of the secondary liquid phase separation during the solidification of the grown Cu-rich droplet. As a result, the grown Cu-rich droplet transformed into the larger spherical Cu-rich particle and the relatively smaller Fe-rich spherical particles were embedded inside it ( Based on the above-mentioned analysis, the behavior of Cu–Fe liquid phase separation during LIHRC can be summarized as follows. The smaller droplets as minor phase can mutually collide, merge and grow up by Marangoni movement. Then the grown droplets merged those smaller droplets to gain a rapid growth and changed into the larger particles, showing that the droplets experienced a course of cannibal growth. Certainly, there were also many smaller droplets as the spherical particles because they had no enough time to be merged by those grown droplets, and then were preserved around those larger particles during the rapid solidification. Therefore, these spherical particles as the reinforcement phases were embedded in the matrix to block the dislocation migration, resulting in an increase in microhardness of single-track coating as shown in  When Cu–Fe-based coating was produced on copper alloy substrate by LIHRC, the maximum laser scanning speed and the maximum powder feeding rate were increased to 3200 In the center of coating, many larger Fe-rich spherical particles were embedded in Cu-rich matrix containing a supersaturated Fe, and many fine Cu-rich spherical grains were dispersedly precipitated inside the Fe-rich spherical particles. At the top of coating, the larger Cu-rich spherical particles were embedded in Fe-rich matrix containing a supersaturated Cu, and the smaller Fe-rich spherical particles were embedded inside the lager Cu-rich spherical particles due to the secondary liquid phase separation. The microhardness of coating was much three times higher than that of substrate. The strengthening mechanism of Cu–Fe-based coating by LIHRC was the combined strengthening of solution-hardening, precipitation-hardening and dispersion-hardening. However, how to harmoniously enhance the thermal conductivity and mechanical properties will be the future aspects of Cu–Fe-based coatings by LIHRC. The supports of this work by the