It is important to know which parameters are effective for the manufacture of expanded clay aggregate and to determine how effective these parameters are on expansion. In this study, expansion tests were conducted by using samples from three separate fields to determine how different parameters influence manufacturing. Clay grain size, pellet size, temperature in the furnace and firing time were selected in the expansion tests as parameters. Their effect on production was evidenced separately. It was found that decreasing the clay size has a positive effect on expansion while a decrease in pellet size has a negative effect on it. Also, temperature in the furnace and the time period during which the clay remains in the furnace are critical values for the resultant aggregate quality. The conditions for optimum manufacturing were explained in detail.Expanded clays are clays which may expand up to 5–6 fold by volume as a result of gas release when they are treated with heat. A hard sintered crust is formed on the outer surface, while quite light and highly durable aggregate with a porous clinker-like structure may be produced inside it Typical characteristics of the concrete masonry units made of expanded clay aggregates are Low density. Optimum capacity in load carrying. Low water absorption ratio. High resistance to freezing. Optimum plaster holding. Thermal insulation. High resistance to fire. Noise insulation. Resistance to chemicals. Many studies have been conducted on lightweight aggregate production and aggregate technology since 1908, when it was discovered that some clays may expand when heated Hayde invented the horizontal rotating furnace process with clay and shale before 1917 and produced highly durable low-density aggregate. Thus, it was used in concrete reinforced vessel building, multi-story buildings, bridges and platforms, especially after World War I Expanded clay aggregates are used in many different industries thanks to their high technical features and numerous advantages when compared to many other industrial raw materials. One of the materials with the greatest compressive strength among lightweight aggregates is expanded clay aggregates. This gives it a significant position in the construction industry. 20% may be saved in reinforcing steel while up to 50% may be saved in heating–cooling expenses in buildings containing expanded clay aggregate in Turkey Expanded clay aggregates are a new topic for Turkey and detailed studies on their production have begun to be conducted recently. Considering that there is no factory manufacturing expanded clay aggregate in Turkey, this study is an original study, especially for Turkey. It is also very important to note that Turkish clays are spread over a large area and the reserves are high. Therefore, it is very important that studies on the use and production of expanded clay aggregate should be conducted rapidly and the use of it should be made more popular in Turkey considering its superior advantages to current alternatives. If lightweight aggregates are required to compete with natural aggregates successfully, then manufacturing methods should be developed and comprehensive studies on the factors that, which are effective in expansion, should be conducted to ensure higher-quality lower-price aggregate manufacturing. Knowing which parameters have an effect on expanded clay aggregate manufacturing is important to understand the expansion mechanism and to improve manufacturing quality. The factors influencing the expansion process include Temperature in the furnace. Firing time. Grain size of the clay. Pellet size. Furnace design. Furnace’s atmosphere. Firing rate. Additives. Mineralogical and chemical structure. Viscosity of the melt. The effective parameters mentioned above designate the selected manufacturing method. Different types of clay should be studied to quantify the effect that any parameter has on expanded clay aggregate manufacturing. Therefore, samples were collected from three different clay fields, in Turkey ( From a geological point of view, of the expanding clay fields under study, the Ankara Kalecik field has a greyish metallic luster, while it is seen as dark grey–black when wet. Secondary calcite was developed in some places. It has sandstone-shale alteration with a schist-like view behind limestone lenses. This unit is overlain by greyish-grey color sandstone-shale faces. It is a unit exposed in macro scale achieving 100 The Kastamonu Küre field consists of shale containing blackish-greenish brown laminated phyllite with mica in some localities, blackish-grey, fine-grained, tight-sandstone–limestone intermediate levels and a black-yellowish-brown color, thin–medium–thick layered hard and strictly tied sandstone. Secondary pyrite formation and capillary quartz are encountered. It has a metallic luster and a lubricated feeling. The Bartın Kozcağız field is made up of alteration of autochtonous rocks such as shale, marn, and limestone, and consists of turbiditic deposits such as sandstone, limestone with sand and conglomerates. Moreover, it contains various olistolites. Black-greyish schist is a unit containing secondary calcite formations, although there are not too many. It is in the form of schist laminated on the surface and coarse grains beneath. The fractured surfaces are a kidney-like-conchoidal shape. X-ray diffraction patterns belonging to the samples obtained from the fields under study are given in The samples collected from the fields were broken and then milled. To show the effect of clay size clearly, samples in different clay sizes (100, 200 and 300 When the sample preparation and shaping operations are well performed, greater expansion of the clay can be obtained. Only optimum furnace conditions produce the desired expanded clay aggregate. In this study, a high volume stationary furnace, which is resistant to sudden temperature shocks, allowing the temperature to be raised rapidly, was employed. Studies were conducted at different furnace temperatures to determine at which temperature expansion was effective, at which temperature raw pellets began to expand, and which temperature yielded optimum expansion. Firing processes took place at different temperatures beginning from 900 Another significant point in the expansion process is how long raw pellets stay inside the furnace. Thus, raw pellets were kept inside the furnace for different time periods at the same temperature to find the optimum time period for remaining inside the furnace and these time periods were specified as 5, 10, 15 or 20 The mass of a unit volume of the produced aggregates was measured by using the ASTM C493-98 To find out the effects of the production parameters on expansion in the best way, four different parameters were investigated. For this purpose, 756 expansion experiments in total were conducted by using the samples collected from three different fields. The results from which the best expansion had been obtained were assessed to show the effects of each parameter. Each manufacturing parameter was evaluated and the obtained results are explained below. Samples from three different fields were prepared in three different grain sizes. Clay was shaped in a constant pellet size of 15 The following conclusions can be made from the data in Ankara clay produces 0.42 More expansion was obtained by decreasing the clay size from −300 It is seen that different clay sizes (−200 Because reducing the clay size is an undesired situation from an economical point of view, the maximum grain size should be employed depending on the application. Samples from three different fields having the same clay size were prepared in three different pellet sizes and the obtained results are seen in The following conclusions can be made from the data in A 5 When the pellet size increased from 5 It is clearly seen that pellets that were 10 and 15 10 and 15 Considering the Bartın clay, it is seen that if the pellet size is too big, a recovery in expansion to some extent may be seen. The reason may be that sufficient heat cannot be transferred to the center of a big pellet for gas formation and for arresting any released gas within the formed sintered crust. Samples from three different fields were prepared and fired at different temperatures with different holding times in the furnace. The relationships between temperature and unit volume mass for three samples are given in The following conclusions can be made from It was determined under identical operational conditions that the Ankara clay began to expand at 1050 Because clay from Ankara and Bartın melt at 1200 Ankara and Bartın clays melted at 1200 Considering clay’s behavior according to heat, it expands to a certain extent and then begins to melt; melting causes irregular and big pores and decreases the aggregate’s mechanical resistance. It is seen that a sufficient temperature should be found to ensure optimum manufacturing conditions. Increasing the operational temperature is an undesired situation due to economical concerns; this increases unit manufacturing costs. Samples from three different fields were prepared and fired at the same temperatures in the furnace during different time periods and the results are given in The following conclusions can be made from the data in Under identical operational conditions, the Ankara clay produced aggregates with a density of 0.36 Optimum expansion rates were obtained with 15 The time period spent in the furnace becomes significant after clay has been sufficiently heated for gas formation; shorter time periods cannot suffice for sufficient gas release and the formation of a pyroplastic structure, but on the other hand, when the material stays in the furnace for a time period which is longer than required, the generated gas leaks outside before the sintered crust is formed, thus the projected expansion cannot occur. The following conclusions were made according to the conducted study: Decreasing the clay grain size, which is one of the manufacturing parameters, results in an increase in expansion. To produce aggregate that meets the requirements of its intended application, while reducing manufacturing cost, clay size should be optimized. As pellet size increases, expansion also increases. If a lower density is required in manufacturing aggregates in a desired size, a pellet size close to the maximum point within that pellet size range may be chosen. The temperature inside the furnace is the most significant parameter, which must be ensured. Expansion increases as temperature increases up to near the melting point, which varies according to clay type. Thus, an optimum temperature should be specified according to the type of clay. To reduce unit manufacturing cost, the lowest possible temperature should be employed in manufacturing to achieve the desired aggregate density. The effective time period in the furnace varies between types of clay. Thus, tests should be conducted to find the effective time period for each clay to be used in manufacturing. Significant data was obtained relating to expanded clay aggregate production, which is a new task in Turkey. This determination of the effects of the four parameters (clay grain size, pellet size, temperature in the furnace, and firing time) serves as a reference point for production and studies to be conducted in the future.