This paper adopts a novel data-processing method of ECSA® based on TG/DSC-MS system to basically study the characteristics of release and conversion of fluorides and cyanides during heat treatment of the spent cathode carbon block (SCCB). All the experiments were conducted at 10 K⋅min−1 heating rate and under Ar or Ar–O2 atmospheres. The results indicate that the release of fluorides was just a steady but slow phase transition process under both Ar and Ar–O2 atmospheres, which can be comparatively accelerated when the carbon material was burnt. The cyanides were effectively decomposed at high temperature and at Ar–O2 atmosphere, with around three quarters of the cyanides being converted to the N2 and nearly a quarter being to the NO. Finally, analysis on the flue gas composition indicates that it had a more complicated composition of CO2, N2, NO, NO2, HCN under Ar–O2 atmosphere but only had a composition of CO2 and NO under Ar atmosphere.The primary aluminum is mainly produced in the cryolite-alumina molten salt electrolysis process, which is conducted in cells about 1–1.5 m in height, 5–15 m in length, and 3–5 m in width at present. The cell is filled with the molten mixture of alumina, cryolite and the other fluoride salts between two electrodes, held in temperatures around 950 °C. The carbon anode hangs above the molten bath while the cathode carbon block is arranged regularly on the bottom of the cell connected to steel bars, playing functions of conducting current and bearing the high temperature molten mixture ( The cathode carbon block used in aluminum reduction cell is often made from electric calcined anthracite, graphite scrap and coal tar pitch through mixing, shaping, roasting and graphitization ( The oxygen from the air can react with the penetrated Na and Al The penetrated Al liquid, fluorides can react with the steel bars to form Al–Fe alloy as follows, When overhauling the reduction cell, the damaged cathode carbon blocks need to be replaced and discarded, which is often given a name of “spent cathode carbon block (SCCB)”. It is estimated that for every ton of primary aluminum produced 8–10 kg SCCB is generated, and the total amount of SCCB generated is around 0.85 million tons per year in the world. The SCCB contains highly valuable graphitized carbon material. However, due to containing a large amount of soluble fluorides (in the level of 2000–4000 mg⋅L The prime target of treating the hazardous SCCB is to remove the fluorides and cyanides clearly. Numerous potential treatment technologies had been developed over the last decades ( Actually, no matter the traditional pyrometallurgy process or the high temperature heat treating process, which are uniformly referred to as “heat-treating process” in this paper, most of cyanides and partial fluorides must be transferred into the flue gas. Qualitative and quantitative analysis on the thermal behavior such as release and conversion characteristics of fluorides and cyanides cannot be well done now and the relevant basic data can rarely be found in the literature. It will get the designer into troubles of determining the operating conditions such as temperature, residence time if the quantitative conversion data cannot be obtained; and also of choosing the purification devices like denitrification device if the composition and quantities of the flue gas, especially the pollution gases such as HF, NOx, is still unclear. Therefore there will be of great significance to clearly understand the release and conversion characteristics of fluorides and cyanides for heat-treating SCCB, and to provide a qualitative and quantitative data of gases composition released in the flue gas. The objective of this article is to basically measure and analyze the characteristics of release and conversion of fluorides and cyanides during heat-treating SCCB, to obtain qualitatively the composition of flue gas, and to determine quantitatively the content of pollution gases in the flue gas by using the thermogravimetry - Differential Scanning Calorimeter - mass spectrometry (TG/DSC-MS) analysis ( The spent cathode carbon block used in this study was taken from an overhauled aluminum reduction cell in service for 2163 days in a smelter in western China. The raw spent cathode carbon block was broken down by using a jaw crusher, then sieved to obtain two types of particle size ~1 mm (label as S-1) and ~100 μm (label as S-2). Observation and analysis by optical microscope (OM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) show in In addition, The measurements were conducted on a Netzsch STA 449F3 thermoanalyser coupled with a Quadruple Mass Spectrometer (QMS) 403C Aëolos. The device operated without sample in inert atmosphere (high purity analytical grade dry Ar, 99.999%) every time before measurements to eliminate the memory effects. The measurements were conducted for both samples under Ar and Ar–O Note that relative to a rough and ready measurement, a novel method of equivalent characteristic spectrum analysis (ECSA®) was used to deal with data, i.e., the ion current of mass spectrum that measured directly by the instrument. The specific principle and operation of ECSA based on the TG/DSC-MS measurement can be found in the literatures ( At first, the analysis focuses on the thermal behavior of treating SCCB with particle size of ~1 mm, i.e. sample S-1, under Ar atmosphere and Ar–O The thermal behavior of treating sample S-1 under Ar atmosphere, as shown in In conclusion, the volatilization of fluorides during treating SCCB under both Ar and Ar–O Decomposition of cyanides is a main source of producing the NOx in the flue gas during the heat-treating SCCB process. At first, For heat-treating SCCB with particle size of ~1 mm (sample S-1) under Ar–O Considering the structure of cyanides embedded into the carbon molecular network, particle size could affect the decompostion of cyanides during heat-treating SCCB. Thus the measurement for heat-treating SCCB with particle size of ~100 μm (sample S-2) under Ar–O Generally, the combustion rate of carbon is controlled, separately or in combination, by chemical-reaction, pore-diffusion processes, or bulk-diffusion processes ( Lastly, the influence of atmosphere on the decomposition of cyanides is investigated. In conclusion, decomposition of cyanides is greatly related to the particle size and atmosphere. The cyanides in the SCCB can be effectively decomposed to produce N The thermal behaviors of release and conversion of fluorides and cyanides during thermal treatment of SCCB were basically measured by adopting the TG/DSC-MS analysis combining a novel data-processing method of ECSA® in this paper. The variation in composition and content of the flue gas under varying conditions were qualitatively and quantitatively obtained and analyzed in detail. The main conclusions are summarized as follows: During the thermal treatment, the fluorides can only be volatilized when the temperature is beyond their respective melting point and is almost not affected by the combustion of carbon in the SCCB particle. The fluorides volatilization is a steady but slow process under both Ar and Ar–O The cyanides can be effectively decomposed at the high temperature and at oxygen atmosphere. And, decomposition of cyanides is greatly related to the temperature, atmosphere, particle size as well as the carbon combustion process. The cyanides in the SCCB with small particle size can be completely decomposed at a lower and wide-range temperatures under Ar–O The quantitative caculation by ECSA® indicates that under Ar–O The flue gas composition measured under Ar–O  This study was supported by the