Molecular simulation techniques have been applied to previously synthesised liquid crystalline polymers containing azobenzene and diphenyl mesogenic groups within the chain. Single chains and amorphous unit cells of aromatic polymers with a degree of polymerisation of 4–16 and containing propylene and diethyletheric (oxydiethylene) spacers were used. The energy was minimised and then molecular dynamics were performed for 1000ps at seven temperatures between 10 and 600K. The axial ratio or coefficient of asymmetry was calculated from computer-generated structures. The predictive capability of the orientational order parameter was used to estimate the degree of orientation and the liquid crystalline–isotropic transition temperature of the polymers. The simulated results for the monotropic polymers agreed very well with Maier–Saupe mean field theory and experimental data, though the enantiotropic polymer did not show a good agreement. The predicted glass transition and decomposition temperatures of the simulated polymers are also reported.Molecular simulation techniques are playing an important role in modern characterisation of polymers. These techniques are likely to benefit the study of polymers by increasing the understanding of chemical and physical processes at the molecular and atomic level, improving the characterisation of polymers, assisting in the design of new polymers and predicting their properties. Simulations are usually considerable cheaper and faster than experiments, and are increasingly useful for industrial applications. Molecular simulation also offers a unique perspective on the molecular level processes controlling the mechanical, physical, optical, chemical and liquid crystalline properties. In the last few years scientific research in the polymer area has concentrated on the synthesis, and experimental and molecular simulation characterisations of new polymers having special properties, i.e. liquid crystalline properties. In general, for normally flexible polymers to exhibit liquid crystalline properties, mesogenic molecules, such as rod-like, disk-like or pyramid-like, have to be incorporated into or onto their chains. The mesogenic units are usually made up of a rigid core of two or more aromatic rings. These stiff regions along the chain allow the polymer to orient in a manner similar to ordinary liquid crystals. In previous publications of Hurduc et al. As a consequence, we have replaced the oxetane spacer with a propylene one that presents an approximately similar flexibility The fundamental reason for this research is to explore and investigate if the chain conformation is or is not responsible for monotropic or enantiotropic behaviour. It is true that for random copolymers it is not easy to develop a conformational study, due to the large number of arrangements of the sequences of the repeating units that are present in a random copolymer. Nevertheless, we have selected from many possible conformations those that agree better with the experimental results. Another reason for this research is to explore the unique properties of the studied monotropic and enantiotropic copolymers containing azobenzene and diphenyl mesogens in order to gain considerable insight into the behaviour of these polymers. For the polymers under consideration such a study has not been previously conducted. Due to the In this study molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of monotropic and enantiotropic polymers were performed, which aimed to elucidate whether a correlation exists between polymer conformation and the mesophase character, and to analyse the structure–property relationship of LCPs, thus aiding in the design of new materials. This paper shows how it is possible to predict LC properties and the degree of orientation of polymers by molecular modelling. Therefore, the geometric parameters, such as length ( This study also illustrates the interplay of molecular simulation with both numerical theories of LCPs (lattice model and mean field) and experimental observations. Molecular simulation of these polymers is unquestionably very challenging because of the complexity of their monomeric units, which augments uncertainties in the description of intra- and intermolecular interactions, induces the possibility of complex morphologies with large characteristic length scales, and implies the presence of molecular motions with very long characteristic times that cannot be addressed with conventional simulation techniques. Therefore, molecular simulation is likely to offer explanations that are considerably more far reaching than current experimental techniques. These molecular simulations showed a specific conformation corresponding to monotropic polymers. This specific conformation is also present for similar polymers with azobenzene and diphenyl mesogenic groups containing a flexible diethyletheric spacer. MD simulations and conformational analyses of these polymers containing a flexible diethyletheric spacer are also included in this paper. For amorphous structures of the simulated polymers with degree of polymerisation (DP) 16, the predicted glass transition and decomposition temperatures have also been calculated. The motivation behind this research is the wide applications of LCPs in industry and their unique properties such orientational, optical, electrical, magnetic, excellent dimensional stability, etc. LCPs are both scientifically interesting and technologically important. The chemical structure of the monomeric units of the copolymers corresponding to Structure 1, The chemical structure of the monomeric units of the copolymers corresponding to Structure 3, In this study, the chemical structure of the azobenzene mesogenic group used corresponds to the Apart from the main objectives of this research outlined in The simulations of the copolymers corresponding to Structures 2–4 had two main goals. Firstly, the simulations intended to provide more details about the chain geometry of the studied polymers and to verify whether the chain geometry of the polymers is unaffected by the chain length. The simulations were performed for several DPs to examine the tendency of the chain geometry. Secondly, the simulations aimed to predict additional vital data for the experimental observations in terms of the type of the distribution of the unit molecules into the polymer chains (random or alternating). The studied polymers were synthesised by the polycondensation of 1,3-dibromopropane (DBP) or bis(2-chlor-ethyl)ether (CEE) and various bisphenols mixtures such as 4,4′-dihydroxyazobenzene (DHAB) and 4,4′-dihydroxydiphenol (DHD) using phase transfer catalysis. The phase transfer catalysis (PTC) method is widely used in poly- and co-polymer syntheses by incorporating mesogenic segments in the main chain of the polymer. As in a typical polycondensation reaction, 1 The polymers were synthesised according to the chemical reaction scheme shown in The experimental characterisation of the polymers was performed by  The transition temperatures were recorded by DSC thermograms on a SEIKO DSC 220 device with a scan rate of heating/cooling of 10 The next section describes in complete detail the computational method used. Then the computed results are presented, discussed and compared with available experimental data. The simulations were performed for monodisperse systems of random (statistical) and alternating (ordered) copolymer chains with DP between 4 and 16, in agreement with the DP obtained experimentally. The copolymerisation ratio corresponding to the simulated structures present some differences when compared with the experimental results (i.e. it is not possible for a certain DP value to use a copolymerisation ratio of 2.7). In this paper we have presented only two conformations for each of the simulated polymeric structures: a polymer conformation that is in agreement with the experimental results and a polymer conformation that is not in agreement with the experimental results. Computations and conformational analyses were carried out using molecular simulation software for material science Single chains and amorphous unit cells of the polymers with DP equal to 4–16 were used for these simulations. The initial macromolecular conformations of the simulated polymers were optimised and the value of the total potential energy and its components of the investigated polymers were obtained. The Dreiding 2.21 force field provides a potential energy interaction function ( In practice it is common to use a suitably large cut-off distance, so for this study a cut-off distance of 150 The charge distribution in the molecule, due to Coulombic (electrostatic) interactions, of the simulated polymer chains was obtained with the charge equilibration method described by Rappe and Goddard The validity of the molecular simulation calculations depends on the suitability and accuracy of the equations used for the bonded and non-bonded potentials, which are of great importance for industrial applications. After the force field is constructed, the total potential energy is likely to be high and not representative of the actual structure. The next logical application of the total potential energy expression is to find an “ideal” structure for the polymer molecule through energy minimisation, where the term “ideal structure” usually is taken to mean the lowest-energy conformation. This involves mathematical methods for shifting the atoms in space to lower the energy and eventually bring the structure to an equilibrium state by adjusting the atomic coordinates and recalculating the energy repeatedly. In order to find a local minimum of the total potential energy ( Minimisation algorithms used for polymers may be classified according to the types of derivatives that are used in choosing the search direction. The minimisations were performed using the steepest-descent method and Conjugate-Gradient 200 minimiser. The Conjugate-Gradient algorithm, described by Fletcher and Reeves The conjugate-gradient method utilises information from a previous minimisation step to modify the move in the next step. For each minimisation step the gradient is calculated and used as auxiliary information for computing the new direction vector forward to energy minimum. Each minimisation step successively refines the direction that ends in arriving at the minimum. Then the minimised macromolecular conformations and unit cells were used for MD simulation in order to avoid the possibility of starting from a highly improbable configuration. The The order parameter, The order parameter, known also as the anisotropy factor, of LCPs varies inversely with temperature as a result of kinetic molecular motion. To calculate the orientational order parameter of the simulated copolymers and to analyse their orientational properties, the MD, polymer properties and orientation function modules have been employed. The polymer properties module uses the average value, 〈cos The predictive capability of The experimental observations show an enantiotropic mesophase for the polymer corresponding to Structure 1. The In order to clarify the presence of liquid crystalline behaviour of the polymer corresponding to Structure 1, molecular simulations were performed for random copolymers with DP equal to 4 and 5 in accordance with the experimentally obtained value of DP (  In order to characterise the degree of orientation of the mesophase, the order parameter, The order parameter values of the polymer chains corresponding to Structure 1 are presented in In previous studies For the polymers corresponding to Structures 2–4, the experimental observations show monotropic behaviour. The For this purpose, the nearest value to the experimentally obtained DP for both random and alternating copolymers was used (i.e. 8 for 7 or 12 for 11) in order to make sure that the desired copolymerisation ratio remains unchanged. These simulations intended to investigate which one of the random and alternating copolymers exhibits a mesophase. And if they both do, the next step would be to find the best match of the computationally obtained values of the For the polymer corresponding to Structure 2, different chain geometries were obtained for alternating and random copolymers. The simulations displayed interesting chain geometry for the alternating polymer. Although the mesogenic groups of this polymer do not have a disc-like shape by themselves, the chain geometry of the polymer can still be assimilated to a columnar one. This can be explained by the helical chain geometry of the polymer ( Due to the low DP values of the investigated polymers a comparison between the order parameter values (for the nematic/isotropic transition) corresponding to the Maier–Saupe theory, and the synthesised polymers was undertaken. As asserted in the Maier–Saupe theory, the calculated order parameters predict for this polymer a possible mesophase. These order parameters of the alternating polymer for DP equal to 8, 12 or 16 are presented in In general, the Flory–Ronca theory is appropriate for long and linear semi-rigid or rigid polymers, whereas the Maier–Saupe theory is appropriate for any kind of polymer geometry. Taking into consideration the above theories, for the helical chain geometry of the polymer corresponding to Structure 2 ( The chain geometry of the polymer corresponding to Structure 2 with a random distribution of the monomeric units is different from the chain geometry of this polymer with alternating distribution. Thus, for a random distribution of the monomeric units of the polymer with DP equal to 16, the chain geometry is of a circle-like shape with a diameter of about 60 According to the Maier–Saupe theory, the calculated order parameters predict for the random copolymer a possible mesophase. These order parameters are presented in In conclusion, the Another observation that can be made according to this study is related to the order parameter variation with temperature. The order parameter for the alternating copolymer increases slightly when compared with the starting value, and reaches a maximum at about 300 To verify whether the conformations of the polymer chains are different in terms of monotropic behaviour, two other polymers containing a flexible diethyletheric spacer moiety (Structures 3 and 4) have been analysed. The same mesogens, azobenzene and diphenyl, have been used. The experimental observations show, for the polymer corresponding to Structure 3, a monotropic mesophase between 473 and 468 The polymer chain geometry was obtained with a pitch of the helix of 17 Thus, for the alternating copolymer with DP equal to 12, according to the Maier–Saupe theory, the order parameter is very close to the minimum value necessary to exhibit a mesophase (0.6), whereas for DP equal to 16 the computational calculations predict that a mesophase is not possible. Although the experimental difficulties do not allow us, at least for the time being, the synthesis of this polymer with DP≥16, it would be desirable to verify experimentally whether for DP equal to 16 the liquid crystalline behaviour disappears, as is predicted by molecular simulation. In order to determine the type of distribution of the unit molecules in the polymer corresponding to Structure 3, a comparison was made between the experimental and computational values of Another important observation of the performed simulations is worth noticing. Unlike the alternating polymer with DP equal to 16, the random polymer with the same DP still exhibits a mesophase, but the clearing temperature is about 425 For the polymer corresponding to Structure 4 the conformations obtained for alternating and random copolymers had similar helical chain geometry. The pitch of the helix of the alternating copolymer is equal to 36 The calculated order parameters of the alternating and random copolymers corresponding to Structure 4 are given in Since the experimentally obtained DP was 10, the closest values of DP to satisfy the copolymerisation ratios 1:1 and 3:1 are 8 and 12. Corresponding with the Maier–Saupe theory, the order parameters for these DPs predict that both the alternating and random copolymers exhibit a mesophase. In this case a comparison is required between the experimental and computational values of This can be explained by the similarities of the structures, order parameter values and The experimental characterisation by DSC could not determine the glass transition temperature, The calculations were performed for amorphous structures of the studied random copolymers with DP equal to 16. As an example, the amorphous structure of the pure copolymer corresponding to Structure 3 is given in Initial observation of the data for all the studied copolymers indicates that the values of  The calculated Finally, it would be interesting in the future to compare the presented theoretical Molecular simulation is considered a new way of complementing experimental studies by identifying and describing in detail the chemical and physical processes at the molecular and atomic levels, and in turn increasing the understanding of the properties of the materials. This paper has presented a detailed characterisation of monotropic and enantiotropic main-chain liquid crystalline aromatic polymers by molecular simulations and laboratory experiments. The computer-generated structures of the studied copolymers have given essential information about polymer chain geometry including chain length, chain diameter, coefficient of asymmetry and some other characteristics specific to a particular structure (i.e. internal diameter of the helical polymer structures). Thus molecular simulation has proven that it can offer a complete image of the chain geometry and supramolecular ordering of the polymeric structures. The conformational analyses have shown helical chain geometry for polymers corresponding to Structures 2–4 and almost linear chain geometry for the polymer corresponding to Structure 1. Since the polymers corresponding to Structures 2–4 are monotropic and the polymer corresponding to Structure 1 is enantiotropic, the conclusion can be drawn that a correlation exists between the chain geometry and the type of mesophase. Thus, according to this study and some previous studies According to the thermodynamic theory of the monotropic liquid crystalline phase Since the experimental observations could not provide information about the distribution of monomeric units, random or alternating, into the synthesised polymer chains, the simulations were performed to determine the distribution. The predictive capability of the orientational order parameter has been utilised to predict the liquid crystalline–isotropic transition (clearing temperature), of the investigated polymers and this was used in the prediction of the type of the distribution. For most of the studied polymers the simulation predicted a random distribution. Only for the copolymer corresponding to Structure 4 the data for random and alternating distribution have very similar values. In terms of chain geometry, the conformational studies of the polymer corresponding to Structure 2 have shown significant differences between alternating and random copolymer chain geometry, whereas for the polymer corresponding to Structures 3 and 4 these geometries are approximately similar. According to the Maier–Saupe mean field theory related to the order parameter value ( In general, the simulations of the studied copolymers with DP 8, 12 and 16 have shown that the order parameter decreases with an increase of DP. Moreover the simulations of the alternating copolymer chains corresponding to Structures 3 and 4 with DP equal to 16 have predicted that the mesophase will no longer exist. Molecular simulation is considered as a bridge between experimental and theoretical studies and is a powerful research tool for gaining insights into polymer chemical structures and predicting the properties of polymers. Thus, the predictive capability of isothermal–isobaric The simulated polymers are predicted to have high thermal stability because no decomposition temperature below 678