The relative strength of posterior plating and dual medial-lateral plating for comminuted olecranon fractures has not been evaluated. Fifteen male cadaveric elbows with simulated highly comminuted olecranon fractures were tested to failure via cantilever bending. The strength of dual medial-lateral plates and a single posterior plate with and without an intramedullary screw was evaluated. The mean bending moment at failure for the dual-plated specimens was 30.0 ± 7.5 Nm. The mean bending moment at failure for specimens with a posterior plate without an intramedullary screw was 34.5 ± 9.1 Nm. The mean bending moment at failure for specimens with a posterior plate and an intramedullary screw was 44.5 ± 6.9 Nm; this was significantly greater than for dual-plated specimens (P < .05) but not for specimens with a posterior plate without an intramedullary screw. The posterior plate with an intramedullary screw was the most stable construct tested and may, therefore, be the preferred method of fixation for comminuted olecranon fractures. This construct was significantly (48%) stronger than dual medial and lateral plating.Internal fixation of comminuted fractures has evolved toward more stable constructs. The purpose of this study was to compare the strength and rigidity of dual medial and lateral plating with posterior plating, with and without an intramedullary screw, in a cadaveric model simulating a highly comminuted olecranon fracture. The null hypothesis was that there was no significant difference in strength or stiffness between these constructs. Fifteen male cadaveric elbows were sectioned from fresh-frozen upper extremities at the mid arm and distal forearm. The mean age of the specimens was 64 years, with a range from 40 to 83 years. Each specimen was examined clinically and radiographically to rule out pathology and advanced osteopenia; specimens without trabeculae present in the olecranon were excluded. The superficial soft tissues were removed, leaving only the joint capsule, medial and lateral collateral ligaments, annular ligament, and triceps mechanism. A small capsulotomy was made to inspect the articular surface of the elbow and to rule out any evidence of previous injury. The elbows were then randomly assigned to one of three groups. Group 1 elbows were fixed with dual medial and lateral 3.5-mm dynamic compression plates (Synthes, Paoli, PA), a 7-hole plate medially and an 8-hole plate laterally ( Group 2 elbows were fixed with a posterior plate with an intramedullary screw. A single 8-hole 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate was anatomically contoured along the posterior border of the ulna. A long 4.0 mm cancellous screw (50 mm in length) was placed through the plate, across the fracture gap, and into the ulnar shaft. Two other cancellous screws were placed around the long lag screw into the proximal ulnar fragment. Three distal bicortical screws secured the plate to the distal ulnar fragment ( Group 3 elbows were fixed with a posterior 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate in similar fashion to group 2 elbows. The sole difference was that the intramedullary screw was replaced with a shorter screw that remained solely in the proximal fragment and did not traverse the osteotomy site ( Placement of the plates before the segmental excision ensured anatomic reduction of the olecranon with replacement of the plates. The plates were then removed, and an osteotomy of the proximal ulna was performed with an oscillating saw by use of a custom-made jig to produce a 7-mm full-thickness segmental defect in the middle third of the olecranon. After segmental bone resection, there was no continuity between the proximal and distal fragments, simulating a highly comminuted fracture without cortical continuity. The proximal humerus of each specimen was potted into a polyvinyl chloride pipe with potting polymer. To avoid slipping of the proximal fragment during testing, the triceps was secured to the polyvinyl chloride pipe, and a stainless steel Dall-Miles cable (Stryker-Howmedica-Osteonics, Allendale, NJ) was placed through the proximal ulna. The cable was placed to avoid interference with construct failure. It was passed from the osteotomy site, anterior to all screws, out through the area of the triceps insertion, and anchored to the testing apparatus. To prevent the cable from cutting through the metaphyseal bone adjacent to the osteotomy site, it was passed through a small, thin aluminum plate positioned inside the osteotomy defect, also placed to avoid interference with construct failure ( All specimens were tested via a cyclical loading protocol with a servohydraulic test machine (MTS machine; Instron Corporation, Canton, MA). A cantilever bending force was applied to the distal most posterior aspect of the ulnar shaft, distal to the end of the plate. The force was applied in the plane of elbow motion to create an anterior bending moment at the osteotomy ( Ten cycles were performed at each force level with incremental increases of 20 N, similar to a published incremental cyclic loading protocol. Failure was defined as 3 mm of displacement at the posterior aspect of the fracture site or catastrophic failure, whichever came first. The force of failure was the maximum force that the construct withstood. Measurements of force application at the point of failure were converted to bending moments by measuring the distance from the fracture site to the point at which the force was applied. The linear part of each specimen’s bending moment–gap displacement curve was used to compare stiffness. Statistical comparison was made among groups by use of 1-way analysis of variance for 3 independent samples. With failure defined as either 3 mm of displacement at the posterior aspect of the fracture site or catastrophic failure, the mean bending moment at failure for the dual medial-lateral plated specimens was 30.0 ± 7.5 Nm. The mean bending moment at failure for specimens with a posterior plate without an intramedullary screw was 34.5 ± 9.1 Nm. This difference was not statistically significant ( The mean number of cycles to failure for the dual plates was 172 ± 40. The mean number of cycles to failure for the posterior plate without an intramedullary screw was 175 ± 52. The mean number of cycles to failure for the posterior plate with an intramedullary screw was 258 ± 56. The mean number of cycles to failure was significantly greater for posterior plating with the intramedullary screw compared with dual plating ( Focusing on only catastrophic failure and ignoring prefailure displacement, the mean bending moment for the 5 dual-plated (medial-lateral) specimens was 39.0 ± 14.8 Nm. The mean bending moment for the 5 posteriorly plated specimens without an intramedullary screws was 35.3 ± 9.3 Nm. The mean bending moment for the 5 posteriorly plated specimens with an intramedullary screw was 45.2 ± 6.3. None of these differences was significantly different ( The mean stiffness for dual plating was 7.0 ± 5.8 Nm/mm. The mean stiffness for a posterior plate without an intramedullary screw was 13.0 ± 8.0 Nm/mm. The mean stiffness a posterior plate with an intramedullary screw was 17.6 ± 4.1 Nm/mm. Although there was a trend toward increasing construct stiffness from dual plates to a posterior plate without an intramedullary screw to a posterior plate with an intramedullary screw, these differences did not attain statistical significance ( In the dual-plated group, 4 of 5 specimens had 3 mm of prefixation failure displacement before fixation failure occurred; only 1 underwent fixation failure before displacing 3 mm. In the group with a posterior plate without an intramedullary screw, 2 underwent 3 mm of prefixation failure before fixation failure occurred and 3 had fixation failure without displacing 3 mm. In the group with a posterior plate with an intramedullary screw, only 1 underwent 3 mm of displacement before fixation failure and 4 had fixation failure before displacing 3 mm. In the treatment of comminuted olecranon fractures, rigid internal fixation is essential to permit early elbow motion, which facilitates optimal postoperative functional results. To our knowledge, the biomechanical importance of the intramedullary screw placed through the most proximal hole of the posterior plate has not been evaluated. Placement of an intramedullary screw may limit options for placement of posterior screws in cases of extreme comminution. Therefore, its importance to the strength of the fixation construct should be known. This cadaveric model used a segmental mid-olecranon defect to represent severe comminution without cortical continuity in cadaveric male olecranons without significant osteopenia. In this model, a posterior plate with an intramedullary screw had a significantly (48%) higher bending moment at failure compared with dual medial-lateral plates. On the basis of our observations, the posterior plate’s ability to act as a tension-band device compensated for its lesser number of screws in the proximal fragment, as well as the unicortical nature of these screws. In addition, the intramedullary screw may have acted as an internal splint, analogous to an intramedullary nail, providing more support for the construct. There was a trend toward progressively increasing construct stiffness from dual medial-lateral plating to posterior plating without an intramedullary screw to posterior plating with an intramedullary screw. This trend was reflected in the progressively increasing number of specimens that underwent fixation failure before displacing 3 mm. As a 10-kg pull at the level of the wrist creates a moment of approximately 30 Nm at the elbow The usual limitations of cadaveric studies were present here. The cadavers averaged 64 years of age, which may be higher than the mean age of patients sustaining high-energy elbow trauma. The cadavers may, therefore, have more osteopenia than noted clinically. To account for this, specimens with severe osteopenia (without trabeculae in the olecranon) were excluded. Comminution may come in many patterns and is difficult to predict. In clinical situations, further comminution of the proximal fragment may occur, and rigid internal fixation is an ideal that may not always be clinically attainable. Other plate configurations are available that were not tested here. Although it may be reasonable to place 1 plate posteriorly and 1 plate either medially or laterally, we chose to evaluate dual medial and lateral plates in order to allow bicortical fixation of all proximal fragment screws and to allow the plates to cradle the comminuted pieces, buttressing them in position. In addition, newer periarticular plates are now available, which may have different biomechanical properties than the 3.5-mm dynamic compression plates used here. However, in no case did plate failure occur. All failures occurred at the screw-bone junction, implying that similar results could be expected with the use of any class of strong plates. After plating, the cadaveric elbows were cyclically loaded to failure in cantilever bending fashion in the direction of motion. This is the same direction of motion used by other studies of olecranon fixation and is believed to be the most clinically relevant. Given the morphology of the specimens acquired for use in this experiment, it was not possible to standardize the length of the ulnar stump that was available for application of load. Consequently, the stump lengths averaged 95 mm but varied from 70 to 117 mm. We attempted to compensate for this variability by randomizing the assignment of specimens to treatment groups. Post hoc analysis demonstrated that this was indeed achieved, as the In conclusion, posterior plating with an intramedullary screw was significantly stronger than dual medial and lateral plating and may, therefore, be the preferred method of fixation for comminuted olecranon fractures, especially when early motion is desired. We thank Lyndon Nguyen, Jerry Alexander, Jennifer Jassawalla, Carolyn Adams, Dr Wei-Qiang Liu, and Ronald W. Lindsey, MD, for their help with this project.