Direct photolysis and photocatalytic degradations of alachlor, a widely used herbicide, were studied using three different monochromatic UV lamps (254, 300 and 350 nm) and two TiO2 sources. Both the direct photolysis and photocatalytic degradations of alachlor follow pseudo-first-order decay kinetics. TiO2-P25 was found to be an effective photocatalyst compared to TiO2-BDH. The direct photolysis of alachlor was dominant at 254 nm even if TiO2 was present in the solution. Among the three UV wavelengths used, the highest photocatalysis quantum yield was obtained at 300 nm. The photocatalytic degradation rate of alachlor increased with the dosages of TiO2, but an overdose of TiO2 would retard the reaction due to light attenuation. Photocatalytic reactions were slightly enhanced in an alkaline medium, and the different proton sources causing various degrees of rate retardation were due to the presence of the corresponding counter anions. This effect was diminished at a later stage after the reaction intermediates were formed.Photocatalytic reaction has been shown to be useful in destructing a wide range of air and/or water originated contaminants ( A review of past research revealed that broadband light sources such as xenon lamp were used for studying the photolysis or photocatalysis of alachlor ( Alachlor (99.7% HPLC grade) was purchased from Riedel-de Haën, and the initial concentration of alachlor in all experiments was 22 μM. Two types of titanium dioxide, Anatase TiO All direct photolysis and photocatalysis experiments were conducted using an RPR-200 Rayonet photochemical reactor purchased from the South New England Ultraviolet Company. In each experiment, a quartz vessel ( Samples were taken from the quartz vessel at different pre-determined reaction times until the total degradation of alachlor achieved 80% or higher. The collected samples were first centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min by using a Hettich ZENTRIFUGEN centrifuge to remove the titanium dioxide prior to chemical quantification. The remaining alachlor in the supernatant was then quantified by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), comprising a pump with a 100 μl injector, a Water™ SYMMETRY 5 μm C The photodecay of alachlor by UV with and without the presence of TiO The photocatalysis of alachlor using TiO Since the photodecay of alachlor involves both direct photolysis and photocatalysis, and the degree of participation of both pathways may be varied if different UV sources (wavelengths) are applied, it is necessary to investigate the alachlor decay by both direct photolysis and photocatalysis at different UV wavelengths. The study was conducted by quantum yield examination, so that the differences of light intensities among different light sources could be eliminated and the results become comparable. Quantum yields of first-order alachlor photodecay with monochromatic light sources for both the direct photolysis and photocatalysis could be calculated using the following equation ( The quantum yields of direct photolysis were found to increase with the molar absorption coefficient and decrease with the increase of UV wavelength, in which the direct photolysis of alachlor at 254 nm gives the highest quantum yield (0.095), and followed by 300 nm (0.051) and 350 mm (0.008). This observation can be rationalized by two mechanisms. First, as the molar absorptivity of the target compound at a particular wavelength is high, a higher fraction of the compound will be involved in the direct photolysis process within a fixed time interval, resulting in higher decay rates (i.e. a higher Although the direct photolysis is the highest at UV 254 nm, there is little difference between the direct photolysis quantum yield (0.095) and the photocatalysis quantum yield (0.12), suggesting that the photodecay of alachlor at UV 254 nm was dominated by direct photolysis even if the TiO The effect of different dosages of TiO The effect of different initial pH levels on the photocatalytic degradation rates of alachlor was also investigated. In general, the photocatalytic degradations rate was found to slightly depend on pH, as shown in In addition, it is interesting to note that the different proton sources (i.e. the associated counter anions that come with protons) can alter the reaction of alachlor photocatalysis to different degrees. At first, the HCl was used as the exclusive source of protons in adjusting the pH levels in the study. However, if the proton source was replaced by other inorganic acids such as H The initial lag-stage is likely the result of the adsorption of anions on the surface of TiO Subsequent to the lag-stage, the reaction accelerates progressively. This is most likely due to the formation of intermediates, which may accumulate and form higher concentrations near the TiO The pseudo-first-order decay kinetics of alachlor were observed for both direct photolysis and photocatalysis using three different monochromatic UV lamps at 254, 300 and 350 nm. TiO Photocatalytic degradation rates increased with dosage of TiO The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from the University Research Fund of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (GW-045).