Bovine serum albumin (BSA) Langmuir monolayer, as a model of biomineralization-associated proteins, was used to study its effect on regulated biomineralization of calcium carbonate. The effects of the BSA Langmuir monolayer and the concentration of the subphase solution on the nucleation and growth processes and morphology of the calcium carbonate crystal were investigated. The morphology and polymorphic phase of the resulting calcium carbonate crystals were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD). Moreover, the interaction mechanisms of the subphase solution with the BSA Langmuir monolayer were discussed. It was found that BSA Langmuir monolayer could be used as a template to successfully manipulate the polymorphic phase and crystal morphology of calcium carbonate and had obvious influence on the oriented crystallization and growth. The final morphology or aggregation mode of the calcite crystal was closely dependent on the concentration of calcium bicarbonate solution. It is expected that this research would help to better understand the mechanism of biomineralization by revealing the interactions between protein matrices and crystallization of calcium carbonate crystal.In nature, proteins are commonly used to direct and control the crystallization process of biominerals such as calcium carbonate with special orientation, texture, and morphology at ambient conditions It is well known that a locally supersaturated solution is firstly generated by the organisms near the biomacromolecule surface when biominerals are deposited. Thus it could be feasible to simulate the biomineralization process by choosing suitable bioorganic surfaces to manipulate the supersaturated solutions of interest. Langmuir monolayer is an excellent candidate for this purpose: they are already in contact with water, they are ordered, and their structures are well-known and can be varied by changing pressure, temperature and other experimental parameters. Recently, the nucleation of inorganic crystals under Langmuir monolayer has been extensively studied Analytical grade CaCO Ca(HCO The prepared supersaturated calcium bicarbonate solutions were poured into a Langmuir trough (KSV Minitrough), and the air–water interface was swept and aspirated before deposition of the surfactant solution. Pressure–area isotherms were recorded until the pre-set pressure was reached (15 mN m The sizes and morphologies of the CaCO  Since BSA has an isoelectric point of 4.7, and supersaturated Ca(HCO   Generally, the formation of the CaCO Where Δ BSA molecule (582 AA; Aside from the BSA Langmuir monolayer, some factors such as pH, temperature, and supersaturation degree also play key roles in controlling the growth and morphologies of CaCO To sum up, the morphological differences of the CaCO Pure calcite particles with different morphologies were successfully prepared through biomimetic routes from the supersaturated calcium bicarbonate solution underneath BSA Langmuir monolayer as a model of biomineralization-associated proteins. The BSA Langmuir monolayer showed obvious influence on the orientation crystallization, growth processes and hence the morphology of calcium carbonate crystal, while the concentration of calcium bicarbonate solution obviously influenced the final morphology or aggregation mode of calcite crystals. This research could provide important information about the interaction between protein matrix and crystallization of calcium carbonate, which is useful to understand the mechanism of biomineralization. This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 20371015), Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (No. NCET-04-0653).