The effects of macerals, ash, elemental analysis and moisture of wide range of Kentucky coal samples from calorific value of 23.65–34.68MJ/kg (10,170–14,910(BTU/lb)) on Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) have been investigated by multivariable regression method. Two sets of input: (a) macerals, ash and moisture (b) macerals, elemental analysis and moisture, were used for the estimation of HGI. The least square mathematical method shows that increase of the TiO2 and Al2O3 contents in coal can decrease HGI. The higher Fe2O3 content in coal can result in higher HGI. With the increase of micrinite and exinite contents in coal, the HGI has been decreased and higher vitrinite content in coal results in higher HGI. The multivariable studies have shown that input set of macerals, elemental analysis and moisture in non-linear condition can be achieved an acceptable correlation, R
                     =90.38%, versus R
                     =87.34% for the input set of macerals, ash and moisture. It is predicted that elemental analysis of coal can be a better representative of mineral matters for the prediction of HGI than ash.The grindability of coal is an important practical and economical property with applications in coal mining, beneficiation and utilization, particularly for pulverized coal-fired utilities Both coal rank and maceral composition have an influence on grinding properties. Previous studies have indicated that maceral and microlithotypes influences are more important than the rank influences Coal grindability, usually measured by Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI), is of great interest since it is used as a predictive tool to determine the performance capacity of industrial pulverizers in power station boilers. Although the HGI testing device is not costly, the measuring procedure to get a HGI value is time consuming. In addition, it is not a routine testing item in coal-fired power plants The relationship between HGI and coal petrography was studied by Hower et al. Recently, Li et al. The aim of the present work is the assessment of properties of 548 Kentucky coals with reference to the HGI and possible variations with respect to moisture, elemental analysis, and petrography of coal using the SPSS software package. This work is an attempt to solve the following important questions: (a) Is there a relationship between coal macerals, ash and moisture with HGI for a wide range of Kentucky coals? (b) Is it possible to improvement the correlation of predicted formula by replacing of coal ash with coal elemental analysis as a representative of coal mineral matter? Evaluation of coal macerals also elemental analysis effects of wide range of coal samples from calorific value of 23.65–34.68 A mathematical model requires a comprehensive database to cover a wide variety of coal types. Such a model will be capable for predicting of HGI with a high degree of accuracy. Data used to test the proposed approach are from studies conducted at the University of Kentucky Center for Applied Energy Research. A total of 595 sets of data were used. Vuthaluru et al. Li et al. Relation of HGI with moisture , a measure of coal rank for lower-rank coals, and ash for the Kentucky samples with moisture from 0.93% to 12.30% (average of 3.90%) and ash from 0.73% to 19.95% (average of 8.11%), on as determined basis, are shown in Ural and Akyildiz The ranges of elemental analysis components: MgO, Fe The results show that there is no acceptable correlation coefficient between coal elemental analysis and HGI. Examinations of the graphs in The ranges of the macerals of micrinite (Mic), exinite (Ex), macrinite (Mac), resinite (Res) and vitrinite (Vit) of the samples are shown in It is observed that there is no acceptable correlation coefficient between coal macerals and HGI in multivariable regression (Eq. By a least square mathematical method, the correlation coefficients of moisture, ash, micrinite, macrinite, resinite, exinite, and vitrinite with HGI value were determined to be +0.103, +0.163, −0.599, +0.038, −0.433, −0.747 and +0.653, respectively. The results are shown that higher micrinite and exinite contents in coal can result lower HGI and higher vitrinite content in coal results higher HGI. No other parameters were significant. A final equation between the various parameters and HGI can be shown as follows: Linear and non-linear regression estimated HGI (Eqs. By a least square mathematical method, the correlation coefficients of MgO, Fe Linear and non-linear regression estimated HGI (Eqs. According to Eqs. With reference to the Eqs. According to the above significant results, it can be concluded that the estimate of HGI from the input set of The elemental analysis of coal: MgO, Al  The correlations between coal macerals and HGI in linear multivariate regression equations show that with the increase of micrinite and exinite in coal, the HGI decreased. Higher amounts of vitrinite in coal have positive effects on HGI. The results show that higher Al Correlation of HGI with petrography, elemental analysis, and moisture, in comparison to correlation with petrography, ash, and moisture is more suitable for predicting of the HGI with a high precision and an acceptable limit of correlation. As a work related to this one, Hower and Wild It can be concluded that elemental analysis of coal can be used as a predictor than ash for the estimation of HGI.