In Dissolved Air Flotation (DAF) a solid phase is separated from a liquid phase with the aid of air bubbles. The solid phase is usually coagulated into larger particles termed flocs. The air bubbles and flocs form aggregates, which rise to the surface of the flotation unit where they are removed. In this paper we propose a model that estimates the size of the formed aggregates. The estimation is based on the local balance of forces describing the approach and attachment of flocs to air bubbles. The interaction of flocs and bubbles is described by surface forces, hydrodynamic forces and the buoyancy force. The model is validated with available experimental results and the obtained aggregate sizes agree reasonable with those obtained by the experiments. The approach proposed here is intended for water treatment applications, but can be modified for other flotation processes.Flotation is used in many industrial applications where a solid phase is to be separated from a liquid phase. As an aid for recovery of the solid particles in a flotation unit, a gaseous phase is injected into the liquid phase. The injected bubbles attach to the solid particles and the formed aggregates rise to the surface in the tank where they are removed. Although general mechanisms for recovery of the solid phase are the same in the process of flotation, there are substantial differences singling out the diverse areas of application. Flotation units in operation can be found in, for example, water and wastewater treatment facilities Dissolved Air Flotation used for water treatment has been shown to operate adequately for handling raw water containing low-density particles, e.g. dissolved organic matter and algae. Additionally, the process efficiently removes microorganisms such as Giardia cysts and Cryptosporidium oocysts The flotation process itself can be seen as consisting of two parts acting in parallel and at two different levels: the macroscopic level, which includes the influence of tank geometry and the general flow pattern; and the microscopic level, at which there is interaction of flocs and bubbles and where the formation of aggregates takes place. At the macroscopic level, the flow pattern in a tank is greatly affected by the tank geometry. In water treatment applications, the flotation unit is usually rectangular and divided into two sections It is evident that both the microscopic and macroscopic features are important for understanding the flotation process. Consequently, when investigating or designing a new flotation unit, the parameters mentioned above should all be accounted for. Experimental investigations are, however, expensive and challenging in terms of both carrying out the measurements and constructing pilot scale units to evaluate the efficiency of the flotation process. In that manner, Lundh The microscopic level of the flotation process has previously been modeled by several research groups (for detailed information see Edzwald A computational fluid dynamic (CFD) model on the other hand provides a suitable tool for including the effects of events taking place at both the macroscopic and microscopic levels of the flotation process. Within a CFD framework, the geometry and the flow field in a DAF unit have previously been investigated at a macroscopic level, e.g. Therefore, with the purpose of being able to formulate a complete flotation model that both resolves the flow in detail and explicitly includes the presence of the aggregates, we here present a model that describes the formation of the aggregates in the flotation process at the microscopic level and, in the same time, provides an estimation of their sizes. The model is a first step towards a comprehensive CFD model of a flotation unit and the aggregation model is therefore designed to meet requirements of the Eulerian–Eulerian framework, into which the model will be subsequently implemented (some details related to implementation of the model will be discussed later in this paper). The final goal is to develop a practical tool to predict performance of the contact zone in a DAF unit. In the contact zone of a DAF unit, the process of formation of aggregates can be conceived to consist of two sub-processes: gravity settling and interception. Air bubbles and flocs will undergo gravitational forces while rising and settling, respectively, in the unit. The rising air bubbles can be viewed as collectors of the settling flocs and thus, aggregates are formed. The water, now carrying the suspension of aggregates, free bubbles and free flocs, will leave the contact zone and enter the separation zone. We propose here a model that estimates the size of the aggregates formed in the contact zone of a DAF unit. In general, the capture of flocs suspended in aqueous medium by rising air bubbles implicates the existence of a broad range of phenomena (both hydrodynamic and physicochemical). Our work focus on the local behavior of flocs when approaching and attaching to air bubbles. In reality, during the approach of a floc towards a bubble, a thin film of liquid forms between them We hypothesize in this work that the formation of aggregates in a DAF unit is a complex outcome of the equilibrium between the hydrodynamic and physicochemical phenomena. To achieve a net attractive force needed for a successive attachment, we include in the model, among other effects, the energy that is required for drainage of the intervening film between bubbles and flocs. In other words, we calculate the resistance to the thinning of the water layer between bubbles and flocs. Additionally, we assume that, due to relatively similar sizes of flocs and bubbles in DAF, a floc is present not only in the innermost zone (the wetting zone, according to the model of Derjaguin and Dukhin There are two options on how to devise an aggregation model. The first one is to express it in terms of the energies involved in the process. Alternatively, it is possible to formulate the model using the relevant forces acting on flocs and bubbles and leading to creation of agglomerates. The latter approach is chosen in our work and it is thus needed that a proper description of these forces is derived. It will be shown that it is not difficult to describe the forces conceptually. However, their quantification is far from trivial and this issue will be discussed in detail when the forces are addressed individually. However, before examining the forces constituting the model, there are a number of general assumptions that have to be clearly stated. First, the bubbles are assumed to have a constant size in the contact zone. Thus, the possible bubble growth that can be either due to air uptake from the water or from coalescence of bubbles is neglected. Second, bubbles are assumed to rise as rigid spheres. This assumption is valid for bubbles smaller than several hundreds of μm To conclude, the aggregate model implies simultaneous acting of hydrodynamic and surface forces. The surface forces, although very weak at large distances, increase in magnitude when the flocs and bubbles approach each other. In the model presented here, it is assumed that the bubbles and flocs have been brought close to each other in such a way that the film between them has become thin enough for the surface forces to be of importance In summary, the forces that constitute our aggregate model are: the hydrodynamic repulsion force Note that this equation cannot be satisfied by either the floc or the bubble diameter. Hence a new diameter, i.e. the aggregate diameter, has to be calculated in order to satisfy the balance. Note that the approach does by no means imply that the aggregates consist of a single bubble and a single floc. Additionally, in this work it is assumed that there is a clear separation of time scales between the process of creating aggregates and their mean advection through the flotation unit. In other words, the model assumes that aggregates are formed considerably faster compared to their mean vertical movement through the unit. Under such conditions, we can neglect inertia in Eq. The forces present in Eq. A force between flocs and bubbles will arise due to instantaneously induced dipoles. This force is commonly known as the London van der Waals force. Within coagulation, this force will promote aggregation of flocs submerged in water In Typically, there is negative charge between bubbles and bubbles and blocs, thus making the electrostatic force repulsive in nature. The negative zeta potentials can be explained by the existence of the negatively charged surfactants or aquatic humic substances at the bubble-water interfaces. When flocs approach bubbles, the electrical double layers surrounding the flocs and bubbles overlap, thus causing a repulsive force. It has been suggested that adding coagulants can lead to positively charged bubbles, which would, in turn, alter the force balance and thereby contribute to achieving an increased attractive net force for bubble-floc attachment. However, this has so far only been performed in laboratory conditions In this work both a representation and quantification of this force is needed. The electrical double-layer force, caused by interaction of the double layer of the flocs and the air bubbles, can be derived assuming a constant surface potential, Hogg et al. Here, ε is the dielectric constant, This force is the primary force behind attachment of hydrophobic flocs to air bubbles. Unlike other forces in this framework, the hydrophobic interaction force is not easy to explain even conceptually. The origin of this force is not fully understood. A possible explanation (Ducker et al. In summary, even if there is still ambiguity related to the origin of the hydrophobic force and to how to best represent it Where This force is repulsive in nature – it inhibits both bubble coalescence and bubble-floc attachment. Its existence implies that energy is required for draining (i.e. displacing) the intervening liquid film between bubbles or bubbles and flocs. In other words, as flocs approach bubbles, the water between them must drain away. As a consequence, there is resistance to this drainage, which in turn impedes the process of bubble-floc attachment. The latter explanation is the reason why this force is called the hydrodynamic repulsion or retardation force. The force is active at distances of the order of tens of nm. Here, this force is modeled as a hydrodynamic drag force with a correction due to existence of micro-hydrodynamic interactions at short distances. At a macroscopic level, the flow field involving flocs and bubbles is assumed turbulent. However, at a local (i.e. microscopic) level, where the aggregation process takes place, the choice of including turbulence is still debated. Several researchers In this model, we assume that we deal with the Stokes flow conditions at a microscopic level. Typically, the expression for the Stokes drag force is derived assuming an undisturbed fluid velocity, i.e. having a rigid sphere settling in an unbounded flow. It has, however, been shown that this approximation overestimates the drag force of a settling floc In the aggregation process, due to the presence of air bubbles approaching the settling flocs, the surrounding flow is no longer undisturbed and, consequently, the hydrodynamic repulsion force should be further modified. To what extent this should be done is again not a trivial question. In mineral flotation, an air bubble is sometimes understood as a wall due to its large size compared to the floc. Both Brenner The buoyancy force of the floc is taken as To obtain the estimation of the size of the formed aggregates, the expression for the force balance is implemented in Matlab In the course of validating the proposed aggregation model, it has become apparent that there is little information available on the measured sizes of the aggregates. Due to their fragile structure, the sizes of the aggregates formed in a flotation unit have proven difficult to measure. Honkanen et al. In Eq. To estimate the size of the formed aggregates using our model we need the value of the parameters identified in expressions As indicated above, the aggregation model will be subsequently implemented into a comprehensive Eulerian–Eulerian numerical model. In such a framework, the settling velocities of the flocs will be known. However, these velocities have to be estimated in the current work in order to calculate the size of the aggregates. For that purpose, we use here the settling velocities determined by Johnson et al. Aggregate sizes estimated with our model are shown in Comparison between the experimentally obtained aggregate sizes and the estimated ones using our model demonstrates that the two are in reasonable agreement. For a more exact validation of any DAF model, we believe that experimental investigations are required that aim at direct obtaining of the sizes of the formed aggregates. The aggregation model presented in this paper demonstrates how the size of the formed aggregates in a DAF unit can be estimated. In general, the results are in reasonable agreement with information obtained from the available measurements. Still, there are a number of issues related to formulation and possible improvement of our model that need to be further addressed. An important remark is that the derived aggregate model only accounts for the creation of aggregates through the interaction and attachment of flocs to bubbles. Within a DAF unit aggregates could also be formed by flocs acting as nuclei when air bubbles are formed from the dissolved air. It has, however, been suggested by Kitchener and Gochin The surface properties of the flocs to be removed in a water treatment plant are determined by the particulate matter in the raw water and the coagulant aid used in the flocculation step. In the latter, the coagulant is typically added to promote the formation of the flocs. However, it is equally important that the surface properties of the flocs support the formation of bubble-floc aggregates in the subsequent flotation step. Edzwald The surface properties vary across the surface of the floc The hydrophobicity of the flocs is a property not investigated extensively in previous works. Here, we assume that the flocs experience a hydrophobic property. It is important to note that, if some of the flocs are hydrophilic, the inclusion of an attractive hydrophobic force will overestimate the efficiency of the flotation process. In search of the surface properties that promote the attachment of air bubbles to flocs, attention has not only been directed towards the properties of flocs but also towards air bubbles. Henderson et al. The present model shows that aggregate sizes increase with increasing the floc and bubble size. The results have been compared to experimentally obtained size of aggregates consisting of a single floc and several air bubbles, in accordance with the results presented by Fukushi et al. Finally, we give here some details on our current activity that aims at implementing the model presented in this paper into an Eulerian simulation of a DAF unit. In essence, the planned numerical framework is more of an Eulerian–Lagrangian one, in which two phases (water and aggregates) are treated as interpenetrating continua, whereas bubbles and flocs are tracked individually. In an arbitrary cell in the computational domain we will know both the local properties of the flow and the “history” that led to a current flow field in that cell. As an illustration, the relative velocity between flocs and water (needed in the aggregation model) will, among other parameters, be a function of a local turbulent velocity fluctuation in that cell (the assumption of turbulent flocculation, see Section This paper presents a model to estimate the size of aggregates formed in a flotation unit used in drinking water treatment. The formed aggregates consist of flocs and air bubbles. The estimation of the aggregate size is based on the local balance of forces describing the approach and attachment of flocs to air bubbles. The forces included in the model are surface forces, hydrodynamic forces and the buoyancy force. We demonstrate in this work how the formation of aggregates in a DAF unit can be captured at a microscopic level using a relatively simple model. The model is designed to be included in a comprehensive CFD model standing for a macroscopic representation of an entire DAF unit. The model demonstrates a clear dependence of the calculated aggregate sizes on the size and shape of interacting bubbles and flocs. In addition, we have observed the sensitivity of the results to both the density and the surface potential of the flocs, especially for a more spherical floc structure (fractal dimension Financial support from the