The recovery of silicon powder from the kerfs loss slurry, which consists of Si and SiC particles, metal fragments, and a glycol solution, produced in the silicon wafer slicing process was studied using the phase-transfer separation method. Two stages of phase-transfer separation, which take advantage of the difference in a surface property between the Si and SiC particles after acid washing, were carried out to recover the Si particles from the powder mixture. In either stage of separation, an oil was added to an aqueous slurry of the two particles. The larger SiC particles were removed in the first stage to obtain a Si-rich powder, which was then subject to a second-stage operation to remove the submicron SiC particles. The effects of the operating variables on the purity and recovery of the Si product were investigated, including the pH value of the water phase, oil/water volume ratio, and solid concentration. The best result obtained was 71.1% in overall recovery and 99.1wt% in Si purity.Viewing the global trends in the increasing consumption of energy and awareness of environmental protection, new and clean energy resources have to be developed and exploited. One of these is the photovoltaic (PV) technology, which was limited to aerospace applications up to the early 1970s. The worldwide energy production of solar cells had increased to 2.6 In 2002, Müller and Nasch began a research project on recycling the silicon rejects from the PV production cycle To separate a particle from a powder mixture, the “liquid–liquid extraction” method was used in the field of minerals processing The recovery of silicon powder from kerfs loss slurry produced in the silicon ingot slicing process was investigated in this study, using the phase-transfer separation method. The mixture of Si and SiC particles was taken as the starting material of the separation process after the kerfs loss slurry was washed with acetone and nitric acid to remove the glycol and metal fragments, respectively. Due to the acid washing, the surface of the Si sample became more hydrophilic and the SiC particles remained hydrophobic, as determined by the contact-angle measurement. The separation process contained two stages in series. In the first stage of operation, the larger SiC particles were settled and removed using an oil that was heavier than water, and, in the second stage, most of the remaining submicron SiC particles were removed from the top layer using an oil with a density lower than water. The effects of several operating variables, including pH value of water phase, oil/water volume ratio, and solid concentration were investigated, and the recovery and purity of the recovered Si powder at specific conditions were reported. The kerfs loss slurry, which is comprised of Si, SiC, metal fragments, and a glycol solution, used in this experiment was provided by a local semiconductor company in Taiwan. In order to apply the phase-transfer separation method, the composition and particle size distribution of the particles in the slurry must be known. To determine the composition of the slurry, a series of chemical washing steps, using acetone, nitric acid, and a mixture of hydrogen peroxide and hydrogen fluoric acid as shown in The particle size distribution (PSD) of the solid components in the slurry and the SiC powder after removing Si particles was determined by a static light-scattering analyzer (LS230, Coulter), using an aqueous solution containing 0.1 The contact-angle measurement was proceeded using pure water as a liquid drop and Si and 6H-SiC chips as samples. Here, the particles were replaced by chips because there was no sufficient plane surface on the particle for measuring the contact angle of water drop. It should be noted that the morphology of crystalline SiC chip was the same as that of the SiC abrasive judged from the X-ray diffraction patterns. These chips were subject to different pretreatments. First, we dipped two of each chip into a 30 In this study, a phase-transfer separation method containing two stages of operation was developed to replace the centrifugation method used in our previous work for recovering silicon powder The effects of several operating variables on the purity and recovery of Si product were studied, including pH value of water phase, oil/water volume ratio, and solid concentration. Afterwards, the recovered Si-rich powder of 96.6 In this separation system, the type of emulsion, which formed after mixing the water suspension with the oil solution, was difficult to observe because particles were suspended in the separatory funnel. Instead, we conducted an experiment to check the emulsion type by mixing 100 The kerfs loss slurry used in this work contained 26.2 As far as the wettability is concerned, controversies exist about how to define it by the value of contact angle In the first stage of operation, the effects of gravity and hydrophobicity of SiC particles were applied to remove the larger SiC particles from the water phase via an oil solution consisting of n-butanol and bromoform with a density of 1.1 In the first stage of operation, the experiment was designed using an oil solution that was heavier than water so the larger SiC particles would settle to the bottom of vessel. The electrostatic force on the particle surface, however, would play a role in the determination of product purity and recovery due to particle coagulation. Since the coagulation of particles was influenced by pH, the pH value of the water phase was varied between 3.0 and 10.3 to investigate its effect on the purity and recovery of the product. Other operating variables kept constant were as follows: solid concentration at 2 At the mixing stage, the oil droplets were brought to contact with the SiC and Si particles dispersed in the aqueous phase. In this case, the SiC particles should go with the oil phase to the bottom of the funnel during the settling stage. For larger SiC particles, there was no problem in this regard with the help of gravity. On the other hand, the smaller SiC particles had difficulty entering the oil phase because they were dispersed in the aqueous phase during the mixing stage unless they coagulated to form larger aggregates, which usually occurs near the IEP. To explain the results on purity and recovery, the zeta potentials of SiC particle at various pH values were measured and presented in In most research reports, the oil/water (O/W) volume ratio was usually fixed between 1:6 and 1:4 In this series of experiments, the solid concentration was raised from 2 The Si-rich powder that was recovered from the first-stage operation, with a purity and recovery of 96.6 In this experiment, the pH value of the water phase was varied between 3.0 and 10.0 under the conditions of solid concentration at 2 In this series of experiments, the solid concentration was varied between 2 By comparing the effects of solid concentration, one sees that two similarities exist in the two stages of operation. One is that the higher solid concentration resulted in a lower Si purity due to the lower collision frequency between SiC particles and oil droplets, and the other is that the effect of over-crowded space prevailed at solid concentrations higher than 12 As mentioned in Section The two-stage phase-transfer separation method, which takes advantage of surface properties, gravity force, and zeta potential, was successfully applied for separating Si and SiC particles in the kerfs loss slurry, which consisted of a glycol solution, metal fragments, silicon, and silicon carbide. A high Si purity product was obtained from the slurry by adding an oil to the slurry, enabling the SiC particles to be able to move to the oil phase from the aqueous phase. The oil used was heavier and lighter than water in the first-stage and second-stage operation, respectively, and the micron particles and submicron particles of SiC were removed in the separate stages. Several operating variables were investigated in this study, including pH value of water phase, oil/water volume ratio, and solid concentration. Among the factors, the pH value was the most significant one, which played an important role in the formation of coagulation between similar particles, along with heterocoagulation between oil droplets and particles. In addition, the product purity was usually traded off for the recovery. In considering an acceptable level of both purity and recovery, a Si powder with a purity of 99.1 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the