A bivariate population balance equation applied to a grinding process is implemented in a model (PBM). The particles are simultaneously characterized by their size and their mechanical strength, expressed here by the minimum energy needed to break them. PBM is solved by the Direct Quadrature Method of Moments (DQMOM). The mixed moments of the distribution are expressed by the quadrature form of the population density defined for one order (N) and incorporating the weights and the abscissas defined for the two properties. The effect of the quadrature order (N
                     =2,3,4) and the selected set of the 3N moments needed to solve the system on the accuracy of the results is discussed. For a given order of the quadrature, the selected set of the initial mixed moments slightly affects first the weights and abscissas derived from the initial particle distribution. The set of moments also affects the precision of the moments calculated versus time but only those having high orders in relation with the respective range of the solid properties considered. Problems of convergence and significant differences in the predicted mixed moments are also observed when the order of the quadrature is equal to 2. However, the changes of a bivariate distribution versus time applied to a grinding process are well predicted using the DQMOM approach, choosing a number of nodes equal to 3, associated with a smart selection of the moment set, incorporating all the moments of interest.Particulate process models are currently based on population balance equations either in homogenous conditions or heterogeneous systems combining CFD modeling. They allow tracking the temporal evolution, and eventually the spatial change, of the population density or the particle distribution during continuous processes (growth, dissolution, coating, grinding, erosion, …) or discrete events (nucleation, aggregation, rupture, flocculation, …) The PBE in homogeneous conditions is solved here using the Direct Quadrature Method of Moments (DQMOM) since one of its advantages is to easily take into account of several properties for the solid phase The homogeneous equation of population balance considering two properties for the solid phase can be written as follows by introducing the particle-size energy distribution The right hand side of the equation represents all the birth and death terms. In case of a pure breakage process, it comprises only two terms, the first one expresses the disappearance of particles due to their breakage in smaller pieces and the second one the apparition of fragments of properties x and e due to the breakage of larger particles:  The quadrature methods of moments used to solve the population balance equations are based on the approximation of the density function by the Gaussian quadrature: If the discrete decomposition Eq.  After transformation of Eq. One obtains: Eq. Although the two solid properties (particle size and breakage energy) have been mathematically treated as if they were independent, the breakage energy is assumed in this work to be dependent on particle size with respects to experimental data reported in the literature The energy spectrum, assumed to be independent of time, is thus given by: Moreover, the following selection and breakage functions have been used. More details on the case studied could be found in Frances and Liné Population balance equations adapted for DQMOM method have The initial particle size-energy distribution has to be defined to initialize the code. For the results presented in the following sections, the initial particle size distribution was assumed to be a normal-law with a mean equal to 3 and a standard deviation to 0.5. The energy spectrum was given by Eq. Using the DQMOM approach, the code must be initialized by the weights and abscissas of the initial distribution. In the monovariate case, such quantities can be easily determined from the first moments of the particle distribution using the Product-Difference algorithm The fracture probability being given by Eq. Introducing the variable change The initial mixed moments were then calculated using the Matlab A discrete solution of the population balance equation was also used to compare the results obtained with DQMOM varying the selected sets or the quadrature order. For that purpose, discrete forms for the selection and breakage functions were introduced in the PBE as suggested by Crespo Theoretically, the choice of moments can be done arbitrarily as long as it results to a non-singular matrix derived from Eq. In this section the effect of the selected set of moments with Another way to initialize the weights and abscissas is to consider an oversized non-linear system (Eq. The evolutions of the weights and abscissas along time are reported on The weight fraction of the coarser population ( Concerning the intermediate and finer sub-populations, their evolutions are quite correlated. The sub-population of the intermediate-size population first increases (may be due to the breakage of the coarser particles) and then decreases to the benefit of the finer population. Inversely, the fraction of the fines seems to decrease during the first minutes of the process before increasing and becoming the main sub-population after ten minutes. In fact, during the first minutes of the process, the fines do not disappear but their characteristic size (which can be approximated by The change of the abscissas-energy versus time is similar to that of the abscissas-size since in the present case the energy needed for breakage is correlated with the particle size. The higher the particle size, the higher is the minimum energy for breakage in the studied case. Moreover, the effect of the selected set of moments on the predictions of the weights is not very important, remembering that slight differences were already present at the initial time. The values of the weights recovered for the different selected sets even seem to converge along time, except for those obtained with the Set 5. Considering now the changes of the size and energy abscissas versus time, it can be concluded that the effect of the selected set of moments is rather weak for the Sets 1, 2, 3 and 5. Some differences can be observed on the evolution of the third abscissa. The difference is more pronounced for the Set 4 but this was already true at the initial time as mentioned before and it tends to lessen versus time. It must be noticed that in Set 4 and Set 5 only one pure moment of global order three ( The change in the predictions of the first mixed moments for some process times obtained with DQMOM for three nodes and different sets are presented on It can be observed on Globally speaking, the values of the moments differ from one set to another if they are not included in the set of moments used to saturate the degrees of freedom. This limitation was already pointed out by Marchisio and Fox The effect of the number of nodes for The mixed moments of global order 0, 1 or 2 are quite similar whatever the number of nodes and equal to the moments calculated from the discrete solution. Significant differences are observed, above all for a number of nodes equal to 2 compared to the other cases. For In order to complete this analysis, the change of the predictions of some specific mixed moments versus time have been reported on Moreover, as reported by Frances and Liné The decrease of pure mixed moments related to the first internal coordinate versus time is coherent with a particle size decrease (pure breakage process). The time-scale of the process always exceeded the time-scale of the local disintegration process. Furthermore, the values of the size reduction time-scale are nearly the same when the number of nodes are equal to 3 or 4 and slightly differ to the ones obtained with a number of nodes equal to 2. Concerning the change versus time of the dimensionless pure moments with respect to the second property, their decrease is coherent with a decrease of the energy needed for breakage as the particle size decreases. The values of the energy reduction time-scale recovered for a number of nodes equal to 3 or 4 are also rather similar. When the number of nodes is equal to 2, the values obtained are significantly different for The DQMOM approach provides access to the change of the weights and abscissas versus time. These data are not directly correlated to the particle size-energy distribution but additional information can be drawn visualizing theses values on the particle distribution for the different conditions. The monovariate particle distributions considering the particle size as the property for the solid phase were obtained using a discrete solution of the population balance equation. Using the discrete solution of the particle size-energy distribution, the monovariate distributions Theoretically, the same analysis could be done on the particle energy distributions. However, in that case, using the discrete solution of the particle size-energy distribution, identical monovariate energy distribution curves So an alternative analysis is proposed on Concerning the change versus time of the normalized weighted energy reported on The DQMOM approach was used to solve a bivariate population balance equation applied to a grinding process in which the particles are simultaneously characterized by their size and the minimum energy needed for their breakage. The mixed moments of the energy-size distribution are expressed by the quadrature form of the population density defined for a given number of nodes and incorporating the weights and the abscissas defined for each solid property. We discuss in this paper the effect of the number of nodes and the selected set of moments needed to solve the system on the accuracy of the results. The method allows predicting the transient change of the mixed moments which were compared to the values derived from a discrete solution of the PBE considering a finite number of size and energy intervals. The model must be initialized by the weights and abscissas corresponding to the initial particle distribution. For that purpose, a squared mean method has been implemented to solve the non-linear system constituted by the initial mixed moments. For a given number of nodes, the values of the weights and abscissas can slightly differ depending on the selected set of moments and consequently the initial mixed moments are not exactly the same. The choice of moments set also affects the precision of the moments predicted versus time but above all the values of the mixed moments for which the global order is high and more particularly in the studied case for those having a high order with respect to the second property. This result must be put in relation with the respective range of variation of the two properties. The most discrepancy between predicted values occurs for the moments which are not included in the selected set. Moreover, the mixed moments of global order 0, 1 or 2 are quite similar whatever the number of nodes and equal to the moments calculated from the discrete solution. Significant differences are observed for the moments with a higher order and above all for a number of nodes equal to 2. A good agreement between DQMOM and discrete solutions are obtained with a number of nodes equal to 3 or 4 depending on the mixed moment considered. It was also concluded that the effect of the number of nodes on the results is more important than the effect of the selected set for a fixed number of nodes. Finally, it was observed that the values and the changes of the size-abscissas versus time are well correlated with the particle size distribution, calculated from the discrete solution, considering mean values of the mass fractions over the entire energy range. Two abscissas (when the number of nodes is equal to 2) are not enough to represent properly bimodal distributions but three abscissas for