The effects of rapid pulse electric current sintering (PECS), Ni as a Co binder substitute, Mo2C additions and laser surface modification (LSM) on the microstructure, mechanical properties and machining performance during roughing and finishing turning of Ti-6Al-4 V were investigated. Additions of Mo2C reduced the carbide grain size from 0.65 ± 0.01 μm to 0.5 ± 0.01 μm in liquid phase sintered (LPS) WC-Co/Ni cermets, with the PECS manufactured WC-0.5Cr3C2–3.5Mo2C-10Co (wt%) having the highest hardness. The LSM technique produced a ~2.5 μm self-carbide coating, increasing the surface hardness of all the samples. LSM was done to improve abrasion, attrition and thermal wear resistance. Turning was done at cuttings speeds (v
                     c) of 45–120 m/min, depths of cut (ap) of 0.25–2.0 mm and feeds of 0.15–0.2 mm/revolution, under lubricated conditions. The developed inserts were compared to TH10 (an industrial reference), and performance was assessed by cutting forces, tool wear and tool life. The liquid phase sintered WC-0.5Cr3C2-10Co (wt%) and WC-0.5Cr3C2–3.5Mo2C-10Co (wt%) inserts had longer tool lives than TH10 during roughing at a cutting speed (v
                     c) of 45 m/min, depth of cut (ap) of 2 mm and feed of 0.2 mm/revolution, although TH10 had the best tool life during finishing (v
                     c = 120 m/min, ap = 0.25 mm and feed =0.15 mm/revolution). Generally, LSM had a negligible effect on tool life, WC-Ni based inserts had the shortest tool lives and LPS inserts performed better than PECS inserts.Titanium and its alloys are widely used in the aerospace industry due to their good combination of strength-to-weight ratio at elevated temperatures, fracture toughness and corrosion resistance [ Tungsten carbide‑cobalt based cutting tools have been reported to have the best performance in almost all machining process of Ti alloys [ Cobalt is the preferred binder of choice for WC based cemented carbides because of its very good wetting of WC [ Chemical wear from diffusion between the cutting insert and Ti-6Al-4 V workpiece is a main cause of WC-Co based insert failure [ This study attempted to improve the Ti-6Al-4 V turning performance of WC based inserts by pulse electric current sintering (PECS), carbide additives (Cr The starting powders and their characteristics are given in Table I. The powders were wet milled in 99% pure ethanol for 24 h in a steel container with WC milling balls. They were then dried using a rota evaporator at 64 °C and 80 rpm for 1 h. The milled composite powders were consolidated in an SPS furnace (HP D5, FCT Systeme, Germany). The powders were poured into cylindrical graphite dies with inner and outer diameters of 20.9 mm and 40 mm respectively, and 48 mm height. The composite powder assemblies were heated in a vacuum (2 Pa) in two steps, for example WC-10Co (wt%) powders were first heated to 1000 °C at a rate of 200 °C/min and subsequently to 1220 °C at a heating rate of 100 °C/min, and the temperature was held at 1220 °C for 5 min during sintering. A cooling rate of 200 °C/min was used for all samples. The applied pressure was increased from 16 MPa to 30 MPa at 1000 °C, and from 30 MPa to 50 MPa at 1220 °C within 30 s. The pressure was then held constant at 50 MPa throughout the rapid sintering cycle. Horizontal and vertical graphite papers were used to separate the powders from the die and punch set-up. Hexagonal boron nitride was placed on the graphite paper to prevent carbon diffusion from the graphite paper to the powders during sintering. The graphite die was wrapped in a carbon cloth to minimize the heat loss from the die surface. The temperature was measured by an optical pyrometer focused on a central borehole on the upper punch, 1 mm above the top surface of the sample, to give an accurate measurement of the sample temperature [ Liquid phase sintering (HIP, Ultra Temp, USA) was done by heating the compositions in a vacuum (0.04 MPa) at an initial heating rate of 2.4 °C/min up to 1200 °C. At 1200 °C, cobalt loss protection (CLP) was carried out by adding argon gas at a pressure of 0.37 MPa, and a heating rate 3.5 °C/min up to 1430 °C. The temperature was held constant for 75 min, and for the last 20 min, hot isostatic pressing (HIP) was done at 4.4 MPa to eliminate all the surface porosity [ Archimedes' principle was used to determine the density of the sintered samples (ED224S, Sartorius, Germany). Microstructures of the cemented carbides were examined in a field emission scanning electron microscope (SIGMA, Karl Zeiss, Germany), with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (X-act, Oxford Instruments, United Kingdom) and annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) (JEOL 2100, with a LaB A Medicom LD50C laser with maximum output power of 50 W was used for surface modification of the sintered samples and cutting tool inserts. Treatment was done by applying a nano pulse 5 mJ laser with a process frequency of 5000 Hz. A scanning speed of 100 mm/s and laser beam diameter of 100 μm were used. An 80% overlap was applied, and the laser beam was passed four times on every surface. Turning of Ti-6Al-4 V was done in a Kovosvit MAS SP-430Y CNC turning machine using cutting tool inserts manufactured from the sintered WC cemented carbides. A CSBNR 2525 tool holder was used to secure the cutting tool inserts during the turning test. The inserts were square, 12.7 mm by 12.7 mm, with a thickness of 4.3 mm and a nose radius of 1.6 mm. Square cutting inserts were manufactured from the cylindrical 20 mm diameter, 5 mm height sintered WC cemented carbides by EDM wire cutting (A422S, CHMER, Taiwan). Chamfering (chamfer angle of 20 The resultant force (F) during turning was calculated using Eq. The average resultant force (F where ∑ F The flank wear and crater wear were evaluated using an optical microscope (CT3, Jenoptic – ProgRes, Laboratory Image Assemply, Czech Republic), a field emission scanning electron microscope (SIGMA, Karl Zeiss, Germany), with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (X-act, Oxford Instruments, United Kingdom) and annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) (JEOL 2100, with a LaB where t = insert cutting time. The flank wear was measured after every pass, and a maximum cutting time of 20 min was used for every test. Each test was repeated twice on different cutting edges. Cutting inserts which failed the tool life criterion before 20 min were removed from the test and their cutting time was recorded. The machining conditions are shown in Cross-sections through the worn regions of the flank were cut using a FIB SEM to study the interface between the workpiece and cutting edge. During preparation of the FIB-SEM cross-sections, areas of interested on the worn cutting edges were identified and covered by a carbon-based protective layer. A gallium (Ga) ion beam of 30 kV energy was used to cut out the cross-sections from the bulk sample, and they were placed on a copper FIB grid. The cross-sections were thinned using a 30 kV Ga ion beam, first at a high beam current, and then at a slightly lower beam current, until the thinned cross-sections were ~100 nm thick. The Ga beam energy was reduced to 5 kV and the sample thinned further to ~90 nm. The final preparation involved polishing the sample using a 2 kV Ga ion beam. Once all the cross-sections from the different inserts were cut out, placed on the copper grip, thinned and polished, they were placed in an annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscope (ADF-STEM) to analyse the wear on the insert cutting edges. Secondary electron images of WC-0.5Cr The addition of Mo The hardness and fracture toughness (K To further improve the hardness, abrasion and attrition wear resistance, laser surface modification (LSM) was done on the samples using a nano pulse laser. The LSM technique produced a ~2.5 μm thick carbide layer, which increased the surface hardness of all samples ( Generally, the LPS samples had higher K The average resultant force (F The WC-10Co inserts had lower FWR values than the WC-Mo During roughing at 60 m/min, the WC-10Co (LPS) insert had the longest tool life, followed by the TH10 insert while the WC-Mo Finishing was done at The WC-10Co (LPS) insert had the best tool life during roughing at both 45 m/min and 60 m/min and the TH10 insert had the best tool life during finishing. The overall better performance of the LPS inserts than PECS inserts was due to higher K Addition of Mo This work was financially supported by Declaration of Competing Interest None.