Bentonites are commonly subjected to a water and energy intensive purification process in order to obtain high-grade montmorillonite, prior to modification to suit technological needs. In this study, the purification and modification processes were combined in order to minimize costs. A method for the production of organobentonite from roughly purified Na-bentonite from Reşadiye, Turkey, was proposed with a quaternary alkylammonium salt, hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide. Further purification and ion exchange reactions were simultaneous within a centrifugal separation process, followed by the removal of excess modifier agent using the flotation method. The parameters of centrifugal force, feed solid content for Falcon concentrator and modification time, and the amount of alcohol for ion exchange reactions were optimized. Ammonium intercalated organoclays were characterized by X-ray diffraction analysis, thermogravimetric analysis, and swelling tests in organic liquids. An optimum flow sheet for the simultaneous purification and modification process yielding a 97% pure organobentonite with a 2.02nm basal spacing was developed.Na Various organoclays are widely used ( Effective separation of a Na-bentonite sample by multistage hydrocyclone was reported in our earlier study ( The aim of this study was to obtain highly pure organobentonite through a simultaneous purification and modification process while reducing water and energy costs. The properties of organomontmorillonite were investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric (TG), and swelling test analyses. A raw Na-bentonite sample (ROM: Run of mine ore) with cation exchange capacity (CEC) of 78 The representative sample of the raw bentonite exhibited a mineralogical composition of mainly dioctahedral smectite with a mixed layer of illite–smectite of about 10% and small amounts of quartz, feldspar, calcite, and opal-CT (opal-cristobalite/tridymite) (approximately 15% in total) ( Chemical analyses performed at ACME Labs (Vancouver, Canada), established that the bentonite sample contains 57.09% SiO Mineralogical compositions of the representative ROM sample and products were analyzed by XRD method using air-dried and ethylene-glycol-treated samples. The Rigaku diffractometer with Cu(Kα) radiation was used. In addition, mineral contents of the samples were estimated by the quantitative XRD modal analysis method recommended by Chung ( The differential thermal analysis (DTA) and TG analysis of the 20 The bentonite sample 4–5 Bentonite dispersions were then left to settle in 1000 Following disintegration, screening (500 The purified organobentonite products were then transferred to a Denver flotation cell, in which both further purification and the washing processes can be performed simultaneously. Initial tests on the flotation/washing process revealed that four stages of washing/flotation were required for the complete removal of excess modifier agent ( The application of the simultaneous purification and modification process is illustrated in As seen from  The purification of raw bentonite dispersions through centrifugation techniques (conventional method) is a well-known method in industry, which allows the removal of most of the impurities of coarse sizes. However, it is obvious that some of these impurities, such as feldspar, zeolite, and O-CT, of similar sizes to disintegrated bentonite, might remain with the bentonite. In this case, centrifugal separation or purification techniques might work to remove these impurities to some extent, by employing high centrifugal forces of up to 300 “ It is worth mentioning that this proposed process was not successful in the complete removal of O-CT because it is submicron in size and exhibits similar behavior to that of bentonite against amine salt interaction. However, it was reported that the removal of O-CT was possible in non-aqueous media such as nitrobenzene (  The weight loss in the TG curve (see In The aim of this study was to produce high purity and well-modified organobentonite through a proposed simultaneous purification and modification process, which also achieves reduced water and energy costs. Our study showed that conditions to remove coarse impurities from the modified bentonite structure through centrifugation differ when compared with conventional purification conditions. Lower centrifugal forces are required for organobentonite-impurity separation. The use of a Falcon concentrator employing high centrifugal forces in the range of 50–300 “ Finally, it is worth noting that with the proposed process, a negligible amount of HTAB can be consumed by the impurities. However, the proposed process eliminates some additional high cost sub-processes, such as drying, grinding, etc., and provides a more economical and environmentally friendly purification and modification technique in a single production line. The authors would like to thank the