During the last decades mechanical rock excavation has gained a significant share in the construction of both civil and mining engineering projects. The machines used for mechanical rock excavation are in general capital intensive and, in most cases, site specific, so that a good understanding of the application conditions plays a vital role in maximizing machine performance. A number of models have been developed during the last years to evaluate machine performance under various application conditions According to Atkinson A number of different rock abrasiveness tests have been reported However, in spite of its popularity, there are some ambiguities in the description of the test setup in the various references, especially regarding the hardness of the steel styli used. In this paper the influence of the steel styli hardness on the CAI value is examined. The Cerchar test has been proposed by the Laboratoire du Centre d’Etudes et Recherches des Charbonnages (Cerchar) de France To determine the CAI value the rock is slowly displaced by 10 From the above description, the Cerchar test can be classified as an A formal description of the testing procedure is provided in the French standard NF P 94-430-1 Al-Ameen and Waller According to the French standard NF P 94-430-1 the tip of the steel stylus applied to the rock sample is formed as a sharp conical point of cone angle equal to 90°±3° and 1 The recommended steel styli geometry is generally the same in the various references. However, this does not apply regarding the hardness of the steel styli. It is obvious that any change in the hardness of the steel styli alters significantly the testing conditions, thus providing incomparable CAI values. This has been demonstrated by Al-Ameen and Waller In the original test setup description Suana and Peters Atkinson et al. West Atkinson Al-Ameen and Waller AFNOR Plinninger et al. The various recommendations can be seen in From the authors’ experience, although it is clear from the above that there is a general consensus for styli made from steel heat treated to HRC 54–56, several equipment manufacturers, planners and contractors request CAI values determined with steel styli of HRC 40, as is recommended by West. The objective of this study has been to investigate the influence of steel styli hardness on the CAI value obtained. To accomplish this objective the CAI value of 73 rock samples has been determined for two different steel styli types. Of the 73 samples, 5 were either extremely fragmented/weathered or too hard to test, thus results for a total of 68 samples were obtained. The samples were of 6 different rock types, which can be seen in Each sample has been subjected to 5 individual tests with each steel styli type, and the mean CAI value and standard deviation of the mean corresponding to each styli type have been computed. The specifications of the utilized steel types can be seen in The CAI values obtained can be seen in As expected, the CAI In The predicted CAI The regression analysis is given in The In In Finally, Eq. The Cerchar test has gained popularity as a relatively convenient and inexpensive method of measuring and comparing the abrasiveness of rocks. However, there are some ambiguities regarding the recommended steel styli hardness. In this paper the influence of steel styli hardness on the CAI value has been investigated. Sixty-eight samples of various rock types have been tested with steel styli of both HRC 55 and 40. The relation of the two CAI values has been examined and a linear correlation was observed. The yielded equation can be used to convert CAI