 The present situation, both in the US and elsewhere, is examined in a recent survey article ( In England (excluding Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), there were 21 mainline MSE departments in 1998;  In spite of statistical problems, two things are clear from a close examination of student numbers in various countries and institutions: MSE courses are burgeoning, and the best mainline departments are going from strength to strength. However, some of the weaker departments/institutes (those with relatively few students) are being forced by resolute academic deans into marriages with quite distinct disciplines – which (experience suggests) can be a precursor of brain death – or being closed down altogether.  The most striking features, apart from the sharp drop in fecundity, are the large numbers of graduates who went on to obtain business qualifications (Masters of Business Administration, MBAs); the fact that in 1958, working in metallurgy and in engineering seems to have been synonymous in the eyes of respondents, but not so in 1998; the drastic fall in the numbers who gave research and development as their current métier, in spite of a sharp rise in those taking advanced degrees; and the fact that, around the age 30,   The key justification of the whole concept of MSE, from the beginning, has been the mutual illumination resulting from research on different categories of materials. The way I worded this recognition in my editorial capacity, writing the Series Preface for the 25 volumes of Whether I was justified in saying that Materials Science “has by now become a discipline in its own right”, is briefly discussed in the last chapter. The most idiosyncratic of the materials families are polymers and plastics. The mutual illumination between these and the various categories of inorganic crystalline materials has been slow in coming, and this means that teaching polymer science in broad materials science departments and relating the properties of polymers to other parts of the course, has not been easy. Yet things are improving, partly because more and more leading researchers and teachers in polymer physics are converted metallurgists. One of these reformed metallurgists is Edward Kramer, now in the Materials Department at the University of California, Santa Barbara. In a message (private communication, 2000) he pointed to three links from his own experience: In a semicrystalline polymer, the crystals are embedded in a matrix of amorphous polymer whose properties depend on the ambient temperature relative to its glass transition temperature. Thus, the overall elastic properties of the semicrystalline polymer can be predicted by treating the polymer as a composite material Thermodynamics and kinetics of phase separation of polymer mixtures have benefited greatly from theories of spinodal decomposition and of classical nucleation. In fact, the best documented tests of the theory of spinodal decomposition have been performed on polymer mixtures. A third topic is the mutual diffusion of different macromolecules in the melt. Here, the original formulation of the interdiffusion problem in metals proved very useful even though the mechanisms involved are utterly different. When a layer of polymer A with a low molecular weight diffuses into a layer of the same polymer with high molecular weight, markers placed at the original interface move towards the low-molecular-weight side, just as in Kirkendall's classical experiments with metals (Section 4.2.2). The viscous bulk flow that drives this marker displacement is equivalent to the vacancy flux in metals. I shall be wholly convinced of the beneficial conceptual synergy between polymers and other classes of materials when polymer scientists begin to make more extensive use of phase diagrams. In earlier chapters, especially The plethora of professional societies now linked to MSE can be divided into three categories – old metallurgical societies, either unregenerate or converted to broader concerns; specialised societies, concerned with other particular categories of materials or functions; and societies devoted to MSE from the time of their foundation. Beyond this, there are some federations, umbrella organisations that link a number of societies.  There have long been a number of renowned national societies devoted to metals and alloys, some of them more than a century old. They include (to cite just a few examples, using early – not necessarily original – names) the Metallurgical Society of the American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers, The American Society for Metals, the Institute of Metals in London, the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Metallkunde, the Société Française de Métallurgie, the Indian Institute of Metals, the Japan Institute of Metals. Most of these have now changed their names because, at various times, they have sought to broaden their remit from metals to materials; the Indian and Japanese bodies have not hitherto changed their names. Some bodies have simply resolved to become broader; one has become simply TMS (which represents The Minerals, Metals and Materials Society), another, ASM International. Other societies have broadened by merging with other preexisting societies: thus the Institute of Metals in London first became the Metals Society, which merged with the Iron and Steel Institute to become the Institute of Metals once again, and eventually merged with other societies concerned with ceramics, polymers and rubber to become the Institute of Materials. The journals published by the various societies have mostly undergone repeated changes of name. Thus, the old The underlying idea fueling the many changes of names of journals is that by changing the name, societies can bring about a broadening of content. By and large this has not happened, and the journals have remained obstinately metallurgical in In Europe, a Federation of Materials Societies, FEMS, was established in 1987; it links 19 societies in 17 countries (website: Numerous societies are devoted to ceramics, to glass or to both jointly. The American Ceramic Society is the senior body; the European Ceramic Society is an interesting example of a single body covering a wide but still restricted geographical area. Societies covering polymers (and elastomers sometimes treated as a separate group) are multifarious, both nationally and internationally. Still other specialisms, such as composite materials, carbon and diamond are covered by commercial journals rather than by specialised societies, but even where there is no society to organise conferences in a field, yet independent and self-perpetuating groups of experts arrange such conferences without society support. Semiconductor devices and integrated circuits are mostly covered by societies closely linked to the electrical engineering profession. There are a number of societies, such as the Royal Microscopical Society in Britain, which focus on aspects of materials characterization. Any attempt to list the many specialised professional bodies would be unproductive. The first organization to carry the name of materials science was a British club, the Materials Science Club, founded by a group of materials-oriented British chemical engineers in 1963. This group organised broad meetings on topics such as ‘materials science in relation to design’ and ‘biomechanics’, and published some of the contributions in its own quarterly Undoubtedly, the key organization created to foster the new concepts of interdisciplinary research on materials is the Materials Research Society, MRS, founded in the US in 1973, after 7 years of exhaustive discussions. It is to be particularly noted that its name carries the words ‘Materials Research’, not ‘Materials Science’. ‘Materials Research’ avoids specifying which kinds of scientists and engineers should be involved in the society; all that is required that their work should contribute to an understanding and improvement of materials. According to illuminating essays ( There was a further consideration in the minds of the founders, though that has been kept rather quiet in public. In the early 1970s, physicists and chemists working in American industry, especially the many working on aspects of materials, were not made welcome in their professional physics and chemistry societies, which were inclined to ignore industrial concerns. These two groups played a substantial part in bringing the MRS to life; it must also be said immediately that enlightened figures in industry, especially William O. Baker, director of research at Bell Telephone Laboratories, from an early stage supported MRS by word and deed. MRS from the beginning welcomed industrial scientists and topics of close concern to industry. It is thus natural that today, as many as 25% of the ≈12,500 members of MRS (in more than 60 countries) are in industry (as against 63% in academe and 12% in government laboratories) (  In addition to the symposium proceedings, MRS publishes a monthly Once it was well-established, and mindful of its many foreign members, the MRS encouraged the progressive creation of local MRSs in a number of countries. There are now 10 of these, in Australia, China, Mexico, Argentina, India, Japan, South Korea, Russia, Taiwan and Europe (embodying various European countries, and domiciled in France). Some are more active than others; in particular, the Indian body, MRS-I, publishes its own successful research periodical, In Japan, the Japan Federation of Materials acts as an umbrella organisation for 18 Japanese materials societies, and very recently, in 2000, it has co-sponsored a new English-language Japanese journal, One primary aim of the MRS, to achieve a breakdown of interdisciplinary barriers, has been well achieved, according to one of the prime godfathers of materials science, the American Frederick Seitz (Fig. 3.19, Of course, many other professional societies have played their part in this successful reaching out between specialisms. As outlined above, the big metallurgical societies have broadened resolutely, and the American Physical Society and American Chemical Society are now much more hospitable to their members in industry than they apparently were 30 years ago. There is now an immense range of scientific journals, broad, narrow and in-between, to serve the great range of materials. The journals published by the many professional societies have encountered increasing competition from the many published by commercial publishers, but those, in turn, are now under severe pressure because of a growing librarians’ revolt against subscription prices that rise much faster than general inflation. One classification is of special importance: there is a small minority of materials journals that can be described as Another journal, The MRS archival journal, Some older journals, such as  In Japan, as recorded above, a new journal called An interesting, broad-spectrum journal founded in 1997 by Roy is A number of journals devoted wholly to review articles, shading from metallurgy to genuine materials science, are now appearing; the grandfather of this group is The journal whose genesis is to be described here is of extreme importance in the history of modern physical metallurgy and, later, materials science. Its birth in 1953 coincided with the high point of the ‘quantitative revolution’ portrayed in   By 1967, the flood of short papers had become so great that a separate journal,  In recent years, under the leadership of a coordinating editor, Subra Suresh, Scientific journals devoted to particular categories of materials, or procedures, become ever more numerous. Some are national, others continental or international in scope; some are highly specific, others somewhere between broad and narrow spectrum; some publish in English or another language only, others accept papers in several languages. All I can usefully do here is to cite a few examples. An example of a journal hovering between broad and narrow spectrum is Polymer journals are very plentiful and most of them are relatively broad in coverage. Examples – Other examples of specialised journals include  Materials chemistry is now served by a whole range of journals, ranging from the venerable In this listing of examples, I have excluded straight metallurgical journals and the many devoted to solid-state physics, such as the venerable One of the defining features of a new discipline is the publication of textbooks setting out its essentials. In Section 2.1.1, devoted to the emergence of physical chemistry, I pointed out that the first textbook of physical chemistry was not published until 1940, more than half a century after the foundation of the field. Materials science has been better served. In what follows, I propose to omit entirely all textbooks devoted to straight physical metallurgy, of which there have been dozens, say little about straight physics texts, and focus on genuine MSE texts. As we saw in However, the first text specifically for students of materials science was Lawrence van Vleck's In 1964, two competing series of slender volumes appeared: one, the ‘Macmillan Series in Materials Science’, came from Northwestern: Morris Fine wrote a fine account of From the early 1970s onwards, more substantial texts began to appear, notably Arthur Ruoff's A fresh start has been made by Samuel Allen and Edwin Thomas of MIT, with A number of somewhat more specialised texts also began to appear, such as Anderson and Leaver's A good example of a book aimed specifically at processes is Alexander and Brewer's There have also been some excellent books and collections of articles written at a popular level. The master of this difficult art was James (J.E.) Gordon, who brought out two immensely successful titles, A valuable source of up-to-date reviews of many aspects of MSE is a series of books, Recently, at an international conference, during the ‘afternoon off’ when we were all ambling in the sunshine, a young Algerian student asked me for a ‘word of wisdom’. What elderly scholar can resist such a dewy-eyed approach from youth? So I reflected for a moment and then told him: “Remember that there is not really such What I said to the young man was both true and untrue. It is quite true that working with, or at least communicating with, one's colleagues worldwide is one of the things that most makes a life in science worth while. Yet what one can do in a particular place depends on the resources and stimulus available, which in turn depend on the traditions and economy of that place. For instance, the traditions of (say) a Middle Eastern country may predispose scientists (and even engineers) there to focus on theoretical work at the expense of experiment. So in that limited sense, there is interest in saying something about how materials science and engineering have developed in different places, and to try to draw some conclusions. That is my objective in this section. I have picked people and institutions on the basis of personal acquaintance in years past, and that is why there is a certain metallurgical bias in my choices, since my personal research was on metals. I have outlined Those countries apart, if there were much more space available I could outline research institutions for materials science in the many European countries that possess them, in India, China and Korea, in Canada, Brazil, Israel. The fact that I do not implies no disrespect for the many fine experts in those lands. A number of American research institutions and the people who shaped them have already featured in this book: the creation of the Materials Research Laboratories; Robert Mehl's influence on the Naval Research Laboratory and on Carnegie Institute of Technology; Hollomon's influence on the GE laboratory; Seitz's influence on the University of Illinois (and numerous other places); Carothers and Flory at the Dupont laboratory; the triumvirate who invented the transistor and the atmosphere at Bell Laboratories that made this feat possible; Stookey, glass-ceramics and the Corning Glass laboratory. I would like now to round off this list with an account of a most impressive laboratory that came to grief, and the man who shaped it. Cyril Stanley Smith (1903–1992) ( In April 1946, a few months before the Institute began operation, Smith made public a memorandum detailing the principles on which it was to be founded. (The memorandum is reprinted in Kleppa's paper, and might be described as an Cyril Smith succeeded in attracting some very distinguished researchers at the beginning, including Charles Barrett (who had worked with Mehl in Pittsburgh), Clarence Zener, Norman Nachtrieb, the eminent crystallographer William Zachariasen, Andrew Lawson, Joseph Burke, Earl Long, the Chinese T'ing-Sui Kê… to mention only a few of the metallurgists, ceramists, physicists and chemists whom Smith had recruited (partly drawing on his acquaintances at Los Alamos). Smith also secured a large group of industrial sponsors, drawing on his industrial past. The Institute published a series of quarterly reports, distributed to the sponsors and some other favoured recipients; these reports in the early years contained entire papers which later appeared in journals, especially Smith himself stimulated many researchers but, though he wrote a celebrated paper on the evolution of microstructure, did not take any graduate students, and so he did not perhaps initially perceive the implications of the fact that large numbers of doctoral students came from the university's physics and chemistry departments to work with some of the permanent Institute staff… but there were no metallurgically trained students to draw on. Some of the Institute staff became closely involved with the physics or chemistry departments, and one even became chairman of the physics department. A consequence of this situation was that Smith could not attract further metallurgists to join the Institute, and junior metallurgists who came for short In 1955, Smith took a year's sabbatical to pursue his interests in metallurgical history (see, for instance, Section 3.1.2) which led in 1960 to the publication of his Smith resigned in 1961 and returned to his alma mater, MIT, where he developed his renowned work on the history of metallurgy, drawing on an enormous collection of ancient texts which he had begun to form in the 1930s. It would be fair to say that his courageous conception at Chicago eventually failed, and turned into something entirely different with his departure, because there was no academic home for the metallurgists on the Institute staff and the lack of such a home impeded recruitment and retention of staff. Scientists, like all other people, need a sense of belonging. In the various National Laboratories in America where so much distinguished research on materials goes on today, there is no such problem, but universities are different. When, in 1867, the repressive shogun was overthrown, the Meiji (Imperial) Restoration took place and Japan was at last thrown open to the world, the Japanese government soon recognised that Japan had a lot of catching up to do with respect to science and engineering. At once, a number of foreign professors were recruited to teach at Japanese universities, especially from Germany, Britain, France and America. One of those who came was Alfred Ewing, the many-faceted magnetician and engineer whom we met in   In 1919, after much politics (the details of which can be found in Bartholomew's book) Honda's group was inaugurated under the name of Iron and Steel Research Institute. Three years later, to broaden its terms of reference, it was rechristened the Research Institute for Iron, Steel and Other Metals (RIISOM). The Institute was wholly focused on intensive research, at all hours of the day and night; Honda was full of scientific ideas and implacable with his colleagues and students. Among many other early successes were a series of improved magnetic alloys, details of which can be found in a survey of Japanese research in magnetism ( The prodigious research output of the Institute often first saw the light of day in the In 1931, Honda, loaded with honors, became president of the university, and the Institute was directed by a successor. The Institute expanded its space, personnel and range of interests, until in 1987, in the words of the current descriptive brochure, “it was reorganised as a countrywide collaborative research institute to meet the rapid progress in materials science and renamed Institute for Materials Research.” Its institutional centre has remained in Sendai. Its constituent 31 laboratories range from very pure to very applied science, from crystal physics to irradiation studies, from low-temperature physics to solid-state chemistry under high pressure, from high-purity metals to crystal chemistry, from magnetism to solidification and casting metallurgy – to name just a few. One recent director was Tsuyoshi Masumoto, who made his name in research on metastable alloys and has very recently founded a new Today, there are many eminent researchers on materials in Japan, alike in universities and in various national research institutes, and latterly in Tsukuba Science City – but the Tohoku Institute has always held a special place, owing to the energy, determination and organising ability of its founder and the habits of work which he instilled in his staff. In the 1930s, the world's greatest migration of scientists took place under the lash of Nazism. It has sometimes been asserted that Hitler may have lost the War because of the talent he forced to flee, and that the American development of the atomic bomb that shortened the War so drastically might have been much slower without that migration. Other, less cataclysmic, consequences also flowed from the migration, and this Section is devoted to one of them.  Boas praised Becker's personality, as one of the most ethical men he had ever met, with high principles from which he would not deviate and for which he stood up with great courage, even vis-à-vis the dangerous Nazis. When Becker (1887–1955) died in Göttingen, after a life marked by major contributions to nucleation theory and ferromagnetism as well as plasticity and even explosives, his memorial speeches all insisted on his striking honesty and uprightness of character. Heisenberg at the In later 1927, Becker saw to it that in spite of the severe Depression, Boas was given a job at the Kaiser-Wilhelm-Institut für Metallkunde in Berlin. Becker told Boas that he was dean of the faculty which had to adjudicate on the ‘habilitation’ (right to lecture at university) of a young Austrian metallurgist at the Institute, Erich Schmid, and that (in spite of his – Becker's – high ethical standards!) he would tell Schmid that he would agree to his habilitation only if he appointed Boas to a position in his section.” He did, and was duly habilitated. On such curious practices can a lifetime career depend. With Schmid, Boas began the experiments on the plasticity of metal crystals (Sections 2.1.6, 4.2.1) that culminated in the publication, in 1935, of their joint book  Boas's post at the University of Melbourne was made permanent, and for 9 years he taught and supervised research, and helped train metallurgists for war work. A number of noted metallurgists, such as Robert Honeycombe, passed through his hands. Then, after the War, the department was faced by insuperable difficulties and research facilities disappeared. In 1947 he applied for and secured a senior post in the Division of Tribophysics of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, CSIRO, also in Melbourne. ‘Tribophysics’ in the name was a residue of the interests of F.P. Bowden who studied wear and lubrication and sought a more elegant name to denote his interests (Bowden had moved on to Cambridge). Boas's duties were to undertake, and direct, research in the physics of solids. In spite of the tribophysics name, Boas took a broad view of his remit, and studied many aspects of metal physics. CSIRO made no difficulties about his choice of themes; they had an attitude to their senior scientists rather like that of Bell Laboratories… choose the best and give them their heads. How different from the situation today! In 1949, Boas was appointed to the post of divisional chief after the incumbent retired. He took some persuasion to accept this, because it meant more attention to administration and supervision and would make it difficult for Boas to undertake personal research. But he accepted this and had an enormous influence on a whole generation of Australian physicists and metallurgists, aided in this by his open and affable personality. He remained in charge until 1969; his list of publications could not be large, though he brought out two more didactic books. He became known throughout the world; thus, in 1953 he became a senior adviser to the newly established  After his retirement, the character of CSIRO changed utterly, and research in the Division, which repeatedly changed name, became wholly focused on applications. Boas's team fell apart and the scientific atmosphere in the Division became quite different. According to However, none of what has happened recently can detract from the contribution made by Walter Boas, that eminent physicist of solids, to the scientific life of his adopted and beloved country. In 1955, being a Spanish-speaking metallurgist, I was invited to spend some weeks in Buenos Aires to deliver a course in elementary modern metallurgy to some members of the mainly youthful staff of the Atomic Energy Commission. The person who invited me, a dynamo of energy and originality, was Jorge Sabato (1924–1983) ( While I was in Argentina in 1955, Sabato took me to visit a brand new laboratory in Patagonia, deep in the ‘south’, near the ski resort of San Carlos de Bariloche. This was, and still is, the Centro Atomico de Bariloche (CAB). It is an institution (formally part of a local university) for research and teaching in physics, ranging from particle physics to solid-state physics. Its origin is one of the most curious in the entire history of academe.  After the commission reported, it took some time for the government to extract Richter from his island; surprisingly, he was allowed to retire peacefully and (I was informed at the time of my visit) to take up chicken farming near Buenos Aires. So by 1953, there was a mass of virtually unused laboratory equipment on the isle of I came back in 1959 to deliver a course of crystallography lectures at the CAB, and by that time the metal physics was well established. It has continued to flourish, and broaden; many papers of note were published, and a succession of international materials symposia have been held there. The CAB director, Balseiro, died young, of cancer, and the latest of a succession of directors is José Abriata, an Argentinian materials scientist. Most observers, I believe, both in South America and beyond, would concur that the Bariloche centre is the most distinguished physics laboratory in South America. Materials science plays an important part there, and credit for that belongs to Jorge Sabato. The early path of scientists in Russia was not an easy one, especially for those precocious individuals who were far ahead of their contemporaries. In Georgii Vyacheslavovich Kurdyumov (1902–1996) ( Kurdyumov was educated as a physicist at Abram Ioffe's famous institute in Petersburg (= Petrograd = Leningrad = now, St. Petersburg). Alexander Roytburd, one of Kurdyumov's later collaborators, in a memoir of his revered master ( As a very young scientist, Kurdyumov homed in on the important problem of how and why carbon steel becomes hard when it is quenched from red heat. At an early stage, he established firmly that the hard phase was Back in the Soviet Union, he moved to the Ukraine to help, with his scientist wife, create a research institute in Dniepropetrovsk, where he continued with his researches. He was invited to be director, sought to escape from this fate (he complained that he would be a bad administrator, and that by administering he would lose contact with real science and then become unable to direct scientific work properly) but was persuaded to overcome his scruples. The rest of his long career he both administered (usually more than one institute at once) and remained a unique scientist. During the War, the institute had to move, and after the War, it was moved again, to Moscow, and Kurdyumov with it. While in Moscow, he also created a laboratory of metal physics in Kiev, Ukraine, and directed both the Moscow and the Two further aspects merit notice. Kurdyumov's Moscow laboratory was part of the great network of laboratories administered by the Soviet Academy of Sciences, and his Kiev one belonged to the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences. Throughout the Soviet sphere of influence, and also in China, the science academies were the chief organisers of scientific research – essentially, the academies were, and are, organs of state – whereas in the West, the academies are independent bodies of experts, ready to advise governments but not to administer laboratories. Briefly, just before the First World War, when the US National Academy of Sciences (NAS) was in its formative state, there were voices raised in favour of laboratories to be run by the NAS, but the idea was soon abandoned. Independence from the state was too precious to be thus compromised. All who knew Kurdyumov well testify to his kindness, consideration of his staff and courage. Roytburd remarks: “In order to be a founder of a new scientific era one has to be a great scientist; to create a science school one has to be a great person. Kurdyumov was this scientist and this person. His personality attracted everyone who met him, but we, his pupils, colleagues and friends especially felt enchanted by him… He was Director of our institute but that was not what defined his authority. He was a spiritual leader because of his vision of the problem, his enthusiasm, his respect for the scientific truth, his belief that the truth is more important than success.” Another of Kurdyumov's collaborators, Evgeny Glickman, informed me ( 