Hydrophobic polystyrene nanoparticles (latex) were evaluated as replacement collectors for pentlandite flotation with a view to improving processing of ultramafic ores. Nanoparticles adsorb onto pentlandite particles, rendering them sufficiently hydrophobic to induce flotation. Polystyrene nanoparticles bearing surface imidazole groups specifically bind nickel ions and appear to improve selectivity (i.e. nickel grade), presumably because of chelation interactions between the imidazole groups and the pentlandite surface. Very high nanoparticle concentrations were required for high pentlandite recoveries under the high ionic strength conditions typically used in industry because the nanoparticles were coagulating. The path to commercially relevant nanoparticle flotation collectors involves increasing the colloidal stability of the nanoparticles while minimally impacting hydrophobicity.In Canada and many other countries there is interest and activities aimed at extracting nickel from ultramafic ores. Flotation of pulps with high serpentine contents presents many challenges including: 1) high flotation pulp viscosities ( Many studies have revealed the mechanisms of serpentine interference. High viscosity flotation pulps can inhibit or completely prevent bubble transport through the pulp, leading to levitation of the bed of serpentine fibers to the top of the flotation cell. Similar effects have been reported for deinking flotation in wood pulp fiber suspensions ( The consequences of serpentine coatings on pentlandite have also been discussed. Pietrobon et al. proposed that slime coatings interfere with collector adsorption ( There are commercial ultramafic pentlandite processing operations currently running or in the planning stages ( In the early stages of this project we were surprised to learn that colloidal or nanoparticles had never been employed as collectors. Thus we did not know if nanoparticles could serve as collectors for any type of mineral or mineral model. Furthermore, we had no idea of the potential roles of nanoparticle size, hydrophobicity and coverage (i.e. the fraction of the mineral surface coated with nanoparticle). Coverage is a particularly important parameter because completely coating mineral particles with what is essentially a latex paint would be too expensive. Our initial work addressed these issues and the key findings were: 1) nanoparticles based on polystyrene (polystyrene latex) are sufficiently hydrophobic to promote flotation when adsorbed onto hydrophilic glass beads; coverage of as little as 5% of the glass bead area was sufficient to give good recoveries (  Glass beads (≤  The model slime sample was taken from scavenger flotation tails of a Pipe drill ore sample. Vale's flotation procedures for acquiring tails included grinding, hydrocyclone desliming followed by rougher and scavenger flotation — details have been published elsewhere ( Both Pn and slime samples were chemically cleaned to remove residual xanthate and oxidation products from particle surfaces. 5     Air bubbles (1.2 to 2.0  In a typical experiment, a mixture of 2.0 Flotation tests employing ultramafic nickel ore were performed in a 4.2 The nickel content of each product was measured by a Varian Vista inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrophotometer (ICP–OES). Approximately 0.25 The microstructure of flotation products or the mixture of Pn/glass beads, Pn/tails from model flotation runs was investigated by using a JEOL JSM-7000F scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray diffraction (EDX). A series of nanoparticle suspensions was prepared by standard emulsion polymerization techniques yielding spherical particles with very narrow particle size distribution. The major component of the nanoparticles was polystyrene, a fairly hydrophobic plastic. However, it is not possible to prepare colloidally stable nanoparticle suspensions from pristine polystyrene because the nanoparticles would coagulate. To confer colloidal stability and promote nanoparticle deposition onto pentlandite, nanoparticle surfaces were decorated with up to three components: 1) a few amidine cationic polymerization initiator fragments present on all particles at low surface concentrations (  For flotation, the nanoparticles must be sufficiently hydrophobic to induce mineral attachment to air bubbles. As a measure of the ability of adsorbed nanoparticles to promote air bubble adhesion, we adsorbed a saturated monolayer of nanoparticles onto a pentlandite surface and measured the contact angle formed when an air bubble is attached to the surface. The resulting contact angles are summarized in the right hand column of Imidazole functional groups were chosen because they have an affinity to nickel ions ( Small-scale flotation runs were performed with a suspension of purified Pn, and the results for three flotation collectors are compared in A good flotation collector must selectively adsorb to pentlandite rich particles. We hypothesized that imidazole groups should promote the selective deposition of nanoparticles on pentlandite. In ultramafic ores, the pentlandite surfaces are anionic ( The selectivity of the VI nanoparticles for pentlandite is further illustrated in One of the advantages of the nanoparticles is that they can be observed by electron microscopy. Moving beyond very small-scale laboratory flotation experiments described so far, nanoparticles with and without surface VI groups were compared using a Denver cell following the “incremental” procedure with a pipe ore. The results in The polystyrene nanoparticle design parameters include particle size, surface group type, and surface group concentration. The sensitivity of flotation behavior to nanoparticle properties is illustrated in Examination of many electron micrographs revealed that many nanoparticles were present as aggregates on the pentlandite surfaces, suggesting that some of the nanoparticles were not colloidally stable under flotation conditions. To further support this explanation, we measured the critical coagulation concentration (CCC) of the various flotation chemicals. The CCC is the minimum concentration of a reagent that induces rapid coagulation of a colloid ( PAX (potassium amyl xanthate) is a short chain anionic surfactant and is expected to have a high affinity to the cationic, hydrophobic nanoparticles, neutralizing the cationic charge and inducing coagulation. The PAX CCC for St-VI-52 was only 0.025 ST-VI-MAPTAC-121 had a high surface charge density requiring much more sodium carbonate or PAX to induce coagulation. Thus the nanoparticles would not aggregate during flotation. Finally, Unifroth is a mild nonionic surfactant that has no influence on nanoparticle aggregation. The overall goal of our research is to develop design rules for the synthesis of nanoparticle flotation collectors, possibly leading to trials and commercial implementation. We believe that nanoparticles may offer advantages, particularly when pentlandite surfaces are contaminated by nanoscale deposits that can hide the underlying surface from approaching air bubbles — see For conventional nickel ores where molecular collectors like PAX are effective, it is unlikely that nanoparticles will compete because the mass dosage of nanoparticles is always likely to be higher. For example, the coverage corresponding to an adsorbed layer of PAX is approximately 2 In summary, we have established that nanoparticle flotation collectors can promote pentlandite flotation from ultramafic. Ongoing work involves fine-tuning of the nanoparticle surface chemistry to balance hydrophobicity, colloidal stability and the selectivity towards pentlandite. Based on our previous model experiments, optimized nanoparticles should function at low dosages giving as low as five percent coverage. The specific conclusions from this work are: Vinylimidazole functionalized polystyrene nanoparticles preferentially adsorb onto pentlandite surfaces promoting flotation. Because imidazole groups bind nickel ions, we propose that the VI nanoparticle deposition onto pentlandite is facilitated by chemisorption of the imidazole groups on the nickel rich surfaces. Current generations of nanoparticle flotation collectors described herein require impractically high collector dosages because the nanoparticles undergo coagulation in the high ionic strengths associated with conventional flotation. A practical nanoparticle flotation collector must be sufficiently charged to prevent coagulation but sufficiently hydrophobic to facilitate flotation — a delicate balance. We thank the