The present contribution focuses on the micro-mechanisms associated to cataclasis of both calcite- and dolomite-rich fault rocks. This work combines field and laboratory data of carbonate fault cores currently exposed in central and southern Italy. By first deciphering the main fault rock textures, their spatial distribution, crosscutting relationships and multi-scale dimensional properties, the relative timing of Intragranular Extensional Fracturing (IEF), chipping, and localized shear is inferred. IEF was predominant within already fractured carbonates, forming coarse and angular rock fragments, and likely lasted for a longer period within the dolomitic fault rocks. Chipping occurred in both lithologies, and was activated by grain rolling forming minute, sub-rounded survivor grains embedded in a powder-like carbonate matrix. The largest fault zones, which crosscut either limestones or dolostones, were subjected to localized shear and, eventually, to flash temperature increase which caused thermal decomposition of calcite within narrow (cm-thick) slip zones. Results are organized in a synoptic panel including the main dimensional properties of survivor grains. Finally, a conceptual model of the time-dependent evolution of cataclastic deformation in carbonate rocks is proposed.Simplistically, fault zones are comprised of two main structural domains, named as fault cores and damage zones ( Both IEF and chipping do not always occur at the same time. IEF often dominates in the early evolutionary stages of cataclasis, whereas chipping govern the progression of comminution (i.e. the reduction of grain size) at higher amounts of fault displacement ( On this regard, the present work focuses on the space-time evolution of the micro-mechanisms associated to cataclasis of both limestones and dolostones. By considering well-exposed fault cores pertaining to normal fault zones of central and southern Italy, a detailed documentation of the main fault rock textures is carried on by mean of both qualitative and quantitative structural analyses. Then, by deciphering the crosscutting relationships among the main fault rock texture types, the relative timing among IEF, chipping, and localized shear is inferred. Furthermore, evidences of seismic-related deformation are reported. Data are discussed in light of the possible differences between calcite- and dolomite-rich fault rocks, and summarized in both a synoptic panel and a conceptual model of cataclastic deformation in carbonate rocks. Results of this work can be helpful to better understand the storage and migration properties of carbonate-hosted fault zones ( The Apennine fold-and-thrust belt is a circum-Mediterranean orogeny, in which the tectonostratigraphic imprint of superposed events of rifting and collision are preserved ( Tectono-stratigraphic units occurring in the central Apennines are related to the Mesozoic evolution of the outer Adriatic margin ( In the central Apennines, the study areas ( Since Late Miocene, contractional deformation in the eastern sector of the Apennine fold-and-thrust belt was accompanied by extensional tectonics of its inner and axial portions. The inner portion is characterized by crustal thinning (∼25 km-thick crust) and opening of the Tyrrhenian basin, which is interpreted as a back-arc basin ( Normal faults located in the axial sector of the Apennines chain produced a series of small, elongated sedimentary basins progressively younging eastward, which are nowadays located on both sides of the orographic divide. Some of the best examples in the Lazio-Abruzzi and Campania-Lucania platform carbonates are the Fucino, Sulmona, Val d’Agri and Mercure continental basins ( Five fault zones were selected for this study on the basis of their comparable amount of exhumation from shallow crustal depths, availability of information on their geological setting in the literature, and overall quality of the outcrops. Moreover, all selected fault zones crosscut similar platform carbonates, and developed in recent times during downfaulting of the central and southern Apennines fold-and-thrust belt. The Marsicovetere Fault (1), is located along the northern edges of the Agri Valley, which is a NW-trending intermontane basin located in the southern Apennine, along the axial zone of the chain and it is filled with Quaternary fluvio-lacustrine, alluvial fan and slope deposits ( The Roccacasale Fault (2), is located along the western side of the Morrone Mountain, which constitutes the eastern edge of the Sulmona Basin, a Quaternary intramontane basin of the Central Apennines that hosted a continental sedimentary succession through the whole Quaternary ( The Venere-Gioia dei Marsi Fault (3), is a part of a NW-trending fault zone along the eastern side of the Fucino Basin. The Fucino is a ∼30 km wide sedimentary basin, filled with Late Pliocene-Holocene fluvio-lacustrine deposits ( The Madonna del Soccorso Fault (4), is a part of a series of NW-trending and SW-dipping extensional high-angle faults that border the eastern side of the Mercure Basin, an intramontane basin filled with Middle-Late Pleistocene fluvial-lacustrine deposits ( The Vetrice Fault (5), is a part of a NW-trending and SW-dipping extensional high-angle fault zone located in the axial sector of the Southern Apennines, near the Campania-Basilicata border. The Vetrice Fault is part of an underlap fault zone between two seismic fault segments, the San Gregorio Magno Fault, to the NW, and the Pergola-Melandro Fault, to the SE. The underlap fault zone comprises two main NW-trending and NE-trending fault sets; minor E-trending faults are also present ( Investigation of the five fault zones included field-based structural analysis, micro-structural analysis, and digital image processing. In the field, detailed surveys of the outcropping carbonate fault cores, which are comprised of a variety of cataclastic rocks and major slip zones, were carried out. Representative (∼50) oriented blocks of about 30 cubic decimetres were collected from the study fault cores for subsequent laboratory analyses. From each hand specimen, polished slabs were obtained (∼95) by cutting them either parallel or perpendicular to the dip direction of the main slip surfaces. Detailed qualitative microstructural analyses were performed on each slab image, which were recorded on a high-resolution scanner at 2400 dpi, in order to distinguish the main texture types ( The present work focusses on NW-SE trending, high-angle, normal fault zones that crosscut Mesozoic limestones and dolostones. Specifically, limestone-hosted normal faults crop out along the Fucino, Sulmona and Agri Valley basins, whereas those dolostone-hosted are exposed in the vicinity of the Vietri di Potenza and Castelluccio Superiore villages, southern Italy. The study limestone-hosted normal fault zones have lengths comprised between 5 Km and 10 Km, and throws between 50 m and 600 m ( The Marsicovetere Fault (1), is located in the central portion of a NW-trending, ∼5 km-long, SW-dipping fault zone (VAFS, The Roccacasale Fault (2), is a part of ∼10 km long, NW-SE-trending and SW-dipping normal fault zone, which shows an amount of cumulative throw up to ∼400 m, juxtaposing Upper Cretaceous limestones and dolostones against Quaternary fluvial, lacustrine, and alluvial deposits ( The Venere-Gioia dei Marsi Fault (3), is part of a ∼10 km-long fault zone characterized by ∼600 m of throw that juxtaposes Jurassic limestone against Quaternary fluvio-lacustrine sediments ( Elaboration of the quantitative data obtained after digital image analysis of 1 cm The northern portion of the Madonna del Soccorso fault zone (4), is part of a NW-trending, ∼1.5 km-long fault zone characterized by ∼100 m of throw ( The Vetrice Fault (5), is part of a NW-trending, ∼5 km-long, ∼400 m-throw ( Results of digital image analysis (cf. Section. Results of structural analyses are first discussed in order to distinguish the main carbonate fault rock textures. We propose a new nomenclature for the documented texture types, report the box-counting dimensional properties of survivor grains (D This work provides a comprehensive documentation of fault rock textures in both limestone- and dolostone-hosted fault zones formed at similar shallow crustal depths and under the same extensional tectonic regime. This evidence is interpreted in terms of micro-mechanisms that took place during fault evolution and exhumation, leading to the formulation of a conceptual model of the time-dependant evolution of cataclastic deformation in carbonate rocks. The The The The Both calcite- and dolomite-rich fault rocks exhibit a very similar D On the contrary, correlations among SD and both D The 10's of m-throw, Marsicovetere and Madonna del Soccorso faults include up to ∼40 cm-thick fault cores, which are made up of predominant Gs-type and, less significantly, Ms-type fault rocks ( A schematic cross-section of the 100's of m-throw carbonate fault zones is shown in The aforementioned spatial distribution of fault rocks within the study carbonate fault cores is consistent with an increasing amount of deformation towards the main slip surfaces, as already documented by Based on the relations reported above, a conceptual model of the time-dependant evolution of cataclasis in both calcite- and dolomite-rich fault cores is proposed hereafter ( Cataclasis involves already fragmented, somehow cubic, carbonate elements by mean of their translation and/or rotation under the effect of a local stress field ( With increasing strain, it is inferred that chipping becomes the dominant micro-mechanism, which causes formation of the Ms-type texture ( Large-scale fault zones might be affected by high flash temperatures that localize at the frictional micro-contacts, asperities, during rapid, ∼1 m/s slip ( The aforementioned time-dependant evolution of cataclasis could be profoundly affected by the diagenetic evolution of the carbonate fault rocks ( We presented the results of a combined field and laboratory structural investigation of carbonates fault rocks pertaining to NW-SE trending, high-angle extensional fault zones characterized by throws ranging between a few 10's of m and several 100's of m. The work is aimed at deciphering the main texture types and micro-mechanisms that took place in both limestones and dolostones at shallow crustal depths. As a result, despite the different nature and inherited structural fabric of the protoliths, all study fault zones are comprised of fault rock assemblages with very similar cataclastic textures and multiscale dimensional properties (box-counting dimension, D The aforementioned texture types are consistently distributed within the study fault zones. The Fh-type carbonate commonly flanks the Gs-type fault rocks on the footwall side, which form the bulk of the carbonate fault cores pertaining to the 10's of m-throw fault zones. Conversely, the Ms-type fault rocks constitute the main part of the exposed fault cores pertaining to the 100's of m-throw fault zones, which also include continuous veneers of Fg-type fault rocks that preserve relicts of coseismic deformation. The individual fault rock textures were interpreted as the result of specific micro-mechanisms such as IEF, chipping, localized shear, and seismic-induces thermal decomposition of calcite. According to the crosscutting relations documented both in the field and at hand-sample scales, as well as their computed dimensional properties, occurrence of specific fault rock texture types was linked to the time-dependent evolution of cataclastic deformation. In conclusion, both limestones and dolostones were affected by a very similar time-dependent evolution of micro-mechanisms. In fact, a slight difference between the two lithologies was assessed for IEF, which might last for a longer period within the dolomite-rich fault rocks due to their higher values of elastic moduli with respect to the calcite-rich ones. The present contribution is part of the first author's Ph.D. research work. Emma A.H. Michie and an anonymous reviewer are acknowledged for their fruitful suggestions and revisions. Alessandro Bardi, Alessandro Mastroberti and Antonio Sabatino are acknowledged for the help provided during field survey and a preliminary data elaboration, Antonino Cilona for the useful comments on the project. This work was funded by the