Given the increasing global demand for rare metals, there is a need for the development of fundamental predictive models to improve extraction processes. Comminution models commonly predict particle size reduction based on the compressive breakage behaviour; however, few of them include mineral concentration or mineral liberation at a coarse scale. This paper focuses on developing a model to predict the mineral concentration of rare metals as a function of the particle size distribution after a cycle of the compression crushing process. In this study, compressive breakage and geochemical analysis experiments were conducted on four different rare metal ores of tantalum and tungsten. The work is divided into two stages: the methodology of modelling particle size and modelling concentration by selecting a bimodal Weibull distribution for calibration. A novel model for simulating the concentration of rare metals as a function of the compression ratio is presented.breakage matrix [–] feed distribution [mm] identity matrix [–] product distribution [mm] selection matrix [–] calibration constant [–] calibration constant [–] normalized frequency distribution concentration[–] calibration constant [–] calibration constant [–] bed height [mm] integration interval fraction size [mm] integration interval fraction size [mm] element index [–] mass in each fraction [g] total mass [g] size fraction [–] relative compression ratio [–] displacement piston [mm] normalized particle size [–] particle size [mm] cumulative normalized distribution concentration [–] An ore is a naturally occurring mineral or aggregate of minerals containing valuable substances that can be extracted, for example, metals. To release or liberate the valuable minerals, it is necessary to reduce all the particles to small sizes. The process to achieve this reduction in particle size is known as comminution. Once the particles are reduced to the smallest sizes, it is possible to separate the valuable minerals from the gangue minerals by subsequent classification and separation of the ore and the gangue minerals. One of the most important aspects of the performance of the comminution processes that has been studied is the particle size distribution. The work of In recent years, other models have been developed that are suitable for predicting the particle shape, e.g., The quality and performance of a comminution circuit is normally assessed by measuring the particle size distribution; however, the existing models are limited by the intrinsic physical properties of the ore, e.g., the multi-component element/mineral concentration, and because they do not incorporate mineral liberation. Moreover, the fracture process is not the only basic fundamental concept that must be understood; it is necessary to understand and assess other concepts, such as liberation, mineral concentration, breakage mechanisms and the behaviour of different minerals from the earliest stages in the process, namely, the crushing stage. The understanding of the breakage mechanism will open up new possibilities regarding the design and optimization of comminution circuits. In random breakage, the fracture occurs randomly, without consideration of the different phases present in the ore, allowing the composition of all particles to remain constant. In contrast, in selective or non-random breakage, the fracture is preferential. There are two forms of non-random breakage in particle bed breakage: interfacial breakage (grain/phase boundary fracture) and preferential breakage. In interfacial breakage, the fracture occurs between different grains or between the phase boundaries, allowing the preferential liberation of the phases. In the second case, preferential breakage occurs when the characteristics of the phases are different, resulting in breakage at different rates according to the soft mineral and hard mineral contents of the ore. The soft minerals will break more rapidly than the hard minerals, considering the same amount of forces, generating different concentrations in the composition of the fine fraction and the coarse fraction. Another concept that must be taken into account in the liberation process is the mineral associations and their mechanical properties, especially elastic properties. In recent years, the work by  As a consequence of the preferential breakage, the composition may vary depending on the size fraction. There are multiple models that consider particle size reduction for coarse comminution based on the compressive breakage behaviour; however, few of them include mineral concentration or mineral liberation at a coarse scale. Normally, the evaluation of liberation is performed in the last step of the process, when all particles are reduced to a certain size (micro-scale). In the work by In the work of There are different studies, knowledge and models in coarse comminution that predict the size distribution after crushing and predict the liberation after milling. These studies and models do not include the elemental concentration in coarse comminution. The aim of this paper is to propose a novel method for modelling the concentration of elements in low grade ores. The model is applicable to coarse comminution, e.g., fine crushing by means of a cone crusher. The laboratory experiments in this paper are divided into two parts. The first part involves characterization of the mechanical breakage behaviour of the samples via inter-particle compressive breakage tests (IPB) according to the work of The second part of the experiments focuses on determining the chemical composition using geochemical analysis (bulk chemical analysis). The materials tested and characterized in these experiments are four different rare metal ores of tantalum and tungsten. The compression breakage tests were performed in a hydraulic press (Instron 400RD) using a piston and die test procedure originally presented by The compression ratio The cylinder was placed in the hydraulic press to apply compressive forces. The compressive force was monitored during each test to allow for integration of the force to determine the used mechanical energy. During the compression test, the compression ratio A geochemical analysis was performed for each particle size fraction shown in Results from the ICP analysis are shown in In this paper, we introduce the methodology of analysing the ICP data using a cumulative distribution function. The data are normalized by dividing each fraction mass by the total mass of all fractions. The mathematical technique of normalization functions is described in In the work of The breakage model generates a particle size distribution for an arbitrary size range; in this case, for the experiments conducted, the particle size distribution will be in the same size range as shown in The breakage function was fitted to the particle size distributions obtained from the laboratory compression tests for the four different ore types, with three different compression ratios for each ore type. The model validation is shown in By combining The observations on how the concentrations of minerals are distributed between the fractions show that there is a general distribution behaviour. By examining the cumulative distribution of the concentrations, the data will be filtered and easier to fit a model to. By plotting the distributions in a Weibull diagram, it can be shown ( Many phenomena in nature have been shown to follow the characteristics of exponential or logarithmic distributions. In the literature, the Weibull distribution has been used for modelling reliability distributions. The Weibull distribution is well known for its flexibility, having been used in modelling a wide range of distributions. The Weibull distribution is presented in Eq. The parameters By taking the logarithm of Eq. Recalling the cumulative distribution of the measured data presented previously in As a result of this analysis, a modified Weibull distribution is introduced that is capable of handling the bimodal frequency distribution of the element concentration The model estimating the normalized cumulative concentration is shown in Eq. The normalized concentration model shown in Eq.  The presented model for simulating the absolute elemental concentrations must be combined with the information given by other modelling components in the crusher model. The central components for calculating the elemental concentration is the particle size distribution and the normalized concentration model. A flowsheet of the elemental concentration model is presented in In In contrast, in the cases of T1 and T2, they originate from the same mine, but the sampling was conducted in different parts of the mine, i.e., the calibration constants should be similar. The analysis using normalization of the cumulative concentration showed that there is a general behaviour regarding how the concentrations of elements are distributed after compression-induced fracturing. This behaviour can be modelled as a bimodal Weibull distribution. The absolute concentration of rare elements is calculated using the particle size model combined with the normalized concentration model derived in this paper. The modelling of the normalized cumulative concentration using a bimodal Weibull distribution was shown to be effective. The model has a good correlation to the measured data, with some exceptions for the smallest size range in two of the samples. The normalized cumulative concentration curves show that the compression ratio This work is based on the research supported by the In this section, the calibration constants are presented in combination with additional simulations of all the samples analysed in the study (