Background:
                  This study compared the radiologic outcome of fixation using locking plate only with fixation using locking plate with an endosteal strut allograft in the treatment of comminuted proximal humeral fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  Among 52 patients with comminuted proximal humeral fracture, 32 patients underwent fixation with locking plate only, and 20 patients underwent fixation using locking plate with an endosteal strut allograft. The strut allograft was inserted into the intramedullary cavity of the humerus to support the humeral head and fixed with the locking plate. Immediate postoperative radiologic findings were compared with those of 6 months or more after the surgery, and loss of anatomic fixation was defined if the varus malalignment of neck-shaft angle (NSA) was more than 5° or if the change of humeral head height (HHH) was more than 3 mm.
               
                  Results
                  In the locking plate-only group, 22 of 32 patients (69%) showed the change in NSA of more than 5°, with an average of 10.2°. The HHH change in 20 patients (62.5%) was more than 3 mm, with an average of 4 mm. Among 20 patients who underwent locking plate with the endosteal strut allograft, the average NSA and HHH change was 3° and 1 mm, respectively. Varus malalignment was evident in 2 patients (10%). The HHH change was more than 3 mm in 1 patient (5%).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fixation using a locking plate with an endosteal strut allograft can be considered a reasonable option to maintain the anatomic reduction in elderly patients with comminuted proximal humeral fracture.Comminuted fracture of the proximal humerus is a common type of fracture in those with insufficient bone quality, such as elderly patients and patients with osteoporosis, and obtaining and maintaining satisfactory fixation and bony union after surgery is not easy. The recent introduction of the locking plate has made it easier to achieve the maintenance of fixation of proximal humeral fracture. This study compared the radiologic outcome of fixation using locking plate only with fixation using locking plate along with an endosteal strut allograft in the treatment of comminuted fracture of the proximal humerus. This retrospective case study enrolled 52 patients (13 men and 39 women) who underwent a surgical procedure for comminuted proximal humeral fracture between September 2008 and May 2014. The average age was 69.1 years (range, 55-87 years). Thirty-two patients underwent fixation with locking plate only (group A) and 20 underwent fixation using locking plate with an endosteal strut allograft (group B). The average ages were 67.8 years (range, 55-87 years) in group A (8 men, 24 women) and 71.3 years (range, 55-85 years) in group B (5 men, 15 women). By the Neer classification, there were 8 type II (5 with metaphyseal comminution), 21 type III (5 with metaphyseal comminution), and 3 type IV fractures in group A and 3 type II (all with metaphyseal comminution), 15 (8 with metaphyseal comminution) type III, and 2 type IV (1 with metaphyseal comminution) fractures in group B. All operations were performed by a senior shoulder surgeon (J.J.). The surgery was performed through the deltopectoral approach. A PHILOS Proximal Humerus Internal Locking System (Synthes, Mezzovico-Vira, Switzerland) was used as a locking plate. The average follow-up period was 15 months (range, 12-28 months), and radiologic evaluation was done by measuring neck-shaft angle (NSA) on anteroposterior or Grashey view and by measuring humeral head height (HHH), as previously proposed The surgery was performed through the deltopectoral approach. Gardner et al After the confirmation of fracture reduction under image intensifier, the PHILOS Proximal Humerus Internal Locking System was positioned on the lateral cortex and fixed with locking and cortical screws. At least 1 or 2 screws penetrated into the graft, and 2 locking screws were fixed toward the inferomedial cortical bone of the proximal humerus to support the reduction. The wound was closed after profuse irrigation and insertion of a suction drain. The shoulder sugar tong splint or sling was applied for several days for immobilization and gentle passive motion in tolerable range was allowed. The splint or sling was removed 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively and active motion was allowed. Statistical significance of the difference in radiologic measurements between groups was evaluated with the Student In group A, 22 of 32 patients (69%) showed a change in the NSA of more than 5°, with the average of 10.2° (range, 0°-30°). Twenty patients (62.5%) had a change of HHH of more than 3 mm, with an average of 4 mm (range, 0-13 mm). The complications comprised 2 cases of screw penetration, 1 case of screw loosening, and 1 plate breakage. Among 20 patients in group B, the average NSA and HHH change was 3° (range, 0°-8°) and 1.2 mm (range, 0-3 mm), respectively. Varus malalignment was seen in 2 patients (10%), and the HHH changed more than 3 mm in 1 patient (5%). Heterotrophic ossification occurred in 1 patient in this group. No other complications, such as severe varus malalignment, screw cutout, screw penetration, osteonecrosis or infection, were reported ( The differences of the average values of NSA ( The proximal humeral fracture is 5% of total fractures, and the incidence is increasing as a result of the aging population. For the internal fixation of a 2-part fracture of the proximal humerus, an intramedullary rod, rigid angle devices, side-plate and screw, tension band wiring, and suture fixations are chosen as treatment options. Meier et al Walsh et al Gardner et al Neviaser et al Gardner et al Although allograft has negative aspects, such as disease transmission and risk of infection and immune reaction, these risks can be reduced through selection of suitable donors and aseptic management in processing. Allografts from our tissue bank were irradiated at 2.5 kGy, which may have contributed to further safety in using allograft. In fact in this study, disease transmission or infection was reported in patients treated with endosteal strut allograft. Matassi et al This study has several limitations. First, because the number of patients is not sufficient to generalize the result of the 2 groups, further study is needed with a greater number of patients. Second, a longer period of observation is required because the follow-up period in this study was rather short; however, the differences in NSA and HHH would not likely be significant after the bone union. Third, the study did not include clinical symptoms, such as patients' satisfaction and functional recovery, because of incomplete data collection, and needs to be reinforced through further inquiries. In treating comminuted proximal humeral fracture, fixation using a locking plate alongside an endosteal strut allograft is one of the treatment options that shows a satisfactory result in humeral head support and maintenance of reduction. It is expected to minimize complications that may happen while performing fixation with locking plate only and to allow for early rehabilitation. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.