Objective
                  The aim of this study is to analyze the functional outcome following titanium elastic stable intra-medullary nailing (ESIN) for displaced mid-shaft clavicular fractures (DMCF).
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective study of 60 patients between March 2009 and March 2015 was conducted. Patients were selected based on the inclusion criteria. Six patients were lost during follow up. Out of the remaining 54 patients, there were 39 males and 15 females. The mean age was 30.6 years. The functional outcome was analyzed using the Constant score, rate of bone union, complication, and earliest time of return to work.
               
                  Results
                  All fractures united well, with an average time of 7.5 weeks. Follow-up period ranged between 12 months and 18 months (average, 14 months). 24 out of 54 patients had closed nailing, while 30 had minimal open reduction. The average size of ESIN was 2mm (range, 1.5–3mm). The average Constant score was 97.8 (range, 95–99). There were no major complications, but minor complications occurred, viz. skin irritation in 15 patients, temporary paresthesia in five patients, and three patients who developed superficial infections. One case had implant migration and perforation at the lateral cortex, and one case had delayed union. There were few implant-related problems, as the authors used a standard protocol to remove it after radiological union. All patients returned to work within 10 weeks of the post-operative period.
               
                  Conclusion
                  ESIN is a safe, minimally invasive, engenders rapid healing with good cosmesis, and provides an excellent functional outcome in terms of patient satisfaction, with fewer complications.The shoulder joint functions as a closed chain mechanism and constitutes four joints. Two among the four joints articulates with the clavicle. Therefore any clavicle fracture affects the whole shoulder girdle. The clavicle is the first bone to ossify and it is one of the commonest bones to be fractured (2.6–5% of all fractures). A fall or direct blow to the shoulder is the most common mechanism of injury for any clavicle fracture. The mid-shaft fractures, tend to shorten when displaced. It is due to the combined working of the sternocleidomastoid pulling the medial fragment superiorly and posteriorly, and the pectoralis major, the deltoid and gravity pulling the lateral fragment inferiorly and anteriorly. This results in net displacement and shortening of the fracture ( As nature has endowed clavicle with excellent reparative powers, these fractures are treated conservatively in general, but two-third of DMCF will end up in some degree of malunion with shortening and symptoms. The clavicle length plays an important role to maintain anatomical relationship and function of the shoulder girdle. The standard treatment of DMCF is plate osteosynthesis as it restores length and anatomical alignment, also the implant is mechanically stronger but has its own complications. Intramedullary fixation for clavicular fractures was first described by Peroni Our study is to evaluate this DMCF treated by titanium ESIN. We analyzed (1) union rate, (2) functional outcome using Constant Score, A retrospective review of a cohort of 60 unilateral DMCF treated at our institution between March 2009 and March 2015, treated with titanium ESIN was carried out. Six patients were lost during follow up. Out of the remaining 54 patients there were 39 males (72%) and 15 females (28%) in our study. There were 28 left sided fractures and 26 right sided fractures. The mean age was 30.6 years (range: 23–50 years). Commonest mode of injury was due to fall on the shoulder either due to road traffic accidents ( Skeletally mature patients with diaphyseal mid-shaft fractures with more than 20 (1) Open fractures, (2) floating shoulder, (3) proximal or distal fractures, (4) neurovascular injuries, (5) fractures presenting after one week of injury, (6) patients with pre-existing sub-acromial pathology, (7) co-morbidities with risk of anaesthesia and surgery, (8) surgical techniques other than ESIN, (9) grossly comminuted fractures – type C (OTA), (10) non-union, and (11) malunion. Having got the informed written consent and prophylactic antibiotics, the patient under general anaesthesia was positioned in a supine beach chair position with a folded towel over the medial border of the affected shoulder. The injured part was prepared and draped from the midline to the upper arm. Care was taken to ensure the sterno-clavicular joint accessibility for the entry and was confirmed using an image intensifier. The size of the nail was measured using the following formula −0.4 A small incision was made over the skin 1 Attempt was made for close reduction of the fracture by using two percutaneously introduced pointed reduction clamps. If the fracture could not be reduced by closed means, then a small separate vertical incision was used at the fracture site to aid fracture reduction. Vertical incision (mini open) technique was used as it was parallel to the Langer's lines and minimized the risk of damage to supraclavicular nerves, to avoid dysesthesia of skin and scar neuromas. The nail was then advanced manually until it was just medial to the acromioclavicular joint. Accurate manoeuvring of nail tip was necessary under fluoroscopic control to avoid penetration of thin dorsal cortex. After adequate engagement in the lateral segment, the fracture was compressed and the nail was cut after little bent closed to the entry point on the medial side and buried under skin to minimize soft tissue irritation as well as for an easy extraction in future. The fascia and skin were closed in layers. Post operatively patients were kept in a sling, and they were discharged the very next day after post operative check X-rays and encouraged for early shoulder mobilization with pendular exercises. Suture removal was done on the tenth day. Active range of movement exercises were initiated. The shoulder sling was discarded at the end of three weeks, overhead activity was allowed only after fourth week. Activities of daily living were started thereafter, but those requiring lifting of heavy weights were delayed until union was achieved. All patients were reviewed at second, fourth and sixth week, third and sixth month after surgery at the outpatient department, at each visit the patients were accessed clinico-radiologically for primary and secondary outcomes. We routinely removed the nails after six months with complete radiological union, which was defined as visible bridging callus or complete obliteration of fracture lines. All patients were further followed up for one year to a maximum follow up of two years. As there were no clavicle trauma scores the functional outcome was evaluated using Constant Score. At the end of the study we had 54 patients, who returned for clinical and radiological follow up. Average clinical follow up was 14 months (range 12–18 months). All fractures united with a mean time of 7.5 weeks (7–10 weeks). We had one case of delayed union ( Out of 54 patients, the average ESIN size was 2 We did not have any major complications in our study which needed additional surgical procedures. We had minor complications, the most common complications being medial skin irritation in fifteen patients (27%) at the site of nail entry. In three cases (5.6%) there was superficial infection at the nail entry site, which got settled with oral antibiotics. In one case, we had implant migration with perforation at the lateral end ( We compared the final clavicular lengths after full radiological union and implant removal. In OTA type B fractures, in six cases (21%) we had clavicular shortening of 1 All patients returned to work within 10 weeks of post operative period. The functional outcome was evaluated by using Constant score at each follow up. All patients with one year follow up were included in the study, the average Constant score was 97.8(Max-99, Min-95). Statistical data of constant score in our study had standard deviation 2.4, sample variance Traditionally, from Hippocratic era, mid shaft clavicle fractures were treated conservatively. The reported incidence of unsatisfactory outcome after closed treatment of DMCF varied from 4.4 to 31%. The shortened clavicle has a negative effect on muscle tendon tension resulting in loss of strength and endurability. Anatomically aligned united mid shaft clavicle fracture is always superior over conservatively treated clavicle. The only way to achieve this is an open reduction with internal fixation or a percutaneous procedure. Hence, current recommendation for this fractures is operative fixation. Plating is the gold standard operative procedure for DMCF, as it restores length and alignment anatomically and mechanically even in comminuted fractures by becoming the strongest implant. The neurovascular damage with screw placement in plating can be reduced by placing it anteroinferiorly, but anterosuperior plating offers a more secure fixation. So, another emerging mode of fixation is percutaneous intramedullary fixation with ESIN. The main complications of ESIN are migration and perforation of device. Although they are minor complications in literature, they are reported to be in range of 5.2–38.8%. In our study, we had an excellent union rates in all cases. In one case we had delayed union, in OTA type B fracture, where we did a mini open technique. We did open reduction in 55% of cases which was comparable to other studies. Our study also has limitations, it is a relatively small retrospective series of patients with a mean follow up of fourteen months, we did not compare study with other methods of fixation, our complications were less as we did routine nail removal, we cannot comment regarding symptomatic malunion as we did not have long-term follow up and we excluded OTA type C fractures, where ESIN produces more shortening, so plate fixation remains the operative procedure of choice as it offers better clavicular length maintenance. ESIN is a safe, minimally invasive technique in indicated cases. We had favourable results with this technique but needs a lot of expertise. We do not recommend this technique in severely comminuted DMCF. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.