Understanding methane adsorption behavior in shales is fundamental for optimizing shale gas development as the adsorbed methane is a large portion of the subsurface shale gas resource. However, the adsorption mechanism of supercritical methane in shales and associated thermodynamics are poorly understood because the equation of state of the adsorbed methane is unmeasurable. This work analyzed adsorption equilibria (up to 32MPa and 393.15K) using a rigorous framework that can account for non-ideal gas properties and accurately extrapolate absolute adsorption uptakes from measured adsorption isotherms. The framework also allows a straightforward calculation of thermodynamic potentials relevant to adsorption such as enthalpy and entropy. Modelling results show that methane adsorption isotherms in shale under different pressures and temperatures are represented by a two dimensional adsorption isotherm surface. The density of the adsorbed methane in shales depends on temperature and pressure, which is always lower than the liquid methane density but higher than the corresponding gaseous methane density. The temperature-dependent and pressure-dependent characteristics of adsorbed methane density leads to the corresponding temperature-dependent and pressure-dependent measured/absolute adsorption isotherms. The maximum adsorption uptake of shales is independent of temperature and pressure. The isosteric enthalpy/entropy of adsorption and enthalpy/entropy of adsorbed methane are found to be temperature- and surface coverage-dependent. These new findings therefore not only clarify some historical misunderstandings of methane adsorption in shales for engineering application, but also provide a novel framework for interpreting methane adsorption behavior in shales and for determining the associated thermodynamics.Natural gas produced from subsurface shale formations, also called shale gas, has changed world energy supplies and continues to have global implications for a low carbon-constraint economy. A U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) study indicates that shale gas is expected to account for 30% of the global natural gas production by 2040 (International Energy Outlook 2016). According to the EIA report, there are 35,782 Trillion cubic feet (Tcf) of risked shale gas in-place across 41 countries, of which 7299 Tcf shale gas is considered technically recoverable. With the advancement of hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling technologies, producing shale gas from subsurface formations is becoming economically feasible. The U.S. was the first country to produce commercial volumes of shale gas, followed by Canada, China and Argentina. Extensive researches have been conducted to understand the nature of existing shale gas and their transport behavior in subsurface formations in order to estimate the total shale gas resource and the best manage production Shale gas, consisting mainly of methane, exists in three different states at subsurface shale formations: adsorbed phase that is weakly bounded to the pore surfaces, bulk phase in the free pore space excluding the space occupied by adsorbed phase, and a small amount of dissolved phase in organic matter and formation liquids. Previous studies have revealed that adsorbed methane accounts for 30%–80% of total gas reservoirs Accurate estimation of adsorbed methane content in shales under supercritical conditions (subsurface reservoir conditions) still remains unclear. Accurate extrapolation of the absolute (true) adsorption uptake from measured adsorption isotherms requires a thorough understanding of the equation of states (EOS) of the adsorbed phase, i.e., how the volume or density of the adsorbed phase changes with temperature and pressure Analysis of the thermodynamics (e.g., enthalpy and entropy) of supercritical methane adsorption in shales can reveal important information about methane-shale interactions. For example, when the isosteric enthalpy is lower than 40 This report first presents an alternative framework for analyzing measured supercritical methane adsorption equilibria including adsorption model and the analytical method of calculating enthalpy and entropy of adsorption. Secondly, our proposed approach is used for analyzing supercritical methane adsorption equilibria of four different shales from literature (19 adsorption isotherms with 350 measured points at pressures up to 32 Supercritical gas adsorption in porous media is different from subcritical gas adsorption because assumptions such as multilayer formation, capillary condensation in small pores, and saturation pressure are not applicable for the supercritical fluid The porous media has a rigid structure; The absolute adsorption uptake of supercritical gas in porous media monotonously increases with increasing gas pressure; The intrinsic adsorption capacity of a heterogeneous porous framework is determined by material properties such as pore structure and surface chemistry; The location and thickness of the adsorbed layer remain constant and are determined by gas molecule-pore wall interaction. The first assumption assumes the pore structure does not change during adsorption, and that adsorption induced deformation is beyond the scope of this work Following these four basic assumptions, a rigorous framework for modeling supercritical gas adsorption isotherms can be established using Gibbs excess adsorption theory. In any pure gas–solid adsorption system, the measured adsorption quantity, also called the Gibbs excess adsorption uptake For real-world porous materials, a dual-site Langmuir model is applied to describe the absolute gas adsorption behavior by considering the material heterogeneity By combining Eqs. If the adsorption volume, It is expected that if Eq. If the absolute adsorption uptake is available, the thermodynamic parameter, the isosteric enthalpy of adsorption ( The derivative of pressure with temperature along an isostere (constant value of adsorption uptake), The analytical form of If one ignores the volume of the adsorbed phase and applies the ideal gas law, Eq. Eq. The isosteric entropy of adsorption ( Comparing to Eq. The supercritical methane adsorption isotherms in four different shales from China are directly retrieved from the literature. Samples FC-47, FC-66 and F-72 are collected at different depth from lower Cambrian shale formation in northeast Guizhou province and sample Longmaxi is from Longmaxi formation in Sichuan province The observed adsorption isotherms under different temperatures are fitted simultaneously using Eq. Mathematically, Eqs. Modelling results support the proposal that Eq. Both the predicted absolute adsorption surface and Gibbs excess adsorption surface are shown in The density of the adsorbed phase of supercritical methane in shales as a function of pressure and temperature is shown in The calculated isosteric enthalpy of adsorption for methane in shale ranges from −8 The calculated isosteric entropy of adsorption for methane in shale ranges from −19 To demonstrate the applicability of the proposed model, we compare our modeling results with those of two conventionally used methods, namely, the 3-parameter Langmuir model Eqs. It was demonstrated that both models fit the measured results very well, and details about the fitting performance and the corresponding results are shown in Supplementary material. This section focuses on the comparison and interpretation of the modelling results from dual-site Langmuir, Langmuir and SDR model on maximum adsorption uptake, adsorbed methane density, absolute adsorption uptakes, and thermodynamic potentials. It is generally accepted that the adsorption capacity of a shale is positively correlated to its total organic carbon (TOC) content Since the equation of state for adsorbed methane is not measurable, developing alternative ways to estimate the density/volume of the adsorbed methane is key to understanding methane adsorption behavior in shales. Modelling results from the dual-site Langmuir model shows that the density of the adsorbed methane follows a Langmuir type trend, i.e., always higher than the density of gaseous methane and always lower than the density of liquid methane ( Obtaining absolute adsorption uptake of methane in shales is fundamental for accurately estimating shale gas resources as well as understanding shale gas transport models in nanopores of shales. An incorrect ratio between adsorbed methane and gaseous methane for methane in shales was historically reported in literature because the absolute adsorption uptake and gaseous methane were estimated inaccurately Thermodynamic potentials, such as isosteric enthalpy and entropy, indicate the interactions between gas molecules and shales. The isosteric enthalpy/entropy of adsorption calculated by the C–C equation through the curve fitting method (Eq. A rigorous framework to analyze adsorption equilibria for supercritical methane in shales has been developed in this report. This framework can accurately account for non-ideal gas properties and extrapolate absolute adsorption uptakes from measured adsorption isotherms. It allows accurate description of the complex behavior of thermodynamic indicators such as enthalpy and entropy relevant to adsorption. The modeling results were compared with results obtained using the routinely applied Langmuir model and supercritical Dubinin–Radushkevich (SDR) model. Our preliminary conclusions are as follows; The developed framework was successfully applied for describing supercritical methane adsorption isotherms (up to 32 The maximum adsorption uptake of shale positively relates to the total organic carbon (TOC) content, which is determined by the material property of the shale and is independent of temperature. The higher the TOC, the larger the maximum adsorption uptake. The adsorbed methane density is found to be temperature- and surface coverage-dependent, and is higher the gaseous density but always lower than the density of liquid methane. The calculated isosteric enthalpy and entropy present the temperature- and surface coverage-dependent characteristics of supercritical methane in shales. In contrast, using the simplified Clausius–Clapeyron equation always overestimates the isosteric enthalpy and entropy and does not reveal the temperature-dependent characteristics. Overall, the proposed framework lays the foundation for investigating supercritical fluid adsorption behavior in shales and the associated thermodynamics potentials. This method also allows analysis of how material properties of shales, such as composition, pore structure and surface chemistry, affect estimation of shale gas resources and associated thermodynamic potentials. This project received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 793,128 ( Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: