The extraction of minerals from garden sage (Salvia officinalis L.) using water as a solvent was studied at different extraction conditions. A full factorial experiment 23 with replication was performed. The effects of three extraction factors, liquid/solid ratio (15 and 30 mL/g, solvent volume per g of raw material), extraction temperature (40 and 100 °C) and extraction time (20 and 80 min) such as their interaction were evaluated by the analysis of variance and linear regression model. At the 95% confidence level all three factors were effective on Na, K, Mg, Ca, Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn, Ni, Cr and Al yields, the most important factor being the extraction time (except for Ca, Cr and Al). All regression models gave a good fit to the experimental data (R
                     
                        2
                      > 99%). The content of minerals in water extracts were determined using inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry. The optimum extraction conditions were as follows: liquid/solid ratio 15 mL/g, extraction temperature 100 °C, and extraction time 80 min. The data obtained were used to establish the thermodynamics of the extraction process. The Gibbs free energy change for the extraction of minerals is negative (except for Fe, Al and Cr), indicating that the process is feasible and spontaneous.Botanical and medicinal plants in their natural and processed form are widely used in traditional medicine. Some of the health benefits include antimicrobial and antioxidant efficacies, which can be of great significance in therapeutic approaches of many diseases [ Garden sage ( Trace minerals of The separation is commonly performed in industrial applications and laboratory experiments. Flotation is an effective method for separating target minerals from different sources [ Mineral ions play an important role in the metabolism of all the living organisms and are, therefore, integral components of plants [ The extraction of organic compounds is widely studied [ The plant materials were harvested by hand in the morning during the period of full blooming in one location (Niška Banja – Serbia; the second half/part of May). The herb materials were dried immediately after harvesting in a shady and well-aired place for 15 days. Then, the dry plant materials were packed in paper bags and kept in a dark, dry and cool place. Before being used, the plant material was comminuted by a hammer mill and sieved through a 6 mm screen. The ultra scientific (USA) ICP multi-element standard solution of about 20.00 ± 0.10 mg/L was used as a stock solution for calibration. Nitric acid (65%) and perchloric acid ( In the first stage, the extraction experiments were performed using different conditions of solvent/solid ratio, extraction temperature and extraction time. The conditions used in each experiment were settled according to the 2 The plant samples were digested in a solution containing HNO For the elemental analysis, an iCAP 6000 inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Cambridge, United Kingdom) with an Echelle optical design and a charge injection device (CID) solid-state detector, was used under the operating conditions as follows: flush pump rate – 100 rpm; analysis pump rate – 50 rpm; RF power – 1150 W; nebulizer gas flow – 0.7 L min The precise method was optimized for each element. The choice of wavelength was performed based on relative intensity of the signal, as a measure of sensitivity, defects in response to the standards, and the extent of interference in the real sample. The analytical wavelengths (nm) chosen were as follows: Al (396.152), Ca (422.673), Cr (283.563), Cu (324.754), Fe (259.940), K (769.896), Mg (279.553), Mn (259.373), Na (589.592), Ni (231.604), and Zn (213.856). To construct a calibration graph, which gives the dependence of relative intensity of the signal on the concentration of the analyte, blank samples (  where The thermodynamic parameters, namely the enthalpy of extraction (  A full factorial model 2 The influence of liquid/solid ratio, temperature and time on the extraction yield of minerals from garden sage (  The experimental data of the mineral yield were analyzed with a linear first-order regression model. The general regression equation of this model is as follows: The significant changes in Na, K, Mg, Ca, Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn, Ni, Cr and Al content in relation to the changes in the independent variables ( The analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the response variables (content of Na, K, Mg, Ca, Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn, Ni, Cr and Al) are presented in It was clear that the linear and interaction terms were highly significant ( It is also necessary that the developed regression models ( Our results showed that the The extraction coefficient obtained in this study varied greatly, from 2.81 to 59.67 at 20 °C and from 8.52 to 88.21% at 100 °C, respectively ( The mineral content in extracts, The thermodynamic analysis was performed to determine the basic thermodynamic parameters of the traditional maceration of the minerals from The enthalpy change values for the extraction process are in the range of 2.14–64.26 kJ mol The enthalpy change in this report for K, Ca and Mg was comparatively higher than those of white lady's bedstraw ( The positive values of entropy change for the extraction process of minerals from The negative values of A full factorial experiment 2 This research was supported by grant number The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.