Solid-state fluorescent behavior of the model benzoxazine monomer, 3,4-dihydro-3,6-dimethyl-1,3,2H-benzoxazine denoted as MM, was firstly reported. Three characteristic fluorescence peaks were observed, i.e., (1) the ultraviolet peak at 317nm with the excitation wavelength of 258nm, (2) the blue emission peak at 450nm with the excitation wavelength of 324nm and (3) the other blue fluorescent peak at 454nm with the excitation wavelength of 360nm. It was proved that the benzoxazine core was responsible for the fluorescence of blue light due to the absence of the emission peak in the ring-opening benzoxazine dimer with the same moieties as the benzoxazine monomer MM. The single crystal X-ray structure of the compound MM recorded at 100K showed that the irregular chair conformation of the ring-closure benzoxazine MM gave rise to the fluorescent property since all the members of the oxazine ring other than nitrogen atom arranged themselves at the plane of the benzene ring.Benzoxazines are a sort of heterocyclic compounds which have the core structure of benzene ring fused with oxazine ring which can readily synthesized by the Mannich reaction of mixing three components, namely, primary amines, paraformaldehyde, and phenols However, there are only few serious works on spectroscopic aspects of benzoxazines. The published works on these points covered only in the fields of vibrational Paraformaldehyde was purchased from Fluka while 40% aqueous solution of methylamine, 4-methylphenol and sodium hydroxide were supplied by Merck. Solvents 1,4-dioxane and dichloromethane were obtained from LAB-SCAN. All reagents and solvents were analytical grade and used without further purification. The compound 3,4-dihydro-3,6-dimethyl-1,3,2H-benzoxazine (MM) was synthesized by the one pot Mannich reaction of phenol, formaldehyde and amine with the molar ratio of 1:2:1 The FT-IR spectrum of the prepared benzoxazine was recorded by Alpha FT-IR spectrometer from Bruker using ATR mode. The one hundred FT-IR scans of the sample were taken in the range of 4000–550 The synthesized benzoxazine (about 10–20 FTIR: 3000–2800 (w, CH), 1498 (oxazine ring), 1226 (s, CN), 1117 (m, CO) NMR: The rod shaped colorless crystal of MM with the size of 0.15 The pure crystals of compound MM were ground to get a fine powder. About 0.1 The crystallographic data (CCDC#969107) for this manuscript can be obtained from The Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre via It was noteworthy understanding the effects of substituents on both benzene and nitrogen moieties on the structure parameters of the molecules especially the parameters that were belong to the oxazine part of the molecules. To clarify this issue, the data comparison was needed to be constructed using the results from many previously published works Bond angles of the benzoxazine compounds were the other significant point to consider. Fluorescence behavior of the compound MM was studied by varying the excitation wavelength in the range from 250 to 380 As the excitation wavelengths were escalated further, the emission intensities dropped gradually. When the excitation wavelength was changed up to 310 It was noteworthy recognizing that the emission of the blue light at both wavelengths of 450 Low-temperature X-ray crystallography was employed to study the structure of the benzoxazine MM. The refined structure showed that the benzoxazine MM adopted the irregular chair conformation with the ring strain due to the expansion of the C Solid-state fluorescence of benzoxazine monomer MM showed characteristic fluorescence peaks at the wavelengths of 317, 450 and 454 The authors would like to thank Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 