The combination of an electromagnetic and a dual energy X-ray transmission sensor is a new method for automatic sorting of scrap non-ferrous metals. It allows classification of metals based on differences in electrical conductivity and atomic number. Both sensors were developed and tested at Delft University of Technology. In a number of experiments non-ferrous metals from post-shredder scrap were identified and sorted based on the combined sensor output. The results and possible industrial applications in automatic sorting of scrap metals are discussed. A sorting system that includes both sensors allows replacement of conventional ferro-silicon based dense medium systems by an entirely dry process that does not require any washing.Recycling represents an important source of metals. The processing of scrap starts with size reduction and liberation by a shredder. After magnetic separation of steel the remaining non-ferrous fraction is a mixture of different metals and alloys in a size range of 10 to 100 mm. The mixture consists of copper, brass, zinc, aluminium, magnesium, lead and the remaining non-magnetic stainless steel. Several mechanical concentration techniques are available for further upgrading of the mixed non-ferrous metals, the most important being dry eddy current separation and density separation ( The differences in physical properties of the mixed particles are not in all cases large enough for an effective separation by means of the existing mechanical techniques. Therefore manual sorting of metals is still used despite the fact that it is labour intensive. It has limitations in capacity per person and labour costs, but the products obtained will have a high quality and added value. In Europe and North America the costs of manual sorting are high, but in several countries in Asia labour is still available at low rates, resulting in competitive sorting costs in the order of 5 to 10 €/t. Automatic sorting is the separation of material based on a Separation systems that use cameras are widely applied in different sorting applications, such as food processing, mineral and metal sorting ( Besides colour detection other techniques were developed for a more accurate metal alloy detection. Examples are the Metallgesellschaft, Huron Valley and RWTH-Aachen systems for metals and alloy sorting that is based on laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy or LIBS ( Metal detectors (“metal finders”) are on the contrary extensively used for removal of metals from a mixed feed and provide a reliable and low cost method for enhanced metal recovery or removal. Although a lot of research has been carried out in the field of Dual energy X-ray transmission (DE-XRT) proved effective in sorting materials based on differences in atomic number. It can be applied for the sorting of coal, polymers, recycle glass, waste, shredder fluff etc. It can also be applied for the separation of several alloy groups, notably those of aluminium and magnesium ( EMS and DE-XRT sensors provide a relatively low cost sensing technology without the need for pre-treatment. The sensors can be combined in a single sorting device, such as the CommoDas Mikrosort AR1200. Today the technology to combine the data from different sensors to obtain a maximum detection rate and selectivity of metals is readily available. For a shredder operation the downstream installation of a sensor sorter after screening, magnetic separation and eddy current separators promises an economic and practical solution to improve grade and recovery for sorting of metals and alloys of products that can directly be sold to the market. It is an innovative dry alternative for heavy medium separation and hand picking. The objective of this paper is to show the practical possibilities of metal and alloy concentration by using the combination of EMS and DE-XRT. Samples of various scrap particles from a car shredder were systematically tested on both sensor types resulting in data that indicate the obtainable product purities and recoveries. At Delft University of Technology a DE-XRT system was optimised and tested in co-operation with L3 Communications. The sensor provides information about the average atomic number of the inspected material. The system is similar to that applied for luggage inspection and medical applications, the main difference being the data processing and image analysis software. The laboratory machine was modified to run at a constant scan speed of approximately 1 m/s. The particles used for the experiments were selected from either a low or a high atomic number category. A DE-XRT system provides an image of the particles and the colour and intensity give a relationship between the atomic number and the inspected particle.  A prototype EMS that was developed at Delft University of Technology was applied for the experiments. Its design and applications are described in earlier work ( Earlier experiments conducted with the EMS demonstrated that non-ferrous metals with For the experiments a sample shredded scrap metal particles with different shapes, e.g. compact, bar, sheet, pipe and irregular, and sized between 20 and 150 mm were used ( The particles were numbered and scanned with both sensors in the same order and under the same conditions. The obtained data from each sensor were separately analysed. Voltage amplitude ( The objective of the experiments was to assess the differentiation between several non-ferrous scrap metal groups. For this the combined data from the EMS and DE-XRT were used. From the light NF metal fraction wrought aluminium (Alw), cast aluminium (Alc) and the magnesium alloys were scanned with the DE-XRT sensor ( The metal fractions were also analysed with the EMS at two frequencies, which were selected in the working range of the sensor and depending on the particle size and metal composition. Previous publications describe the influence of shape and size of the particles on U and φ ( The variation in With a one sensor application the contour can be determined with the EMS, but a particle geometry measurement using a DE-XRT is more precise than with the EMS, because the DE-XRT sensors have a several times better resolution of typically 1 by 1 mm, instead of 5 by 5 mm to 10 by 10 mm for EMS.  With sensor resolutions of 0.8 mm, currently state-of-art with commercial DE-XRT sorting technology, the computation of the particle size and shape is possible down to particles of 5 mm.  In a similar way the measurements of wrought aluminium, cast aluminium and magnesium based on By comparing In order to have a better representation of the efficiency and the possibility to apply the EMS and DE-XRT for metal sorting, grade and recovery were derived from the graphs in The EMS results show a higher grade and recovery for high density metals compared to low density metals. This can be explained by the fact that the relative difference in σ is larger for high density than for the low density metals. The highest grade and recovery were obtained for SS, where copper and brass showed almost similar values. Cast and wrought aluminium were in one group, because, as earlier mentioned, it is difficult to distinguish between these alloys because of very close values recorded in By doing a similar calculation of grade and recovery as for the EMS, the DE-XRT showed, as to be expected, better results in distinguishing cast aluminium, wrought aluminium and magnesium. By contrast, the high density metals chosen for this experiment were better differentiated with the EMS than with the DE-XRT. ( The combination of the data from the EMS and XRT will provide better and more efficient differentiation between low and high density metals (  Light and heavy NF metals can be separated into two different groups with good accuracy. From a mixture of light metals 86% of the magnesium was recovered at 92% purity. 68% of the cast aluminium was recovered at 81% purity. 50% of the wrought aluminium was recovered at 70% purity. Shape, size, contour and purity of the particles can be derived from the DE-XRT images.  The separation of SS from a mixture of NF metals is efficient. 90% of the SS was removed from a mixture of heavy NF metals at 95% purity. Separation of copper and brass is more difficult. 65% of the copper was removed from a mixture of heavy NF metals at a purity of 80%. Separation of a mixture of light metal groups into aluminium cast, wrought and magnesium is not possible. Separation of SS from a mixture of all groups, light and heavy NF metals, is effective. A combination of EMS and DE-XRT for the sorting of NF metal mixtures enables: Separation of light and heavy NF metals in separate groups Separation of a cast aluminium group that is substantially lowered in magnesium and wrought aluminium Separation of a wrought aluminium group that is substantially lowered in magnesium and cast aluminium Separation of a magnesium group that is substantially lowered in aluminium Separation of SS Separation of a brass fraction that is lowered in copper Separation of a copper fraction that is lowered in brass