The mechanism of pyrite bioleaching has been studied through both the indirect action of bacteria by recycling the leaching agent (Fe3+) and the direct attack of microbial cells attached to the mineral surface. Causes of the decrease of the dissolution rate and the ultimate levelling off of the process are also identified.
                  The study shows that pyrite bioleaching is markedly affected by the oxidation state of the dissolved iron. The ferrous/ferric ratio controls the relative rate of the oxidation reactions involved in the process. Additionally, the pyrite dissolution is controlled by the competitive chemisorption between Fe2+ and Fe3+ on the mineral surface. The accumulation of ferrous ions on the surface results in a diffusion barrier to the ferric attack, producing an increase of the ferric ion concentration in the bulk solution that inhibits the microbial oxidation capacity for concentrations higher than 16 g/L. There is a relationship between the rate of cell attachment to mineral surfaces and the mineral dissolution rate, since the initial attachment accounts for much of the dissolution rate during the bioleaching process. This is explained by the release of Fe2+ from the mineral attack by contact bioleaching and the rapid oxidation of Fe2+ accumulated on the surface by attached microorganisms. The results point to a cooperative bioleaching strategy for pyrite dissolution, whereby contact bioleaching and indirect bioleaching of the mineral possibly occur simultaneously via a thiosulphate mechanism.The role played by microorganisms in pyrite bioleaching has been, is, and probably will be a controversial subject. Although different authors agree with several aspects related to the phenomenon, no unified theory has been accepted. In spite of much evidence presented in favour of the microbial attachment to pyrite Recent studies have proposed new theories. The indirect mechanism via thiosulphate, established by Thiosulphate is an intermediate product that reacts yielding other intermediates such as tetrathionate, disulfane-monosulfonic acid, trithionate, etc., with sulphate as the final product of the global reaction: The The discovery of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), excreted by microorganisms adhering to the mineral surface, has also contributed to clarify the mechanism of microbial action and support the new theories proposed by  Indirect bioleaching: microorganisms are not attached to the mineral surface and their action is restricted to the renewal of the leaching agent, Fe Contact bioleaching: microorganisms attach to the mineral surface to condition it and facilitate the mineral attack through electrochemical dissolution by Fe Cooperative bioleaching: microorganisms attached to the mineral surface cooperate with cells that are free in solution. The attached bacteria liberate oxidizable metal species, which are the energy source of microorganisms in solution. The aim of this study is to better understand the mechanisms involved in pyrite dissolution by determining whether microbial direct attack or microbial indirect action is responsible for mineral dissolution. Highly pure pyrite was bioleached at two different temperatures (35 and 68 °C) and evaluated using Fe A very pure iron sulphide concentrate, obtained from Navajún Mines (La Rioja, Spain) was used in all experiments. Chemical and X-ray diffraction analyses of the sample showed 43.8% Fe, 0.01% Cu, 0.01% Zn, and 49.9% S and pyrite (FeS Two different microbial cultures were used in the bioleaching and microbial attachment tests. They consisted of a mixed culture of mesophilic microorganisms (mainly Tests were carried out in Erlenmeyer flasks shaken at 150 rpm and at 35 and 68 °C, with 90 mL of the corresponding nutrient medium and 5 g of the mineral concentrate. After 2 h of chemical conditioning of the mineral, the pH was adjusted to 1.7 at 35 °C or 1.5 at 68 °C, and finally, 10 mL of stock culture were added. The progress of leaching was monitored at specific time intervals by measuring the concentration of metals ([Fe Additionally, different bioleaching experiments were carried out in 500 mL aerated and mechanically stirred bioreactor tanks. Experimental conditions were the same as in the Erlenmeyer flasks, but in this case, 15 g of mineral concentrate were placed in 300-mL inoculated nutrient medium to obtain a pulp density of 5% (w/v). Each inoculated experiment was duplicated under sterile conditions by adding 2 mL of a bactericide solution of ethanol with 2% thymol (control test). Microbial attachment tests were carried out during the first 24 h of microbial growth in Erlenmeyer flasks, under the same conditions used in the bioleaching experiments. Attachment measurements were performed on samples of the growth medium removed at specific time intervals (1, 10, 30, 60, 120, 480, and 1440 min). The cell number was determined in the liquid phase with a Thoma counting chamber by using a phase-contrast microscope. The number of cells attached to the mineral surface was determined as the difference between the initial inoculated concentration of cells and the concentration of cells remaining in the liquid phase after attachment. The microbial attachment to the minerals during the bioleaching process was studied in aerated and mechanically agitated bioreactors under the same conditions used in the bioleaching experiments. A sample of the solution was removed at specific time periods (2 or 3 days). The attached cells were determined after dislodgement with Tween 20 at a concentration of 0.1% v/v using the quantification method of microbial adsorption with detergents The residues obtained in a first bioleaching attack were bioleached in a second step with fresh nutrient medium and new inoculum. In these experiments, the experimental conditions were similar to those of the first bioleaching test. The electrochemical experiments were carried out at a constant or programmed potential using a Wenking potentiostat (Model LB 81 M) and a Wenking voltage scanner (Model MVS 87) from Bank Electronic. Data were acquired by an analogue board installed in a PC. The stirring of the electrolyte was performed magnetically while the working electrode remained stationary. Potentials refer to the Ag/AgCl electrode (+0.207 vs. SHE at 25 °C). Potentiodynamic polarization tests on mineral electrodes were performed before and after 40 days of bioleaching. The electrochemical cell was provided with a water jacket connected to a thermostatic bath and a recirculation pump to maintain a constant temperature during the test, which was fixed at either 35 or 68±0.1 °C. Electrochemical measurements were carried out with a conventional three-electrode system: a working electrode (pyrite), a counter electrode (platinum spiral wire), and a reference electrode (Ag/AgCl) that was provided with a Luggin–Haber capillary tip filled with a 3 M KCl saturated solution. Electrochemical experiments were carried out with 100 mL of electrolyte (the same nutrient medium used for cell growth, at the same pH and temperature). The working electrode was prepared from both the pyrite concentrate with and without microbial attack. To start with a compact electrode, 0.1 g of the mineral sample was mixed with 0.9 g of graphite in 5 mL of chloroform. Time was allowed for the chloroform to evaporate prior to electrochemical test; the paste electrodes were softly polished with the appropriate paper. The results obtained in the pyrite bioleaching experiments at 35 and 68 °C are shown in Iron dissolution rate and final extraction show a direct relationship with the Fe The mineral dissolution process is also related to the cell growth since it establishes a higher or a lower Fe The microbial attachment tests were performed on the mineral during the first 24 h of bioleaching More tests were carried out in mechanically stirred bioreactors. Mechanical stirring is more aggressive and improves the fluid dynamics by removing the Fe On the other hand, the dissolution yield obtained using thermophiles was much lower using mechanical than orbital stirring. This behaviour can be explained in terms of cell lysis of the thermophilic microorganisms produced by the mechanical stirring  From our experimental results, and taking into consideration studies carried out by others, it can be concluded that pyrite bioleaching is a two-stage process. In the first stage, the dissolution takes place by microorganisms initially attached to the solid through a contact bioleaching mechanism The electrochemical study of the mineral surface contributed basic information on mineral reactivity and the metal dissolution mechanism When the potential scan was shifted to negative values (reduction), the current density showed a sharp drop to the rest potential. In the reduction scan, two peaks were recorded: at +400 mV, the reduction peak of Fe These results indicate that the dissolution of this mineral takes place in the absence of passivating layers of S°. Therefore, the dissolution of pyrite can be accomplished without the formation of diffusion barriers to electron transfer. The last statement is supported by an electrochemical test carried out on the mineral after its microbial attack. Anodic polarization curves on pyrite electrodes at 35 °C Since the pyrite dissolution process is not under diffusion control by the formation of passivating layers of S°, it is possible that the controlling step was the Fe The oxidation state of dissolved iron plays a major role in pyrite bioleaching by controlling the relative rate of the oxidation reactions in the process. There is a direct relationship between the cell attachment rate to the mineral surface and the dissolution rate of the pyrite. A high initial cell attachment is necessary in order to obtain high dissolution rates during the bioleaching process. This is related to the release of Fe Pyrite dissolution is markedly controlled by the competitive chemisorption between ferrous and ferric ions on the mineral surface. The surface accumulation of Fe The pyrite bioleaching process takes place by cooperative bioleaching with the simultaneous participation of contact and indirect bioleaching, probably through a mechanism via thiosulphate. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (CICYT) of the Spanish government for the funding of this work. Furthermore, one of the authors (Y. Rodrı́guez) wishes to express her gratitude to the Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional (AECI) for the graduate grant that helped her to carry out these research studies.