When I first cast eyes on this book I was immediately interested having spent most of my life near to or actually within the area of Sherwood Forest. But what on earth had this to do with FUEL? The answer lies in the sub-title-oil. This book provides a most interesting account of the production of oil from the area around Eakring in Nottinghamshire at a time when the relatively small amounts produced from this virtually unknown source, were nevertheless indispensable. But the real success came from the skill and efforts of the team of 44 American oil field ‘roughnecks’ who were selected and recruited by two Oklahoma based oil companies which made no financial gain from the venture but acted out of a sense of duty and patriotism. This book is an account of the trials and tribulations, as well as the highs, lows and anecdotes of life in wartime rural England for the roughnecks. It makes absolutely fascinating reading. The story begins with the effort of one man, Sir Philip Southwell (it is rather unfortunate that much of the action took place around the town of Southwell and the reader has to be wide awake in some instances to determine whether reference is to the town or to the man), who sought to increase the limited output from the Millstone Grit formations in Nottinghamshire by obtaining much needed drilling equipment from the USA to boost the output of the oil required for the war effort. He had the perception and tenacity to overcome the necessary but fearsome bureaucracy existing on both sides of the Atlantic during the wartime years. Eventually this led to the Noble and Fain-Porter Drilling Companies of Oklahoma not only obtaining the drilling equipment, which was in great demand at that time, but also providing all the personnel to operate the rigs for a contracted period of one year. So, early in 1943 some forty men crossed the Atlantic aboard the H.M.S. Queen Elizabeth on their way to sharing accommodation with Anglican monks at Kelham Hall. Quite apart from the record of the extraordinary improvement in oil output the Oklahoma oil men achieved with their up-to-date rigs and streamlined drilling practice (including unbelievable, that is to the British oil men, drilling depths of over 1000 feet of hole drilled per 12 On the other hand West Texas five-gallon hats, leather field jackets, rainbow coloured shirts and high heeled boots were not common sights in Nottinghamshire, prompting locals to ask “Where is your gun?” or “Where did you tie up your horse?”. I like the story of the glass-domed clock bought from a shop in Newark-on-Trent being the start of a collection of more than one hundred clocks and the addition of salt to the local ‘black and bitter’ beer to make it an acceptable drink for American tastes. Problems with the food rations being inadequate, escapades at the docks when taking delivery of equipment, black market dealing in cigars and whisky and some clandestine Christmas time trading of soap for eggs, are recounted with some delightful light-hearted touches. The book is extremely well written with such detail that the reader begins to feel personal knowledge of, and involvement with, some of the leading characters in this venture. I have very few gripes, but the sheriff in these parts is the Sheriff of Nottingham not Nottinghamshire. Overall the book provides not only a highly descriptive account of a significant event in the history of oil production, but it is at the same time illuminating and enjoyable reading. I certainly enjoyed reading it and I recommend it as a well worthwhile purchase.