The catalytic conversion of lignocellulosic biomass is attractive due to the feasible generation of valuable products such as reducing sugars which constitute the basic substrates for chemical and transportation fuel production, as well as the production of renewable hydrogen. This study shows the efficient conversion of lignocellulose, especially hemicellulose, into reducing sugars such as xylose and galactose, by mechanocatalysis using potassium pyrosulfate, K2S2O7, as an effective salt catalyst. Ball milling was performed, introducing a mechanical force which, combined with chemical pretreatment, leads to reducing sugar yields (40%) almost as high as when commonly used sulfuric acid was employed. Kinetic experiments as well as the optimization of the saccharification process are presented.Lignocellulosic biomass-derived feedstocks typically comprise of three major fractions: cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. These constituents form a complex structure which requires efficient pretreatment solutions to overcome the recalcitrance of the material towards chemical and microbial applications. Several catalytic strategies have been successfully implemented using e.g. physical pretreatment by milling ( For instance, Shen and Wymar recovered a higher total xylose yield when hydrothermal pretreatment was carried out with a catalytic amount of sulfuric acid which allowed a faster reaction of xylan directly into monomeric xylose, while autocatalytic hydrothermal pretreatment included the formation of oligomers as an intermediate step ( Most commonly used catalysts include inorganic acids such as sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid ( This study focuses on mechanocatalysis which combines physical and chemical processing driven by ball milling with the addition of a solid catalyst. The mechanical force reduces the particle size and decreases the crystallinity of lignocellulose ( This study presents the effective saccharification of lignocellulosic barley straw applying mechanical ball milling and chemical conversion simultaneously. The mechanocatalytical process showed great selectivity for hemicellulose turnover yielding high release of xylo-oligosaccharides and xylose. Potassium pyrosulfate, K Barley straw ( Chemicals used were: Potassium pyrosulfate (97.5%, Merck). Barley straw and the salt catalyst (1.0 Hydrolysis was carried out without any further catalyst addition. Milled straw samples were hydrolyzed in a weight ratio of 5% in distilled water for 1 The determination of total reducing sugars (TRS) by UV/VIS spectrometry (Shimadzu UV-1800 spectrometer) was performed as described earlier ( Capillary electrophoresis (CE) analysis was performed as described in our earlier publication ( Kinetic experiments with K Changes in texture, integrated in To further improve the saccharification, the mechanocatalytical treatment conditions were optimized by varying the mechanical conditions (grinding and pause times and cycle numbers). Barley straw was briefly mixed with potassium pyrosulfate, 1.0 Our previous research indicated that prolonged grinding turns of up to 10 The amount of TRS determined from the liquid hydrolysate fractions of the samples processed under conditions A–H, was plotted against the milling time (sum of grinding turns excluding pausing turns, The results show that milling significantly increased total reducing sugar levels compared to merely catalyzed hydrolysis reaction of the straw sample (milling time t Generally, the reducing sugar yield increased with progressing milling time. Under most milling conditions a maximum TRS yield was reached after mechanical treatment for 50–60 Due to long pausing turns, the reaction mixture and the milling container cooled slightly down, leading to a moderate internal vessel temperature (final temperatures ∼60–70 All milling conditions which include 5 Moreover, comminution of the straw sample proceeds with prolonged milling, reducing the particle size which leads to increased sugar release ( In regard to the hydrolysis temperature, it can be noted that the additional increase to 160 The concentration of monomeric sugars was analyzed for the samples which yielded the overall highest TRS levels (50 Highest concentration of xylose (5.6%) was released under milling condition In general, xylose levels were approximately thrice as high and galactose levels twice as high as glucose yields. Since the determined sugars are major constituents of hemicellulose, it can be assumed that mainly hemicellulose was subject to conversion reactions under the conditions applied. Surprisingly, higher galactose than arabinose yields were obtained which is contradictory to the natural composition of barley straw which typically shows higher arabinan and arabinose levels than galactan and galactose levels ( The degree of hemicellulose removal and conversion depends on the choice of catalyst and pretreatment method. Hydrothermal pretreatment of wheat straw with water at 190–200 Assuming that no monomeric sugars were adsorbed onto the catalyst ( High formation of byproducts was unlikely in the present study since sulfonated catalysts show much less generation of undesirable degradation products such as C The mechanocatalytic reaction of hemicellulose to its main degradation products using potassium pyrosulfate, K Eq. Following Eq. The efficient recovery of xylo-oligosaccharides and xylose from lignocellulosic barley straw by mechanocatalysis was shown. Potassium pyrosulfate as a novel catalyst applied in the pretreatment process shows great potential and conversion efficiency. Future research is needed to provide a clear picture of the catalytic reaction mechanism. Mechanocatalysis was revealed as an effective method for the generation of reducing sugars from inedible biomass feedstock. Much effort should be done in order to develop and establish a productive and selective industrial process. Finally, in terms of cost efficiency, waste disposal and energy consumption should be kept at an acceptable level. This work was financially supported by the