Salt cakes, which are nominally waste products derived from aluminium dross melting furnaces, are complex mixtures of some 20 different compounds made up of many different elements. Normally they are regarded as waste products and they are disposed of in toxic waste dumps. However, it is shown here that some components are readily recoverable as high-grade products for recycling or sale and that the residues thus generated can be non-toxic. Recoverable components include metallic aluminium, salt (halite (NaCl) and sylvite (KCl)), alumina-containing compounds, and possibly hydrogen gas.
                  Metallic aluminium is soft and malleable and is not reduced in size by crushing and grinding, whereas the other components in salt cake are soft and brittle or are readily dissolved in water. Hence the coarse metallic aluminium can be readily recovered by crushing and screening and the finer metallic aluminium can be recovered by fine grinding and screening, froth flotation, or possibly electrostatic separation. Aqueous acid or alkaline leaching has also been proposed to recover aluminium metal from salt cake.
                  The halite and sylvite are easily extracted by leaching ground salt cake with cold water and filtering off the saline solution. This solution can be sent to solar evaporation ponds where the water is evaporated and the dry salt harvested for recycling to dross treatment furnaces or other markets.
                  Some of the water-insoluble or oxide aluminium compounds present are soluble in Bayer-type leach solutions and could possibly be sent to a Bayer-type leach plant for production of high-grade alumina for aluminium production. Alternatively, because the oxide aluminium compounds are inert they could be sent to a non-toxic dump. The possibility of integrated flowsheets to recover more than one product in a single plant is also discussed.Aluminium salt cakes are solid waste products derived from the smelting of aluminium drosses under a salt cover to recover some of the metallic aluminium entrained in the dross. However, the solidified salt cake itself contains metallic aluminium as well as many other substances, some of which have an intrinsic value, some of which are toxic, and some of which react with water to give off toxic gases. Whilst a number of workers have considered the recovery of valuables, mostly metallic aluminium, from aluminium dross, e.g., It is the main purpose of this paper to review and discuss the various ways in which some of the more valuable materials can be recovered from salt cakes. It may be possible to recover more than one material in a single processing plant. These materials include metallic aluminium, sodium and potassium chlorides, and an alumina-containing solid or solution which could be suitable as Bayer process plant feed. In addition, leach conditions which decrease the toxicity caused by compounds such as aluminium nitrides are proposed so that final residues can be safely sent to a non-toxic waste dump. Salt cakes contain many different components, and most of the elements present are listed in  It is known that particles of metallic aluminium up to about 2.5 mm in size can occur in salt cakes (  Very little water-soluble aluminium is present, and this can probably be ignored in any treatment process. However, as shown in Reasonably high levels of aluminium oxide, bayerite, corundum, and gibbsite were present. Whilst corundum is not soluble in strongly alkaline solution, some of the other phases are, and these could potentially be recovered for feeding to a Bayer process plant ( With respect to magnesium, data from On the basis of the potential recoverable products outlined above, it seemed that it was worth reviewing the various methods suggested for recovering these and other compounds from salt cakes and this is done below. Recovery of sodium and potassium chlorides from salt cakes for recycling back to the smelting process could be economically advantageous and would reduce the amount to be disposed of in toxic waste dumps. It should then be possible to recover the pure dissolved salts by solar evaporation as practised commercially in many operations throughout the world (e.g., The solids residue from the water leach stage may be suitable for disposal in a non-toxic dump, depending on the absolute levels of elements such as fluorine in the residue. Appropriate TCLP tests would need to be conducted to validate this. Methods that can be used for the recovery or extraction of metallic aluminium from a salt cake include screening, flotation, electrostatic separation, and dissolution in strong alkali. These methods are discussed briefly in turn below. As shown in In this circuit, cold salt cake from the melting furnace is first crushed in closed circuit with a double deck screen fitted with 20 mm and 10 mm aperture screens. The screen sizes here are nominal and may be varied to suit the particular salt cake feed (it is proposed that material less than 10 mm may be a suitable size to wet mill for salt cake). Any + It should also be noted that the grinding behaviour of aluminium metal will depend on its content of alloying elements. It is likely, for example, that an aluminium-silicon alloy would be more brittle in comparison to pure aluminium. The grinding behaviour of the metallics would also be influenced by the time of grinding and the type of grinding device used. Only a few metals occur in nature in metallic form. These include gold, silver, platinum, and more rarely mercury and copper. Metallic aluminium does not occur in nature and so no work has been published on its flotation from ores. Furthermore, no work has been published on its flotation from salt cakes. However, It was found that metallic aluminium did not float with xanthate-type collectors alone, but when copper sulphate was added the aluminium was activated and floated readily. The activation process in this instance was in fact copper cementation on the aluminium metal surfaces. Best results were obtained on particles in the size range of 110–275 μm, and good recoveries in good grade concentrates were achieved. These results need to be confirmed on salt cakes, but it seems reasonable to expect that they would be. Coarse aluminium that does not float could be recovered by screening, and, as noted previously, dissolved halite and sylvite could be recovered by solar evaporation. Electrostatic recovery of metallic aluminium from dross has been studied by As Either acid or alkaline leaching would also dissolve many of the other oxide aluminium compounds present in salt cakes. Recovery of aluminium in metallic form from acid solutions is not easy, whereas with alkaline leaching it may be that the solution is suitable for feeding directly to a Bayer-type process plant. This might be viable, as discussed later, and could be worth further investigation. It would be necessary, of course, to first dissolve and remove the chlorides and some other elements before conducting an alkaline leach because these elements are not wanted in Bayer-type solutions.  Although the amount extracted may be worth recovering in a combined process as shown in It may be possible to produce hydrogen gas from salt cake using a complex process analogous to that developed by The hydrogen could be used as a fuel and/or feed to fuel cells and the aluminium hydroxide sold in the market. Furthermore, the reaction is exothermic and the heat of reaction could be utilized for drying the aluminium hydroxide product. Whether or not such a process could be economic is unknown. Certainly there are numerous methods currently available for commercial hydrogen production ( Various compounds in salt cakes react with water in the atmosphere, and especially in aqueous pulps, to give off ammonia and other noxious gases. These gases need to be properly vented from any treatment plant. Only one venting point is shown for example in Aluminium nitrides react with water according to Eqs. (4) and (5) to give either ammonium hydroxide or ammonia. Eq. (4) is more likely to occur in more alkaline solutions (say above pH 8) and Eq. (5) is more likely to occur below pH 8. Aluminium oxide nitride (Al Aluminium carbide reacts with water according to Eq. (7) to give aluminium oxide and methane gas.  Based on the ratio of aluminium nitride to metallic aluminium in the salt cakes considered in this study, one would expect about 5 times more ammonia to be generated via Eqs. (4) to (7), than hydrogen via Eq. (3). Methods proposed and tested for recovering valuable materials from salt cakes, waste products derived from the treatment of aluminium dross, are presented and discussed. Whilst the chemical and physical complexity of salt cakes make re-processing or recycling challenging, many workers have shown that valuable components can be extracted in simple flowsheets which have both technical and possibly economic merit. Coarse metallic aluminium can be recovered by crushing and screening, intermediate size aluminium can be recovered by grinding and screening or electrostatic separation, and fine aluminium can be recovered by flotation. Recovery of aluminium metal by aqueous acid or alkaline leaching has also been proposed. Sodium and potassium chlorides present can be extracted by cold water leaching and recovered by solar evaporation after removing the insoluble components by thickening and filtration. Some of the oxide aluminium components are soluble in Bayer-type leach solutions and could be sent to a Bayer-type leach plant to extract alumina. Alternatively, since the water-insoluble phases are inert, they could possibly be disposed of in a non-toxic dump, given they pass appropriate TCLP testing criteria. Hydrogen gas has also been generated from salt cakes, but, to date, only in laboratory studies. It seems possible that integrated flowsheets could be developed whereby one or more of the above valuable components are recovered, assisting positively with the process economics, and helping to close the loop in terms of overall waste disposal. The Analytical Services and XRD Services Groups of CSIRO Minerals in Melbourne and Perth are thanked for conducting the many chemical analyses and XRD scans required in this work.