In this work, treatment of an azo dye solution containing C.I. Basic Red 46 (BR46) by photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) combined with photocatalytic process was studied. Carbon nanotube–polytetrafluoroethylene (CNT–PTFE) electrode was used as cathode. The investigated photocatalyst was TiO2 nanoparticles (Degussa P25) having 80% anatase and 20% rutile, specific surface area (BET) 50m2/g, and particle size 21nm immobilized on glass plates. A comparison of electro-Fenton (EF), UV/TiO2, PEF and PEF/TiO2 processes for decolorization of BR46 solution was performed. Results showed that color removal follows the decreasing order: PEF/TiO2
                     >PEF>EF>UV/TiO2. The influence of the basic operational parameters such as initial pH of the solution, initial dye concentration, the size of anode, applied current, kind of ultraviolet (UV) light and initial Fe3+ concentration on the degradation efficiency of BR46 was studied. The mineralization of the dye was investigated by total organic carbon (TOC) measurements that showed 98.8% mineralization of 20mg/l dye at 6h using PEF/TiO2 process. An artificial neural network (ANN) model was developed to predict the decolorization of BR46 solution. The findings indicated that artificial neural network provided reasonable predictive performance (R
                     2
                     =0.986).Dyeing and finishing of textile goods are a major concern to the environmentalist, because of the introduction of large quantities of color, chemical oxygen demand, non-biodegradable organics and other hazardous chemicals into the process effluents Hydrogen peroxide and ferrous ions are simultaneously produced in an aqueous medium by the 2e The electro-Fenton (EF) method utilizes a Pt or a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode in an undivided cell, while Fe The mineralization process can be accelerated using the photoelectron-Fenton (PEF) method, where the solution treated under EF conditions is exposed to an UV light. The photocatalytic action of this irradiation is complex and its main effects can be related to: (i) the photolysis of Fe(OH) On the other hand, heterogeneous photocatalysis through illumination of UV on semiconductor surface is an attractive advanced oxidation process. The photocatalyst titanium dioxide (TiO AOPs have been shown to be highly efficient, their operation is still quite expensive Multi walled CNT was produced from Cheap Tubes Inc. (USA). Its specific surface area, outer diameters and inside diameters were 233 The experiments were performed using a DC power supply (ADAK PS 808, Iran). The solution pH was measured with a Metrohm 654 pH-meter, Switzerland. The removal of color was followed by using UV–vis spectrophotometer (Lightwave S2000, England). Before analysis of samples extracted from solutions, they were filtered with 0.2 TiO The treatment of BR46 was conducted at room temperature in an undivided, cubic tank with a capacity of about 2500 In all experiments, solutions were vigorously stirred with a magnetic bar to ensure suitable transport of reactants towards/from the electrodes. The diffusion cathode was fed with pure O The degradation of BR46 was carried out by using EF, PEF, UV/TiO The solution pH is an important control parameter for maintaining the effectiveness of the EF process. Several authors Second, hydroxyl radicals can be formed by the reaction between hydroxide ions and positive holes. The positive holes are considered as the major oxidation species at low pH whereas hydroxyl radicals are considered as the predominant species at neutral or high pH levels. It has been stated that in alkaline solution hydroxyl radicals are easier to be generated by oxidizing more hydroxide ions available on TiO Another important operation parameter is the applied current in two-electrode cells. To investigate the effect of applied current on the decolorization efficiency, PEF/TiO The decolorization efficiency also depends on the initial concentration of the dye. To study the influence of initial dye concentration on the efficiency of decolorization, the experiments were performed at different initial concentration of BR46 by maintaining the other parameters constant. A key factor in the EF process is the concentration of Fe To characterize the effect of anode surface area on decolorization efficiency in PEF/TiO In order to study the effect of UV-C and UV-B light irradiation on the decolorization efficiency of BR46 experiments were carried out by 20 Due to the complexity of the reactions in the combined photoelectro-Fenton and photocatalytic system, the kinetic parameters of the various steps involved are very difficult to determine. This is caused by the complexity of solving the equations that involve the radiant energy balance, the spatial distribution of the absorbed radiation, mass transfer, and mechanisms of PEF/TiO The topology of an artificial neural network is determined by number of its layers, number of nodes in each layer and the nature of transfer functions. Optimization of ANN topology is probably the most important step in development of model. We used three-layered feed-forward back propagation neural network (5:16:1) for modeling of decolorization of BR46 solution by PEF/TiO In order to determine the optimum number of hidden nodes, a series of topologies was used, in which the number of nodes were varied from 2 to 20. Each topology was repeated three times to avoid random correlation due to random initialization of the weights. MSE was used as the error function. In this work, the training function was Train Scaled Conjugate Gradient (trainscg), and the training-and-test method was used to evaluate the ANN. Out of the several data points generated, 128 experimental sets were used to feed the ANN structure. The samples were divided into training, validation and test subsets that each of them contained 76, 26 and 26 samples, respectively. The validation and test sets, for evaluation of the validation and modeling power of the model, were randomly selected from the experimental data. Since the used transfer function in the hidden layer was sigmoid, all samples must be scaled into the 0.1–0.9. So any samples (  The relative importance of input variables on the value of dye removal efficiency (%) that may be obtained through the neural weight matrix is shown in In this work, the removal of BR46 has been studied as a model dye from aqueous solutions by photocatalytic process using immobilized TiO The authors thank the