Slurry acidification is recommended to minimize ammonia emissions during the whole management chain. However, the impact of the application of acidified slurry to soil has been poorly studied, namely its effect on the nitrogen dynamics (organic nitrogen mineralization and nitrification).
                  In the present study, we hypothesized that a) slurry acidification would slow down nitrification and that this effect would be comparable to that of a nitrification inhibitor (DMPP); b) the alkalinity and/or buffering capacity of some soils would neutralize the acidified slurry and minimize its effect. Thus, a laboratory incubation was run to assess the effect of pig slurry treatment by acidification or DMPP addition on N mineralization and nitrification in five contrasting soils.
                  Our results show that slurry acidification affected the N dynamics after application to the soils, but this effect was closely related to the soil properties. The inhibitory effect of slurry acidification on nitrification was not as evident as that of the nitrification inhibitor, DMPP, but it is noteworthy that, in some soils, the nitrate content remained lower in soil amended with acidified slurry than in soil amended with slurry treated with DMPP. Furthermore, in no case did slurry acidification stimulate nitrification when compared to non-acidified slurry. It can then be concluded that slurry acidification is an efficient way to increase the NH4
                     + content in slurry amended soils, without intensifying nitrification.Over the last few years, the strong intensification and growing geographic concentration of livestock production activities have led to some significant changes in agriculture. Even though new management practices have been introduced to minimize water consumption, the amount of slurry produced annually in the EU-27 surpasses 148 million tonnes per year ( Nitrogen is an essential nutrient and the main limiting factor for plant growth in most agricultural ecosystems ( In this context, all the new management practices and treatments developed over the last few decades to reduce nitrification rates and nitrate availability in slurry amended soils can be seen as positive and important solutions to increase the N use efficiency of slurry and minimize N losses and the consequent environmental pollution impacts ( The use of nitrification inhibitors (NIs), such as 3,4-dimethylepyrazole phosphate (DMPP) or dicyandiamide (DCD), has proven to be efficient with respect to reducing N losses from soils amended with mineral fertilizers ( Slurry acidification is a recommended technique for the minimization of NH If such an effect is confirmed, slurry acidification could become a key treatment for slurry management since it raises the possibility of solving several problems related to slurry application to soil without causing pollution swapping, as may occur with NIs (decrease of NO In the present study, we hypothesized that a) slurry acidification would delay nitrification and that this effect would be comparable to that of a nitrification inhibitor (DMPP); b) the alkalinity and/or buffering capacity of some soils would neutralize the acidified slurry and minimize its effect. The effect of pig slurry acidification on N mineralization and nitrification was tested in five contrasting soils. Five soils, differing widely in their physical and chemical characteristics, were used. The soils were sampled from the upper layer (0–10 The cation exchange capacity (CEC) was determined by following the methodology described by The pig slurry for the study was sampled in a commercial farm located close to Sintra (Portugal) and stored at 4 The N concentration in the slurry was determined by a modified Kjeldahl method, based on a sulfuric acid/potassium sulfate digestion, and with copper and selenium as catalysts, using a Kjeldahl thermo-digestion unit and a compact distillation unit. The mineral N in the slurry was extracted with 2 An aerobic incubation was performed to follow the N mineralization/immobilization dynamics in soil after the application of pig slurry treated by acidification or DMPP addition. The following treatments were considered: Soil Soil Soil Soil only (CTR) Each treatment was replicated three times. For each soil, 50 A destructive sampling system was used in this study; hence, three experimental units were prepared for each soil, each treatment, and each sampling date. The soils were sampled on days 3, 8, 11, 15, 22, 29, 36, 57, 78, and 92 of the incubation experiment. Therefore, a total of 600 experimental units (10 sampling dates At each sampling date, the NH The apparent net N mineralization (ANNM) on days 8, 15, 36, and 92 was calculated considering the total mineral N content in the soil and using the following equation: We considered, for the calculation of ANNM, the amount of total mineral N (min The net nitrification (Nit) in specific time intervals was calculated using the following formula: The results were analyzed by analysis of variance (two-way ANOVA) to test the effects of the treatment (RS, ARS, DMPP), soil type, and treatment The error bars shown in the figures represent the standard errors used for comparison in the Tukey test. The statistical software package used was STATISTIX 7.0 (USA). Significant differences were observed among the non-amended soils in terms of NP, with the values following the order: PAL Raw slurry application led to a significant increase in the NP values, relative to the control (CTR), in all soils except EDM - where NP decreased significantly, from 1.87 In every soil, the initial NH For the raw slurry treatment, the NH The most significant effect of slurry acidification or DMPP addition on the NH The effects of DMPP and acidification on the NH The NO The evolution of the NO The NO The major differences between treatments AS and RS were observed in PAL soil. The effect of DMPP on the NO When comparing the effects of DMPP and acidification on the NO The nitrification rate (Nit) in each soil, for each treatment, was calculated for some time intervals ( A strong decrease in the nitrification rates was seen after day 8 for all treatments and soils - except in CB soil receiving the amended treatments, where the nitrification rates were highest in the time interval of days 8–15. A lower nitrification rate was observed with the DMPP treatment, relative to raw slurry application, until day 36 in soils EDM and PAL, day 15 in soils CB and ELV, and day 8 in TAP soil. It is of note that, between days 36 and 92, the nitrification rate was highest with the DMPP treatment in the CB, ELV, and PAL soils. The decreasing effect of slurry acidification on nitrification was clear in PAL soil during the entire incubation and in ELV soil during the first 15 When considering the nitrification rate over the whole incubation, no significant differences were observed between the amended treatments in soils CB, ELV, or PAL. In TAP soil, the nitrification rate was significantly lower for treatments DMPP and AS, relative to RS, while in EDM a lower value was observed for DMPP, relative to RS, but no differences existed between the acidified and non-acidified slurry treatments. Immobilization of N was observed on day 8 in all amended soils, except in EDM soil with DMPP and PAL soil with raw slurry ( Slurry treatment by acidification or DMPP addition led to a more significant immobilization, relative to raw slurry, in CB soil; the N immobilization lasted longer with the DMPP treatment. In TAP soil, where no N mineralization was observed during the whole experiment except on day 92 for treatment AWS, N immobilization was lower for AS and DMPP - relative to RS - until day 8 and day 36, respectively. Application of acidified slurry rather than raw slurry had little effect on N mineralization in soils EDM and ELV. However, in comparison with RS, application of slurry treated with DMPP stimulated N mineralization in ELV and N immobilization in EDM. When considering the PAL soil, no significant differences existed between treatments after day 15. Previous studies performed by our research group showed a potential effect of slurry acidification, stimulating N mineralization and decreasing N immobilization after application to sandy soils with characteristics close to those of the PAL soil used here ( The nitrification rates were affected significantly by the slurry treatment, in all soils. The inhibitory effect of DMPP is well known and was expected in all soils ( The main impact of slurry acidification on N dynamics after soil application is related to the inhibition of NH The inhibitory effect of AS on nitrification was limited to the first 36 As already mentioned, soil pH is the main parameter affecting nitrification and, consequently, application to soil of acidified slurry should impact the nitrification process only if the soil buffer capacity is not high enough to neutralize the effect of acidified slurry. Indeed, as can be seen in The values of NP obtained here were then corrected, considering the amount of available NH The decay of the available NH Immobilization of N was observed in soils CB, ELV, and TAP, for all amendment treatments, during the first 8 Immobilization of N was also seen on day 8 in PAL soil for the AS and DMPP treatments but not for RS. The higher N immobilization observed for treatments AS and DMPP might be explained by the fact that in these treatments the amount of available mineral N, namely NH Slurry acidification affected the N dynamics after application of the slurry to soils, but this effect was closely related to the soil properties. The inhibitory effect of acidified slurry on nitrification was not so evident as that of the nitrification inhibitor, DMPP, but it is of note that, in some soils, the NO The authors thank the reviewers for their excellent revision of the manuscript and constructive suggestions. This work was supported by the