Introduction
                  Data concerning outcome after management of acetabular fractures by anterior approaches with focus on age and fractures associated with roof impaction, central dislocation and/or quadrilateral plate displacement are rare.
               
                  Methods
                  Between October 2005 and April 2009 a series of 59 patients (mean age 57 years, range 13–91) with fractures involving the anterior column was treated using the modified Stoppa approach alone or for reduction of displaced iliac wing or low anterior column fractures in combination with the 1st window of the ilioinguinal approach or the modified Smith-Petersen approach, respectively. Surgical data, accuracy of reduction, clinical and radiographic outcome at mid-term and the need for endoprosthetic replacement in the postoperative course (defined as failure) were assessed; uni- and multivariate regression analysis were performed to identify independent predictive factors (e.g. age, nonanatomical reduction, acetabular roof impaction, central dislocation, quadrilateral plate displacement) for a failure. Outcome was assessed for all patients in general and in accordance to age in particular; patients were subdivided into two groups according to their age (group “<60yrs”, group “≥60yrs”).
               
                  Results
                  Forty-three of 59 patients (mean age 54yrs, 13–89) were available for evaluation. Of these, anatomic reduction was achieved in 72% of cases. Nonanatomical reduction was identified as being the only multivariate predictor for subsequent total hip replacement (Adjusted Hazard Ratio 23.5; p
                     <0.01). A statistically significant higher rate of nonanatomical reduction was observed in the presence of acetabular roof impaction (p
                     =0.01). In 16% of all patients, total hip replacement was performed and in 69% of patients with preserved hips the clinical results were excellent or good at a mean follow up of 35±10 months (range: 24–55). No statistical significant differences were observed between both groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Nonanatomical reconstruction of the articular surfaces is at risk for failure of joint-preserving management of acetabular fractures through an isolated or combined modified Stoppa approach resulting in total joint replacement at mid-term. In the elderly, joint-preserving surgery is worth considering as promising clinical and radiographic results might be obtained at mid-term.The greater longevity of the population associated with an active life-style may account for an observed increasing incidence of geriatric acetabular trauma In particular in the elderly, anatomical restoration of articular surfaces is cumbersome since impaction of the superomedial acetabular roof (“gull sign” The objective of the presented report was to assess the outcome after fixation of acetabular fractures involving the anterior column using the modified Stoppa approach Between October 2005 and April 2009 a series of 59 patients (mean age 57 Patients were placed in supine position on a radiolucent operating table. C-arm fluoroscopy was used to assess reduction of the fracture fragments and the implant location intraoperatively. The limb was draped free to allow for intraoperative reduction manoeuvres. For fracture fixation, 3.5 In this retrospective study, we reviewed all records and re-evaluated the patients after a minimum follow-up period of two years. Patients in poor medical condition or expected to be unable to comply with the assessments (e.g. dementia, paraplegia, Down's syndrome) were excluded from the study. The patients available at midterm were subdivided into two groups for analysis of outcome in accordance to age (group “<60 The mean delay to surgery, operation time, blood loss, the occurrence of intraoperative and/or postoperative complications as well as the need for revision surgery were analysed. The utilisation of the Stoppa approach alone or in combination was related to the age, the occurrence of quadrilateral plate displacement and the extent of the initial displacement. For radiographic analysis, CT scans were used generally for classification of fractures (according to Judet and Letournel At midterm, the outcome in patients with preserved hips was assessed. Clinically, the functional status of the injured hip joint was assessed using the Harris Hip Score Nonparametric data were examined using the Wilcoxon rank sum test and categorical variables by the Chi-squared test. Thirty months of cumulative survivorship of the hips were calculated according to the method of Kaplan and Meier Out of 59 patients, five patients were excluded for evaluation due to co-morbidities having a significant impact (dementia in three, paraplegia in one and Down‘s syndrome in another). Three patients refused consultation at the midterm as they were doing well, two were lost to follow-up and one moved overseas. Five further patients died before re-evaluation due to medical comorbidities unrelated to surgery, one to nine months after injury. Thus, 43 of the 59 patients (mean age 54 For the initial 43 patients, the demographics, mechanisms of injury and fracture classifications (according to age) are presented in The utilisation of the Stoppa approach in combination, compared to the utilisation of the Stoppa approach alone was more frequently observed to be statistically significant in cases with a higher extent of the initial fracture displacement (mean The radiographic analysis according to age showed statistical significance more frequently for the occurrence of an acetabular roof impaction, a femoral head impaction, a central dislocation and an initial displacement of the fracture ≥20 Using the Cox-regression, the four univariate parameters were associated with an increased risk of subsequent total hip replacement ( At midterm, 36 patients with preserved hips were re-evaluated clinically and radiographically at a mean follow-up period of 35 The overall results in the presented study cohort are depicted in Treatment of acetabular fractures aims to achieve the most accurate reduction In the present report, overall mainly anatomic or satisfactory reduction was achieved using the modified Stoppa approach alone or in combination with lateral incisions (the 1st window of the ilioinguinal approach At midterm, in 69% of all patients the clinical results were excellent or good. Within the first two years of follow-up, total hip replacement was performed in seven patients (16%) with a mean age of 65 years. Of these, central dislocation was present due to trauma in five patients. In the other two patients no central dislocation was seen although femoral head damage or acetabular roof impaction was evident. These parameters had also previously been identified as predictors for poor outcome (inter alia prosthetic replacement of the hip) The outcome following primary total hip replacement was not found to be superior to our own results and secondary total hip replacement resulted in a favourable functional outcome compared to primary total hip replacement One limitation of the study might be the low number of cases and the retrospective study design. However, the strengths of the study are the detailed assessment and presentation of the outcome in relation to age, specific fracture characteristics and of approach-related limitations. Nonanatomical reconstruction of the articular surfaces is at risk for failure of joint-preserving management of acetabular fractures through the modified Stoppa approach resulting in total joint replacement at mid-term. In the elderly, joint-preserving surgery is worth considering as promising clinical and radiographic results might be obtained at mid-term. None. The authors would like to thank Dr D. Bickes-Kelleher for linguistic help in the preparation of this manuscript.