In the chemical looping reforming (CLR) process, methane is converted to hydrogen and carbon monoxide through cyclic reduction–oxidation reactions of fuel with active lattice oxygen (O2−) of an oxygen carrier. In this research, Mg promoted iron based oxygen carrier was used in the process. The response surface method (RSM) based on Box–Behnken design was applied to examine the operating conditions of chemical looping steam methane reforming process. Independent variables including reaction temperature (550–750°C), Mg loading (0–10%) and oxygen carrier preparation method (co-impregnation and sequential impregnation methods) were selected for investigation and optimization of methane conversion, hydrogen production yield and CO/CO2 molar ratio using RSM. The characterization of samples was accomplished by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD), N2 adsorption–desorption (BET test) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). The Design expert software suggested several optimized solutions; among them, the best choice was 15Fe/5Mg/Al2O3 oxygen carrier synthesized with sequential impregnation method at reaction temperature of 650°C. However, 15Fe/5Mg/Al2O3 oxygen carrier is consistently stable in chemical looping reforming with high hydrogen producing capacity over redox cycles.In today's world, hydrogen is undoubtedly one of the most important chemicals which not only is used in different industries such as petroleum refining, methanol and ammonia production, and high-purity metal extraction, but it also is considered as an environmentally friendly energy carrier Hydrogen can be derived from different sources including natural gas, coal, oil, biomass and water by using various methods such as hydrocarbon reforming, biomass gasification, thermochemical water splitting, photoeletrolysis, electrolysis of water Chemical looping is a breakthrough technology that provides the means to convert carbonaceous fuel to desired products, such as heat/electricity or hydrogen, and provide carbon capture without significant efficiency or cost penalties When the chemical looping concept is used for steam reforming of methane, it is called chemical looping steam methane reforming (CL-SMR) which is of two major benefits. Firstly, the produced syngas is not diluted with N Also, other reactions like steam methane reforming, water gas shift reaction, CO oxidation and methane decomposition would occur in the reaction media. Therefore, the presence of carbon dioxide in the reactor effluent gas with a low concentration is expected. In the second step, the reduced oxygen carrier is reoxidized to its initial form (Me One of the key factors in the efficiency of chemical looping process is the usage of a suitable oxygen carrier Several oxygen carriers have been synthesized and tested for chemical looping steam methane reforming. Diego et al. Determining the sensitivity analysis and optimum conditions for evaluating the catalytic performance of an oxygen carrier is a tedious and difficult procedure including many steps, variables and complex interactions among the variables. The most of previous researches involved using the one-factor-at-a-time experimental approach The application of design of experiments (DOE) procedure seems to be one of the best methodologies for studying and improving the catalytic processes efficiency Iron oxide has been widely used as an oxygen carrier material (OCM) for hydrogen production by chemical looping due to its favorable thermodynamic properties. Consequently, the present study was undertaken to optimize the process variables of chemical looping steam methane reforming by performing a three-level, tree-factor response surface method. The performance of iron based oxygen carrier in CL-SMR process was improved with Mg addition to its structure. Furthermore, we studied the oxygen carrier's lifetime and stability over the cycles. With the purpose of studying the effect of oxygen carrier synthesis method, the samples were synthesized by two different methods including co-precipitation and sequential impregnation. Moreover, co-impregnation and sequential impregnation methods were applied to examine the influence of magnesium promoter position. The wetness co-impregnation method was applied to synthesize the 15Fe- To synthesis Fe/Mg/Al In order to characterize the crystalline phases in the solid samples, X-ray powder diffraction data were achieved by Bruker (D8 Advance, Germany) diffractometer using Cu Textual properties (specific area, pore volume and average pore diameter) of oxygen carriers was calculated and analyzed according to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method by N Gas−solid reaction containing reduction and oxidation cycles were carried out in a fixed-bed stainless steel reactor with a diameter of 16 Methane conversion ( where Box–Behnken design (BBD) procedure is one of the most popular response surface method (RSM) that is well suited for fitting the complicated systems. The Box–Behnken design regularly works well for the process investigation and optimization and is an effective design for the chronological experimentation. This method also allows a reasonable amount of information for sensitivity analysis, with reasonable number of test points. In this research, the Box–Behnken design was used for the response surface method in the experimental design. Experimental designs were developed for the optimization of numeric variables including reaction temperature and Mg loading percentage and oxygen carrier synthesis method, which is a categoric factor. The process parameters involved in the experimental design are demonstrated in In this study, The X-ray diffraction patterns of some samples (fresh and used for 15 cycles) obtained in CL-SMR redox cycles are shown in Physical properties (BET surface area, pore volume, average pore size and average Fe Textural properties of the oxygen carriers and alumina support were studied by N In addition, The TEM analysis of 15Fe/5Mg/Al With the aim of ensuring the suitability of a model, the tests for the significance of the regression model, “Lack-of-Fit” test and investigation of the significance of individual model coefficients are needed. In experimental design, these tests can be examined with the analysis of variance (ANOVA). Therefore, ANOVA table is applied to investigate the validity of the obtained model. Among several variables for methane conversion, temperature ( The coefficient of determination shows the predictability and accuracy of the model in the prediction of responses. As indicated in The regression coefficient values of simplified second-order polynomial equation for methane conversion percentage ( where In addition, The model Similar to methane conversion and hydrogen production yield models, temperature is the most effective variable on CO/CO where As an adequacy check for the acquired models, the normal probablity plot of the studentized residuals can be investigated In order to evaluate the effects of different independent variables on methane conversion, hydrogen production yield and CO/CO   The influence of reaction temperature, Mg loading percentage and synthesis method on carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide molar ratio is demonstrated in It is obvious that RSM is a powerful method for examination and optimization of the multi-variable procedures. In the Design Expert software, numerical optimization could be applied for finding the combination of independent parameters accomplishing the desired requirements instantaneously. In this way, the higher and lower levels of each independent variable and the response were provided according to the 3D surfaces and contour plots. The optimization was performed and the optimum variables that satisfied all of the specified conditions for the maximization of the responses were achieved, as reported in In order to evaluate the performance of best oxygen carrier at optimized conditions, sequentially impregnated oxygen carrier with 5 The gas composition of product steam in reduction step of CL-SMR process using 15Fe/5Mg/Al In this study, the application of several iron based oxygen carrier materials for hydrogen production by chemical looping was investigated. The objective was to obtain an optimal Mg loading percentage in oxygen carrier structure, reaction temperature and studying the best synthesis method. Thus, a BBD based response surface method was implemented with independent variables including reaction temperature (550–750 In conclusion, to maximize all of the responses, the independent variables could be optimized. The design expert software provides the optimal value of the variables in order to maximizing three responses. The best optimized condition was achieved by applying the reaction temperature of 650°, using 5% Mg in oxygen carrier structure prepared with sequential impregnation method (15Fe/5Mg/Al