Mining projects are complex businesses that demand constant risk assessment. This is because several kinds of uncertainties influence the value of a mine project, typically. These uncertainties may be classified as exploration uncertainties, economic uncertainties and engineering uncertainties. The evaluation of a mine project under these uncertainties is a complicated job, which may lead to making a wrong decision by managers and stockholders. Therefore, at first, the engineers must recognize the mining uncertainties before carrying out the project evaluation. The economic uncertainties are the most important factors, which may affect the project evaluation. Among the mentioned uncertainties, the operating cost uncertainty is an important and effective factor, which is ignored to a certain extent.
                  This research uses the binomial tree technique to compute the net present value of the Cayeli copper mine under three scenarios: (1) assuming certainty for both price and operating costs, (2) assuming uncertainty for metal price and certainty for operating costs and (3) assuming uncertainty for both price and operating costs. It is concluded that the mine evaluation suggests greater net present value when uncertainty is considered for both price and operating costs.Mining projects are complex businesses that demand a constant assessment of risk. This is because the value of a mine project is influenced by many underlying economic and physical uncertainties, such as metal prices, ore grades, costs, schedules and environmental issues. Therefore, evaluating and estimating a mine project without mentioning the risk for future losses (or opportunities) will lead to invalid results. Consequently, managers and stockholders of a mine company make an indiscreet decision based on invalid information. The main sources of uncertainty arising at the beginning of a mine project can be categorized into three groups: exploration uncertainties, engineering uncertainties and economic uncertainties. Exploration uncertainties will occur in the duration of resource evaluation stages such as geologic uncertainty, data collection, interpretation, modeling, deposit classification, reporting and so forth. Many researchers such as Engineering uncertainties include bench heights determination, planned grade control, minimum stoping widths, choice of stoping method, dilution factors, geotechnical and hydrological parameters, mining recovery factors and metallurgical recovery. This type of uncertainty will affect the ultimate pit (stope) limit and scheduling period. Economic uncertainty is another important source of uncertainty, which has a critical impact on mine project evaluation. From the economic point of view, future metal prices and operating costs are the most important factors of uncertainty. The metal price is the real cash-settlement that represents the equilibrium or non-equilibrium of the metal market. Since this market is based on demand, supply and other factors such as speculation, news events and dividend payouts ( The lack of exact knowledge of those factors leading to the increase/decrease in metal supply and demand. The practices that producers or consumers perform in the face of powerful speculative and political motives. In the mining industry, metal prices are normally modeled as the average price for the last three years, especially for those commodities whose price is listed on open markets, such as precious and base metals ( Cost is another source of uncertainty when evaluating a mine project. The economic evaluation component of the feasibility study is based on the information that provides an answer to the question, ‘what is it going to cost?’ ( Numerous research works have been carried out for price uncertainty ( In this paper, for determining the effect of operating cost uncertainty on the project value, the project net present value was computed and compared under three scenarios: (1) assuming certainty for both price and operating costs, (2) assuming uncertainty for metal price and certainty for operating costs and (3) assuming uncertainty for both price and operating costs. The binomial tree method was used for studying the operating cost and price uncertainties. The binomial model is a well-known alternative discrete time, which is developed by The basic inputs are the volatility of the metal price or operating cost ( In this section, three different scenarios were studied to investigate the effect of the uncertainty of the economic parameters such as metal price and operating cost on a mining project: Scenario 1: NPV computation under certain metal price and operating cost situation, scenario 2: NPV computation under uncertain metal price and certain operating cost situation, scenario 3: NPV computation under uncertain metal price and operating cost situation. In this scenario the project NPV was calculated using the traditional DCF technique. For this purpose, at the first step, the free cash flow (FCF) was determined using Eq. There are many methods for estimating the future metal price and operating cost such as using the average of the previous metal price and operating cost data and regression analysis. After calculating the FCF, the NPV will be determined using Eq. In this scenario, the metal price is considered uncertain but like the previous scenario, the operating cost is assumed certain. A binomial tree, which is constructed using the historical data is utilized for estimating the future metal price changes. Therefore, a new FCF binomial tree is constructed using the metal price binomial tree, annual estimated operating cost and Eq. In this scenario unlike the previous scenarios, the metal price and operating cost are uncertain. Therefore, the uncertainty of these parameters will be modeled using the binomial tree method. Then, the project free cash flow binomial tree will be constructed using these two trees and Eq. In this section the role of price and operating cost uncertainties is studied on the project evaluation using the Cayeli mine data. Cayeli mine is located on the Black Sea coast of northeastern Turkey ( Now, the Cayeli mine project may be evaluated using the mentioned scenarios. For more simplicity, it is assumed that the Cayeli mine produce the copper ore, only.   In this scenario, the copper price fluctuations are modeled using the binomial tree method. For this purpose, the volatility of the metal price was calculated using the historical data.  The operating cost and the rest of input data are the same as that of Scenario 1. Therefore, the FCF binomial tree is calculated using the Eq.  In this scenario, the project discounted cash flow binomial tree is calculated from project free cash flow binomial tree. The last column in According to this approach, the NPV is −327.2 In this scenario, the NPV of the Cayeli mine is determined by considering the uncertainty of both the price and operating costs. For this purpose, the binomial tree is built for the operating costs ( The free cash flow is calculated using Eq.  After calculating the FCF binomial tree, the DCF binomial tree will be determined using Eq. By comparing the NPVs of the mentioned scenarios, it is found that when uncertainty is taken into account for both metal price and operating cost, the maximum NPV is obtained. In this section a sensitivity analysis was carried out using the input data. For this purpose, the NPV of each scenario was computed by changing the input data. The NPV, obtained previously, was assumed as the base NPV for comparison. Then each kind of input data was changed ±10% (or ±20%) while other kinds of input data were constant. Using new input data, the task was performed under all scenarios and the corresponding NPVs were obtained.  The NPV of the Cayeli copper mine production project was determined under three scenarios, i.e. using: certain metal price and certain operating costs, uncertain metal price and certain operating costs and uncertain metal price and uncertain operating costs. The following results were concluded: Applying the metal price and cost uncertainties cause the net present value to be calculated more realistically than certain conditions.