Due to stricter regulations, some drinking water utilities must implement additional treatment processes to meet potable water standards for hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)), such as the California limit of 10 μg/L. Strong base anion exchange is effective for Cr(VI) removal, but efficient resin regeneration and waste minimization are important for operational, economic and environmental considerations. This study compared multiple regeneration methods on pilot-scale columns on the basis of regeneration efficiency, waste production and salt usage. A conventional 1-Stage regeneration using 2 N sodium chloride (NaCl) was compared to 1) a 2-Stage process with 0.2 N NaCl followed by 2 N NaCl and 2) a mixed regenerant solution with 2 N NaCl and 0.2 N sodium bicarbonate. All methods eluted similar cumulative amounts of chromium with 2 N NaCl. The 2-Stage process eluted an additional 20–30% of chromium in the 0.2 N fraction, but total resin capacity is unaffected if this fraction is recycled to the ion exchange headworks. The 2-Stage approach selectively eluted bicarbonate and sulfate with 0.2 N NaCl before regeneration using 2 N NaCl. Regeneration approach impacted the elution efficiency of both uranium and vanadium. Regeneration without co-eluting sulfate and bicarbonate led to incomplete uranium elution and potential formation of insoluble uranium hydroxides that could lead to long-term resin fouling, decreased capacity and render the resin a low-level radioactive solid waste. Partial vanadium elution occurred during regeneration due to co-eluting sulfate suppressing vanadium release. Waste production and salt usage were comparable for the 1- and 2-Stage regeneration processes with similar operational setpoints with respect to chromium or nitrate elution.Hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) is present in many groundwater aquifers used as drinking water sources and may be naturally occurring or due to anthropogenic sources ( Strong base anion exchange (SBA) is one treatment technology that is effective for removing Cr(VI) ( Resin exhaustion is operationally-defined based on contaminants of concern and process configuration. In a single pass system, the threshold for Cr(VI) exhaustion may occur when the effluent concentration exceeds a pre-defined concentration either from an individual contactor or the blended effluent from several contactors (e.g., 8 μg/L or 80% of the California MCL). In a lead-lag configuration, the lead (i.e., first) contactor is fully loaded with Cr(VI) at exhaustion, and a second contactor in series (i.e., lag) captures Cr(VI) in the effluent of the lead unit. Upon exhaustion, SBA resin can be regenerated using a concentrated salt solution. In the case of Cr(VI) processes, this waste brine is hazardous, and disposal represents a major operating cost. Currently, there are two regeneration approaches implemented at full-scale plants. One approach uses a single regenerant solution concentration, while the second uses a staged approach with multiple regenerant solution concentrations. The multi-stage approach includes strategically increasing the regenerant concentration to first elute sulfate and bicarbonate followed by chromium and nitrate ( Regeneration efficiency, waste production and salt usage are primary factors governing SBA selection for full-scale treatment of drinking water, but little research has focused on the regeneration efficiency of chromium treatment. In most studies, only chromate, sulfate and/or nitrate data is presented ( The objective of this study was to regenerate parallel loaded pilot-scale SBA columns for drinking water Cr(VI) removal using different regeneration approaches and compare performance in terms of 1) total constituent elution, 2) waste production and 3) regenerant salt requirements. Groundwater from a well in California with naturally-occurring Cr(VI) at concentrations above the California regulatory MCL was used as the source water for the pilot-scale SBA columns ( After the first water treatment loading cycle, the columns were regenerated following three approaches. As summarized in Each regeneration process was conducted co-current to flow during water treatment. Regeneration loading rate was 49 ± 4 L/min/m During regeneration, effluent from the column was fractionated into high density polyethylene bottles between 250 and 1000 mL depending on required elution resolution. Small sample bottles were used for dynamic segments of the regeneration to better define elution peaks (e.g. initial increase of conductivity after interstitial water is displaced). By collecting entire fractions rather than grab samples, a mass balance could be performed with minimal data interpolation. The mass and volume of each fraction was measured, and the average bed volume (BV After the second regeneration cycle, the columns were regenerated with analytical grade hydrochloric acid (HCl) to evaluate the elution efficiency of trace metals. Following manufacturer recommendations, three BVs of 6% (w/w) HCl was prepared. Upon elution of the first HCl BV, the pump was turned off. After a 2 h HCl soaking period, the final 2 bed volumes were eluted from the column before rinsing. For the first regeneration cycle, aliquots of resin were collected from the top, middle and bottom of the loaded columns and regenerated as a batch experiment to determine the spatial profile of constituents throughout the resin bed. 10 mL resin samples were added to 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks with 200 mL of 2 N NaCl and agitated for about 70 h. All regenerant solutions were made using DI. A strainer was used to separate the resin from the supernatant, and the supernatant was analyzed for trace metals, sulfate, nitrate and alkalinity. During column loading, raw water quality was monitored using standard methods listed in A suite of elements in the regeneration brine were measured using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) (7500, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). Samples were acidified with nitric acid prior to analysis and diluted as needed with 1% nitric acid based on the instrument calibration range. The instrument was calibrated with a multi-element solution (SPEX CertiPrep 2A) between 0.1 μg/L and 1 mg/L and also calibrated with a chloride standard (Hach, 1000 mg/L as Cl) from 1 mg/L to 200 mg/L. Duplicates and matrix spikes were analyzed every 10 samples, and a NIST 1643f standard was used to verify the calibration curve. In the regeneration brine, total chromium was analyzed as a surrogate for Cr(VI). Negligible concentrations of trivalent chromium were measured in the raw water, and reduction reactions during ion exchange were assumed to be negligible. Total elemental chlorine was used as a surrogate for chloride as no other common sources of elemental chlorine (e.g., perchlorate) were measured in the source water. The average relative percent difference (RPD) between duplicate samples was 2.0% for elemental sodium, chlorine, chromium and uranium. Matrix spike recoveries for chromium and uranium were within an acceptable range (85–109% and 89–97%, respectively). Nitrate was analyzed using flow injection analysis (QuikChem Method 10-107-04-1-A). The average RPD between nitrate duplicates was 11% (< 0.2 mg-N/L, n = 14), and matrix spike recoveries ranged from 83 to 111%. Sulfate was also analyzed by flow injection analysis (QuikChem Method 10-116-10-1-A). The average RPD for sulfate duplicates was 5%, and matrix spike recovery ranged from 74 to 101% (n = 11). To facilitate mass balance calculations during regeneration, several assumptions were made regarding the anionic form of constituents in the exchanger phase. For elements measured by ICP-MS that have a propensity to form oxyanions in aqueous systems, anionic forms were assumed based on oxidation state and pH. It was assumed that the oxidized form would be most abundant since more than 97% of chromium was found in the oxidized, hexavalent form. At a pH of 8, chromium is present as predominantly chromate (CrO The form of polyprotic anions and polynuclear metals within the exchanger phase were also assumed. Although found predominantly as bicarbonate at pH 8 in groundwater, bicarbonate (HCO Natural organic matter (NOM) can compete in SBA processes due to the negative surface charge of humic substances ( The source water for the pilot-scale SBA columns was an operational groundwater well at a municipal water district in California that has Cr(VI) concentrations of 40 μg/L as summarized in Columns were fully exhausted around 50,000 BV with respect to Cr(VI). Loading until exhaustion is representative of an ion exchange process operating in a lead-lag configuration. The observed run-time is significantly longer than reported data from other studies using the same resin and is due to different concentrations of competing anions (i.e., sulfate). One pilot study with half as much raw water Cr(VI) 0.61–0.65 μeq/L (16–17 μg/L) exceeded the California MCL at a similar throughput (30,000–35,000 BV), a difference that can be attributed to higher raw water sulfate concentrations around 0.42 eq/L (20 mg/L) ( The 1-Stage regeneration process was designed to model a conventional SBA regeneration process with NaCl at a constant concentration (2 N NaCl). This regeneration was performed on Column 1 after each loading cycle ( The elution profiles for regenerations R1 and R4 are shown in The effects of selectivity reversal on elution order are apparent comparing In both regenerations (R1 and R4), the bed volumes of solution required for complete regeneration is governed by nitrate rather than chromium elution. Using sodium as a conservative tracer, a mass balance was used to calculate the total volume of regenerant solution eluted from the column at complete nitrate elution. For the 1-Stage DI regeneration (R1), 3.2 BVs of regenerant solution were passed through the column corresponding to samples collected up to 4 BV The 2-Stage regeneration process exposed the resin to a low strength stage with 0.2 N NaCl (0.2 N Stage) followed by a high strength stage with 2 N NaCl (2 N Stage) to control the elution of constituents based on selectivity. This regeneration was performed on Column 3 after each loading cycle ( Focusing on the 2-Stage DI regeneration ( By the end of 0.2 N Stage in regeneration R3, the concentration of both sulfate and bicarbonate decreased, indicating that elution was not limited by the number of 0.2 N bed volumes. Simultaneously, chloride concentrations in the effluent increased eventually equaling sodium concentrations at 7.25 BV The 2 N Stage eluted chromium, nitrate, vanadium, molybdenum and some uranium from the column. The delayed elution of nitrate compared to chromium, vanadium and uranium demonstrated selectivity reversal and/or retardation similar to the 1-Stage regenerations. Uranium elution differed between the two 2-Stage regenerations (R3 and R6). In the 2-Stage DI regeneration (R3), the maximum uranium fraction concentration was only 7.2 μeq/L (0.4 mg/L) at 7.8 BV By sodium mass balance, regeneration R3 exposed the resin to a total of 6.7 BV of 0.2 N NaCl followed by 1.6 BV of 2 N NaCl. Complete nitrate elution was not observed in regeneration R3. Regeneration R6 exposed the resin to 3.9 BV of 0.2 N NaCl followed by 3.6 BV of 2 N NaCl for complete nitrate elution. Based on the elution results from the first regeneration cycle, a hybrid regeneration approach was conducted on Column 2 ( The differences between regeneration approaches were evaluated by comparing constituent elution efficiency, salt chemical requirements, and waste production. Elution efficiency was evaluated based on cumulative mass recovery, peak sharpness, and the presence of tailing, all of which impact overall process performance. Salt use directly compares regeneration chemical consumption. Waste volume is directly related to operating costs ( To minimize waste in full-scale regeneration processes, the leading and tail edge of the regeneration are often recycled to the SBA process headworks or secondary holding tanks for use in a subsequent regeneration cycle. To allow for comparison between regeneration approaches, standard operating criteria were assumed. Under these criteria, brine at the beginning of regeneration with a conductivity less than 20 mS/cm would be recycled to the SBA process headworks and would not require disposal. This fraction would include the 0.2 N Stage in the 2-Stage approaches and leading edge in the 1-Stage and NaCl/NaHCO For total chromium elution, the 2-Stage approaches eluted more chromium, but the mass in the waste fraction was similar between all approaches. Within each regeneration cycle, the 2-Stage regeneration approaches eluted 20–30% more chromium than the 1-Stage approaches (i.e., R1 vs R3 and R4 vs R6) ( Using the conductivity and effluent chromium concentration criteria as process setpoints to define the waste fraction, all regeneration approaches exhibited little difference in chromium elution when exposed to 2 N NaCl ( A significant difference between regeneration approaches, however, was the presence of effluent chromium concentration tailing. Since the effluent chromium concentration is a direct indication of residual chromium in the exchanger phase, tailing is indicative of inefficient regeneration at the end of the cycle. Comparing the 1-Stage (R1 and R4) and 2-Stage (R3 and R6) regenerations, differences in pH may explain some of the differences in elution efficiency at the end of the regeneration cycle. After the elution of bicarbonate, pH decreased through the remainder of the regeneration process. One BV In both 1-Stage regenerations, the effluent pH dropped below 6.5. This transition from alkaline to acidic pH has multiple impacts on ion exchange mechanisms. Under acidic conditions, the Cr(VI) speciation in the bulk liquid phase shifts from chromate to bichromate (HCrO The NaCl/NaHCO A key difference in elution efficiency between approaches was the location of residual chromium in the exchanger phase. Residual chromium at the bottom of the column can cause leakage during the next loading cycle, which was observed for Column 1 ( Regeneration approach impacted the elution efficiency of uranium. To compare regeneration efficiency, only select regeneration profiles could be compared directly, because the elution efficiency of the first regeneration cycle (R1-R3) directly impacted the initial exchanger phase uranium concentration for the second loading cycle (R4-R6). Comparing the first cycle, the 1-Stage DI (R1) removed 100 times more uranium than the 2-Stage DI (R3) approach. Previous work has shown that uranium regeneration depends on both the regenerant solution concentration and total salt dose, but these factors cannot explain differences in uranium elution efficiency. At the same total salt dose (eq Differences in uranium regeneration efficiency are partially attributed to bicarbonate concentrations. In the 1-Stage regeneration, uranium concentrations peaked at 1.4 BV Differences in sulfate may also play a role in the stability of uranyl complexes. At peak uranium elution during the 1-Stage DI regeneration (R1) shown in For the second round of column regenerations, care must be taken in directly comparing the total mass of uranium eluted as R5 and R6 had a higher starting mass of uranium due to inefficient elution in the first cycle, and the availability of the uranium to be eluted by NaCl is unknown. Coupled with the acid regeneration performed after the second regeneration cycle, uranium elution trends emerge. The 2-Stage GW regeneration (R6) exhibited significant cumulative elution of uranium (1.8 meq), which is nearly 200 times more than the first regeneration cycle (2-Stage DI (R3)). Since the 0.2 N Stage removed most of the bicarbonate ( The NaCl/NaHCO Incomplete uranium elution may impact the resin capacity, disposal, subsequent regenerations and plant licensing requirements. Uranium could accumulate in the resin with each regeneration. Over time, entrained uranium precipitate could foul resin, reducing capacity during water treatment operations and requiring more frequent regeneration. Uranium accumulation could result in a plant requiring U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission licensing and resin that must be handled and disposed of as technologically enhanced naturally occurring radioactive materials (TENORM). Regeneration approach also impacted the elution of vanadium from SBA resin. While not regulated by the Safe Drinking Water Act, accumulation of vanadium through multiple loading cycles may also impact long-term operation of SBA for Cr(VI) removal. During regeneration with only NaCl, multiple vanadium elution peaks indicate that either 1) vanadium moieties with different relative selectivities eluted from the resin and/or 2) the co-elution of other anions impacted vanadium elution. In the 2-Stage NaCl regenerations, vanadium eluted during both the 0.2 N and 2 N Stages ( Regeneration approaches with NaCl alone did not completely elute vanadium from the resin. Batch tests conducted after the first regeneration cycle recovered additional vanadium, specifically from the middle and lower column sections ( Insight into this behavior can be garnered from studies investigating the separation of uranium and vanadium from low-grade uranium ores, such as carnotite (K Incomplete elution of vanadium can be attributed to sulfate suppression. The 2-Stage DI (R3) regeneration exhibited a vanadium elution peak with the highest concentration compared to the other NaCl-only regeneration approaches ( While not radioactive, accumulation of vanadium on resin could impact long-term operation of SBA processes for chromium removal. Regeneration approaches tailored to vanadium and uranium elution may be periodically required to maintain long-term performance. Differences in total salt use were largely governed by the chromium elution tailing, because the assumed operational setpoint to start the rinse cycle was an effluent chromium concentration of 5 meq/L. The salt requirements for the 1-Stage GW (R4) and 2-Stage GW (R6) regenerations were similar at 3.7 and 3.5 eq Defining an operational regeneration setpoint with respect to chromium would leave significant nitrate on the resin. With an assumed 0.5 BV of brine remaining in the bed pore space, nitrate elution would continue until about 1.1 BV – 1.3 BV after peak chromium elution. At this point, 20–30% of the total nitrate would be left on the resin. Little difference in nitrate elution was observed between methods ( With the exception of the NaCl/NaHCO  1-Stage and 2-Stage regeneration approaches with 2 N NaCl have trade-offs primarily associated with uranium, vanadium and chromium regeneration efficiency rather than waste production or salt use. Little difference was observed in the chromium elution efficiency using a 2 N NaCl regenerant solution, resulting in similar waste volumes and salt requirements. Tailing effects for chromium elution can be significant for 1-Stage co-current regeneration approaches and can promote leakage during the subsequent water treatment (loading) cycle. Uranium elution efficiency is improved by the co-elution of both bicarbonate and sulfate. Vanadium elution efficiency is suppressed by co-eluting sulfate and promoted by bicarbonate in the regenerant solution. Regeneration approaches specifically targeting removal of uranium and vanadium is important for long-term operation of SBA for Cr(VI) treatment to prevent constituent accumulation across water treatment loading/regeneration cycles. The views, analysis, recommendations, and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not represent official or unofficial policies or opinions of the United States Government and the United States takes no position with regard to any findings, conclusions, or recommendations made. As such, mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute their endorsement by the United States Government. This work was conducted under the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at