Steam centrifugation is a mechanical thermal process that decreases the pore liquid in the porous medium by the help of centrifugal pressure and the pressure of injected steam. The steam is used in centrifuges to overcome the capillary forces, which retain the liquid in the lower area of the porous system. Both external forces affect the pore liquid in a different manner. This may lead to a different velocity of the liquid flow and the steam front, resulting in two different states of operation. The steam intrudes the pore and condenses until the bulk is locally heated on boiling temperature. The liquid flow in the porous system can be modeled as a plug flow in a single capillary. The steam intrudes a porous system, which is already partially de-watered, if the acceleration of the pore liquid due to the centrifugal force is more rapid than the penetration velocity of the steam. In this case the pressure difference cannot affect the mechanical de-watering. The pore liquid runs ahead of the condensation front and both processes operate independently.
                  It is intended that the pressurized steam directly acts on the pore liquid and hence interacts with the centrifugal pressure. In this case both external forces are employed to accelerate the liquid in the capillary system and to reduce it to a greater extent. Therefore the relation between steam pressure and centrifugal pressure has to exceed a characteristic value. Then the steam has access to finer pores and finally overcomes the capillary forces.
                  The aim of the experimental and theoretical work is to find the optimal state of operation. Both front velocities can be measured and compared to each other. Furthermore these results are compared to calculations, which can predict the optimal process parameter. With the help of this optimization the steam centrifugation leads to a lower moisture content and operates more economical than a conventional process.Steam centrifugation is definitely a mechanical–thermal de-watering process. Pressurized steam and centrifugal forces act simultaneously to reduce the moisture content compared to conventional centrifugation processes. Furthermore the solid particles can be dried directly in the centrifuge after the mechanical–thermal removal of the pore liquid ( The reduced moisture content is archived by the optimal mechanical de-watering process. The pressurized steam accelerates liquid drainage, which is driven by the centrifugal force. The pressure force empties the fine pores in the capillary system, which are too tight for the mass forces to overcome the local surface forces. The centrifugal field leads to the maximal reduction of the volume in the liquid bridges between the particles. The elevated temperature due to the condensing steam affects the properties of the pore liquid. Both viscosity and surface tension are decreased, resulting in lower moisture content and accelerated de-watering kinetic. Therefore steam assisted centrifugation archives lower moisture content than conventional centrifugation. The process design has to ensure that the steam penetration is at least as fast as the draining velocity of the pore liquid. Otherwise the local pressure at the liquid surface is too small to effect the de-watering process. The steam is locally not capable to empty any pore. Hence the minimal pressure difference, which is necessary for the interaction of steam pressure and mass force, has to be predicted and calculated. The key question is how the steam and the mass force interact in the porous matrix. Further it has to be investigated what is the consequence when the steam pressure is insufficient to catch up with the draining liquid. The experiments have been carried out on a newly developed centrifuge ( The beaker of the steam centrifuge is equipped with three thermocouples, pressure transducer and two pneumatic valves. Six drillings in the sidewall can be used to insert thermocouples into the cake. The drillings are at 2 mm, 5 mm, 9 mm, 19 mm, and 29 mm (2 drillings) from the filter cloth. Two drillings at 19 mm and 29 mm with a larger diameter of 3 mm are used to remove the air above the cake before the experiment is started. The drilling is connected to a special pneumatic valve. The air flows via the drilling through the valve out of the beaker when the steam is injected in the beaker. After certain duration the valve is closed and the steam pressure acts on the pore liquid. The removal of the air is necessary, to avoid the formation of a distinct layer between the liquid flow and the steam condensation front. The other part of the beaker is called the reservoir. Here the filtrate is collected. At the bottom of this reservoir a pressure transducer measures the static liquid pressure. The experiments are conducted with two different disperse solids: limestone and iron ore ( The liquid drainage during centrifugation can be described by the flow in a model capillary. The liquid plug moves in a capillary, which is representative for the porous system. The length of this capillary is equal to the dimensions of the porous system. The diameter of the capillary is chosen to provoke the same pressure drop with the same liquid velocity. Therefore the Darcy equation is transformed to a laminar Hagen–Poissieulle flow in a tubular capillary (Eq. The two notations differ in the description of the flow resistance. It is supposed that the flow resistance in both notations has to be equal to determine the hydraulic diameter. Furthermore the porosity has to be taken into consideration (Eq. The force balance describes the transient plug flow (Eq. The relation allows determining at which time point the liquid has drained off the main pore system ( The liquid level in the model capillary decreases in a linear way with the time. The closer it comes to the capillary height, the higher is the influence of the surface force. The flow is decelerated. The penetration of a condensable fluid in a porous matrix, which has a temperature lower than the boiling temperature, differs from that of a non-condensable fluid. The steam does not penetrate the pore until the solid particles are heated up to boiling temperature. Otherwise the steam condenses to increase the temperature of the porous system locally with the help of its latent heat. The particle size of the solids, which are processed in a centrifuge, is below 1 mm. Therefore it can be considered that the temperature gradient in any solid particle equalizes in less than a second. The temperature of the solid particles is assumed to be uniform. The steam penetrates the capillary system in the areas where the particles are already heated up. The condensation establishes a front, which is even from the macroscopic point of view. The gas fingering is inhibited by the cold inner surface. The steam cannot advance further into the porous matrix until its particles reach the boiling temperature. The steam is reduced in volume due to condensation by factor of 1000. Thus the penetration velocity of the condensation front is more than two orders of magnitude slower than the flow velocity of the steam. The ratio of latent heat and sensible heat, to heat up a solid particle from ambient to boiling temperature, determines the movement of the steam front in the porous matrix. It is further determined by the convective transport of latent heat to the location of the condensation front. The external pressure difference between upper and lower side of the filter cake is dissipated on the way to the condensation front. It can be described by the Darcy equation, in which the steam is regarded as an incompressible gas (Eq. The energy balance in a differential layer in the porous matrix ( Finally the mass flow of steam is combined with the energy balance resulting in a differential equation of first order. The integration leads to an equation for the penetration time of the steam into the porous system. This duration is proportional to the square of the distance to steam penetrates into the porous matrix (Eq. The flow permeability of the partially de-watered filter cake depends on the liquid content. The effect of the remaining liquid is described by different empirical equations. It is nearly impossible to calculate directly the impact of the remaining liquid on the permeability. Therefore the relative permeability is used ( The relative permeability is taken into consideration to calculate the transient penetration of the steam (Eq. The transient liquid movement and the steam penetration in a partially de-watered porous matrix are plotted into the same diagram ( The plain symbols represent the steam penetration. As long as these symbols are situated below the lines of the plug (‘piston’) flow, the steam is supposed to penetrate faster than the liquid drains off. In this case the steam is able to act on the liquid surface and to accelerate the liquid movement. The pressure drop in the steam flow on the way to the condensation front is smaller than the external pressure. The remaining part of the pressure acts on the liquid surface. The condensation front runs along with the liquid surface in the porous matrix. The steam penetration decelerates more and more in the center of the porous system. At the The time dependent temperature profile and the filtrate flow show the kinetic of steam assisted centrifugal de-watering ( The pressure signal (filtrate flow) and the temperature signal, which is measured 2 mm above the filter cloth, are plotted versus the same time scale ( The pressure signal initially shows a strong increase, which later on approximates a linear run. The moment when the inclination of the curve becomes constant defines the end of the plug flow. The plug flow ends after 30 s at a With the increase of the pressure difference the penetration velocity of the steam also increases ( The signal of the pressure transducer shows the influence of the steam on the liquid plug flow. The flow ends after 25 s at the The experimental data shows the acceleration of the liquid drainage, when the pressure difference is increased. The condensation front falls behind the liquid surface in case of insufficient steam pressure. However steam assisted centrifugation can be successfully operated with a sufficient external pressure difference. Furthermore experiments with a fine iron ore fraction have been conducted. The iron ore was chosen due to its high heat capacity, which consumes a high quantity of steam while being heated up. The permeability of the cake, which was built up with the ore, is even lower compared to the limestone. The de-watering result of this iron ore fraction with conventional processes such as vacuum filtration is very poor. Centrifugation leads to 60% saturation, hyperbar filtration ( The de-watering result due to steam assisted centrifugation depends on the pressure difference applied ( The steam breakthrough time decreases with increasing pressure difference ( The transient filtrate flow shows a different behavior. The pressure signal for conventional centrifugation reaches its final value after a very short interval (< The steam condenses during the filtration and provokes the convective transport of more steam to the location of the condensation front. The force balance directly at the condensation front shows that the pressure drop of the steam flow in the porous matrix even can get higher than the external pressure difference. The plug flow, which is supposed to detach from the condensation front, transfers an additional force on the steam. This force decelerates the liquid drainage of the plug flow. It is supposed that the force is transferred by a kind of vacuum in the porous matrix between the liquid surface and the location, where the steam condensation takes place. However the question is what the physical properties in the pores between the liquid surface and the steam are, which condense at 100 °C. As long as no air is permitted in the system, air or any other non-condensable gas cannot fill the pores between the two fronts. Only steam or water vapor is present at this location. Therefore the condensation of the steam occurs at a pressure below ambient pressure, acting as a decelerating force on the liquid plug. As schematically shown ( The temperature measurement does not directly detect the condensation. It is supposed that steam is present at the thermocouple after the temperature has reached 100 °C or a higher level after a steep temperature rise. However the steam condenses during centrifugation at lower pressure. Furthermore the local pressure at the thermocouple rises when the condensation front advances. The increasing local pressure is directly connected to temperature field in the porous system. The increase of the pressure incorporates the increase of the dew point of the steam flow, which finally leads to an increasing temperature signal. Therefore it is not clearly determined whether the curvature of the temperature rise is due to the heat transfer into the liquid filled pores (as known from steam pressure filtration ( It can be supposed that there is an optimal pressure difference, as shown for the limestone, which is high enough to prevent the local vacuum. Further investigations will focus on the calculation and experimental determination of the optimum pressure of steam assisted centrifugation. The interaction of steam pressure and centrifugal force in a porous matrix is a sophisticated question. Definitely a minimum ratio between pressure a centrifugal force is necessary to accelerate the liquid drainage. Otherwise the condensation provokes a local vacuum in the porous matrix, which decelerates the liquid flow. In this case the steam pressure difference has to be increased to ensure a specified process behavior. However the experimental results show a notable reduction of the moisture content due to the steam application. face heat capacity centrifugal value gravitation evaporation heat specific enthalpy cake height mass flow permeability pressure pore radius saturation temperature time flow velocity co-ordinate porosity density viscosity surface tension Contact angle steam liquid phase relative solid phase We like to thank AIF-Germany (Project No. 11759N) and Institut für Mechanische Verfahrenstechnik und Mechanik der Universität Karlsruhe, where the experimental part has been performed.