The coalescence of gas bubbles in many salt solutions such as NaCl is significantly inhibited if the salt concentration exceeds a critical concentration which is unique for each salt. It has been predicted as a function of the Hamaker constants of van der Waals attractions between two bubbles. In this paper, the Lifshitz theory on the van der Waals interaction energy and the available spectrum for water dielectric permittivity are applied to determine the Hamaker constants for liquid films between bubbles in pure water and salt solutions. Using the new values for Hamaker constants for thin films of saline solutions, we show that the effect of van der Waals attractions on the critical salt concentration is significantly weaker than previously hypothesized. The predictions based on van der Waals attractions significantly under-estimate the experimental critical concentrations. The failure of the van der Waals attraction in predicting the critical salt concentration highlights the urgent need of revising the available theories on bubble coalescence in salt solutions and saline water.The effect of inorganic salts on bubble coalescence, froth stability and flotation performance is well known and documented ( The inhibiting effect of salts on bubble coalescence has been investigated experimentally using three techniques. The first technique is to monitor the population of bubbles in a swarm in a bubble column by measuring the solution turbidity (the gas holdup) or bubbles size distribution ( So far different mechanisms have been proposed to explain the inhibiting effect of salts on bubble coalescence. In this paper we aim to quantify the effect of van der Waals attractions on bubble coalescence in saline solutions. The main question to be addressed in this paper is whether or not van der Waals attractions are strong enough to balance the opposing forces to inhibit bubble coalescence. Therefore, we first review the two mathematical models proposed for predicting the critical salt concentration by The first theoretical model to predict the critical salt concentration was proposed by The non-retarded London–van der Waals disjoining pressure was first considered in modelling the disjoining pressure in Eq.  It is noted that Eq. The uncertainty of assigning the values for the Hamaker constants in determining the critical salt concentration using Eqs. The experimental data for complete spectrum of Eq. It is noted that the zero-frequency term contribution to the van der Waals attraction described by Eq. The dependence of Having obtained the accurate values for the Hamaker constants from the numerical results for saline water films, the predictions described by Eqs. It is concluded that the effect of van der Waals attraction on the critical salt concentration for bubble coalescence inhibition is significantly weaker than previously hypothesized. The models based on van der Waals attractions significantly under-predict the experimental critical concentration. This failure of the van der Waals attraction in predicting the critical salt concentration demands further theoretical developments and understanding of bubble coalescence in salt solutions and saline water. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Australian Research Council (Grant DP0985079).