 Jack’s research activities were primarily on carbonization mechanisms, petroleum coke, mesophase carbon fibers, and fiber-reinforced composites. With the discovery of the Brooks-Taylor spherules, his research work focused on understanding the formation of mesophase microstructures during the pyrolysis of pitches used to fabricate graphitic materials. In early 1970s Jack and his co-workers showed that the carbonaceous mesophase can undergo extensive deformation during the transformation process, and this constituted a mechanism by which mesophase microstructures are oriented and reduced to finer texture. With the use of his favorite instrument, the polarized-light microscope, Jack mapped the folds, bends, splays, and disclination structures of the bulk mesophase. He coined the term lamelliform morphology to describe the layered texture of the mesophase microstructures. Using a quenching hot-stage microscope he was the first to observe and record mesophase coalescence and disclination reactions. These results were instrumental in providing the basic understanding of the importance of the mesophase, while in its liquid crystal state, to the formation of the microstructure of needle cokes and mesophase fibers. In the 1980s, Jack was the first to successfully apply oxidation stabilization to mesophase-impregnated preforms in order to fix the matrix in place before carbonization. He took advantage of the favorable flow properties of low-viscosity mesophase to develop an “injection” process for the fabrication of aircraft brakes. During the past 14 years Jack was working closely with graduate and undergraduate students at University of California, San Diego. He focused on spinning a new class of mesophase carbon fibers, with designed microstructures produced by manipulating flow of the mesophase liquid in the spinneret. Using a unique quenching technique and detailed micrography, he showed how regular arrays of disclinations can be generated in the spinneret and retained at a reduced scale in as-spun filaments. In recognition of his innovative contributions, Jack was selected as the Graffin Lecturer for 1984, received the SGL Carbon (Skakel) Award in 1987, and was elected a Fellow of the American Carbon Society in 1999. He was an active and enthusiastic member of the American Carbon Society. He served on the Advisory Committee from 1989 to 1993, and on the Executive Committee from 1993 to 1997. Jack was the chairman of the Society from 1995 to 1997. He served as the Program Chairman of CARBON’95. Jack was born in 1925 in Hollywood, California. After completing a year at Cal Tech, he entered the Army during World War II. He returned to Cal Tech and graduated in 1949 with a Bachelor of Science in Applied Chemistry, and a member of Phi Beta Kappa. He obtained a second Bachelor degree in Metallurgical Engineering from Carnegie Institute of Technology in 1950. Also in 1950, he married the love of his life, Elizabeth Sherrard. Their marriage lasted nearly 50 years ending with Betty’s death in 2000. He received his doctorate in Metallurgy from UC Berkeley in 1955. He conducted his Ph.D. studies at Imperial College where he also received a Diploma. Afterwards, he joined the Naval Research Laboratory as a NRC postdoctoral Research Fellow. In 1958 Jack joined the research staff at General Atomics. From 1967 to 1969, he worked as visiting scientist at EUROATOM in Holland. In 1973, Jack joined the Aerospace Corporation in El Segundo, CA, as a Research Scientist in the Materials Science Lab. He “retired” in 1988 and joined the Chemical Engineering group at University of California, San Diego. Jack was diagnosed with acute leukemia in December 2001. Through chemotherapy, he achieved remission of the disease but died due to multiple complications after treatment. He is survived by his brother, Don; a daughter, Janette; and two grandsons. Jack was greatly admired by his colleagues for his intellectual ability, his generosity with his knowledge and time, and his dedication to the Carbon Society. We asked several of his colleagues to share their memories.         