Introduction
                  At present, surgical treatment of comminuted radial head fractures without associated instability continues to be controversial. When anatomical reconstruction is not possible, radial head excision is performed. However, the appearance of long-term complications with this technique, along with the development of new radial head implants situates arthroplasty as a promising surgical alternative. The purpose of the present study was to compare the mid-term functional outcomes of both techniques.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  A retrospective study was performed between 2002 and 2011 on 25 Mason type-III fractures, 11 patients treated with primary radial head resection and 14 who received treatment of the fracture with metal prosthesis. At the end of follow-up, patients were contacted and outcomes evaluated according to: Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS), the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score (DASH) and strength measurement. Radiographic assessment (proximal migration of the radius, osteoarthritic changes, and signs of prosthesis loosening) was also performed.
               
                  Results
                  The average age of the sample was 53.7 years in the resection group, and 54.4 years in the replacement group, with a mean follow-up of 60.3 and 42 months respectively. According to the MEPS scale, there were 6 excellent cases, 3 good and 2 acceptable in the resection group, and 6 excellent cases, 3 good, 3 acceptable, and 2 poor in the prosthesis group. The mean DASH score were 13.5, and 24.8 for the resection and the replacement group respectively. We found one postoperative complication in the resection group (stiffness and valgus instability) and 6 in the replacement group: 3 of joint stiffness, 1 case of prosthesis breakage, and 2 neurological injuries.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Although this is a retrospective study, the high complication rate occurring after radial head replacement in comparison with radial head resection, as well as good functional results obtained with this last technique, leads us to recommend it for comminuted radial head fractures without associated instability.The treatment of choice for a comminuted radial head fracture in the midst of a clear instability, either due to ligament lesion or interosseous membrane, is clearly established: attempt open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) and, if not possible, prosthetic replacement. However, the appropriate moment and method for treatment of comminuted radial head fractures without associated instability is still a cause for controversy. When anatomical reconstruction is not possible via ORIF, one of the surgical options is radial head excision. However, the appearance of long-term complications such as proximal migration of the radius, decreased strength, elbow and wrist degenerative arthritis or cubitus valgus, pose a disadvantage of such treatment, leading to the proposal of other therapeutic options by some authors. The new metallic radial head implants, which lack many of the complications that presented with the first silastic prosthetics The aim of our study was to functionally and radiographically compare both surgical techniques: the excision and arthroplasty, in comminuted radial head fractures (Mason III) We performed a retrospective study of Mason type III  Surgically, not amenable to reconstruction, comminuted radial head fracture without ligamentous instability associated surgically treated with acute excision or prosthesis replacement Absence of concomitant fractures in the affected limb Absence of previous injuries in that joint Osseous maturity with closure of physes.  Open fracture or concomitant neurological lesion Elbow dislocation, coronoid fractures or associated ligamentous instability. All patients were operated upon under general anesthesia in supine position with affected extremity in abduction with the use a pneumatic tourniquet. The Kocher approach was used to expose the radial head fractures for radial head excision and implanting the prostheses The variables analyzed in the 25 patients were: age, gender, mean follow-up, injury side, surgical wait time, and complications. At the end of follow-up all of those patients were contacted and invited to return to our hospital for an interview, physical examination, and radiographic evaluation. Clinical and radiographic evaluations were performed by one of the authors (A.G) who had not been involved in the treatment of the patients. For the radiographical evaluation, at least two radiographs of the affected elbow joint were requested wherein the presence of heterotopic ossifications were evaluated (Hastings and Graham Classification In the excision group, anteroposterior radiographies were performed on both wrists, and radiographies in the zero position (neutral position of the forearm) to evaluate the degree of radial shortening, and thus determine the ulnar variation, avoiding the confusion that could be caused by anatomical variants. Differences in ulnar variance greater than 2 In the group of arthroplasties, the presences of radiolucent periprosthetic lines were analyzed, as well as the presence of dislocation or prosthesis fractures. The outcome assessment included: The Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score (DASH) Qualitative variables are presented with frequency distribution and percentage. Quantitative variables are summarized with averages and standard deviation (SD). Quantitative variables that show an asymmetrical distribution are summarized with the average. The comparison of continuous variables that show a normal distribution was performed via variance analysis (ANOVA). For all tests, a significance value of 5% was accepted. The processing and analysis of the data were performed with the SPSS 15.0 statistical package. During the period between January 2002 and December 2011, 127 patients were operated upon for radial head fractures through different surgical techniques. 53 patients presented a Mason type III fracture and only 29 patients fulfilled inclusion criteria defined above. Of these 29 patients, 15 received an excision, and 14 an arthroplasty with metallic prosthesis. Of the 15 patients receiving excision, four patients were excluded from the study: three unable to be contacted (change of address) and one due to death (not related to the surgery). In the group of arthroplasties there was no loss of follow-up. There were no statistical differences ( Following surgery, the type of immobilization of the elbow used was a brachio-palmar plaster slab in neutral pronosupination, at 90° flexion during an average of 10 days (7–14) for both groups, allowing passive movements to begin. In the third week, the directed rehabilitation program began with active movements and muscular strengthening. The average patient follow-up was 60.3 months in the excision group, and 42 months for those with prosthesis. At the end of the same, the clinical-radiographic analysis was performed. In the Arthroplasty group we found 4 cases of elbow arthritis grade I, 9 cases grade II and 1 case grade III, these degenerative changes do not seem to correlate with pain. According to the Hastings classification, there were 11 cases of periarticular ossifications classified as grade I, meaning that they were obvious but without functional deficit ( In the excision group, all patients presented degenerative changes grade I ( The average DASH score at the time of the latest examination was 13.5 points (range 0–21) for the excision group and 24.8 (range, 0–27 points) for the prosthesis group ( The average Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) for each item is summarized in 8 of the patients are free from pain in the excision group compared to 9 in the replacement group ( The average range of motion achieved for flexo-extension was 105.2° In the stability measurement, 4 of the cases were stable in the excision group, and 9 in the replacement group, although the differences were not statistically different ( In the functionality analysis for the performance of 5 daily tasks (brushing hair, eating, personal hygiene, dressing self and putting on shoes) the following results were obtained: 9 of patients with excision of the radial head could perform at least 4 of the 5 activities, while only 6 of the prostheses could perform them, this being statistically significant ( Considering those with greater than 75 points on the Mayo scale to be good and excellent results, 9 out of 11 in the excision group fall into this category, compared with 9 out of 14 in the prosthesis group ( The total average score on the MEPS scale was correlated with the perceived quality of life according to the DASH questionnaire, with the result of a positive correlative coefficient value (+ At the wrist we did not find any significant symptom (pain or cubital deviation) in the radial head resection group. In terms of the measurement of elbow strength, 8 of the patients presented normal strength in flexion and extension counter resistance when compared with the healthy side in the excision group, while in the replacement group, strength was normal in 9. Therefore, no significant differences in elbow strength were found between both groups ( Complication in the two groups were 1 in the resection group and 6 in the replacement group with statistical significance ( In the excision group, the complications include one episode of elbow stiffness (range of movement limited to 60°) with associated valgus instability. Treated with arthrolysis and radial head replacement. In the prosthesis group, 3 cases corresponded to elbow stiffness with a range of movement less than 50°, in all of them a revision surgery was performed. In 2 cases the head and the neck size were changed to a lower size and in the other one the prosthesis was removed without positioning a new implant. Additionally, there was 1 case of prosthesis fracture with associated instability that required a revision surgery with a new arthroplasty and 2 cases of neuropathies (1 case of ulnar neurapraxia and 1 case of radial neurapraxia) which resolved. Treatment of simple radial head fractures in isolation or complex fractures without or with associated instability is clearly established in the literature However, osteosynthesis of the head is often impossible due to the degree of comminution, and the only therapeutic alternatives are resection or arthroplasty. Although there are studies reporting good results with both techniques individually The influence of radial head resection in elbow stability with ligament integrity is controversial. Some studies have shown that resection can be performed without affecting elbow stability On the other hand, there are biomechanical studies performed with radial head arthroplasty which show that the implant improves stability but is not able of restoring valgus stability that gives the collateral cubital ligament integrity. Some of the complications included with the use of the arthroplasty are dislocation, implant loosening, radial head oversizing or the non-restoration of the normal length neck (overstuff). The Functional results we obtained after resection of the radial head are excellent MEPS: 87,7, DASH:13,5). Other authors In the replacement group our results are moderately lower than those obtained in other series Comparing our two groups the replacement group has obtained lower scores than the excision group. The differences focus principally on three parameters evaluated by the MEPS score: pain relief, mobility in flexion and daily life activities ( These results in pain relief have been corroborated by other authors who have achieved even higher results In the present literature the results obtained by the arthroplasties concerning pain relief are difficult to establish, given that in most studies in which a prosthesis is implanted for a Mason III fracture, they include associated ligament lesions or concomitant fractures. On the other hand, in many of the studies Regarding articular balance, our average range of movement following head resection was 105.2°, similar to that obtained by Sánchez Gómez et al. In the replacement group, the range of movement obtained in our study was less than that obtained following head resection with an average range of 85.5° As mentioned above, the resection of the radial head has been traditionally associated with long-term complications that in many cases are not considered to be important due to their low functional repercussion and maintenance of an acceptable articular movement In the radiographic analysis, evaluation of the proximal radius migration is mandatory. If present it can cause cubital deviation, loss of grip strength and pain in the elbow In the arthroplasties group, our complications rate has been higher than that found following radial head excision (43% compared to 9%) and the one collected in other series The presence of peri-implant radiolucency lines in almost 40% of our patients did not have clinical implications, as many other authors have stated Neurological injuries are a frequent complication in these surgeries In our experience, radial head resection continues to be a good treatment option when the fracture is not amenable to reconstruction and there is no associated instability, with a high rate of patient satisfaction despite mobility restrictions. This discrepancy is probably due to the majority of the patients being able to perform all daily life activities. Metal prosthetic radial head replacement obtains better functional outcomes in absence of complications, however, the high rate of complications that accompanies its implantation makes us discourage its use with this particular type of fracture. This is a retrospective study, with a patient volume that does not allow us to make statistical conclusions in many parameters; however, it is possible to infer correlations or tendencies. All authors, their immediate family, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated did not receive any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. The authors did not received any outside funding or grants that assisted this study.