Objectives
                  To measure, in an in vitro study, the number of shock waves to complete comminution for 195 human stones, representing six major stone types. Not all renal calculi are easily broken with shock wave lithotripsy. Different types of stones are thought to have characteristic fragilities, and suggestions have been made in published reports of variation in the fragility within some types of stones, but few quantitative data are available.
               
                  Methods
                  Kidney stones classified by their dominant mineral content were broken in an unmodified Dornier HM3 lithotripter or in a research lithotripter modeled after the HM3, and the number of shock waves was counted for each stone until all fragments passed through a sieve (3-mm-round or 2-mm-square holes).
               
                  Results
                  The mean ± SD number of shock waves to complete comminution was 400 ± 333 per gram (n = 39) for uric acid; 965 ± 900 per gram (n = 75) for calcium oxalate monohydrate; 1134 ± 770 per gram (n = 21) for hydroxyapatite; 1138 ± 746 per gram (n = 13) for struvite; 1681 ± 1363 per gram (n = 23) for brushite; and 5937 ± 6190 per gram (n = 24) for cystine. The variation for these natural stones (83% ± 15% coefficient of variation) was greater than that for artificial (eg, gypsum-based) stones (17% ± 8%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The variability in stone fragility to shock waves is large, even within groups defined by mineral composition. Thus, knowing the major composition of a stone may not allow adequate prediction of its fragility in lithotripsy treatment. The variation in stone structure could underlie the variation in stone fragility within type, but testing of this hypothesis remains to be done.Shock wave lithotripsy has been used for the treatment of urinary stones for two decades. Thus, the concept has arisen that patient treatment could be improved by knowing the major composition of a kidney stone before treatment. If a stone was of a type that is not amenable to treatment by shock wave lithotripsy, other modes of treatment could be pursued. Several studies have evaluated the potential of computed tomography (CT) for this purpose, using the value for x-ray attenuation as a discriminator to allow the identification of the stone type. On the other hand, it is not at all clear that the premise of this approach is valid. That is, it has not been proved that the ease with which a stone is broken by shock wave lithotripsy can be predicted by knowing only the major mineral composition of the stone. Support for this premise is weak, and some of the available data actually suggest otherwise. For example, cystine stones, which are considered hard to break, have been shown to sometimes break quite easily. Human kidney stones, obtained by percutaneous nephrostolithotomy or from a stone analysis laboratory (Beck Analytical Services, Indianapolis, Ind), were weighed, and the stone volume was measured with a displacement volumeter ( Stones were exposed to shock waves (20 kV, 1 Hz) using two in vitro test systems: 108 stones were treated in an unmodified (80 nF capacitor) Dornier HM3 lithotripter while held in a 15-mL plastic centrifuge tube. Dornier electrodes (Dornier MedTech, Kennesaw, Ga) were conditioned with 50 shock waves and discarded after 1500 shock waves. After delivery of 50 shock waves, stone fragments were allowed to settle over a sieve with 3-mm diameter, round holes. Fragments retained by the sieve were returned to the tube and treated with another 50 shock waves. This process was repeated until the stone was completely comminuted or until 2000 shock waves had been delivered. An additional 87 stones were treated in a research lithotripter that delivers shock waves indistinguishable from those of the HM3 Data were analyzed using analysis of variance, with significant differences assessed using the Tukey-Kramer honestly significant difference (HSD) method on log-transformed data (transformed to equalize variances). Linear regression analyses for stone size effect were also done. Differences were considered significant if the probability of their occurring by chance was less than 0.05. The software used was JMP (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Stone fragility was related to stone composition ( Some of this variability is accounted for by the variation in the size of the stones within each compositional group, because a statistically significant relationship was found between stone size and the number of shock waves required for comminution for some of the stones ( The concept that renal stones of different types have differing susceptibilities to shock waves has been appreciated since shock wave lithotripsy first came into common use, and the term “fragility” has been used to describe this for almost 15 years. The rationale behind these studies to identify stones using radiologic methods has assumed that the most important thing to learn is the major mineral component of a stone, because this is the way that stones have commonly been identified as being “hard” or “easy” to break. For example, cystine stones have consistently been identified as difficult to treat using shock wave lithotripsy, and uric acid stones are widely known to be much more fragile. However, Bhatta Thus, the data on cystine stones confirm the traditional view of their being relatively hard to break with lithotripsy, but the data also show a great amount of variability in the fragility of these stones. Significant variability was also seen in the other classes of stones ( The variability in the shock wave fragility of renal calculi could be due to variation in stone composition and/or structure, including variable amounts of secondary mineral in the stone, variation in the spatial arrangement of the secondary mineral within the stone, and variation in the layer structures of the primary and secondary minerals within a stone. Even the purest calcium oxalate stone is likely to have a core of variable size composed of another material, Similarly, the wide variety of structures seen in natural stones—both of pure and mixed compositions—could be a cause of variability in stone fragility. Adding these data from natural and artificial stones with others from published studies The data in the present report show that even under well-controlled, in vitro conditions, human kidney stones display great variability in fragility to lithotripter shock waves. Thus, simply knowing the major composition of a renal stone may provide insufficient information to predict the behavior of the stone in shock wave lithotripsy. Variations in internal stone structure, including secondary mineral composition, may be a significant cause of this variability in stone fragility. The ability to visualize stone structure using CT