The objectives of this study were to investigate the behavior of Phormidium sp. during flocculation and negatively or positively charged bubble flotation in order to optimize algal removal processes and identify mechanisms underlying the efficiency of flotation with positively charged bubbles. The nuisance of Phormidium sp. significantly decreases water quality in natural watershed and clogs filter bed in water treatment plant. Although dissolved air flotation has been recently adopted for algae removal, the best method has not been fully investigated. According to theories on dissolved air flotation, the operational conditions affect removal of the process and in this study, the optimum bubble generations was also investigated for better algal removal. Bubbles were generated at two levels of saturated pressure and measured at different bubble concentrations (10%, 20% and 30%), in the absence and presence of coagulants. Bubbles forming at 6 bars and 3 bars were observed at zeta potentials of −30mV to +27mV. The chain-like algae were cultured in the laboratory for 20days. At the stationary phase, Phormidium sp. sizes ranged from 2μm to 10μm in diameter and about 100–200μm in length. Over a pH range of 4.0–7.0 (increments of 0.5), the negative zeta potentials were −4mV to −12mV. Algal removal by flocculation was determined by jar tests and by the batch dissolved air flotation (BDAF) method with bubble generation and flotation. We obtained optimal Phormidium sp. removal with positively charged bubble flotation at a 30% bubble rate at >16mV and a bubble formed at 6 bars, with removal of up to 85% and 93% of cells and chlorophyll a, respectively. We also demonstrated the efficacy of using positively charged bubbles to remove Phormidium sp. cells and the importance of positively charged bubbles in the rarely reported interaction between bubbles and chain-like algae.Filamentous algae at the base of the water column in fresh watersheds form a periphyton community under high light conditions, consisting of series of cells joined end-to-end, giving them a thread-like appearance (  We analyzed In the flocculation experiments, aluminum coagulant (as Al Micro-bubbles were generated at saturated pressures in the presence of coagulants in 1 Bubbles were injected from a saturator to an acrylic cylindrical reactor containing The morphology of  These results can be explained by the relationship between the presence of coagulant and change in zeta potential of bubbles that would have the effects on removal efficiencies. Adding Al We characterized the changes in The only mechanism that led to chain breakup was flotation with positively charged bubbles. The breakup mechanism occurs through the shear force of the bubble and the bonding force of the chain-like cell ( In the ideal case, we found that The friction force Bubble zeta potential changed from negative to positive with the addition of Al Bubble zeta potential influences the efficiency of The size distribution of Acidic pH (4.0–7.0) yielded negative zeta potentials (provided in The length of the chain-like cells likely affected their mobility at varying pH; longer cells were less mobile and exhibited a smaller negative zeta potential. Positively charged bubbles broke the long chain-like cells into shorter chains, explaining the change of zeta potentials of the newly generated shorter cells after positive bubble flotation. At higher saturated pressure, bubble size decreased; at a critical pressure of ∼3.5 bars, the average bubble size was constant ( Our average bubble size was slightly larger than those reported by  Bubble size affected cell and chlorophyll This result was attributed to the different bubble sizes generated for the treatment process and to the relatively small size of  We found that application of more bubbles increased the frequency of bubble–algae aggregates and thus removal of more In this study, This research was supported by Korea Ministry of Environment as Eco-Innovation Project (413-111-008). This research was also supported by Integrated Research Institute of Construction and Environmental Engineering at Seoul National University.