The oxidation of iron(II) is an essential step in the oxidative leaching of uranium(IV) minerals such as uraninite and one of the reagents used in practice for this oxidation is sodium chlorate. This paper presents the results of an investigation into the kinetics of the oxidation of iron(II) by chlorate in solutions typical of the leaching of uranium. The results have confirmed the known form of the rate equation which is first-order in each of iron(II), chlorate and acid concentration. An overall rate equation has been derived which can be used to model the rate of iron(II) oxidation as a function of the reactant concentrations and the temperature. The half-life was found to be less than 1min under typical leach conditions at the Olympic Dam operation in South Australia and this species cannot be considered to be the direct oxidant for uranium(IV) minerals.In some uranium leach operations such as Olympic Dam in South Australia, sodium chlorate is used as the oxidant for uranium(IV) minerals such as uraninite(UO There is some published information ( In addition, the rate is sensitive to both the nature and concentration of other cations present; for example, the rate is faster in lithium than sodium or potassium chlorate solutions ( The following are the results of a study of the kinetics of this reaction under conditions that are more appropriate to uranium leaching which is normally conducted in acidic sulphate solutions containing 10 to 20 The reaction was followed by recording the current ( A conventional three-electrode system was employed with a potentiostat (Model 173 Potentiostat/Galvanostat, EG&G.) and the current/time transients were logged using a data acquisition system controlled by LabView software. In all kinetic experiments, the concentrations of chlorate and acid were much greater than that of iron(II) which was generally 1 Confirmation that the reaction is 1st-order in iron(II) was obtained from the fact that, for all experiments, plots of ln(  Plots of One experiment was carried out with a solution containing 0.1 The effect of temperature on the pseudo-1st-order rate constant in solutions containing 0.1 The results obtained in this study have confirmed the previously published rate equation for the reaction. The mechanism probably involves a rate-determining first electron-transfer step between a protonated chlorate ion and iron(II) followed by rapid subsequent electron-transfer steps as follows, The value of Thus, the following overall rate equation can be used to describe the kinetics. For example, under typical leach conditions at Olympic Dam of [H It is apparent that even at the lower temperature, the rate of the reaction is such that chlorate will be rapidly reduced under the conditions of the tails leach for which the pulp has a residence time of many hours. Thus, aside from considerations of reactivity, the lifetime of chlorate ions is such that this species cannot be considered to be the direct oxidant for uranium(IV) minerals.