To decrease d-Lactate production cost, wheat bran, a low-cost waste of milling industry, was selected as the sole feedstock. First, the nutrients were recovered from wheat bran by acid protease hydrolysis. Then, cellulosic hydrolysates were prepared from protease-treated samples after acid pretreatment and enzymatic saccharification. The combined use of nutrients and hydrolysates as nitrogen and carbon sources for fermentation by S. inulinus YB1-5 resulted in d-Lactate levels of 99.5g/L, with an average production efficiency of 1.94g/L/h and a yield of 0.89g/g glucose. Moreover, fed-batch simultaneous saccharification and fermentation process at 40°C, 20% (w/v) solid loading and 20FPU/g solid cellulase concentration was obtained. d-Lactate concentrations, yield, productivity, and optical purity were 87.3g/L, 0.65g/g glucose, 0.81g/L/h and 99.1%, respectively. This study provided a feasible procedure that can help produce cellulosic d-Lactate using agricultural waste without external nutrient supplementation. Lignocellulosic biomass is especially important for multiple features: it is abundant, inexpensive, highly rich in polysaccharides and renewable, and could be used to replace sugar feedstocks ( Wheat bran can be obtained in considerable amounts in agricultural wastes following milling. Since bran comprises approximately 14–25% of whole wheat kernel, 150 Several bacterial species, including Here, the combined utilization of sugar and nutrient constituents in wheat bran for DLA production by strain YBS1-5 was examined. To obtain high glucose amounts from wheat bran, a three-stage enzymatic saccharification strategy was developed. Finally, DLA production by Wheat bran was provided by Nanjing Honghua Feed Co., Ltd. (China). The raw material was dried and crushed into 80-mesh particles. Yeast extract powder was manufactured by Sinopharm Chemical Reagent (China). Acid protease (RY03000), alkaline protease (RY03001), neutral protease (RY03003) and papain (RY03004) with activities of 8 The mutant strain, YBS1-5 organisms were anaerobically cultured in seed medium as previously described (37 Wheat bran was mixed with buffer at 20% (w/v). Next, the four proteases were added separately for treatment. The pH, temperature and protease concentrations were set according to the manufacturers’ instructions. For acid protease, these values were 2.5 (20 The residue was added at 1:5 into 2% (w/v) sulfuric acid and sterilized by autoclave. This pretreatment was followed by enzymatic hydrolysis, carried out at 50 For SHF operation, the hydrolysate and nutrient recovery from wheat bran, supplemented with 1 The SSF operation was performed in a Winpact bioreactor manufactured by Major Science (USA) with 10% (w/v) solid content pretreated wheat bran feedstock in a total volume of 3 Cell growth was measured spectrophotometrically at a wave-length of 660 Wheat bran composition on a dry weight basis is measured. Cellulose was present in high amounts (40.8%), approximately 1.5 times that reported by Reisinger ( Since wheat bran contains high protein levels, its utilization as a nitrogen source for DLA fermentation is of great relevance. Nevertheless, lactate producing bacteria with adequate enzymatic systems capable of fully using the proteinaceous components of lignocellulosic materials or agro-industrial waste are rare ( The influence of various amounts of wheat bran as the substrate on nutrient recovery was studied. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, the dosages of acid and alkaline proteases were 2000 and 500 Dilute acid pretreatment was used to disrupt the structure and solubilize hemicellulose in the protease-treated wheat bran, thereby enhancing the enzymatic hydrolysis ( In the fermentation process, a high substrate concentration is preferred because the product level is a major factor determining product recovery costs. Here we developed a three-stage process for wheat bran hydrolysis. The supplementation was carried out twice at 12 To assess fermentation efficiency with wheat bran as sole feedstock for DLA production by Nowadays, a number of lignocellulosic materials and agricultural wastes have been evaluated for DLA production, aiming to decrease the cost of the overall process. Singhvi et al. obtained 84.7 The SSF operation is favored over the SHF process for lactic acid production, with enhanced reduction of energy required as well as the cost of raw material pre-treatment, and increased productivity of lactic acid, avoiding the inhibition of high sugar concentration ( DLA production by fermentation of sugar and nutrient constituents from a single lignocellulosic biomass was featured in this study. Nutrients were recovered from wheat bran by treatment with acid protease before enzymatic saccharification. The levels of nutrients obtained were sufficient for DLA fermentation of recovered sugar also derived from wheat bran. Therefore, wheat bran could be used as feasible substitutes of refined sugars and yeast extract for DLA production, with potentially reduced total production cost. This research was financially supported by the