This is a synopsis of the key note address by Sid Harris to the Yorkshire branch of the Institute of Corrosion at its one-day seminar on 4 June 2003. The speaker began by describing how he came to be involved in the development of powder coatings during the mid 1960s. At that time he headed the Resins Research Department in a well known coatings company specializing in can coatings. Its largest customer, the Metal Box Company, was always seeking to increase line speeds on its production roller coating machines, and this created problems due to the low viscosities and solids content of speciality can linings, often applied at film thicknesses of 4 microns. Higher machine speeds affected the transfer of lacquer from the reservoir via the pressure roller to the application roller which contacted the tin coated steel sheets. The increased speed resulted in starvation at application and lack of film continuity. It proved to be possible to effect an improvement by adjusting the two parameters of viscosity and solids content by hot roller application and raising the solids by adjustment with stronger solvent blends. The limitations of these adjustments soon became apparent in product stability and smoothness of the applied films. If any progress was to be made in raising line speeds it needed a product that was not limited by viscosity and the ultimate goal for solids content was surely 100% non volatile. The only answer was the adaptation of a completely new coatings technology which was in its infancy, the development of powder coatings. Since the performance of these materials at that time was completely inadequate, and approval of a new can lining material involved many years of product testing, it could not be used to solve this problem. In fact, it would be many years before application of powder coatings to individual sheet or coil lines would become a reality. Nevertheless, this target had fired the imagination of the speaker and before the 1970s he was completely immersed in powder coatings development. Four type epoxy resins were the only contenders for formulating powder coatings in the early days and the quality of these products was questionable as a binder for corrosion resistant powder coatings due the wide molecular weight spread and the presence of traces of chlorine. Crosslinking of these resins was achieved by use of either a substituted dicyandiamide, accelerated dicyandiamide, or alternatively an anhydride. The first major outlet for a corrosion resistant powder coating that could be applied at film thicknesses of around 100 microns by electrostatic spray was the Leyland National Bus project at Workington in Cumberland. It was required to provide a durable coating for the chassis and wheel arch components of the new bus where the substrate was zinc coated steel. Early attempts by competitors using a pigmented system based on epoxy/substituted dicy binder proved to be inadequate, completely failing a 500 hour salt spray test with almost 100% disbondment. The recommended stoichiometrical ratio of resin: curative was 100:5 parts by weight. This rigid adherence to stoichiometric ratios was, according to the speaker, the main reason for system failure. He, therefore, formulated an alternative system using a binder: curative ratio of 100: 3.8. This was tested against other powder systems and the best wet paint primer systems of the day, and found to outstrip them all in performance. The coated panels passed 4000 hours in salt spray without any deterioration in coating appearance or performance. The reasons for this vast improvement in performance were considered to be due to: improved adhesion by leaving more unreacted polar groups to bond with the substrate; greater flexibility resulting from the reduction in crosslink density; freedom from the internal stresses of a highly crosslinked matrix; good film continuity and flow because of the lower system reactivity together with a lack of voids; yet retaining an adequate measure of chemical resistance. For many years this system was unchallenged by competitors and resulted in the sale of hundreds of tonnes of powder coating supplied in specially designed half tonne containers for direct connection to the application line, the largest single outlet for a powder coating primer at that time. This formulating principle should be applied to all corrosion resistant powder coating finishes. North America led the way with the development of fusion bonded epoxies (FBEs) for lining steel pipelines conveying oil and gas together with the external coating of reinforcement bars (rebars) in the 1970s. These materials were invariably crosslinked with aromatic organic amines and were difficult to produce due to the high reactivity and the necessity to take the level of cure to the B stage and stop it at this stage before it reached the rapid cure level, or C stage. Batches varied in quality because of the difficulty of measuring the attainment of the B stage, and the products had poor storage stability that often required shipping in refrigerated containers. Not all pipeline projects were successful and a notable failure was the Alaskan oil line project where disbondment of the outer coating could only be resolved by tape wrapping. In spite of these criticisms, many of these products are still specified today. The original solid grade epoxies had less than two epoxy groups per molecule and it was necessary to choose a multi-functional hardener to build a three dimensional matrix. Newer epoxy resins and epoxy novolac solid grade resins were introduced with epoxy groups greater than two per mole and this allowed more flexibility in formulating corrosion resistant powder coatings. The speaker described his early work in this field using different curing agents. Anhydrides were examined but considered to be unsuitable because of lack of compatibility and toxicity, although this latter criticism could be leveled at the use of aromatic organic amines. The system he favoured was based on the use of epoxy and epoxy novolac resins with more than two epoxy groups per mole. The preferred curing agent was a secondary amine or amidine and the advantages were excellent compatibility, low melt viscosity, high reactivity In Europe, a different system was preferred. The curing agents were resinous solids terminated with phenolic hydroxyl groups. In the presence of a suitable accelerator these materials could be used to effect cure of bisphenol-A and bisphenol-F epoxy resins by an advancement process. These have been widely used in both Europe and North America although some of the claims made for their performance have not been justified. Flow additives for corrosion resistant powder coatings need to be chosen carefully. According to the work of de Lange, spreading rate of powder coatings depends on the role of viscosity, surface tension, and stoving schedules while pigment loading and particle size are also contributory factors. Spreading rate and flow is better at high film thicknesses, high surface tension and low viscosity. Young’s equation, however, suggests that maximum wetting of the substrate depends on reducing surface tension. A compromise situation in thick film powder coatings is best achieved by a balance of several additives. Entrapped air and bubbles raise the melt viscosity and a blend of silicone fluids, a wetting agent and an inert resin gives the best combination of flow promoting additives. Polyacrylates which are exclusively favoured in thinner film decorative powder coatings have the disadvantage of retaining a high viscosity at elevated temperatures. The inert resin is often a low viscosity grade polyvinyl butyral that is unaffected by high temperature stoving schedules. Accelerators often do more harm than good due to the difficulty of incorporating small quantities homogeneously at the extrusion stage. Some epoxy resin manufacturers incorporate an accelerator during resin manufacture and this is preferable. Benzoin is widely used as a bubble breaker in decorative polyester based powder coatings but seems to contribute little to air release in thick film corrosion resistant powder coatings. Perhaps this is due to the usual curing technique of applying the powder coating to a preheated substrate so that curing occurs from inside to out, thus allowing greater control over the release of entrapped air. Pigments seem to contribute little benefit to thick film powder coatings and beyond a maximum level of 25% w/w they tend to adversely affect flow. Anti-corrosive pigments and metallic zinc flakes add nothing to the film performance of corrosion resistant powder coatings and often cause a deterioration in long term durability. One essential feature of any selected pigment is complete freedom from moisture. Manufacturing procedures must optimize the essential stages of preblending and extrusion. It is also essential that all extrudate is ground to the correct particle size immediately after extrusion. Even if the comminution stage is left until the end of the batch run, there may be significant performance differences between powder coatings produced at the beginning and end of the production run. A higher than normal particle size distribution is required for the thick film corrosion resistant powder coatings and the presence of fines should be avoided. The above comments relate specifically to those powder coatings that are termed to be functional powder coatings. It is, however, important that chemical resistance and durability is optimized in all of the binder chemistries that are applied to decorative powder products. In many instances, this can be achieved by following some of the above principles, or by the addition of other curatives that will react preferentially to tie up latent polar groups that are liable to hydrolysis during long term exposure to corrosive atmospheres. A case in point is the addition of a few percent of a uretdione to a polyester/epoxy hybrid system to effect a dramatic improvement in salt spray resistance. Corrosion resistant qualities in powder coatings are the province of the binder systems and future improvements will result in new techniques for tailoring novel binder systems. The versatility of the epoxy group should not be ignored. In pipeline applications there is a continual move to higher operating temperatures and this challenge is being met by resins with a higher Tg. Exterior durable decorative systems are concentrated on replacements for TGIC and it seems that hydroxyalkylamides are the favoured alternatives. The speaker suggested that the possibility of formulating super durables with glycolurils should not be ignored. Increased use of acrylics and silicones are also likely to offer positive improvements in overall performance of super durables. New binder systems will benefit from the wider use of inter penetrating networks (IPNs), hyper branched polymers and core-shell structures with the accent on semi-crystalline polymers to enhance the performance of the conventional amorphous resin systems. In the decorative field the trend to finer particles and narrower particle size distributions will improve the durability of thinner film exterior powder coatings, and nano-particle curatives, pigments and extenders will add to powder coating film performance. Paper entitled “Growth of Corrosion Resistant Powder Coatings” by Sid Harris presented at the Institute of Corrosion, Yorkshire Branch Seminar held on Wednesday 4 Jun 2003