The powerful modern toolbox of hybrid Process Mineralogy for flowsheet development uses best practice sampling as one of its tools. In this paper, the three key components of best practice sampling are reviewed with case studies. These three components are:
                        
                           1.
                           Minimum sample mass.
                        
                        
                           2.
                           Rules of unbiassed sampled extraction.
                        
                        
                           3.
                           The safety line.
                        
                     These excellent models and rules are not commonly taught in undergraduate programmes. In this review paper, which is intended as an introductory reference for those practitioners in Process Mineralogy who have not had exposure to the sampling models, simple and practical explanations are presented for reference. It is shown that finer particle size distributions lead to smaller minimum sample mass requirements.
                  While sampling theory allows us to estimate the error involved obtaining a mass of sample for mineralogical analysis it is also useful to account for errors in the process mineralogy measurements themselves. Examples of the confidence intervals on liberation measurements made on high- and low-grade samples are provided to illustrate the importance of sample size—specifically measuring sufficient numbers of particles—in these analyses.Minimum sample mass. Rules of unbiassed sampled extraction. The safety line. The best practice of sampling in mining and metallurgical engineering places the project or operation on a sound platform with reliable data which may be used for business decisions. This best practice works on a basis of the criteria that divide “samples” from ‘specimens”. In his 1979 seminal work on sampling of particulate materials, Gy stated that in most cases where a mining venture failed, the causes can nearly always be traced to unaccountable sampling errors because of the confusion between samples and specimens. He defined these two terms as: “ A part of the lot, often obtained by the reunion of several increments or fractions of the lot, and meant for representing it in further operations. A sample is not just any part of the lot; its extraction must respect certain rules that the theory of sampling intends to establish. The following key rules must be satisfied in order to declare material to be a sample: The mass of dry solids in a sample must be equal to or more than the minimum sample mass, as determined by Gy’s minimum sample mass models, with sufficiently low fundamental variance. Any particle in the lot, of whatever size class, must be able to enter the primary sample with an equal probability of being excluded from the primary sample. In other words, a sample differs from the lot only in mass. It has an identical composition to that of the lot. “ A part of the lot obtained without respecting these (sampling) rules. In short, best practice sampling amounts to three criteria: How much primary sample must be taken How the increments to that primary sample are extracted How the primary sample is crushed and subsampled to a workable mass and size. In a recently published monograph entitled “Process Mineralogy”, numerous chapters describing relevant case studies in the practice of Process Mineralogy are provided ( This paper does not report any new material in the field of sampling. Its purpose is to set out a simple reference using prior published articles for the practitioner of Process Mineralogy, who probably has not had the opportunity of reading and understanding the basics of Gy’s sampling models. Based on the observation of A chapter entitled “Process Control” was written by One of the primary criteria for a sample is the minimum sample mass, or M  M K f In this method, the fundamental variance f The sampling constant is obtained for a particular ore by an experiment in which the particulate material to be characterised is sampled and sized into a series of bound size classes, then weighed and assayed per size class. At the time of taking this sample, the sampling equation is unknown, so it cannot be declared to be a true sample until the testwork is done, the sampling equation becomes known, and the minimum sample mass declared and quantified. The equation for K is deliberately written in a form that is sensitive to variance of the paymetal grade in the sample. The form for the sampling constant K is shown in Equation  M  M v  M  tonne of ore, or percent metal in ore a d f g The size range factor is the ratio between the d Note that all of these equations use the centimetre gramme second system of units (cgs). In the case of metallurgical plant process streams, which have undergone comminution and classification to liberate the valuable mineral(s), Gy’s fifty-piece experiment has to be modified in order to obtain estimates of variance and thus a sampling equation. In this modification, the metallurgical process stream sample tested is screened over an appropriate set of test sieves into bound size classes, then each size class weighed, assayed, and measured for dry solids density. Each size class is then regarded as a “piece” in the experiment. The following is a summary of the typical sample extraction rules recommended by Pierre Gy in his 1979 publication: For cross-stream sample cutters, which extract primary samples of slurry from a continuously flowing (process) slurry stream, these rules are: The sample cutter must be non-restrictive and self-cleaning, discharge completely. The geometry of the cutter opening must be such that the cutting time at each point in the stream must be equal. For linear-path cutters, the cutter edges must be parallel, while for cutters travelling in an arc or circle (e.g. Vezin cutters) the cutters must be radial. No materials other than the sample must be allowed to enter the cutter, e.g. dust or slurry must be prevented from accumulating in the cutter when in the parked position. The cutter must intersect the stream in a plane normal to the trajectory of the stream. The cutter must travel through the stream at a uniform speed. In this regard electrically-driven cutters are best. The cutter aperture must be not less than three times the nominal topsize of the stream being sampled, with a minimum size of 10 mm for slurries for cases where the topsize is less than 3mm. The cutter must have sufficient capacity to accommodate the increment mass at the maximum flowrate of the stream. For slurries, the loss of sample material due to dribbling is to be avoided. The maximum cutter speed should not exceed 0.6 metres/s. This rule is taken from The mass of dry solids in a sample must be equal to or more than the minimum sample mass, as determined by Gy’s minimum sample mass models. The increments taken into that sample must be taken independently. The general safety line proposed by  M d The safety line is a log-log plot of sample topsize in mm against sample mass in kg. The scales cover mass from 1000 Note that the coefficient of 125,000 is the general value recommended by Gy. In cases where precious metals are involved, he recommends a value of 250,000. One of the rules of unbiased sample extraction is that the increments taken cannot be autocorrelated, i.e. the increments are independent of each other. Because the ore mined in a 3-dimensional space in a stope or opencast bench is correlated (that is how the geostatisticians predict the metal grade of unsampled ore), as the ore is mined and delivered to the mill, the full correlation that existed at the mining face reduces to a residual correlation that must be acknowledged and managed in the sampling arrangements. This will affect the timing of the increments taken by a cross-stream sample cutter. The semivariance of the paymetal is estimated by the semivariogram, and uses Eq.  N g g γ(t) = the semivariance A schematic of the semivariogram is shown in From t To construct a semivariogram for a flowing pulp stream, a series of timed samples is taken across a 60-min period at 1-min intervals. Each of the samples is dewatered and prepared for assay, e.g. % Cu. These assays are the values of g Variations to the model shown in A short-range term, mainly random, discontinuous at every instant, reflecting the random nature of constitution heterogeneity within one increment. A long-range term, nonrandom, mainly continuous, representing trends between units. A cyclic term, continuous, such as cycles introduced by reclaiming operations or corrective actions to maintain parameters between two known limits. Tailings streams commonly demonstrate this feature because of the circulating load behaviour in the cleaner circuit. Case study 2 provides an actual example of a semivariogram using the percent mass retained in the topsize of a particle size distribution of pelletised iron ore. While sampling theory provides the means to estimate the error involved in taking a mass of particulate material as a sample for mineralogical analysis, other techniques can be applied to estimate the error present in the process mineralogy measurements themselves. The choice of method applied to estimate the error depends on the type of data being collected by the process mineralogist. Some of the earliest methods for assessing measurement errors in mineralogical measurements were developed by The more widespread use of automated mineralogy systems over the last 20   Y N N Case study 3 below provides an example of the application of the method of Leigh et al. for high grade and low grade samples. The reader is cautioned that the estimates arising from Leigh’s method are approximate and not exact. A crushed ball mill feed stream of Merensky ore was sampled and sized into size classes ( A cumulative particle size distribution from these data ( From the rest of the data, the parameters for the sampling constant formula are as follows: where  M v  M  a d g To obtain M, we sum each ith M For For the size fraction volume v In like manner, the size class −6.7 A summary of these calculations is shown in Thus the sampling constant K For an 8% fundamental variance, the minimum samples mass resolves to 6976 The next problem is how to reduce this primary sample mass of 6.976 kg to a smaller mass for analysis and mineralogical measurement, as well as flotation testing. Here the Safety Line plays a key role ( A semivariogram was constructed for an iron ore pellets in a pelletising plant in Sweden. In this case, the particle size distribution of the stream is the measure of interest in this variographic characterisation. The particle size class 12.5–16.0 The entire data set is first analysed with a data spacing of 1 unit using 5 to estimate the semivariance for a spacing of 1 time unit (26 The values of semivariance are plotted on the y-axis, and the lag (time spacing between data points) on the x-axis. The semivariogram for pellet size 12.5–16 The measurement system for iron ore pellet size is an automated linear cross stream sampler collecting primary increments every ten minutes. The primary increments are combined into 30–60 The intercept to the semivariance axis for a zero spacing is estimated at 0.75, so the measurements of topsize have an error of (0.75/4.0) or 18% approximately. The liberation distribution of chalcopyrite has been measured in a concentrate and tailings streams and to provide the end-user of the data with information on the errors present in the data confidence intervals have been calculated using the analytical approach of The cumulative liberation distributions of the two streams are shown in It is recommended that, as part of some further work, a team plan an integrated study using these models so that additive properties can be harnessed and used to assess the cumulative error in the liberation measurement, starting from minimum sample mass, then the semivariogram, and ultimately the liberation measurements. That way, the true error levels in this measurement will be seen. This paper offers a short review and three case studies on the subject of sampling ore and the associated implications for microscopic measurement of liberation of minerals. With the common use of modern automated scanning electron platforms to measure liberation, it is appropriate to use best practice sampling to present the sample for mineralogical characterisation, as well as to declare the associated confidence limits of these measurements. The authors would like to acknowledge Professor Tim Napier-Munn, University of Queensland, for his helpful suggestions on the explanation of the size range factor g, and Dr. Isobel Clark, Geostokos Ltd., for her useful lectures and tutorials on the semivariogram. The management of LKAB are acknowledged for their kind permission to use their data for the case study on the semivariogram. The journal reviewers are to be thanked for their detailed and helpful remarks.