Flotation of pure minerals was performed to characterize the conditions for separation of silicates (palygorskite, quartz, orthoclase, albite, biotite, and muscovite) and Ca-bearing minerals (calcite, apatite and gypsum). These minerals constitute a large portion of gangue in some low-grade ores of industrial and rare metals (such as rare earth element REE, uranium, tantalum and niobium). The costs associated with pyro- and hydrometallurgical-processing of low-grade ores of strategic REE are prohibitively high due to huge consumptions of energy and reagents. Froth flotation can be applied to beneficiate the ores prior to application of extractive processes. Batch experiments were performed in order to generate scientific knowledge about zeta potentials and flotation characteristics of pure silicates and Ca-bearing minerals. The paper discusses the effects of mixing cationic collectors (amines) with non ionic reagents on the selective flotation of silicates and Ca-bearing minerals. The most important information from this study is about selective flotation of palygorskite from a family of silicates using a mixture of primary amine (Cataflot, 5×10−5
                     M) and non-ionic reagent (PX4826, 5×10−5
                     M) at pH 8. Also, the paper discusses a strategy for reducing the consumption of amine collectors by adding non ionic reagents. Synergistic effects of primary amine and non-ionic reagent in terms of calcite and apatite recoveries by flotation at pH 8 were observed.Globally, there is an abundance of low grade ores containing industrial and strategic rare metal minerals. Apart from environmental concerns, the major challenges associated with exploitation of low grade ores are about finding economically feasible processes for reducing the mass of gangue minerals. Low grade ores are usually associated with more or less of the following gangue minerals: silicates (including aluminosilicates and phyllosilicates), Ca-bearing minerals and phosphates. Direct pyro- and hydro-metallurgical processes cannot be applied to treat ores containing large amounts of these gangue minerals.  In the case of secondary uranium or rare metal ores, the host minerals are highly disseminated in sedimentary deposits ( In some rare metal low grade ore, the economical recoverable mineral is preferentially associated with some silicates as well palygorskite which constitute gangue mineral. Although flotation has been applied to separate silicates from Ca-bearing minerals using amine collectors, there is very scanty information on selective separation of palygorskite from silicates. Amines are known to be effective flotation reagents for silicates in all pH range ( The synergistic effects of non-ionic reagents for non-sulphide ores flotation both with amine collectors for silicates and anionic collectors for Ca-bearing minerals, were reported by Concerning the further application of non-ionic reagents for silicate recovery by flotation, it has been shown spectroscopically that coadsorption of non ionic collectors with amines onto the surfaces of quartz and albite leads to the formation of closely packed surface layers of organic molecules which renders the particles readily floatable. The highest flotation recovery was obtained when the alkyl chain length of amine and alcohol were the same ( In this study, attempts were made to enhance the flotation recovery and yield of silicates in the presence of Ca-bearing minerals and to separate selectively tectosilicates (quartz, feldspars) from phyllosilicates (palygorskite, biotite and muscovite). Firstly, the effects of mixing non ionic and cationic collectors on the flotation of several silicates were performed. Secondly, the flotation tests were repeated for Ca-bearing minerals separately. The combination of cationic collectors with low polarity non-ionic reagents was considered in this work to enhance the separation efficiency between the minerals of same mineral family (silicate–silicate). The results of flotation behaviour of silicates and calcium bearing minerals are presented in this paper. Pure minerals were used to evaluate the conditions for floatability between the individual minerals. The sources of the pure minerals were as follows: palygorskite from South Africa, Matutu; quartz from Brazil, Corinto; orthoclase from China; albite from Turkey, Yurumtaş, Muğla province; biotite from France, Razès; muscovite from France, Croizant; calcite from France, Provence; apatite from Madagascar, Fort Dauphin, Tuléar province and gypsum from Morocco, Idharen, Central Atlas. Pure minerals were crushed in a laboratory ceramic ring mill, dry and wet sieved to obtain −100 The mineral size fraction was determined by wet sieving. A laser sizer (HELOS BF) before 1 The purity of minerals samples was determined by means of XRD, IR and ICP-MS. XRD analysis were carried out on D8 Advance Bruker. The diffractometer functions in optimal conditions analysis with 35 The BET specific surface area of pure minerals (size range between 20 and 100 To determine impurities in mineral samples, chemical analysis were carried out by using inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrophotometer (ICP-MS). Before ICP-MS analysis, all pure minerals were grinded in agate mortar (−10 The The main properties of palygorskite are high specific surface area, usually, in the range 125 Comparative to the binocular pictures of palygorskite reported in Thus, the BET specific surface measured using nitrogen at 77 The estimated error for surface specific determination method was significant for quartz, biotite, muscovite, palygorskite, calcite, apatite and gypsum due to the wide size range. Quartz, albite, calcite and gypsum showed a high degree of purity. However, biotite contained 2076 Atom adsorption analysis using a Perkin Elmer Analyst 800 spectrometer were used to determine the Mg The electrophoretic mobility measurements were carried out by using the Zetaphoremeter IV instrument. The Smoluchowski equation, modified by Henry ( For the zeta potential measurements, 1 The studied collectors were 98% pure ether mono amine (PX4815, C-12 rich), ether diamine (PX 4817, C-10 rich), non ionic reagent (PX4826, C-10 rich) and a commercial primary amine (Cataflot, C-18 rich) all supplied by Ceca. For pure mineral sample flotation tests, the amines were prepared in the form of 5 Flotation tests using pure minerals were performed in a MINIMET rotor–stator apparatus with a 180 All products obtained were decanted and dried in an oven at 30 The surface charge of minerals in solution correlates well with the potential, which is generated in the electrical double layer of a surface. At the point of zero surface charge or iso-electric point (pH For hydrous oxides (Si–O or Al–O or Mg–O), protons and hydroxyl ions are the potential determining ions (PDI) ( The potential surface reactions (association and dissociation) where the metalloid central ion is Si, Al or Mg are listed as follows: The adsorption of OH For oxide minerals, the surface potential can be estimated from the following equation: The surface charge becomes more negative with the increase of OH  According to Since the surface charge of silicates was the same (negative), selective flotation of one silicate over the other cannot be achieved with cationic type of collectors used alone. However, Therefore, the potential of applying mixtures of amine and non-ionic collectors to separate silicates is a subject worth exploring further. Many researchers have studied the electrokinetic properties of Ca-bearing minerals. In the case of the research by The dissolution of carbonates can be described by three parallel reactions which occur at the solid/water interface ( According to the results obtained by previous researchers (  As in Palygorskite is a hydrated magnesium aluminium silicate (  The release of Si The influence of sodium nitrate concentration on Si To avoid dissolution of palygorskite and the possible adsorption of Mg There is very scanty information from literature on selective flotation of palygorskite from silicates. The BET specific surface area of palygorskite particles in the size range −100 According to  Figs. Effective separation of silicates from palygorskite was achieved with Cataflot collector and other cationic reagent. Moreover, a selective separation between phyllosilicates and tectosilicates was determined using 10 According to Addition of a non ionic reagent to Cataflot modifies the attachment of micas particles on the bubbles and leads to improved selectivity between all silicates and palygorskite. Moreover the presence of non-ionic reagent lowered the required dosage of Cataflot at pH 8 ( The reason for achieving better flotation results with amine–alcohol mixtures was attributed to the formation of a more packed layers of collector molecules on the surface of silicates which enhances their hydrophobicity and hence flotation. The improved selectivity between phyllosilicates and tectosilicates was not observed by using ethermonoamine as collector ( In terms of reagent concentration and pH, separation of all silicates from palygorskite was achieved at pH 8 with 5 The mineral porosity determines the adsorption behaviour of the flotation reagent and then the reagent consumption. Thus, we can explain because of the palygorskite porosity, the very low recovery of palygorskite using 5 Addition of alcohol to amine collectors allowed the concentration of amines to be reduced by tenfold.  It is clear that non ionic reagent enhanced the flotation of biotite and muscovite by Cataflot. In fact, the concentration of amine required to achieve 95% recovery of biotite and muscovite minerals decreased significantly in the presence of non ionic reagent. Mechanisms of adsorption of a mixture of cationic reagent and non ionic reagent onto these phyllosilicates, is not well known at this moment. However, the mechanism can be similar to the amine–alcohol adsorption on the Fe-bearing amphiboles reported by Ca-bearing mineral and silicates (aluminosilicates and phyllosilicates) constitute gangue mineral of some rare metal low grade ores. The recoverable mineral is sometimes mainly associated with silicates. The Ca-bearing minerals flotation behaviour study has been performed using amine, mixture of amine and non ionic reagent and fatty acid in order to separate Ca-bearing mineral from silicates. Many researchers have reported on flotation of Ca-bearing minerals using amine and oleic acid collectors (  At pH 8, amine will have two forms: ionic (  The recovery of gypsum (62%) with Cataflot was the same with or without an alcohol. However, results showed that using a mixture of Cataflot with non ionic reagent (5 However, the surface hydrophobicity of calcite was enhanced due to the co-adsorption of oleate and alcohol on the surface as shown the infrared spectroscopies results ( A selective separation between apatite and calcite and gypsum was determined with ether monoamine and ether diamine in absence or presence of non ionic reagent. The effect of non ionic reagents on the performance of ether monoamine or ether diamine collectors towards flotation of Ca-bearing minerals was not observed. According to In literature, several authors have reported on selective flotation of Ca-bearing minerals from silicates using anionic collectors. Calcite and gypsum carry positive charges at pH values below 10. Therefore, anionic collectors are effective with regards to separation of calcite and gypsum from silicates in the absence of a depressant.  Flotation tests were performed on Ca-bearing minerals using sodium oleate reagent at pH 8. Results showed that 80% of calcites, 92% of apatite and 80% of gypsum were directly floated using 10 The synergistic effect of mixed collectors (fatty acid and non ionic reagents) on the floatability of Ca-bearing minerals has been studied extensively ( Selective flotation of palygorskite from a family of silicates was established using a mixture of Cataflot (cationic reagent) and PX4826 (non ionic reagent) in equal concentrations (5 At pH 8, palygorskite was effectively separated from Ca-bearing minerals (calcite, apatite, gypsum) by floating with 10