Background
                  Anatomic surgical reduction of intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus is important to achieve the best long-term outcomes and prevent post-traumatic arthritis. In this study we compared the radiographic reduction using the trochleocapitellar index. We also correlated the trochleocapitellar index to the functional outcomes next to the comparison of the triceps brachii lifting approach and olecranon osteotomy approach, 2 common approaches for distal humeral fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  From January 2006 to June 2016, patients with elbow fractures were registered in 4 centers. The trochleocapitellar index, a ratio between the angle of the capitellum and the trochlea to the midline of the distal humerus on anterior-posterior radiographs, was calculated for included patients. Functional outcomes were measured using the Oxford Elbow Score and the Mayo Elbow Performance Score. Bone healing was measured using radiographic union scoring.
               
                  Results
                  There were 86 patients enrolled: 46 in the olecranon osteotomy group and 40 in the triceps lifting group. Functional outcomes and bone healing did not differ between the approaches. Functional results had a medium correlation with the trochleocapitellar index, which did not differ between the 2 approaches (olecranon osteotomy group, κ = 0.56; triceps lifting group, κ = 0.57; P = .7932).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The trochleocapitellar index has a moderate predictive value on the functional results after 12 months after open reduction and internal fixation of intra-articular distal humeral factures. There is no difference in reduction, as measured by trochlear index and functional outcome scores, between the olecranon osteotomy approach and the triceps brachii lifting approach groups.Anatomic surgical reduction of intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus is important to achieve the best long-term outcomes and prevent post-traumatic arthritis. Postoperative radiographs are used to evaluate the reduction of fracture elements and the position of the fixation material. This study compared the radiographic reduction and alignment after surgery using the TCI. We also correlated the TCI to the functional outcomes of the triceps brachii lifting approach (TLA) compared with the olecranon osteotomy approach (OOA), 2 commonly used approaches for distal humeral fractures. From January 2006 to June 2016, patients with elbow fractures were registered in 4 elbow Level I trauma centers: Vito Fazzi Hospital, Lecce, Italy; Elbow Unit of Rizzoli Orthopedic Institute, Bologna, Italy; Santa Maria della Misericordia, Perugia, Italy; and Upper Limb Unit, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Amphia Hospital, Breda, The Netherlands. From these fractures, we included patients with distal humeral fractures for this retrospective comparative case study after using the following exclusion criteria: polytrauma, shaft extension of comminution, previous upper limb trauma, bilateral elbow injuries, nerve injuries, vascular injuries, extra-articular fracture type, partially articular fracture type, age younger than 18 years or older than 60 years, hematologic or oncologic pathology, bone metabolism disease, elbow osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid disease. All fractures were classified according to the AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen) classification for distal humeral fractures. The TCI was calculated using the method described by Gorelick et al. The OOA was performed using a V-shaped chevron osteotomy of the olecranon converging towards distal, after a posterior incision and dissection up to the proximal ulna with protection of the ulnar nerve. This approach provides a wide exposure of the articular surface of the distal humerus, facilitating reduction and internal fixation of complex intra-articular fractures. The fixation was performed with 2 plates and screws in orthogonal or parallel configuration. All olecranon osteotomies were fixated using olecranon plates. The TLA entailed a posterior incision, dissection up to the triceps brachii, and exposure and protection of the ulnar nerve. The triceps muscle was detached off the proximal ulna in a V-shape pointing distally and lifted. We then split the muscle from distal to proximal, enabling a view of the articular surface. Fixation was performed with 2 plates and screws in orthogonal or parallel configuration. The triceps was reattached at its insertion with transosseous Monocryl (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) sutures to minimize local reaction on the sutures. Both groups underwent the same rehabilitation protocol (see “Rehabilitation protocol” in the Supplementary Appendix). To study the bone healing on radiographs, we used the Non-Union Scoring System (NUSS) in retrospective mode. Descriptive statistics summarized the characteristics of the study group and subgroups, including means and standard deviations of all continuous variables. We used the Of 1026 elbow fractures that were registered, 86 patients enrolled in this study from 3 trauma centers in Italy. The OOA group consisted of 46 patients, and the TLA group consisted of 40 patients. Patient characteristics are reported in The average duration of surgery was 96 minutes in the OOA group and 97 minutes in the TLA group, showing no statistical difference. The plate fixation of OOA was parallel in 23 patients and orthogonal in 23 patients, and plate fixation of TLA was parallel in 20 patients and orthogonal in 20 patients. All fractures in both groups healed, and no nonunions of the olecranon osteotomy were seen. The NUSS in the OOA group was 35 points for both groups. Postoperative outcomes are reported in The bone healing was measured using radiographic union scoring at 97 days in both groups ( At 12 months after surgery, the arc of flexion-extension motion averaged 106° in the OOA group and 112° in the TLA group ( The quality of life and elbow function before trauma, measured using the MEPS, was 95 in the OOA group (range, 90-100) and 95 (range, 90-100) in the TLA group. At 12 months after the surgery, MEPS was 81 (range, 55-100) in the OOA group and 88 (range, 55-100) in the TLA group ( The subjective quality of life and elbow function before the trauma, measured using the OES, was 96 (range, 90-100) in the OOA group and 97 (range, 92-100) in the TLA group ( Functional results had a medium correlation with the TCI, which did not differ between the OOA group (κ = 0.56) and TLA group (κ = 0.57; The aim of this study was to determine the prognostic value of the TCI for outcomes after open reduction and internal fixation of distal intra-articular humeral fractures. We found a positive relation between the TCI and the functional outcomes after surgical fixation of the distal humeral fractures and no differences between the 2 surgical approaches. The TCI is a new method to determine the reduction of distal humeral fractures. Improper reduction may lead to malrotation, nonunion and long-term problems such as ligamentous insufficiency or osteoarthritis. Patients in our study underwent surgery by the OOA or the TLA. The choice of approach was by the surgeon's preference in each case. We use both approaches according to the patient's activity level, comorbidities, and fracture-specific needs. Both approaches have their own specific pitfalls, yet the functional outcomes are comparable. Concerning the internal fixation, we used the most suitable method for each patient, according to the surgeon's experience and fracture pattern. This resulted in comparably large groups for orthogonal or parallel plating. In the literature, the discussion on which method of plating is best is still unanswered, with good biomechanical properties found for both methods. We provided a standardized physiotherapy schedule for all patients, disregarding the approach used. To avoid excessive stress on the fixated fracture and the olecranon osteotomy or repaired triceps brachii tendon, all patients received an elbow cast for the first 3 weeks. Then, range of motion was restored by intensive physiotherapy. We used a hinged elbow brace because it can be set to limits of elbow extension, so the patients cannot overtake the physiotherapy schedule during the first few weeks, when gradual extension is practiced. We believe use of a hinged elbow brace is beneficial because it provides safe regaining of proprioception and muscle strength, even in high-demand patients even after complete triceps brachii tendon repair. Our study has several limitations. The first is the lack of other studies on the normal value and deviation of the TCI in healthy adults and use of the TCI in the case of fractures of the distal humerus. In children, fractures of the distal humerus are most often treated with percutaneous pins rather than open reduction and internal fixation. The second limitation is our limited sample size. A sole distal humeral fracture was not seen frequently. The research was performed at large trauma centers; thus, many other eligible patients were excluded because of the polytrauma exclusion criterion. This, however, reduced a source of bias, because no concomitant injuries had to be treated or rehabilitated. Third, the measurements and interventions were performed without randomization of the researcher and surgeon to the experimental groups, which has a potential for bias. We therefore used a uniform physiotherapy rehabilitation schedule and a standardized outpatient clinic schedule. Fourth, we measured subjective scores in addition to objective scores. The subjective scores, however, might give a better view of the patient's expectations; therefore, objective and subjective scores both are necessary to evaluate rehabilitation. The TCI has a moderate predictive value on the functional results after 12 months after open reduction and internal fixation of intra-articular distal humeral factures. Because it is a simple tool to evaluate the position of the capitellum and trochlea to the humeral axis, we consider the index as being useful in assessing reduction quality on postoperative radiographs. The OOA approach or the TLA approach do not have an effect on the reduction or functional outcomes. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article: