Nepheline syenite is an igneous rock, which contains around 5.4% of potassium oxide (K2O), but finely dispersed and, locked in the host matrix. The characterization studies reveal the presence of orthoclase, nepheline and biotite as the major potassium bearing mineral phases. The present study aims at the extraction of potash values through microwave heating for its possible application as fertilizer. The microwave assisted roasting studies of nepheline syenite have been carried out and optimized using a statistical approach based on Taguchi design. It is possible to extract around 88% K2O values at 900W microwave power and 6min of roasting time using 20% charcoal and 50% calcium chloride. Charcoal is used as a microwave absorbing material that raises its temperature in a much lesser time, while calcium chloride for the favorable formation of KCl. The transformation of different mineral phases of nepheline syenite is characterized using XRD, and SEM showing the formation of a soluble potassium bearing phase (Sylvite) along with calcium aluminum silicate.The rising demand of potash for the growth of plants, human and animal life is inevitable Nepheline syenite is a feldspathic and plutonic igneous rock. It is primarily made up of nepheline (Na,K)AlSiO Microwave energy based on non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation with frequencies in the range of 0.3–300 Besides grinding, microwave heating also finds some broad application in carbothermic reduction processes of metal oxides. It offers faster heating rate, uniform heat distribution, and preferential reduction that start from the core to the surface as compared to the reverse direction in conventional heating. Therefore, microwave methods are reported as an efficient alternative for the reduction of metal oxides Considering the above mentioned applications of microwave energy, an attempt has been made to extract potassium recovery from nepheline syenite by using microwave assisted heating technique. The purpose of using microwave in place of the conventional roasting is because of its ability to offer faster kinetics through rapid heating. To the best of our knowledge, this methodology has not been applied to optimize the potash extraction from nepheline syenite till date. Recently, we have reported the extraction of potash values from nepheline syenite by CaCl Nepheline syenite sample was collected from one of the mines in Odisha, India. The size reduction of the sample was carried out by using stage crushing with laboratory jaw crusher and roll crusher. The laboratory jaw crusher was supplied by Eastman Crushers Company (P) Ltd, Kolkata India, where as the roll crusher from Rajco Science and Engineering product, New Delhi, India was used in the crushing studies. The size analysis of the crushed products was carried out by standard sieves down to 100 The iron, alumina and silica content of the ore were determined by wet chemical methods, whereas the elemental analysis of potassium, sodium and calcium were done by a Systronic flame photometer (model 128μc). The finely ground dried sample (∼1 The morphological appearance of nepheline syenite sample was investigated by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the mineralogical phases were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies. The JEOL JSM 6510 scanning electron microscope was used to analyze the surface morphology of nepheline syenite and the microwave roasted product at 1500 times magnification. After surface cleaning with absolute ethyl alcohol, the nepheline syenite samples were dried in air. The samples were sputter-coated with a layer of gold prior to the SEM studies. The XRD studies of the samples were carried out using the model, Rigaku Ultima IV, X-ray diffractometer at Co Kα radiation. The diffractograms were recorded from 10° to 80° with a scan speed of 30 Microscopic studies along with XRD data on the nepheline syenite sample indicated the presence of albite, anorthite, microcline, nepheline and biotite as the major phases. The iron content in the sample, as indicated in The experiments were carried out using a 2650 The experiments were carried out using the Taguchi statistical design. This method offers a systematic approach to optimize the process performance with proper screening of factors and selection of the optimum levels. The Taguchi experiments are designed in the form of orthogonal arrays, and the whole parameter space is studied by conducting minimum number of experiments L Taguchi analysis utilizes the signal to noise ( The nepheline syenite sample was ground to different sizes in order to study the effect of particle size on potassium recovery. The In order to optimize the conditions for the recovery of potassium values from nepheline syenite, experiments were conducted as per the L The results as given in Though the contour plots gave an overall idea of the regions where maximum recovery is obtainable, the effects of individual factors were determined based on the Microscopic studies using stereomicroscope and scanning electron microscope (SEM) were conducted to delineate the nature of nepheline syenite and the significant changes that may occur due to microwave roasting. X-ray diffraction studies were carried out for the feed, microwave roasted and leach residue samples. The XRD pattern of the feed samples shown in  The mineral phases associated with nepheline syenite and temperature rise due to microwave treatment is shown in In the present experimental conditions, CaCl The stability of any molecule or compound is strongly affected by the electro-negativity difference between the associated elements. Out of all possible chlorides that may form during the roasting process (KCl, NaCl, AlCl Considering the lattice energy, it is indicated that the formation of NaCl is a little more favorable than KCl. However, due to the poor replaceability factor of Ca Feed sample subjected to roasting with calcium chloride and charcoal was analyzed under SEM, and the photomicrographs are shown in The photograph of the feed mixture (ore, calcium chloride and activated charcoal) and roasted product is shown in Nepheline syenite rock containing around 5.4% K The authors are thankful to the Director, CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar for his kind consent to publish this paper. We are also thankful to the