Geopolymers are similar to zeolites in chemical composition, but they reveal an amorphous microstructure. They form by the co-polymerisation of individual alumino and silicate species, which originate from the dissolution of silicon and aluminium containing source materials at a high pH in the presence of soluble alkali metal silicates. It has been shown before that geopolymerisation can transform a wide range of waste alumino-silicate materials into building and mining materials with excellent chemical and physical properties, such as fire and acid resistance. The geopolymerisation of 15 natural Al–Si minerals has been investigated in this paper with the aim to determine the effect of mineral properties on the compressive strength of the synthesised geopolymer. All these Al–Si minerals are to some degree soluble in concentrated alkaline solution, with in general a higher extent of dissolution in NaOH than in KOH medium. Statistical analysis revealed that framework silicates show a higher extent of dissolution in alkaline solution than the chain, sheet and ring structures. In general, minerals with a higher extent of dissolution demonstrate better compressive strength after geopolymerisation. The use of KOH instead of NaOH favours the geopolymerisation in the case of all 15 minerals. Stilbite, when conditioned in KOH solution, gives the geopolymer with the highest compressive strength (i.e., 18 MPa). It is proposed that the mechanism of mineral dissolution as well as the mechanism of geopolymerisation can be explained by ion-pair theory. This study shows that a wide range of natural Al–Si minerals could serve as potential source materials for the synthesis of geopolymers.Since 1978, Joseph Davidovits has developed amorphous to semi-crystalline three-dimensional alumino-silicate materials, which he called “geopolymers” (mineral polymers resulting from geochemistry) ( The above two reaction paths indicate that any Si–Al materials might become sources of geopolymerisation ( It is well known that geopolymers possess excellent mechanical properties, fire resistance, and acid resistance ( The primary aim of this paper is to demonstrate that a wide range of Al–Si minerals could form geopolymers. Secondly, an attempt is made to relate the composition, physical properties, mineralogy and paragenesis of these minerals to the compressive strengths of the final synthesised matrices. A mechanism of geopolymerisation will also be proposed. Sixteen natural Al–Si minerals — which cover the ring, chain, sheet, and framework crystal structure groups, as well as the garnet, mica, clay, feldspar, sodalite, and zeolite mineral groups — were investigated. It will be shown that all these minerals, except hydroxyapophyllite, produced acceptable matrices. Sixteen natural Al–Si minerals were bought from “Geological Specimen Supplies”, Turramurra, NSW, Australia and were reduced in size and sieved to −212 μm. The approximate formula for each mineral is given in The extent of dissolution of the 16 minerals in alkaline medium was determined by mixing 0.50±0.002 g of each mineral with 20 ml of alkaline solution (2, 5, and 10 N of NaOH or KOH) at room temperature for 5 h using a magnetic stirrer. After filtration the solution part was diluted to 0.2 N alkaline concentration and neutralised by 36% HCl. A Perkin Elmer 3000 Inductively Coupled Plasma was used to analyse the filtered solutions, with scandium being used as an internal standard. In real geopolymeric reactions, the mass ratio of alumino-silicate powder to alkaline solution is ≈3.0, which causes the alkaline solution to form a thick gel instantaneously upon mixing with the minerals. At that stage the dissolution reaction proceeds simultaneously with the gel formation and polycondensation (setting) reactions, so that the dissolution reaction cannot be isolated. Since the gel phase cannot be separated or analysed in situ, a dissolution procedure with lower solid/solution ratio has been chosen to investigate the dissolution behaviour of minerals. At 10 N NaOH, it becomes impractical to use filtration as a means of separating the dissolving solids from the alkaline solution at solid/solution ratios higher than 0.25. Moreover, in both NaOH and KOH solutions, it was found that the concentration of Al or Si after a certain time was linearly dependent on the solid/solution ratio, provided that sufficient excess alkali was present. Consequently, the extent of dissolution of the minerals at low solid/solution ratios could be used to predict their performance at high solid/solution ratios. In order to achieve homogeneously mixed geopolymers and in view of the restricted availability of some mineral samples, very small samples were prepared. In all tests, 10.0 g of mineral and 5.0 g of kaolinite were dry mixed for 10 min, followed by the addition of 0.9 g of sodium silicate solution (with [Si]=0.74 M) and 5.0 ml of 10 N KOH or NaOH solution, followed by a further 2 min of mixing by hand. The resulting slurry was then transferred to steel moulds measuring 20×20×20 mm, which was followed by a gel setting and hardening stage at 35°C for 72 h. After being analysed by XRD to ensure that all samples were dried, the resulting compressive strength of each geopolymer was tested on a Tinius Tolsen compressive testing machine. It should be noted that such small samples are well below the minimum required in standard testing specifications, so that the obtained MPa values should not be interpreted in absolute but rather in relative terms. It should also be realised that such compressive strengths could be substantially higher when the reacting minerals occur in combination with filling or aggregate material of a suitable particle size distribution, similar to what happens in concrete. The concentration of the silicate solution used in this research was [Si]=0.74 M. The aim of adding sodium silicate solution was to enhance the formation of geopolymer precursors upon contact between a mineral and the solution. In view of the different extents of dissolution displayed by the various minerals, it is necessary to optimise the concentration of the sodium silicate solution in each case, as this concentration affects the properties of the ultimate geopolymer. Owing to the limited supply of mineral samples, such an optimisation was conducted only for stilbite by keeping all other conditions constant and using sodium silicate concentrations ranging from [Si]=0.72 to 3.7 M. It was found that [Si]=0.74 M, yielded optimal compressive strengths for both NaOH and KOH conditions in the case of stilbite. This concentration was then applied in the case of all other minerals without further optimisation. The concentration of sodium silicate used by other researchers ranges from [Si]=0.72 to 3.96 M ( Kaolinite and metakaolinite are relatively inexpensive alumino-silicates which have been used in most previous studies on geopolymerisation ( The XRF analyses of 16 natural Al–Si minerals are listed in The main metallic elements contained in the 16 natural minerals are Fe, Ca, Mg, K, and Na. There are nine minerals — almandine, grossular, kyanite, pumpellyite, spodumene, augite, illite, heulandite, and anorthite — that contain some iron. Among them, almandine pumpellyite, and augite contain iron in their chemical formula, while the others contained iron by paragenesis. It is known in the cement industry that Fe Ten minerals — grossular, andalusite, pumpellyite, augite, celsian, sodalite, hydroxyapophyllite, stilbite, heulandite, and anorthite — contain calcium with the CaO content varying from 2.25 wt.% in heulandite to 25.41 wt.% in grossular. The calcium content is an important factor affecting the quick setting and final strength in concrete ( Six minerals — andalusite, kyanite, spodumene, lepidolite, illite and hydroxyapophyllite — show a substantial content of K The XRD patterns of the minerals in The behaviour of alumino-silicate materials in alkaline solution has been researched extensively ( As stated before, the process of geopolymerisation starts with the dissolution of Al and Si from Al–Si materials in alkaline solution as hydrated reaction products with NaOH or KOH, hence forming the [M  Minerals have a higher extent of dissolution with increasing concentrations of alkaline solution. Minerals show a higher extent of dissolution in the NaOH than in the KOH solution, except for sodalite. The concentrations of Si are higher than the corresponding Al, which could be caused partly by the higher content of Si than Al in the minerals, but also by the higher intrinsic extent of dissolution of Si than Al. The correlation coefficient between the extents of dissolution of Al and Si is 0.93. Therefore, Si and Al appear to have synchro-dissolution behaviour in alkaline solution, which means that Si and Al could dissolve from the mineral surface in some linked form. Minerals with framework structure possess a higher extent of dissolution than di-, ortho-, ring, chain, and sheet structures in both NaOH and KOH solutions. Normally, the possible chemical process for the dissolution of Al–Si minerals and silicates under strongly alkaline conditions can be expressed as the following reaction schemes ( As the concentrations of Al and Si in the present study are quite low, mainly these 11 reactions occurred ( From the 11 reactions given above, it can be seen that increasing the concentration of alkaline solution favours all reactions (3) to (9) shifting to the right hand side. Reactions (6) to (13) suggest that the alkali-metal cation affects the extent of dissolution of an alumino-silicate. As Na A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on the extent of dissolution data in  It can be expected that the compressive strength developed after geopolymerisation is a highly non-linear function of numerous variables. In order to identify such variables and to quantify the relative importance of these variables, a linear multi-variable regression analysis was performed using the following variables: (a) The %SiO Evidently, factors such as the %CaO, %K  In geopolymerisation, the weight ratio of alumino-silicate powder to alkaline solution is very high, usually between 3.0 and 5.5 (  With the shorter setting and hardening time, geopolymers are formed with tightly packed polycrystalline structure so as to give better mechanical properties than zeolite which have lower density and cage-like crystalline structure. By taking these differences between zeolites and geopolymers into account the following reaction scheme is proposed for the polycondensation process of geopolymerisation from minerals: In reactions (15) and (16), the amount of Al–Si material(s) used depends on the particle size, the extent of dissolution of Al–Si materials and the concentration of the alkaline solution. With finer particle sizes (<0.5 μm) and hence higher extent of dissolution, comparatively lower ratios of alumino-silicate powder/alkaline solution could be used, as most alumino-silicate particles could then be dissolved as a gel. In most cases, however, alumino-silicate particles cannot be converted totally from the solid phase to the gel phase. Undissolved alumino-silicate solids contained in a geopolymer can behave as reinforcement of the matrix ( The formation of [M The gel phase is formed by dissolution from the surfaces of the alumino-silicate listed in In geopolymerisation, high concentrations of silicate are used, especially when sodium silicate is added. Hence, stronger ion-pair formation is expected, which will result in more long chain silicate oligomers as well as Al–O–Si complexes, i.e., geopolymer precursors ( The geopolymerisation behaviour of 16 natural Al–Si minerals was investigated. These minerals were all to some extent soluble in concentrated alkaline solution with a higher extent of dissolution in NaOH than in KOH, except in the case of sodalite. The framework structure showed a higher extent of dissolution than other structures for both Si and Al, with chain structures being the next most soluble. The order of the extent of dissolution of the other structures such as sheet and ring structures was less evident. Silicon and aluminium appeared to be synchro-dissolving from the surface of the minerals, as their extent of dissolution for the different minerals had a high correlation coefficient. Ion pair theory could be used to explain the differences in the extent of dissolution in NaOH and KOH solutions, as well as the increased compressive strength of the geopolymers synthesised in the presence of KOH. Factors such as the %CaO, %K