The performance of an electrochemical double layer capacitor composed of activated carbon electrodes and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium thiocyanate ([EMIm]SCN) as the electrolyte possessing extremely high conductivity and low viscosity, was investigated by cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charging/discharging. The effect of various factors governing the extraordinary performance of this capacitor in terms of its specific capacitance, current density, voltage and cycle-life, was examined in detail.Electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) are the intermediate systems between electrochemical batteries that can store higher energy density and dielectric capacitors, which can deliver very high power during few milliseconds. So it is widely used in the fields of mobile communication, aviation and spaceflight, and information technology, etc. Since the electric energy stored in EDLCs are given rise by the separation of charged species in the electrochemical double layer across the electrode/electrolyte interface, the performance of the EDLCs depend strongly on the electrolyte and the specific surface area of the electrode materials. Most EDLCs use aqueous solution electrolytes for good conductivity, however, an obvious demerit for these devices is their inherently narrow electrochemical window (less than 1.23 Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium thiocyanate [EMIm]SCN has high conductivity and low viscosity at room temperature compared to other ionic liquids, e.g. [EMIm]BF 1-Methylidazolium (Michael Kors), ethylbromide, acetonitrile and ammonium thiocyanate acid (Chemistry Reagent Co. Ltd. of ShangHai, China), all chemicals were dried at room temperature and distilled under reduced pressure before use. Activated carbon powders with a specific area of 3250 To prepare 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide ([EMIm]Br), the precursor for [EMIm]SCN, 90 Next, 7.6 Activated carbon powder (ACP) (85 Electrochemistry performance was measured by using Arbin BT-4+ (America). Based on galvanostatic charging–discharging experiments, the specific capacitance was calculated from Eq. Specific surface area and pore structure of activated carbon were determined with N  Barisci et al.  The The discharge curves and their associated capacitance were compared in As shown in The relation between specific capacitance and current density is presented in Generally, the relationship between specific capacitance and current density is non-linear. The surprising linear relation observed under the conditions employed in this investigation might indicate a current leakage during the charge/discharge processes, which could be accounted for by concentration gradients of electrolytes at the electrolyte/electrode interface. During the charging process, ion concentrations build up at the interface whereas, during discharging process, they start to decline and eventually disappear upon the finish of discharging. This process would lead to a leakage current being generated, and its intensity rises higher with increasing density of charging current, which obviously determines the gradient of ion concentration at the electrolyte/electrode interface. In addition, the extremely high surface area of the activated carbon powders used (3250 The capacity of the charge storage of an EDLC with [EMIm]SCN was found highly dependent on the voltage applied. Assuming that the electrochemical process of an EDLC could be treated as a series combination of resistors ( The volume of charge stored in an EDLC ( From Eq.  Based on Eq. Long cycle-life is desired for EDLCs. The preparation and use of ionic liquid [EMIm]SCN as an EDLC electrolyte has been investigated with great success, and the factors governing its electrochemical properties and specific capacitance have been examined. The extremely high specific capacitance, uncompromised performance and stability of the AC/[EMIm]SCN EDLC against repeated cyclic charge/discharge cyclic operations demonstrate that [EMIm]SCN can be an extraordinary EDLC electrolyte and possesses some unique characteristics when compared with other ionic liquids reported so far. However, as with other ionic liquids, the use of elevated voltage during charge/discharge cycles can potentially cause, though not significantly, the composition of this electrolyte at the cost of a possible increase in the EDLC internal resistance. This work was financially supported by National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 50272070). The authors gratefully thank Kai-xi Li (Key Laboratory of Carbon Materials, Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences) and Cheng-gong Sun (School of Chemical, Environmental and Mining Engineering, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK) for reading this manuscript.