We report the preparation, using electrochemical and solid-phase synthesis, and characterisation of a 26 member library of 13 dihydroxybenzene derivatives covalently attached to glassy carbon through ethylenediamine (EDA) and C6H4CH2NH linkers. First, Boc-protected EDA or Boc–NHCH2C6H4 were electrochemically attached to the GC surface. After Boc-deprotection, dimethoxybenzoyl chlorides were coupled to the EDA and C6H4CH2NH linkers using solid-phase synthesis followed by deprotection of the methoxy groups to give the corresponding dihydroxybenzene compounds. Surface coverage and electrochemical parameters of the dihydroxybenzene modified electrodes were evaluated in parallel using cyclic voltammetry. The mid-peak potentials, E
                     mp, and surface coverages for the 13 dihydroxybenzene derivatives were found to be independent of the choice of linker. The mid-peak potentials of the immobilised dihydroxybenzene derivatives varied between 0.0 and 260 mV vs. SCE and their surface coverages varied between 0.07 and 1.1 nmol cm−2, depending on the pattern of substitution of the dihydroxybenzene ring. The electrocatalytic activities of the library were evaluated for mediation of NADH oxidation, and the ortho-dihydroxybenzene derivatives were found to have higher catalytic activity.Over the last two decades considerable effort has been devoted to the development of methods for the covalent attachment of monolayers of specific organic functional groups to conducting surfaces to form modified electrodes. Two efficient methods for the electrochemically assisted covalent modification of carbon surfaces have been reviewed by Downard We recently described a general route for covalent attachment of a monolayer of organic probes through various linkers to a glassy carbon (GC) surface by employing electrochemical and solid-phase synthetic methodologies The resulting library of dihydroxybenzene modified electrodes are characterised by cyclic voltammetry and their electrocatalytic activities for NADH oxidation evaluated. The redox couple NADH/NAD The attachment of the mono-Boc-protected EDA linker (electrode 1) onto the GC electrode was performed by electrochemical oxidation of the Boc–EDA compound in acetonitrile (ACN) as described previously This methodology was also applied to a GC electrode modified with C After several washings in The voltammograms for all the modified electrodes clearly show the characteristic and well defined redox peaks for dihydroxybenzene which demonstrate the successful coupling and demethylation of the acyl chlorides coupled to the EDA and C As shown in The surface coverages of the electroactive dihydroxybenzene ( As shown in It is generally accepted that substituted   The rate of reaction between the immobilised dihydroxybenzene and NADH should increase with the thermodynamic driving force for the reaction so that the dihydroxybenzene with the more positive redox potentials should give larger normalised catalytic currents. The net reaction between NADH and the oxidised dihydroxybenzene is a hydride transfer which will be followed at pH 7 by a rapid protonation to give the hydroquinone form, QH The relevant redox potential for the dihydroxybenzene is therefore not the 2e, 2H The calculated values for In this paper we have demonstrated a novel high-throughput methodology for the development of modified carbon electrodes. Our approach is based on the electrochemical coupling of a Boc-protected linker, either with a diazonium compound or with a mono-Boc-protected diamine, followed by deprotection of the Boc-protected amine and subsequent coupling to a range of acyl chlorides to ultimately prepare a library of 26 dihydroxybenzene modified electrodes. This is a generic approach which uses established solid-phase synthesis methodologies and which can be applied to a broad range of different electrode modifications. Electrochemical characterisation of the library shows that the choice of linker does not affect the redox potential of the immobilised dihydroxybenzene or the coverage for each of the 13 different dihydroxybenzenes. However, the substitution pattern of the dihydroxybenzene does alter both its redox potential and surface coverage. Preliminary studies of the mediation of NADH oxidation by the different modified electrodes shows evidence for an exponential increase in the normalised catalytic current with the thermodynamic driving force for the reaction with the library members falling into two distinct groups depending on the substitution pattern of the dihydroxybenzene.  All solutions for electrochemical experiments were prepared using reagent grade water (18 MΩ cm) from Whatman RO80 system coupled to a Whatman “Still Plus”. All glassware were cleaned by soaking in a 5% Decon 90 (Sigma-Aldrich) solution for at least 5 days followed by rinsing with deionised water and dried in an oven at 50 °C. Electrochemical experiments were performed in a conventional three-electrode cell using an Autolab PGSTAT30 potentiostat/galvanostat. A home made saturated calomel electrode (SCE) or Ag/AgCl was used as the reference electrode and about 1 cm p The grafting of the Boc–EDA spacer was carried out from a solution containing 10 mM Boc–EDA and 0.1 M TBATFB in acetonitrile by cycling (5 cycles) the electrode potential in the range from 0.5 to 1.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl at a scan rate of 50 mV s The covalent attachment of C A Boc-protected modified GC electrode 1 or 4 was suspended in a solution of HCl in dioxane (4.0 M, 0.5 mL) at room temperature for 1 h. The electrode was then washed by sonication in DMF (0.5 mL), 1.0 M NaOH (0.5 mL), deionised water (0.5 mL) and absolute EtOH (0.5 mL) for 5 min before electrochemical characterisation. A Boc-deprotected modified GC electrode was suspended in a solution of acyl chloride (1.0 mmol) in a mixture of pyridine/dichloromethane (1:1, 2.0 mL) at room temperature under magnetic stirring for 16 h. The electrode was then washed by sonication in DMF (1.0 mL) and absolute EtOH (1.0 mL) for 5 min before electrochemical characterisation. A modified GC electrode 2 or 5 was suspended in a solution of BBr This work was funded by the EPSRC (EP/D038588/1).