Along the northern edge of the Majella anticline, in a large quarry originally excavated by ancient Romans, we studied the deformation mechanisms and internal architectures of faults characterized by both normal and lateral components of slip. These oblique normal faults, which crosscut Miocene carbonate grainstones, are associated with hydrocarbons in the form of tar. Within the faults, tar is present in the breccia of the fault cores, as well as in the surrounding fractured and faulted damage zones. Outside of them, tar is found within the porous carbonate beds flanking the oblique normal faults. We propose a conceptual model of fault nucleation and development. In this model, incipient faulting was characterized by shearing of the pre-existing pressure solution seams and formation of two main sets of tail pressure solution seams. With ongoing faulting, exhumation, and growth of the Majella anticline, the main deformation mechanism switched to predominant opening-mode failure in the form of tail joints and veins within the evolving oblique normal faults. This processes allowed the linkage of isolated slip surfaces across contiguous carbonate beds, and the development of isolated pods of fragmented rocks along the evolving faults. Brecciation and cataclasis localized only along the main slip surfaces of the oblique normal faults, forming a zone of intense deformation, the fault core, surrounded by less-deformed fractured, faulted and fragmented carbonates of the damage zone.
                  
                     Tar distribution was used as a proxy for fault and fracture permeability. Well-developed oblique normal faults, as a whole, form combined barrier-conduit structures to fluid flow. The cataclastic rocks, if continuous along the fault cores, form seals for cross-fault fluid flow, whereas the fault breccia and the surrounding carbonate damage zones act as conduits to fluid flow. Less-evolved oblique normal faults may form either distributed or localized conduits for fluid flow, depending on the presence (distributed) or absence (isolated) of fragmented carbonates around the conductive slip surfaces. Due to their orientation, these faults enhance the overall fault parallel fluid flow, which is thus prominent in the damage zones of the larger faults. The fundamental structural elements with greater tar content are sub-parallel to the current σ
                     hmax of central Italy, reflecting the possible control exerted by the stress state on the overall fault and fracture permeability. At a larger scale, as suggested by the structural location of the study quarry, hydrocarbons are channeled primarily within the releasing jogs of interacting oblique normal faults.Under geological loading conditions, at shallow crustal levels, faulted carbonate rocks show a quite variable mechanical behavior. Carbonate rocks like dolomites deform primarily by an opening-mode-based mechanism, as documented for strike-slip faults that developed from the hierarchical formation, and subsequent shearing, of several sets of joints and veins ( Fault-related fundamental structural elements such as joints, pressure solution seams, sheared joints and pressure solutions, compaction and shear bands may have different effects on subsurface fluid flow ( The aforementioned fundamental structural elements are generally displayed along incipient faults, as well as in the least-deformed portions of the fault damage zones which consist of fractured, fragmented and faulted rocks that did not obliterate the original host rock features ( In order to better understand the mechanisms of fault initiation and development in carbonate rocks, and their control on fault architecture and permeability, we study high-angle oblique normal faults crosscutting carbonate grainstones of the Majella Mountain, central Italy. The Majella stratigraphy consists of a marine carbonate sequence that includes platform, slope, and basinal deposits of Meso-Cenozoic age ( The Majella is a thrust-related, box-shaped anticline. It is comprised of the Majella Mountain unit overlying the Casoli unit. These units crop out in the outer part of the central Apennine fold-and-thrust belt, override the eastern Adriatic foreland and are, in turn, overridden by the Morrone Mt. unit, to the west, and by the Molise and Sicilide units, to the east ( The Majella anticline is characterized by a steeply dipping, to overturned, eastern flank and a more gently-dipping western flank ( The western limb of the anticline is truncated by the Caramanico normal fault, which is characterized by a maximum throw of ∼4 The study area is located along the northern termination of the Majella Mountain, around the village of Lettomanoppello ( As shown in Our detailed structural analyses were carried out along the vertical outcrops and the few pavements of the Roman Valley Quarry, which display in 3D the internal structures of high-angle faults (cf. inset of Performing the structural analyses of the different elements associated to pre-faulting deformation and of those related to faulting, we mainly considered their geometry, orientation, internal structure, infilling material (if present), possible offset, and the crosscutting and abutting relationships with respect to the surrounding other elements. Fractures were distinguished as mode I (joints), anti-mode I (pressure solution seams), sheared joints and sheared pressure solution seams. Deformation bands were classified based on their orientation with respect to bedding, as well as on the possible offset resolved across these elements. Most of the faults cropping out in the quarry are characterized by apparent normal offsets; only in a few cases we were able to document apparent reverse offsets. Based on their total lengths and offsets, we classify the faults into four different classes: incipient (length The study area exposes the upper part of the Bolognano Formation's lower member, which is mainly comprised of carbonate grainstones, as well as a small portion of marls and calcareous marls (middle member). Far from the faults, four main sets of pressure solution seams (PS) and one set of deformation bands crosscut the unfaulted carbonate grainstones. The PS consist of one set of bed-parallel (PS1), two sets of orthogonal bed-perpendicular (PS2a and PS2b, respectively), and one set of pressure solution seams oblique to bedding (PS3). All four PS are portrayed in The bed-parallel PS1 have a columnar form and localize in the carbonate beds, at the contacts between adjacent beds, as well as within early-formed bed-parallel deformation bands. Most PS1 show evidences of shearing. The two orthogonal bed-perpendicular sets are present within the carbonate beds, crosscut each other, and are often bounded by PS1. Both PS2a and PS2b have generally a wavy form, contain mm-thick clay-rich residue material and, in some cases, show evidences of shearing. PS2a strike E–W to NW–SE and dip more than 70° either N or S; PS2b strike about N–S and dip more than 75° either E or W. PS3 have a wavy irregular form, contain mm-thick clay-rich residue material, and abut against PS1, PS2a and PS2b. Attitudes of PS3 are quite variable; most of them strike E–W and dip 45°–70° N. Individual PS3 localize at the contractional tips and/or irregularities of the sheared PS1. In most porous carbonate grainstone beds, which have porosity (ϕ) values up to ∼30% relative to the 5–20% range of most carbonate beds (data obtained after thin-sections digital image analysis, Rustichelli, personal communication), there are bed-parallel deformation bands. At an outcrop scale, these elements are lighter than the parent rocks ( Along incipient faults, characterized by offsets on the order of ∼1 In addition to the four sets described above, we distinguish two more sets of pressure solution seams (PS4 and PS5, respectively). PS4 are oriented at a low angle to bedding, whereas PS5 are at a high-angle. Both structures abut against all those pertaining to the background deformation. PS4 have a wavy form, contain mm-thick clay-rich residue material, are up to several cm-long and a few mm-thick. These structures localize in the contractional quadrants of normally sheared PS2a and PS2b seams ( Small normal faults with, at least, a few cm offset are comprised of isolated, discontinuous slip surfaces dipping about 40°–50° both to SW and NE, and cm-long tail joints and veins (JV) at their extensional quadrants ( The relationship between tail JV and slip surfaces is more evident along more evolved faults, in which the slip surfaces cut across several carbonate beds ( In some case, both tail JV and PS are present at the extensional and contractional quadrants, respectively, of individual slip surfaces. The internal structure of a small normal fault with a throw of up to 12.5 Faults with offsets on the order of several 10s of cm include an inner core, which is made up of discontinuous brecciated and fragmented carbonate pods around a through-going main slip surface, and less-deformed carbonates of the damage zone. Considering a normal fault with a maximum throw of 36 Faults with offsets on the order of a few meters display more developed fault cores, which may include brecciated and fragmented and major slip surfaces as well as cataclastic rocks, surrounded by fractured and faulted carbonate damage zones. Along a fault with a maximum throw of about 2 The two large faults of the Roman Valley Quarry, labeled SW and NE ( The SW fault is made up of a fault core wide up to 1 Along the northern portion of the quarry, the NE fault is comprised of one main fault segment oriented N270E, which displays an apparent reverse offset (cf. inset in Along the NE fault, at the footwall of one of the main breccias-bounding slip surfaces, there are tightly-spaced, bed-bounded, closed fractures forming sub-parallel clusters, as wide as 50 Tar distribution within the Roman Valley Quarry is used as a marker to characterize the fracture and fault control on hydrocarbon migration and accumulation ( (i) The fault breccia is composed of coarse and angular grains crosscut by PS, sheared PS, isolated and discontinuous slip surfaces, and it is bounded by major slip surfaces ( (ii) Tar-rich fractured and fragmented carbonate rocks are mainly present in the damage zones of the SW and NE faults, as well as along smaller faults of the quarry ( (iii) Tar-rich undeformed carbonate host rocks flank the SW and NE faults ( Our observations are consistent with most of the hydrocarbon flow postdating faulting and fracturing of the carbonate rocks. At a large scale, based on the structural setting of the northern Majella Mountain, the distribution of the tar (cf. We compile the structures into three different categories based on the event in which they formed: (i) burial-related assemblage, (ii) early thrusting and folding assemblage, due to Middle–Upper Pliocene shortening, and (iii) oblique normal faulting assemblage, due to deformation that initiated with folding of the carbonate beds and continued during uplift and exhumation of the Majella Mountain. The first assemblage of structures that formed within the carbonate grainstones was bed-parallel pressure solution seams, PS1, and bed-parallel compaction bands, CB ( The early thrusting and folding assemblage includes two orthogonal sets of bed-perpendicular pressure solution seams, PS2a and PS2b, which we infer developed when the beds were still flat (pre-tilting, The oblique PS3 terminate against the sheared bed-parallel and bed-perpendicular pressure solution seams (cf. The observed faults have been classified into four different classes according to their total lengths and offsets. Based on the relative timing of the specific structural elements associated to the individual fault classes, and previous knowledge on carbonate deformation (cf. Section We propose that faulting initiated by both normal and left-lateral shearing of the pre-existing, primarily bed-perpendicular, structural elements ( Shear banding occurred only in the most porous carbonate beds, forming tabular bands showing porosity reduction and predominant normal components of slip. For this reason, these features are classified as compactive shear bands ( The intermediate stage of faulting was characterized by pronounced opening-mode failure, as well as dilation of the favourably oriented, pre-existing structural features ( Tail joints and veins formed at the extensional quadrants of sheared pressure solution seams, contributing to the development of through-going slip surfaces. Coalescence of these sub-vertical joints and veins with the pre-existing PS, either perpendicular or oblique to bedding, defined small pods of fragmented rocks within the individual carbonate beds. With ongoing deformation the fragmented pods originally pertaining to different beds were juxtaposed, forming thicker zones of fragmented carbonates. This mechanism is widely documented for faults that developed by predominant opening-mode failure (see During this stage, minor pressure solution also took place at the contractional quadrants of the individual slip surfaces and at the contractional jogs of interacting slip surfaces. These two mechanisms were either active at the same time during fault creep, which implies a slow opening of joints, or during co-seismic (jointing) and inter-seismic (dissolution) deformation. Based on the available data, neither one of the two options can be discarded. During this faulting stage, we also propose that brecciation localized around the evolving main slip surfaces of the oblique faults, forming discontinuous pods of fault breccias which therefore developed proto fault cores. In our conceptual model, a mature stage of faulting occurred along the SW and NE faults with strain localized around the major slip surfaces, which allowed them to develop to a few km in length and to accumulate up to several 10s of m offsets. Strain localization caused the intense brecciation and fragmentation, as well as cataclastic deformation, of the fault cores ( The SW fault forms a combined barrier-conduit permeability structure to fluid flow. There, the thin cataclastic rocks of the fault core, if laterally continuous along the whole fault, act as seals for cross-fault fluid flow ( Small and medium faults, which may include isolated and/or through-going slip surfaces, fractures, sheared fractures, and isolated pods of fault breccia, form single conduit permeability structures to fluid flow. Based on our observations, these faults are able to focus on hydrocarbons only when they intersect other hydrocarbon-bearing faults. So, despite their potential conductive behavior to fluid flow, the hydraulic connectivity of these faults to larger fluid conduits is the key in channeling fluids. This is clearly shown within the Roman Valley Quarry, where isolated small and medium faults do not contain hydrocarbons. With regards to the fundamental structures, both sheared PS2a and JV are the most impregnated by tar. These two structures show the greatest aperture among all the surveyed ones of the Roman Valley Quarry ( In this study we documented the deformation mechanisms that occurred during initiation and development of oblique normal faults in carbonate grainstones of the Bolognano Fm., Majella Mountain, central Italy. After geological mapping of the northern side of this mountain and detailed structural analysis of the faulted outcrops of the Roman Valley Quarry, we compiled the structures occurring in pristine carbonate host rocks (5%< ϕ <30%) into two different structural assemblages, burial-related and thrusting and folding, respectively. These structures constituted the background deformation of the rocks later involved in oblique normal faulting. Oblique normal faulting initiated with folding by flexural slip and tilting of the carbonate beds, and continued during ongoing uplift and exhumation of the whole Majella Mountain. Based on the documented fundamental failure modes and mechanisms of fault development, we proposed a conceptual model comprised of three main stages of faulting. The initial stage was characterized by the nucleation of oblique normal faults due to shearing of the pre-existing structures, which produced tail pressure solution seams at the contractional quadrants of the sheared parent fractures. In the most porous carbonate beds (ϕ up to 30%), compactive shear bands formed by particulate flow that involved grain translation and rotation with pore collapse. Oblique normal faults evolved due to the linkage of the bed-bounded, discontinuous slip surfaces across contiguous carbonate beds, which produced mainly tail opening-mode fractures at their extensional quadrants and within releasing jogs. This deformation mechanism enhanced the degree of carbonate deformation, and formed isolated pods of fragmented rocks along the through-going slip surfaces. Brecciation also took place along these surfaces and at their intersections. The mature stage of faulting was mainly characterized by strain localization around the major slip surfaces of the faults, with brecciation and cataclastic deformation of the fault cores. These deformation mechanisms formed grain- and matrix-supported cataclastic rocks and fault breccias. Conversely, the carbonate damage zones surrounding the fault cores were affected by predominant opening-mode failure and dilation of the favourably oriented pre-existing structures, as well as development of small and medium faults. Presence of hydrocarbons in the form of tar along some of the study outcrops of the quarry was used as a proxy to assess the fracture and fault control on fluid flow. Most of the hydrocarbon flow postdated fracturing and faulting of the carbonates, and took place in three main domains: (i) fault breccia, (ii) fractured and fragmented carbonates, and (iii) undeformed porous carbonate grainstones. The thin cataclastic rocks present along the SW and NE faults did not show any presence of tar neither in the matrix nor in the survivor clasts. For this reason, if continuous along the fault cores, these rocks therefore formed seals for cross-fault fluid flow (cf. We thank Andrea Rustichelli and Paolo Vallesi for their help during field work, and both Marco Antonellini and Matthias Braun for useful discussions on the hydraulic properties of the deformed carbonate rocks. We also thank the careful revision and useful suggestions provided by the editor, T. Blenkinsop, and the referees F. Storti and S. Mazzoli. This work was financed by the Faults and Fractures in Carbonates project of the University of Camerino, and the Rock Fracture Project of Stanford University.