The appropriate experimental conditions of Mo(VI) ion transport across a supported liquid membrane containing Alamine 336 as the mobile carrier dissolved in kerosene solvent have been investigated. The molybdenum flux has been studied as a function of the extraction solution acidity, the sodium carbonate concentration in the stripping solution and the carrier concentration in the liquid membrane. Suitable conditions for both feed and stripping solutions were achieved from analysis of experimental results of molybdenum transport through the liquid membrane. The permeation experiments showed that, at pH 2 with sulfuric acid in the extraction solution and at pH 11.5 with Na2CO3 in the stripping solution, an efficient transfer of the metal ion can be obtained. Furthermore, a maximum molybdenum transport was achieved at around 0.02 M of Alamine carrier in the organic phase. From these results, the extraction-stripping interface reactions for Mo(VI) permeation are proposed. An equation describing the permeation rate, taking into account the aqueous stagnant layers and liquid organic resistance as simultaneous controlling factors, has been derived. The validity of this model is evaluated with experimental data of mass transfer coefficient measured at different stirring rates.Undoubtedly, the feasibility of separation and concentration of metals with liquid membranes must be considered as one of the most promising technological advances produced in the field of hydrometallurgical processes It has been well documented that the employment of liquid membrane technology would offer several advantages compared with the current solvent extraction process in mixer–settlers, particularly huge savings in inventory of expensive solvent and smaller reactor size. Because no direct mixing between aqueous and organic phases occurs, crud formation and phase entrapment difficulties would be avoided. Many papers concerned with selective separation and concentration of metallic ions with liquid membranes have lately been reported It is well known that molybdenum disulphide, MoS In the literature are reported many works on Mo(VI) solvent extraction from aqueous solutions using several extractants such as TBP, phosphine trioxide, sulphoxides, high-molecular weight alkylamines and alkylphosphoric acid esters This communication describes the study of molybdenum transport using a supported liquid membrane prepared by dissolving a high molecular weight tertiary alamine-type extractant in kerosene and a poly(tetrafluoroethylene) microporous flat membrane as support. The experiments were carried out with a permeation cell provided a continuous flow system. The information deduced from this work constitutes the basis for developing a practical membrane-based recovery process capable of achieving selective separation and enrichment of molybdenum from industrial waste solutions. The supported liquid membrane consisted of an organic phase that contained the carrier, supported on a polymeric porous membrane. Alamine 336 provided from Henkel was used as carrier of the liquid membrane without further purification. This tertiary amine, [tri-(C8–C10) amine], contains a basic nitrogen capable of forming amine salts with a wide variety of inorganic and organic acids. The organic extracting solutions were prepared by dissolving the extractant carrier in kerosene, an industrial diluent whose specifications averaged a specific gravity of 0.825 g/cm A flat hydrophobic microporous poly(tetrafluoroethylene) membrane supplied by Millipore was used as solid support. This support has a high porosity, low thickness and represents the most chemically inert and hydrophobic synthetic polymer. Its structural characteristics were provided by the supplier and they are: maximum pore size The experimental transport measurements were carried out with a stirred cell described elsewhere Metal ion transport through the membrane takes place with simultaneous extraction and stripping steps at both sides. Therefore, it is necessary to know the extraction and stripping reactions involved at the membrane interfaces since they are fundamental to understanding the transport phenomena of the metal ion through the supported liquid membrane. In order to determine the interfacial reactions and the best experimental conditions for Mo(VI) transport experimental runs changing the feed solution pH, sodium carbonate concentration in the permeate solution, carrier concentration and stirrer speed were designed. Several runs were accomplished varying the pH of the feed phase in a range between 2 and 5, adjusting it by controlled addition of H The transport efficiency of Mo was found to be critically dependent on the pH of the feed solution. It is clearly observed that the permeation of molybdenum decreases as the pH of the feed solution increases. This fact could be explained considering that Mo(VI) in aqueous solutions exists in the form of a series of species, e.g., MoO The expression given by Since the H As the extraction step occurs in the interface between the feed solution and the liquid membrane, the transport of metal necessarily requires a simultaneous back-extraction step at the opposite side of the membrane. In the back-extraction stage, the extractant carrier is regenerated and the metal is stripped. The literature contains many options for accomplishing the stripping of the molybdenum complex, among them, solutions of NH From this list, solutions of Na In It is well known that molybdate ion in basic aqueous solution exists in the form of MoO The result shown in The experimental results of this section and A series of permeation experiments where performed to investigate the influence of the carrier concentration in the organic phase. In all the experiments, the feed solution in the extraction side of the membrane consisted of a 0.001 M Mo(VI) solution, at pH 2 adjusted with sulfuric acid. The acceptor stripping solution consisted of a 1.0 M Na With increasing alamine concentration, initially, the metal transport increases, then goes through a maximum and finally decreases again. The maximum concentration of transported ion is reached at ca 0.02 M of Alamine 336 in kerosene. Some researchers explain this maximum by the increase of the organic phase viscosity A set of permeation experiments was performed to investigate the effect of stirrer speed ( The system under study consists of two aqueous phases and an organic phase, which contains the carrier, denoted as R The transport of Mo through the SLM system can be considered to be composed of many elementary steps From these assumptions, the following expression of the Mo molar flux density at steady-state across the SLM system is obtained: The mass transfer coefficient in the boundary layer as a function of both the geometry and hydrodynamics of the system can be interpreted by means of the dimensional correlation The Mo diffusion coefficient in the aqueous phase was calculated from the Stoke–Einstein equation as Introducing the experimental parameter values and diffusivity obtained from  The results obtained in this study provide important information about the right experimental conditions for the facilitated transport of molybdenum using a supported liquid membrane. The experimentally observed results indicate that the highest extraction of molybdenum occurs when the pH of the feed solution is adjusted to a value of 2.0. Under such a condition, Mo(VI) exists predominantly as the H The effect of the extractant concentration in the organic solutions on the permeation of metal through the membrane was also investigated. It was found that increasing amine content in the liquid membrane increased the metal transport. However, it not possible to raise the amine concentration indefinitely since the diffusion rate of the carrier–metal complex through the membrane decreases as the viscosity of organic film increases. The maximum Mo(VI) ion transport was achieved at an Alamine carrier concentration around 0.02 M in kerosene. The effect of stirring rate on Mo permeation through the SLM was analyzed. Increasing impeller rotation produced an increase in Mo transport. A mass transfer model to predict the extent of Mo(VI) transport was proposed. From this, a general expression of Mo permeation rate, taking into account the aqueous stagnant layer and the organic phase resistance as controlling factors, was derived. The capacity of the supported liquid membrane technique to generate strip solutions with enriched concentrations of solute attest to the potential usefulness of this separation process in hydrometallurgy and decontamination of industrial wastewater. However, it is absolutely necessary to get more information about the long-term period stability of the membrane and the durability (lifetime) of the support material. This work was supported by a Grant for Research from the International Argentina/Chile Program SECyT/CONICYT (1999) and Grants for Research from The National Fund of Science and Technology of Chile (FONDECYT Pr. N° 1980697) and Argentina (CONICET Pr. N° 0354). The authors are grateful to Chile Harting Chem. for the supply of extractant Alamine 336.