We performed a laboratory study on the effect of oxyfluorfen at a rate of 4lha−1 on biological properties of a soil amended with four organic wastes (two biostimulants/biofertilizers, obtained from rice bran, RB1 and RB2; municipal solid waste, MSW; and sheep manure, SM). Soil was mixed with SM at a rate of 1%, MSW at a rate of 0.52%, RB1 at a rate of 0.39% and RB2 at a rate of 0.30%, in order to apply the same amount of organic matter to the soil. The enzymatic activities and microbial community in the soil were determined during the incubation times. The application of RB1 and RB2 to soil without oxyfluorfen increased the enzymatic activities and biodiversity, peaking at day 10 of the incubation period. This stimulation was higher in the soil amended with RB2 than in that amended with RB1. In SM and CF-amended soils, the stimulation of enzymatic activities and soil biodiversity increased during the experiment. The application of herbicide in organic-amended soils decreased the inhibition of soil enzymatic activities and soil biodiversity. Possibly the low molecular weight protein content easily assimilated by soil microorganisms and the higher fat content in the biostimulants/biofertilizers are responsible for the lower inhibition of these soil biological properties.The increase in the levels of pesticide residues in soils and ground water is a current environmental problem. Chemicals that are highly soluble in water, minimally adsorbed by soil particles and not readily degradable, are easily leached by infiltrating water and hence, are likely to be found in ground water Several bioremediation strategies for reducing the presence of pesticides in soil from which they can reach groundwater have been proposed. One such is remediation by enhancing the microbial population capable of specifically degrading the target compounds However, as these organic products to activate soil microorganisms, the organic compounds need to be degraded into simpler easily assimilated forms, requiting a great expenditure of energy by soil microorganisms. Moreover, this degradation depends both on soil factors and the chemical composition of the organic material applied to soil In recent years the use of hydrolysate organic biofertilizers/biostimulants (BS) obtained from different organic materials by hydrolysis reactions has been increasing Biological and biochemically mediated processes in soils are of the utmost importance to ecosystem function. Many studies have shown that biological parameters have been used to assess soil quality and health as affected by agricultural practices The objective of this study was to investigate under laboratory conditions the behavior of oxyfluorfen in soils amended with different organic wastes and its influence on soil enzymatic activities biological and soil biodiversity. The soil used in this experiment is a Calcaric Regosol Soil pH was determined in distilled water with a glass electrode (soil:H The herbicide used in this experiment was the oxyfluorfen. The commercial formulation Fenfen (24% Four sources of organic matter were used. We used two BS obtained from rice bran (RB1 and RB2), a major by-product of the rice industry Organic matter content was determined by combustion at 550 The molecular mass distribution of protein in the samples was determined ( Five hundred grams of dried and 2 Two days after applying oxyfluorfen to soil, organic wastes were also applied to the soil. Soil samples were mixed with SM at a rate of 1% or MSW at a rate of 0.52%, or RB1 at a rate of 0.39% or RB2 at a rate of 0.30% applying to the soil the same amount of organic matter with each organic waste. Both BS were liquid and were solubilized in distilled water before the application. An unamended soil was used as control. Distilled water was added to each soil to bring it to 60% of its water-holding capacity. The incubation treatments are detailed as follows: 1. C, control soil, soil non-organic amended and without oxyfluorfen; 2. H, soil with oxyfluorfen and non-organic amended; 3. SM, soil without oxyfluorfen and amended with SM; 4. MSW, soil without oxyfluorfen and amended with MSW; 5. RB1, soil without oxyfluorfen and amended with RB1; 6. RB2, soil without oxyfluorfen and amended with RB2; 7. SM 8. MSW 9. RB1 10. RB2 Triplicate treatments were kept in semi-closed microcosms at 25 The activity levels of four soil enzymes for each treatment were measured at days 5, 10, 20, 40, 80 and 120 during the incubation period. Dehydrogenase activity was measured as the reduction of 2- Phospholipids were extracted at days 5, 10, 20 and 120 during the incubation period for each treatment, (three replicates per treatment) using a chloroform–methanol extraction based on Bligh and Dyer To estimate the various proportions of the main taxa in the samples according to the PLFAs, the biomarkers i15:0, a15:0, i16:0, 16:1ω7c, 17:0, i17:0, cy17:0, 18:1ω9c, and cy19:0 were used to represent bacterial biomass (bacPLFA) For each treatment and each incubation time, 20 The extraction of oxyfluorfen from soil was realized using the Anastassiades et al. Oxyfluorfen was determined using a tandem mass spectrometer and electron impact, where the chromatographic conditions were as follows: carrier gas: He at 1 Data were submitted to two-way ANOVA with treatment and sampling time as factors followed by Tukey's significant difference as a post hoc test, considering a significance level of Molecular weight distribution showed significant differences ( Statistical analysis indicated a significant ( The application of oxyfluorfen in soil showed a significant decrease in dehydrogenase activity ( The application of both BS in oxyfluorfen soils caused a minor decrease in dehydrogenase activity ( Unlike the dehydrogenase activity, soil urease activity was not stimulated after the application of the two BS studied. However in SM and CF-amended soils, the dehydrogenase activity was progressively stimulated over the whole experimental period ( Similar to the dehydrogenase activity, the β-glucosidase activity was also stimulated in organically amended soils. However this stimulation depended on the organic matter applied to the soil ( The response of β-glucosidase activity to the application of oxyfluorfen in soil was very similar to other enzyme activities studied ( The soil phosphatase activity was also significantly ( Furthermore, applying oxyfluorfen to the soil inhibited this enzymatic activity during the experimental period ( The application of the organic waste increased the soil bacteria and fungi population ( When the herbicide was applied to the soil, the total bacterial population decreased significantly ( The application of organic matter to soil with herbicide, decreased the soil oxyfluorfen concentration ( Oxyfluorfen caused a toxic effect on soil enzymatic activity and soil diversity. These results are in agreement with those obtained by García-Orenes et al. The application of diverse organic wastes caused an increase in soil microbial activity. When SM and MSW were applied to the soil, the stimulation of soil microorganisms increased progressively during the experimental period. These results are in agreement with those obtained by other authors when applying organic matter of very different chemical nature such as urban waste composts, vermicomposts, green manure, poultry manure etc. However, the evolution of the soil microbial stimulation was differed, depending on the type of organic waste applied. This might be a consequence of the different protein size distribution obtained for different organic wastes. Our results indicate that protein size distribution differs greatly for each organic waste. While BS have a higher content of low molecular weight proteins, SM and MSW have a higher content of high molecular weight proteins. Tejada et al. This greater assimilation of low molecular weight proteins might be responsible for the fact that the soil urease activity exhibits no significant stimulation after the RB1 and RB2 application. Since soil microorganisms can obtain this easily available N without any energy expenditure, microorganisms do not need to excrete any enzyme to obtain it. These results also agree with those obtained by García-Martínez et al. In SM- and MSW-amended soils, the urease activity was progressively stimulated during the experimental period. The higher molecular weight proteins are also a source of N for microorganisms. However, as this N is not easily assimilated by microorganisms, they first need to conduct a mineralization process, thus expending energy. Therefore, they excrete enzymes to degrade these higher molecular weight proteins. Therefore, the stimulation of soil microorganisms was higher in SM than in MSW-amended soils. Finally, the RB1 and RB2 stimulation in soils differed. The main difference between the two BS is the fat content. Possibly the higher fat content of RB2 caused a higher soil microbial stimulation in order to degrade this fat and to obtain nutrients and energy from it. With respect to the soil microbial diversity, Marschner et al. When the organic wastes were added to soils with oxyfluorfen, a lower inhibition of the enzymatic activities under study occurred. The toxic effect of the herbicide in soil was considerably reduced. This degradation was faster in the contaminated soil amended with RB1 and RB2 than with SM and MSW, probably due to the greater stimulation of soil microorganisms in the soil treated with both BS. Coinciding with the results obtained by Tejada et al. It can be concluded that the oxyfluorfen herbicide caused a negative effect on soil enzymatic activities and microbial diversity. The application of organic wastes decreased the toxic action of oxyfluorfen on soil biological properties. However, this effect depended on the different size distribution of the proteins of these organic wastes. The higher assimilation by soil microorganisms of low molecular weight proteins might be responsible for the greater degradation of oxyfluorfen in soil. This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Innovation (Spain), Plan Nacional I+D CTM2011-29930-01, CTM2011-29930-03 and by Proyecto Excelencia, Junta de Andalucía P11-RNM-7887.