Effects of pre-oxidation on algal separation by dispersed air flotation were examined. Ozone (O3) and peroxone (O3 and H2O2) could induce cell lysis, release of intracellular organic matter (IOM), and mineralization of organic substances. Separation efficiency of algal cells improved when pre-oxidized. Total of 76.4% algal cells was separated at 40mg/L of N-cetyl-N-N-N-trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), while 95% were separated after 30-min ozonation. Pre-oxidation by ozone and peroxone also enhanced flotation separation efficiency of dissolved organic carbon (DOC), polysaccharide, and protein, in which peroxone process exerted more significantly than O3. Two main mechanisms were involved in flotation separation of unoxidized algal suspension, namely hydrophobic cell surface and cell flocculation resulting from CTAB adsorption. However, flocculation by CTAB was hindered for pre-oxidized algal suspensions. It implied that the compositional changes in extracellular organic matter (EOM) by pre-oxidation were more determined for flotation separation of pre-oxidized cells.Seasonal algae bloom can cause adverse effects on water treatment processes, formation of disinfection by-products, production of several toxins, as well as unpleasant taste and odor. Therefore, removal of algae from eutrophic water is an important issue The production of renewable energy sources has become more and more important nowadays. Among the existing alternatives to fossil fuels, biofuels from algae have raised high interest. Algae mainly consist of organic compounds, such as protein, polysaccharides, and a great amount of lipid. High lipid content, fast growth rate and easy cultivation are the key advantages for algae to become a source of biofuels production Flotation is one of the popular methods for algae separation, especially when the algal density is low. Another advantage of flotation is that it reduces the reaction time when compared with those of sedimentation one The cell disruption is also important, as the contents of the extracted lipids are determined by the disruption method and device. Various methods, such as microwave, sonication, and bead-beating have already been examined for cell disruption The microalgae used in this work were identified as Ozone generator (Fischer, OZON 500) was employed to convert oxygen into ozone. Its concentration was determined by an ozone photometric analyzer (Seki, SQZ-6000). The flow rate of ozone was controlled at 1.5 Dispersed air flotation experiment was conducted using a flotation column (inside diameter of 5 Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) was determined using a total organic carbon analyzer (Tekmar Dohrmann, Phoenix 8000). Polysaccharide (PS) content in samples was determined using the Anthrone method with glucose as the standard. Protein (PN) content was determined using a modified Lowry method with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the standard. Turbidity of the samples was measured by a turbidity meter (Hach, 2100P). To determine zeta potential and particle size distribution of algal suspension, a small angle light scattering instrument was used (Malvern Mastersizer 2000). Excitation emission matrix (EEM) spectra of algal suspensions were determined by using a luminescence spectrometry (Cary Eclipse, Varian). Each sample was scanned for both excitation and emission wavelengths at 250–500 The SEM images of the algae after pre-oxidation demonstrated the effects of oxidants on cell structure and cell wall feature. The median size of algal suspension increased from 5.9 Results of EEM analysis are shown in As mentioned above, pre-oxidation induced cells damage, release of IOM, and concentration changes of DOC, polysaccharide, and protein. The presence of these substances could interfere with the flotation efficiency. With the addition of 40  Algal cells are negatively charged with zeta potential of −18.1 The median size of original algal suspension was 32.1 Pre-oxidation processes using ozone and peroxone could induce cell lysis, release of IOM, and degradation of organic matter. EEM results also showed the changes in algal suspension after pre-oxidation. For unoxidized algal suspension, two main mechanisms were involved, namely the more hydrophobic cell surface and flocculation resulting from CTAB adsorption. Pre-oxidation enhanced flotation separation of algal cells, DOC, polysaccharide, and protein. Pronounced enhancement was found for peroxone pretreatment, and it manifested the synergistic effect of ozone and hydrogen peroxide. It was proposed that surface property changes of cell surfaces resulting from CTAB adsorption were more determining for pre-oxidized algal suspensions. Results showed pre-oxidation in combination with DiAF were suitable for separation of algal cells from water. For potential application to algae harvesting for biofuels production, it is suggested to assess the effects of pre-oxidation on lipid property and its extraction and separation.