The leaching of vanadium from carbonaceous shale using dilute H2SO4 was investigated, and the mechanism of leaching determined. The results showed that higher leaching efficiency of vanadium was obtained by increasing initial concentration of H2SO4, raising leaching temperature and prolonging leaching time. Addition of ammonium fluoride also enhanced recovery. A recovery of 92% was obtained using a liquid to solid ratio 4:1, initial H2SO4 concentration 18%, NH4F addition 4.8 wt.% of carbonaceous shale, leaching temperature 95 °C and contact time 8 h; the recovery was only 56% without NH4F. The presence of NH4F enhanced the leaching of vanadiferous mica.Vanadium is an important metal which is used almost exclusively in ferrous and non-ferrous alloys to improve tensile strength, hardness, and fatigue resistance. The global supply of vanadium originates from primary sources such as ore feedstock, concentrates, metallurgical slag, and petroleum residues. China, as a major player in the global supply of vanadium bearing products, has two important vanadium sources, one is the vanadium and titanium magnetite ore, and the other is carbonaceous shale, sometimes called stone coal ( The carbonaceous shale used in this study was obtained from Hubei province, China. XRF (X-Ray Fluorescence) of the carbonaceous shale is shown in All the reagents including sulfuric acid, ammonium fluoride used for leaching and ammonium ferrous sulfate, urea, potassium permanganate, sodium nitrite and N-phenylanthralinic acid used in chemical analysis were of analytical grade. The dried ore was ground and sieved, and particles below 150 μm was used in this study. A portion of the ground ore and a predetermined volume of dilute H Titration with ammonium ferrous sulfate was used to determine the content of vanadium in the carbonaceous shale and the concentration of vanadium in the solution. The effect of initial sulfuric acid concentration on vanadium leaching was studied while leaching temperature, contact time, liquid to solid ratio and ammonium fluoride addition were kept constant as 95 °C, 8 h, 4:1 and 18% (mass ratio of NH Ammonium fluoride addition was examined under the following conditions: liquid to solid ratio 4:1, initial H The effect of temperature on vanadium leaching was examined at fixed liquid to solid ratio (4:1), initial H The effect of contact time from 2 to 10 h on vanadium leaching was studied using liquid-to-solid ratio 4:1, initial H The effect of liquid to solid ratio on vanadium leaching was examined under the following conditions: initial H A vanadium leaching efficiency of 92% was obtained with a liquid to solid ratio of 4:1, in 18% H To understand the mechanism of fluoride addition XRD analysis of the raw shale and leach residues were conducted. The extent of dissolution of vanadium from carboniferous shale is enhanced by increasing initial concentration of H