A significant amount of waste residue and adsorbent containing uranium generated by uranium refining and conversion R&D activities has been stored at the Ningyo-toge Environmental Engineering Center of the Japan Atomic Energy Agency. The treatment of these materials is one of the most important tasks in the decommissioning of the plant. These solid wastes also contain significant quantities of fluorine, and it is important to separate this out in order to recover pure uranium as a resource.
                  As one method for separating fluorine from uranium, we have proposed the use of solvent extraction using tri-n-octylamine (TNOA), and silicofluoride (Na2SiF6) precipitation. The decontamination factor of fluorine for solutions, prepared by dissolving spent sodium fluoride (NaF) and uranium tetrafluoride (UF4) residue into sulfuric acid, became 5.2 and 6.6 respectively when the TNOA solvent extraction process was performed. The Na2SiF6 process using SiO2 is more effective in separating fluorine from a solution prepared by dissolving spent NaF and UF4 residue using sulfuric and hydrochloric acid, with the decontamination factor of fluorine being 14 and 28. Uranium remaining in solution after removal of fluorine was recovered as uranium peroxide. The fluorine content of uranium recovered from UF4 by SiO2 treatment was as low as 0.012wt%, and that of uranium recovered from NaF was below 0.0075%. This is in accordance with the target conditions defined by the ASTM standard.Uranium deposits were first discovered in the Ningyo-toge area in 1955. A test milling facility constructed in 1965 was used to establish the fundamental technology of the PNC process, producing uranium tetrafluoride directly from uranium ore. A Refining and Conversion Pilot Plant using this process was constructed in 1981 ( Small-scale reprocessed-uranium conversion testing was carried out at the Refining and Conversion Plant from 1982, in order to develop fundamental technologies for converting reprocessed UO On the other hand, as a result of the aforementioned tests a significant amount of scrap uranium, and adsorbent containing uranium, was generated. The treatment of scrap uranium and adsorbent is one of the most pressing issues in the decommissioning of the plant. This waste totals approximately 1500 tons, and is presently stored in drums. The uranium concentration for some varieties of this waste exceeds 50 The production of yellow cake from ores is an essential step in the preparation of fuel for use in nuclear power plants. Sulfuric acid has been used for dissolving uranium ore, and this same method is expected to be applied to the recovery of uranium from scrap uranium ( Wet chemical decontamination processes using inorganic or organic acids have also been developed as effective decontamination methods for metal wastes, and sludge-like uranium bearing wastes ( In uranium recovery processes for ore, uranium is generally recovered from the eluate by precipitation with either ammonia or hydrogen peroxide (H On the other hand, it has been reported that high purity uranium can be recovered from solution as uranium peroxide using H Hydrogen peroxide hardly generates secondary waste, because it decomposes to water and oxygen. Thus, we selected the uranium peroxide method for the recovery of uranium from solution. The formula for the reaction between uranium and H  Unless fluorine is removed from the solution in which the NaF and UF There is a variety of techniques available to remove fluorine from acidic solutions, for example, it has been reported that fluorine can be removed as Na Consequently, it is expected that pure uranium can be recovered from solution when fluorine is removed by using one of these methods.  The concentration of major elements in the UF  Dissolution experiments were carried out in air while stirring. Blockish UF Once again, dissolution experiments were carried out in air while stirring. Spent NaF was dissolved in water with a variable solid–liquid ratio at ambient temperature. After dissolution, the residual solid phase was filtered off, and the uranium concentration of the filtrates, and residual solid phase, was measured using AAS and inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Blockish UF It is known that uranium in H Extracted uranium is converted into a uranyl chloride complex salt by HCl, and back-extracted into water to recover pure uranium. Sample solutions were prepared by dissolving UF Furthermore, a sample solution was prepared by dissolving NaF in water with H Both extraction solvents containing uranium were washed with 10 It has been reported that fluorine can be removed as Na The sample solution was prepared by dissolving UF Fluorine tends to exist as NaF in water, hence, it is necessary to dissociate fluorine by the addition of a strong acid in order to react it with SiO Sample solutions were prepared by dissolving NaF (8 A sample solution was prepared by dissolving NaF (800 Extraction solvent containing uranium was washed with 100 The reaction temperature for precipitation of uranium was controlled from 55 to 80 A sample solution was prepared by dissolving UF  Approximately 37% of uranium was dissolved in 0.45     Fluorine extracted with uranium was separated by back extraction, with the decontamination factor of fluorine (DF) defined as follows: The decontamination factor of fluorine for the NaF solution, and the UF   Correspondingly, the loss of uranium from solutions where NaCl and Na The results also indicate that uranium peroxide, which is generated by hydrogen peroxide remaining in the solution, was coprecipitated with Na For the solution prepared by dissolving UF On the other hand, 93% of fluorine was removed when Ba(OH) The decontamination factors of fluorine by Na   The recovery ratio of uranium from the NaF solution is low in comparison to the UF These results indicate that removal of fluorine is important in order to improve the efficiency of recovery of uranium. The fluorine content of uranium recovered from NaF solution is higher than that recovered from UF For the UF   The uranium recovery ratio for UF The fluorine content of uranium recovered by SiO Based on these results, uranium that meets the target conditions can be recovered from UF However, it appears that the SiO Based on these results, we would expect that pure uranium could be recovered from solid waste containing uranium and fluorine. Two aqueous processes for the separation of fluorine from uranium in solid waste were investigated. Based on the results of the present investigation, the following conclusions have been drawn. UF The decontamination factor of fluorine for solutions prepared by dissolving NaF and UF Compared with solvent extraction, for which the decontamination factor of fluorine was 10–28, SiO Uranium recovered from solution without the removal of fluorine contains 1.7–18% of fluorine. On the other hand, the fluorine content of uranium recovered from UF