Very recently, integrated biorefinery approaches are being developed with the aim to produce high-value products for a variety of industries in conjunction with green energy from sustainable biomass. Macroalgae (seaweed) have been regarded as more sustainable compared to terrestrial crops, since they do not occupy land for growth. Macroalgal biomass changes greatly according to species and harvest season, which affects its chemical energy potential. This study was conducted seasonally on five species of brown seaweed over a yearlong period to investigate the effects of chemical composition variations, bioproducts extraction processes and inoculum acclimatation on methane production. As a result of the bioproducts extraction, it was found the seaweed residues exhibit a great potential to produce methane. Stoichiometric methane yield and C:N ratio changed in favour of an improved digestibility with bioconversion rates greater than 70% in some instances, i.e. achieved by Laminaria species and on the West coast Fucus serratus. The two Laminaria species investigated also presented the highest CH4 production rate, with Laminaria digitata reaching 523 mL CH4 gVS−1 and L. saccharina peaking at 535 mL CH4 gVS−1 with acclimatised and non-acclimatised sludge respectively.Seaweed biomass has been under the spotlight as feedstock for biogas production in the recent years. Seaweeds (or macroalgae) are regarded as third generation feedstocks for biofuels, since their use as energy crops exhibits several advantages when compared to terrestrial crops The EU has underpinned that seaweed biogas or biomethane as transport fuel may be playing a significant role for energy generation in the near future Seasonal variation in composition has a major influence in determining the methane potential from marine biomass. Therefore, in order to obtain a stable biogas production, investigations are needed over a year period to assess the variability of the methane yields achievable and plan for complementary co-substrates for digestion. Very few studies have been conducted on seasonal composition of macroalgae Brown macroalgae have been selected for this research as these are mainly used in Irish industrial applications across a variety of sectors. Ireland’s seaweed-based industry consists of small and medium businesses involved in production of animal nutrition, animal hygiene, plant health, soil fertilizers, alginate, cosmetics and nutraceutical products Anaerobic digestion (AD) essays have been conducted over a yearlong period during which brown seaweed biomass has been wild-harvested seasonally at two opposite sides of the island, in order to evaluate the influence of geographical location on composition. These are Howth Bay, Co. Dublin on the East coast and a number of bathing beaches in Co. Galway and Co. Clare on the West coast. The harvested feedstocks underwent bioproducts extraction using room temperature extraction procedures provided by the project industry partner (Irish Seaweed Processors Ltd.) based in Ireland. The extraction processes used in this research also follow the seaweed biorefinery concept proposed by Balina et al. Biomass of The collections took place on the East and West coasts of Ireland in order to investigate the effect of geographical location on the biomass composition. The harvesting sites were Co. Galway and Co. Clare beaches on the West side of the island with collections in May, September, November and January, and Howth Bay on the East side with collections in June, October, November and January. Samples were harvested and frozen within 24 h to −20 °C until use. The collections started in May/June 2015 and were completed in January of the following year. In order to add the necessary fermenting microorganisms to the reactors, the residue samples were then incubated with 300 g of digested sewage sludge, provided by the wastewater treatment plant of Celtic Anglian Water (CAW) Ltd. The initial sludge’s pH was measured as 8.1 ± 0.02. Acclimatation was conducted by inoculating reactors with extracted residue of the same seaweed species to be subsequently digested and allowing fermentation to occur for approximately 10 days before incubation in the reactors. Dry organic matter or Total Solids (TS) and Volatile Solids (VS) contents were determined by using a high-temperature oven via overnight drying of the samples at 105 °C, followed by combustion at 575 °C of the seaweed residues, as by standard procedure The ultimate analysis was outsourced to Celignis Ltd. (Irish biomass laboratory) to identify the elemental composition of the fresh and residual substrates. The carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and sulphur contents of samples were obtained according to the European Standard procedure EN 15104:2011 Approximately 200 g of each individual macroalgal species’ fronds were manually chopped down to roughly <0.5 cm and sealed in a food plastic bag, which was then extensively perforated to maximise soaking in the reagent solution. Bags were kept below solvent level by the aid of a weight. To simulate the industrial scale extraction process, the biomass species were extracted together in series using three separate buckets respectively containing 3L of ethanol 99.9% pure, then a mild acid (acetic acid pH 5.5) and finally a 5L solution of 10% w/w Na The samples’ pH was measured using a Hanna precision pH meter, model pH 213 prior to and after digestion was completed. Furthermore, pH adjustments were required as following the last alkaline extraction with 10% w/w Na The bioreactors set-up was conducted following procedure VDI 4630 The total chemical oxygen demand (tCOD) content is widely used to evaluate the amount of organic matter within water and wastewater. This parameter was used in this study to estimate the organic matter dissolved in the residue samples. The procedure for tCOD analysis was performed according to Hach Lange Results from the elemental analysis, described in Section A biodegradability index (BI) in Eq. Results of the proximate analysis on the freshly collected seaweed biomass are reported in The proximate compositions of fresh samples generally reflect the range values found in the studies conducted by Allen et al. In relation to seasons, a study by Marinho-Soriano et al. From Outcomes of the ultimate analysis on fresh un-extracted and extracted biomass species are reported in The extraction procedure has generally caused an increase in C:N ratio across the samples, which in most cases means an improved suitability for AD. For example, FS harvested on the East coast naturally presents a value of 8.5 which is too low for a stable digestion. After extraction this increases to 24.7, which instead is in the range of what the literature The tCOD concentrations in  The SMP values obtained for AN are in line with values found by Tabassum et al. The use of The final pH was measured at the end of every digestion period for all reactors and it was found ranging between 7.5 and 7.9. Therefore, in this study such parameter did not affect the digestion significantly. Results from the BMP trials set up as described in Section In particular, the best results were obtained from LD residue from the East coast with acclimatised sludge (499 mL CH As expected from the SMP indicators, both Seasonal BIs are plotted for each species in Higher BIs are instead observed in presence of lower A:V ratio and higher tCOD concentrations. This can be seen clearly for FS in To summarise the outcomes of the BMP trials, on an annual basis acclimatation has been found effective at improving yields from AN and LD residues harvested in the East of Ireland, with increased average yields of 12% and 32% respectively over non-acclimatised seeding. For harvest collected instead on the West coast, acclimatation is recommendable when digesting FS and LD residues, with an advantage of 10% and 30% extra methane production. Benefits of inoculum acclimatation are species dependant as well as composition being affected by harvest location. Co-seeding with a portion of acclimatised inoculum could be extremely beneficial to digest residues that performed closely in BMP values with different inocula, like for example FS harvested in the West ( The potential of macroalgal biorefinery to produce bioenergy in the final step of the bioresource valorisation’s chain is substantially unexploited. This study attempts to evaluate the feasibility of fermenting waste solids from seaweed processing plants to generate biogas on site. Seaweed residues from five spp. harvested from the East and West coastlines of Ireland were characterised and studied for anaerobic digestion. Factors examined were seasonal biochemical variation in relation to bioproducts extraction, which significantly affected the change in fermentable solids. Inoculum acclimatation was also tested to enhance the reactors performance. The results showed that acclimatation of inoculum is recommended for digestion of Important correlations were identified for seasonal biodegradability rates, whose trends were found to follow the distribution of the tCOD and/or the ash:volatile-solids parameter, depending on species and geographical harvest location. High average methane yields on an annual basis are estimated between 107 and 405 mL gVS None. This research was supported by