Metal–slag phase compositions of molten iron metal and high titania slags or solid titanate phases were determined between 1500 and 1700 °C. In particular the influence of so-called ‘impurity oxide’ (MnO, MgO, Cr2O3, Al2O3 and SiO2) additions, gas atmosphere, temperature and amount of reductant was investigated. Under strong reducing conditions iron oxide was almost completely reduced and the slag phase solidified as a consequence thereof because FeO acts as a fluxing agent for high titania slags. Cr2O3, SiO2, MnO were also reduced to a high degree. Under weak reducing conditions a fully molten slag was stable as iron oxide was only partially reduced. A large portion of manganese and some magnesia, were removed via the gas phase due to their considerable vapor pressures. Alumina was not reduced under the applied conditions. Continued reduction is easily achieved but resulted in titania slags with over 90 wt.% TiO2 with liquidus temperatures above 1700 °C. A comparison of the experimental results with industrial data suggests that industrial ilmenite smelting process operate under non-equilibrium conditions.The reduction of ilmenite concentrate is an important step in the titanium industry in order to decrease the reagent consumption and the waste material accumulation in the subsequent pigment making process. The aim is to remove the iron oxide together with part of the impurity oxides and to obtain a high titania slag together with a marketable iron metal. The reduction in the solid state at around 1200 °C to achieve ‘synthetic rutile’ and smelting reduction above 1600 °C to obtain a high titania slag and iron metal are currently applied in industry ( The slag smelting process is usually applied for low grade ilmenite concentrates which are high in iron oxide so the obtained iron metal adds to the profit. However the titania grade of the slag is lower than that of synthetic rutile. In the solid state reduction the iron fraction usually accumulates as a waste product and causes environmental hazards and costs. The aim of this work therefore is to provide phase compositions of metal and slag under varying conditions in order to better understand the industrial process and to give incentives for improvements. A vertical tube furnace with a recrystallized alumina tube was used. The heating element was a molybdenum resistance winding protected by cracked ammonia gas. The gas atmosphere in the work tube consisted of high purity argon or carbon monoxide. A more detailed description is given elsewhere ( The use of graphite or other high melting carbides, nitrides or borides (such as TiC, ZrC, BN, TiN, TiB The general experimental parameters were: temperature; 1500, 1600 and 1700 °C, the majority of the experiments being conducted at 1600 °C, quantity of graphite; the amount was normalized to the stoichiometric requirement according to composition of gas mixture; either pure argon or pure CO-gas under atmospheric pressure, the impurity oxide addition; the amounts added was determined by a statistical simplex-centroid design for mixtures ( The reagent powders were homogenized in a mortar under acetone. After drying the powder was compacted into small cylindrical pellets loaded into the container and suspended into the hot zone of the furnace by means of a molybdenum wire until equilibration was completed and then rapidly cooled by drop quenching into cold water. The periods required for equilibration were determined first. It was found that 6 h were necessary at 1500 °C. To be on the safe side the times chosen were: 10 h at 1500 °C, 8 h at 1600 °C and 6 h at 1700 °C. Occasionally measured grain profiles confirmed an even distribution of elements. The total element concentration of the phases were measured by electron microprobe techniques (WDS). Samples were also analyzed by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) to determine the coexisting mineral phase. The majority of the samples were also examined under a reflected light microscope to detect mineralogical phase changes and characteristic microstructures. The corresponding bulk composition was calculated by combining the stoichiometry obtained by XRD and the total element concentrations from WDS analysis in a molar mass balance calculation. Contents of tri- and tetra-valent titanium were not determined (e.g. by wet chemical methods). The analysis of the metal phase was complicated since the signal was affected by the surrounding titanate matrix. Titanium and carbon concentrations in the metal could not be measured reliably. All experiments in series B1 through B4 are at 1600 °C. Series B1 and B2 have identical graphite additions (C-ratio=0.82, stoichiometric reduction to Fe The titanate phase in series B1, B2 and B3 is solid because of the fairly strong reduction of FeO. In this case the metal phase was not contaminated by molybdenum from the cage. In series B4 the slag phase was liquid and the metal was seriously contaminated (see In series B5 through to B7 the initial composition of the mixture is identical in all experiments and the process parameters (temperature, gas atmosphere, C-ratio) are varied. The experimental design consisted of three series; B5 at 1500 °C, B6 at 1600 °C and B7 at 1700 °C. The initial mixture was composed of each 2.5 wt.%: MgO, MnO, SiO Under argon atmosphere and low graphite addition (C-ratio <0.5) a liquid slag coexisted with the metal whereas at higher graphite addition or under CO-gas a solid titanate phase appeared due to the almost complete reduction of FeO. At higher temperature the solidification of the slag occurred at slightly higher C-ratios. Moreover the liquid slag also crystallized into distinct mineral phases when quenched. The different minerals were identified by XRD. The phase sequence of titanate phases during carbo-thermic reduction is given qualitatively in Carbide phases were present at a C-ratio of 4 under both argon and CO atmospheres. However for argon atmosphere it is suggested that the carbide phase starts to form out of the TiO at C-ratio >2 and that oxygen is substituted as carbon is added to the system. This suggestion is also supported by the existence of a complete solid solution between TiO and TiC at experimental temperatures as reported by previous investigators ( The respective carbide compositions are listed in Under argon atmosphere the partial pressure of CO is very low and the carbide should not contain oxygen; however under CO atmosphere the carbide should contain some oxygen ( Due to the high standard Gibbs free energy of reaction FeO is almost completely reduced regardless of graphite addition and temperature under CO atmosphere. The FeO contents are generally below 0.5 mol.%. In experiments where no or little carbon was added the reduction follows reaction Statistical treatment of data in Because of the mutual immiscibility of titanate and silicate phases in the solid state, the measured concentrations of silica in the titanate were generally below 0.1 mol.% SiO The silicate phase vanished at a C-ratio of 1 under argon atmosphere while it was still present under CO-gas. This behavior coincides closely with the reduction of pseudobrookite to M The chromic oxide content was generally much lower in the silicate phase than in the titanate phase. The silica content is in the range between 40 and 50 mol.%, near the meta-silicate stoichiometry. However silicate phases with around 90 mol.% silica were found under reducing conditions such as series B1 and B2 (C-ratio=0.82). These phase relations between pseudobrookite, silica and meta-silicates were also reported ( At low carbon addition iron oxide, manganese oxide and alumina contents are high in the silicate phase. The silicate forming oxides substitute each other which results in lower FeO contents when MnO, MgO and alumina are added to the initial mixture. With increasing carbon addition FeO and MnO are also reduced from the silicate and substituted by MgO. The silica reduction takes place at C-ratios of 0.82–1.5 with the strongest reduction occurring between 0.82<C-ratio<1.0 (see Without carbon addition silica is reduced to a small extent. According to reaction The high vapor pressure of manganese under the temperatures applied affected the reduction behavior of MnO under both argon and CO atmospheres. The continuous gas stream of about 800 ml/min removed the Mn vapor from the condensed phases. In samples with high MnO addition a Fe–Mn titanate phase with ilmenite like structure (FeTiO The reduction of manganese oxide from the slag/titanate phase is described in The reduction takes place to some extent even without graphite addition (see The chromium oxide reduction took place at a carbon addition regime similar to manganese oxide. Naturally MnO is more stable than chromium oxide and should be reduced afterwards but it is rendered more reducible because it forms a volatile species. The reduction of chromium oxide occurred predominantly in the (0.82<C-ratio<1.0) range where a rapid increase of chromium in the metal was recorded. The carbide phase which became stable at higher carbon addition incorporated around 0.5 mol.% chromium. The apparent rise of chromium oxide in Chromium oxide is partly reduced without carbon addition. The reduction proceeded further when carbon was added to the system. The Under strongly reducing conditions where M The concentrations of magnesia and alumina in the titanate phase are shown in The magnesia content under CO atmosphere stays constant because the overall degree of reduction of less stable oxides is fairly uniform for C-ratios up to 1. Further increasing the graphite addition hardly reduces the magnesia contents in the titanate phase but the CO pressure in the gas was obviously sufficient to prevent extensive reduction of MgO (reaction During the carbo-thermic reduction of ilmenite concentrate the Boudouard reaction controls the gas composition at the reaction interface. At the high temperatures involved the gas consists almost entirely of CO. The compositions of ilmenite and the upgraded titanium rich product (either synthetic rutile or titania slag) are shown in The carbon activity of the system has to be limited to prevent carbide or oxy-carbide formation. The carbon content in the metal is normally between 2 and 3 wt.% C. This corresponds to a carbon activity of 0.1–0.2 and an oxygen potential between 10 Previous investigators ( A typical carbon addition for an ilmenite reduction process is 140–150 kg anthracite per 1000 kg of ilmenite. The corresponding C-ratio is 0.96 for 90% fixed carbon in the anthracite. Using this value the calculated slag equilibrium compositions for the smelting process as a function of temperature are shown in Alumina and magnesia are not reduced. Silica reduction only starts above 1500 °C and is strongly favored at higher temperature. At 1700 °C about 40% of the silica is reduced. Formation of SiO(g) is very low. MnO is already partially reduced at 1500 °C but its reduction is also strongly favored by higher temperature. Little manganese is stable as Mn(g) above 1600 °C therefore no significant loss of oxide to the gas is predicted. At 1700 °C about 70% of the initial MnO is reduced. According to the calculations chromium oxide is almost fully reduced and iron oxide contents in the slag are below 1 mol.% between 1500 and 1700 °C. These findings are in good agreement with the experimental results under similar conditions except for the behavior of MnO which may form volatile species. According to calculations the carbon content in the metal decreases with increasing temperature because reduction extends further. Above 1600 °C the carbon content is between 0.75 and 1.25 wt.% C. On the other hand industrial slags show high FeO contents above 10 wt.% and chromium oxide is only reduced partially and MnO and silica hardly at all. The carbon content in the metal is between 2 and 3 wt.%. Therefore it can easily be presumed that the industrial process does not reach equilibrium. Comparing the industrial simulation results with the results from the laboratory experiments, also demonstrates the important influence of the total gas volume involved in the equilibrium system in that the ‘loss’ of Mn(g), Mg(g) or SiO(g) is insignificant in closed systems. Another important difference between experimental and industrial conditions occurs in the silica reduction. Under industrial conditions silica was presumed dissolved in the slag while under experimental conditions when solid phases are present separate silicate phases formed in which the activity of silica is close to unity. This also explains why the silica reduction was much stronger under experimental conditions than under industrial conditions. It was also mentioned previously ( It is clear from experimental and simulation results that reduction of FeO would proceed easily to a very high degree. Thus it is predicted that a very high titania slag, with up to 95 wt.% accounted as TiO Slags from industrial processes lie close to the double saturation point of the liquid slag with respect to metal and M In The most important conclusion for samples equilibrated under argon is that the extent of reduction is primarily governed by the reductant addition expressed as C-ratio with little temperature influence. The reduction under CO atmosphere is very different especially at low reductant additions because reduction takes place despite the lack of graphite. The relatively high CO pressure on the other hand counteracts the reduction reactions and thermodynamic equilibrium considerations play a role. The reduction of magnesia, silica and MnO is therefore less strong than under argon. Experimental results as well as simulation results showed that lowering the CO pressure leads to higher degree of reduction in general and to the reduction of very stable oxides like MnO, MgO and SiO Titania is already slightly co-reduced with FeO and forms first a liquid slag which freezes to a pseudobrookite solid solution in which all oxides except silica are accommodated. Silicate phases are present in solidified slags. The pseudobrookite phase is further reduced to a M FeO is reduced easily to below 1 mol.%. However because FeO is the main flux for titanates the liquidus temperature rises rapidly to above 1700 °C. Therefore it is necessary to increase the process temperature alongside in order to obtain a liquid high grade titania slag with more than 90% TiO The temperature dependence of the reduction of a specific oxide is also dependent on the amount of carbon added. If the specific amount of carbon added is sufficient to reduce a certain oxide species completely or on the other hand if a species is too stable to be affected then there will be little influence by temperature changes. The volume of the gas phase involved has a strong impact on oxides which form gaseous species upon reduction. These species are diluted in the gas phase so that their activity is lowered which promotes the reduction of otherwise stable oxides like MgO and MnO. The authors are grateful to MINTEK (Council for Minerals Technology) and RBM (Richardsbay Minerals) for funding this project and for assistance in the chemical analyses.