Preparation of nickel-coated composite powders is presented by pressure reduction with hydrogen of aqueous Ni(II) from acetate feed solutions containing various base powders (graphite, tungsten carbide, and aluminium). Particularly, the effect of major process variables (pressure of hydrogen, temperature, concentration of Ni(II), concentration of acetates) on both the course of reduction and on the quality of resultant composite powders were investigated. Optimum conditions were established for preparation of nickel-coated graphite, tungsten carbide, and aluminium composite powders. Moreover, the effect of the presence of Bi(III), Sb(III), and As(V) in the feed Ni(II) acetate solutions on the course of pressure reduction and on the quality of nickel coating was examined and determined. The best quality nickel-coated composites were obtained from feed solutions containing Bi(III) at concentrations less than 1.0 g/l.Pressure reduction of aqueous metals with hydrogen is an efficient operation leading to metallic powders and/or to metal-coated composite powders. The metallic coat is being formed from the reduced aqueous metal due to the heterogeneous activation of molecular hydrogen Metal-coated composite powders are widely used in industry for regeneration of machinery parts, protective coatings, etc. We now present an experimental investigation on pressure reduction of aqueous Ni(II) with hydrogen from acetate solutions containing powdered graphite, tungsten carbide, and aluminium. In particular, the course of reduction and quality of resultant nickel-coated composite powders were examined at varying process variables. In order to control the concentration of hydrogen ions being generated in the reduced solutions: The course of pressure reduction of Ni(II) from solutions containing tungsten carbide powder was examined with the experimental design based on statistical methodology. The apparent rate constants of reduction were determined for reduction of aqueous nickel from acetate solutions containing nickel and graphite powders. This process followed first order kinetics with respect to concentration of Ni(II) in reduced solution Experiments were performed in an autoclave made from acid-resistant steel with Teflon-coated interior and fixtures. Analytical grade nickel sulphate, sodium acetate, and acetic acid were dissolved in double-distilled water to prepare the feed solution with required initial Ni(II) concentration and pH. The initial volume of reduced solution was constant and equal to 1 l. The feed solution was poured into a Teflon beaker containing a certain amount of powdered material to be coated and then placed in the autoclave. Thereafter, the autoclave was covered, purged three times with nitrogen to remove air, and then mixed while heating at the rate of 0.5°C/min. Once the required initial temperature for an experiment has been reached the hydrogen was introduced to the autoclave under controlled pressure. Samples (10 ml) of the reduced solution were periodically taken from the autoclave during reduction, pH was measured and nickel concentration was analysed colorimetrically at a wavelength of 445 nm. All analyses were made at ambient temperature with analytical grade reagents. In order to determine the role of selected process variables on both the course of pressure reduction and on the quality of the final nickel-coat the statistical method of design of experiment was used From results of above experiment the percent of Ni(II) reduction after 60 min ( These equations appeared to be adequate at the level of importance a=0.01. Moreover, they reveal that pressure reduction of Ni(II) with hydrogen from acetate aqueous solutions containing powdered WC is essentially governed by the initial pH of the feed solution and temperature [ The concentration of acetates in the feed solution does not affect the course of pressure reduction of aqueous Ni(II). Electron spectroscopy measurements proved that nickel exists in reduced solutions as Ni(H Somewhat more complex is the dependence of the degree of hydrolysis of Ni(II) on examined variables. From Moreover, the hydrolysis seems to influence the quality of resultant nickel-coated WC powders. Some composite powders contain only small amounts of free nickel powder (60 μm) and have a compact and uniform nickel coating ( Such powders are being generated at lower rates of the pressure reduction: initial pH less than 4.5 and temperature lower than 433 K. At higher values of these two variables the final powders contain substantial amounts of free nickel powder and have insufficient nickel coating ( The free nickel powder (60 μm) is produced as a result of reduction of precipitates originated from the hydrolysis of aqueous Ni(II). Chemical quantitative analysis, infrared spectroscopy, and thermal analysis revealed that these precipitates are the basic nickel(II) sulfates of the general formula: NiSO Basing on dependencies observed during pressure reduction of Ni(II) with hydrogen from aqueous acetate solutions containing WC powder, we assumed that both initial pH and temperature would be the key parameters in pressure reduction of nickel from solutions containing the graphite powder. Moreover, we examined the effect of the presence of Bi(III) and As(V) in the feed solution on the course of reduction. The graphite powder (P-85) was used of granulation 60–90 μm and of specific surface area 9.8 m Iron and silica were removed from the feed graphite powder by flotation with 1% terpineol solution. The remaining iron was removed with the hot, concentrated nitric acid, then, the powder was washed with water and dried with methanol. The effect of initial pH of the feed solution and the temperature on the course of pressure reduction of Ni(II) with hydrogen is shown in  The optimal conditions for preparation of nickel-coated graphite powders are: initial pH of the feed solution lower than 4.8 and temperature below 443 K. At higher pH and temperature of the reduced solution a precipitate is formed which, in turn, undergoes further reduction leading to a separate, fine fraction of nickel grains. The nickel-coated graphite powders have a uniform and compact metal coating but of varying thickness ( Nickel-coated graphite powders of almost ideal metal coating are made by pressure reduction of aqueous Ni(II) with hydrogen from acetate solutions containing Bi(III) compounds at concentration less than 1.0 g/dm Substantial amounts of fine nickel powder containing arsenic is formed beside the composite grains. Therefore, nickel-coated graphite powders produced from the feed solutions containing arsenates are of no use for plasma sprying. The course of pressure reduction with hydrogen of Ni(II) from acetate solutions containing aluminium powder and the quality of resultant nickel-coated aluminium powder were examined at varying temperatures and initial pH. Since the nickel-coated aluminium powder to be used for plasma spraying requires a nickel content of approximately 70%, 13 g of aluminium (60–90 μm) were added to each feed solution. The effect of initial temperature on the course of reduction is shown in A sharp minimum ( The initial pH of the feed acetate solution appeared to be essential for both the rate of Ni(II) reduction and the quality of nickel-coated aluminium powders. The temperature of pressure reduction does not affect the quality of these powders. The rate of Ni(II) reduction initially increases with the initial pH up to 4.8 and then sharply decreases. This dependence is correlated with another shown in The highest rate of reduction is observed at the initial pH at which the drop of Ni concentration caused by heating the feed solution to the desired temperature is negligible. Analysis of the precipitates formed during reduction revealed that their composition is similar to that observed in aqueous Ni(II) acetate solutions containing graphite and tungsten carbide powders. They were basic nickel sulfates containing aluminium. Their compositions vary with the initial pH of the feed solutions. Scanning micrographs of nickel-coated aluminium powders ( The pressure reduction with hydrogen of aqueous Ni(II) from acetate-buffered feed solutions containing various base powders allows for the preparation of a variety of nickel-coated composite powders. At the adequate process variables (temperature, initial pH) almost ideal nickel coating is achievable. Precipitation of insoluble Ni(II) compounds from heated feed solutions worsens the quality of final nickel-coated composite powders. The Presence of Bi(III) in the feed solutions improves the quality of the resultant composite powder while the presence of Sb(III) does not influence this quality. On the other hand, the presence of arsenates in the feed solutions substantially worsens the quality of final composite powders.