The ease or complexity of the selective separation of copper sulphur minerals during sulphide flotation is always dominated by the level of surface oxidation. The interaction between oxidized pyrite and other base metal sulphides is important for the flotation process. In this study, the effects of fine digenite particles on the flotation of heavily oxidized pyrite in the presence of sodium butyl xanthate were investigated. The micro-flotation results showed that the floatability of pyrite declined sharply once it was over-oxidized. However, the addition of fine digenite significantly restored the floatability and flotation rate of pyrite, even in strong alkaline solutions. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) of the flotation products indicated no copper ions on the pyrite surface. This restoration can be attributed to fine digenite particles adsorbing on the surface of coarse pyrite particles and removing a large number of fine pyrite particles covering the pyrite surface in the presence of sodium butyl xanthate. The extended Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek theory based on zeta potential measurements and contact angle measurements was used to calculate the interaction energy between mineral particles. The calculation results showed good agreement with the flotation and SEM-EDS analysis results and explained the mechanism of particle interaction.Froth flotation is widely used for the treatment of base metal sulphides, and relies on the differences in surface chemistry between valuable sulphide minerals and gangue minerals ( Moderate surface oxidation of pyrite is known to be beneficial for the adsorption of collectors and formation of a hydrophobic surface. However, once pyrite is heavily oxidized, the floatability declines sharply, and xanthates cannot effectively collect pyrite unless the dosage is significantly increased. Based on this, many researchers have attempted to depress pyrite in sulphide flotation by oxidation. For example, lime can depress pyrite by accelerating the oxidation of pyrite in alkaline solutions, and is widely used in traditional practices. However, the results of selective separation are unsatisfactory in many cases, particularly when obtaining high-grade copper concentrate. On the one hand, metal ions like copper ions also exist in the flotation pulp, and they can activate pyrite flotation through Cu adsorption on the surface above a certain concentration ( Low/high temperature thermal oxidation ( Digenite is a type of secondary copper-bearing ore. In the present study, the flotation of natural, heavily oxidized pyrite in the presence of fine digenite was investigated by the micro-flotation, zeta potential, and scanning electron microscopy–energy dispersive spectrometry (SEM-EDS) analysis. The interaction results were verified by the calculations based on the extended Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory. The findings of this study will help in understanding the selective separation of heavily oxidized pyrite and fine digenite. Fine digenite may be used as an activating agent to restore the floatability of heavily oxidized pyrite. Lump pyrite and digenite samples were obtained from Zijin Mining (Fujian Province, China). The ore samples were carefully crushed, handpicked, dry-ground with a porcelain ball mill, and finally dry-sieved to obtain size fractions of −74 + 38 µm for the pure mineral flotation tests. The −5 µm fraction of pyrite and digenite was obtained by the elutriation method, and used for the artificial mineral flotation tests, contact angle measurements, and zeta potential measurements. The samples were exposed to air during the preparation for less than 2 h ( For the oxidation experiments, the samples were left on glass dishes and exposed to air. In order to make the results comparable, the temperature and relative humidity of the laboratory were controlled at approximately 25 °C and 60%, respectively, during the course of the experiments. Sodium butyl xanthate (SBX) obtained from Tieling, China had 95% purity, and was employed as the collector for the micro-flotation experiments. Analytical-grade HCl and NaOH were used as the pH regulators. Ferric chloride was used as an activating agent. Terpenic oil was employed as a frother. Deionized water (DI water) with a resistivity of 18.3 MΩ·cm was employed in all experiments. The micro-flotation experiments were performed with a XFGC A Malvern Instruments Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyser was used to determine the zeta potential values of −5 µm pyrite and digenite particles. After 20 mg of a sample was added to 50 mL of DI water, the pulp was stirred with a magnetic stirrer for 5 min. Then, the pulp pH was adjusted with 0.1 mol/L HCl or 0.1 mol/L NaOH to the desired value in the presence or absence of SBX. The pulp was stirred for additional 5 min, and left to stand for another 10 min in order to settle down the coarse particles. Then, the supernatant was injected through a syringe into the test electrophoresis tube for the measurement. To ensure the accuracy of the results, the zeta potential measurements were performed at least five times for each pH value, and the average value was calculated. The measurements were performed at room temperature (25 °C), and the error was found to be within 5 mV. An SU1510 scanning electron microscope built by the Hitachi Company in Japan and equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer was used to observe the surface profile of the mineral particles, and obtain the elemental composition of the surface. The operating voltage of the scanning electron microscope was 15 kV. The contact angles of pyrite after the oxidation and digenite in the presence of SBX were measured with the JC2000A contact angle apparatus. Lamellar samples with a highly smooth surface were prepared by using the compression method. The samples were placed in a rectangular glass chamber, and a liquid drop with a base diameter of 3–4 mm was introduced onto the surface through a micro-syringe. Special care was taken during the measurements to avoid vibrating the needle and distorting the drop shape. Each measurement was repeated at least five times, and the average value was reported. All measurements were carried out at approximately 25 °C. The pulp pH values showed a significant effect on the interaction between the sulphide ores and SBX. The flotation of pyrite as a function of pH and oxidation level in the presence of SBX is shown in However, when pyrite was over-oxidized for 120 days, the flotation recovery became extremely low (12.26% at pH 8.25) even with the ultrasonication/decantation technique. This indicates that the oxidized layer of the surface was difficult to remove. In a weakly acidic solution, the floatability was slightly restored because of the cleaning effect of the acid ( There are few studies in literature on the flotation of digenite ( Flotation kinetics studies the variation in the amount of froth product with flotation time and quantitative identification of all rate-controlling variables ( The correlation index  Electrokinetic measurements are widely used to monitor the changes in charge that occur on the surface (  As the oxidation time was increased, however, the surface potential shifted toward the positive side, and the IEP of pyrite changed to higher pH values of pH 4.6, 7.6, and 7.8 in the absence of SBX shown in  To ascertain the oxidation level of pyrite after oxidizing for 120 days and the mechanism by which adding fine digenite improved the flotation of heavily oxidized pyrite in the presence of 1 × 10    The analysis results above showed that the addition of fine digenite particles effectively improved the flotation recovery of heavily oxidized pyrite by removing the fine pyrite particles and adsorbing onto the surface of larger pyrite particles in the presence of SBX. The interactions between fine digenite particles and fine pyrite particles oxidized for 120 days (fine–fine particles), fine digenite particles and coarse pyrite particles oxidized for 40 days (fine–coarse particles 1), and fine digenite particles and coarse pyrite particles oxidized for 120 days (fine–coarse particles 2) could be calculated with the extended DLVO theory. According to this theory, the total interaction energy ( The van der Waals interactions between fine–fine particles and fine–coarse particles can be respectively calculated as: The electrical interactions between fine–fine particles and fine–coarse particles are respectively determined by The hydrophobic or hydration interactions between fine–fine particles and between fine–coarse particles are respectively given by The value of the decay length Because most oxidized minerals and sulphide minerals have a monopolar surface for which, The Hamaker constant can be determined from The total interaction energies between fine–fine particles and between fine–coarse particles were calculated based on Eqs.  This paper mainly studied the effect of fine digenite particles on heavily oxidized pyrite prepared by air-oxidation techniques at fixed ambient temperature and relative humidity conditions, and presents in detail the mechanism by which fine digenite particles restore the floatability of heavily oxidized pyrite. Zeta potential measurements, SEM-EDS studied, and extended DLVO theoretical calculations are used to explain the mechanism. The results show that after 10% of fine digenite was introduced to the pulp, the pyrite recovery increased from 12.26% to 90.14% at pH 8.5 in the presence of 1 × 10 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided from the