Thermoplastics are primarily used as packaging materials that—unlike those used in automobile production, the electronics, and construction industries—show life cycles of <1 year and substantial return flows worldwide of about 150 million tonnes per annum. Today, forecasts of considerably increased production of plastics and their contamination of aquatic and soil systems throughout the world have prompted more stringent legal requirements as well as industrial initiatives to manage the resource “plastics” more sustainably. Regarding packaging wastes, there are established process chains that generate preconcentrates of different qualities via mechanically based methods and that consist of a combination of comminution, conditioning, sorting, and compacting steps. During the first enrichment level, the resource plastics, at best, should be highly preconcentrated through collection and technical treatment. The subsequent refining process aims to separate out the remaining foreign materials and impurities and then make available a suitable material for further processing. Altered target objectives on the individual levels lead to the implementation of various processes that are mostly unique and are geared to upstream waste collection systems and/or technological processes. The wide variety of materials poses a huge challenge for generating defined recycling materials. Thus, the highest recycling qualities (food grade) place high demands on waste collection and technology.Introduction Structure of recycling chains for packaging wastes Collection and preenrichment of postconsumer packaging wastes Technologies of the preenrichment level Comminution (liberation) Countercomb shredders Conditioning Drum screens Waste screen Ballistic separators Air separators Drum separators Sorting Magnetic separators Eddy current separators Sensor-based sorting—belt sorters Manual sorting Compacting Factors influencing the sorting processes Refinement Comminution Single-shaft shredders Removal of impurities Cleaning/washing/separating/sorting Wet methods Static sink-swim separation Dry-mechanical treatment Finishing Cutting mills Agglomerators Extrusion Deep cleansing (food-grade qualities) Outlook References The advantages of plastics include its low density, high functionalities with comparably simple processing properties together with the recent material advances in the field of polymer chemistry, and the simultaneous high availability of petroleum as the starting material. These advantages have continuously expanded the possibilities to utilize plastics in consumer goods as well in the construction, automobile, agricultural, and medical industries. This development has been amplified by the increasing living standards of wide population strata in emerging countries, changing consumer habits in industrial countries together with the rise in global trade. Thus, in the period from 1989 to 2016, the worldwide annual production of plastics has more than tripled from about 100 million tonnes to 335 million tonnes At the end of their utilization phase, plastics accumulate as waste, totaling about 260 Unlike metals for which economically sustainable recycling loops have been established for decades By contrast, from a global perspective, in 2016, approximately 16% (40 Waste composition and their origination site essentially dictate the organizational and technological measures necessary for a material recycling. In practice, various recycling chains have become established (   Moreover, packaging wastes can accrue, e.g., as overpackaging or transport packaging from large canteens or the retail sector as well as production wastes or as reject batches from the plastics-processing industry. Often these material streams are separately recorded and, depending on the After an enrichment by collection and/or technical treatment, the so-called “refinement” takes place in recycling plants. The required technological effort depends on the input qualities and the product qualities specified for the secondary raw material. The spectrum of secondary products ranges from thick-walled, simple consumption goods—manufactured mainly from mixed plastics—such as park benches, garden furniture, and flower pots up to food-grade PET, which is used as a secondary raw material for PET bottles. The collection of wastes in specific c For  The so-called “ In Germany, e.g., the “ For separate collection systems, it is important to take into account the huge space required (due to their low bulk density) for the transport and intermediate warehouse capacities of packaging wastes, all of which drives up the costs of such systems. Thus, even if there is no efficiently separate collection expected under the given waste management framework conditions but a material recycling is intended, packaging wastes can be collected together with residual wastes in the gray bin ( Studies have shown that plastic waste from municipal solid waste (MSW) basically can be materially recycled and that the yield of used plastics from municipal wastes and posttreatment in a MBT plant can be somewhat greater than for preconcentrates from a separate collection The technological processes employed in the first and second levels of enrichment are dry processes, which means without using washing water, and consist of liberation, classifying, sorting, and compacting steps. Due to The process objective is defined according to the qualitative specifications that customers place on the generated preconcentrates. Quality parameters are prescribed, for example, by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Kunststoff-Recycling mbH, in the form of product specifications which, in many European countries, have been taken up by the branches of the plastics-processing recycling industry. These specifications stipulate the material group, purity grades, the type of and maximum levels of impurities, and the delivery form  C To reduce the costs of transport, the generated preconcentrates are pressed into bales and, subsequently, are either directed to the second enrichment level (from the MBT) or are directly brought to the recycling process (refinement). Exemplified through sorting plants for postconsumer packaging waste, the aggregates and the target objectives are presented as discussed in the following sections. In the first process step of sorting plants, only the bags (often bags of thin polyethylene [PE] film) should be opened to expose the contents. There are two reasons for this: on the one hand, crushing of, e.g., bottles would destroy the sorting-relevant article properties. On the other hand, crushing would reduce the particle size, thereby producing a large number of fine and, thus, nonsortable particles. Moreover, dust fractions that adhere to the coarser particles would lead to poorer product quality and also could interfere with the process. In light of these demands, a more intensive comminution is precluded because of these accompanying harmful effects. In modern sorting plants, countercomb shredders (CCSs), which mainly use a tearing action to open up the bundles, are used for larger throughputs of >10 tonnes per annum. After delivery or intermediate storage, the wastes are loaded in the feed hopper via a wheel loader. CCSs ( In the reverse mode, no shredding takes place, thereby causing an interruption or reduction in the material flow to subsequent screening steps. A CCS in two-shaft design can reduce the duration of the reversals in total, which means that the material discharge from the CCS can be made somewhat uniform, which is fundamentally desirable in view of a uniform volumetric loading of the subsequent sieving process CCSs have a rotary diameter of up to 1050 Through conditioning processes, material flows are pretreated so that sorting processes can be conducted according to the best possible conditions. The following fundamental requirements are Ejection of coarse and disturbing fractions and fractions of fines, heavy, and light materials, Differentiation according to shape characteristics such as 2D and 3D particles, Allocation of material flows in narrow particle size distributions, and The making available of material flows that enable a reliable separation in the single particle-based sorting steps. Here, the process engineering is implemented via screening machines, air separators, and/or ballistic separators. After the liberation stage, the material flow is first directed to the initial separation unit—a screening machine. Screening machines separate according to the geometric dimensions of the mass flows. For material flows with a high 2D fraction, an intensive revolution of the material is necessary; this can be attained with drum screens and so-called “waste” screens. Drum screens (see The screen casing rotates over rollers, equipped with either truck tires for simpler machine technology or with Vulkollan rollers for more expensive units. The material, fed axially into the drum, is pulled via frictional and centrifugal forces up the cylindrical wall until a certain height, In practice, drum screen machines are designed for average residence times: typically, orientation values with residence times of between 90 and 120 As the result of the low acceleration forces, the self-cleaning forces of drum screens are very limited compared to that of other screen machine types. This increases the risk of blockage of the screen cloth by the tendency of braiding by 1D material and of long elastic particles. Tubes, which are fixed on the screen openings in stationary drum screens, can effectively help prevent the blockage of the screen surface. Besides separating out fines, drum screens in sorting plants must fulfill the function of volume separator. Typically, the input flow is separated into three partial fractions, e.g., <40 The so-called ‘waste” screens are also used for material systems with low bulk densities and considerable flat fractions ( For classification processes and specific to the unit, the separation takes place according to the various particle properties. Ballistic separators ( However, ballistic separators are essentially important in sorting plants for their conditioning action for subsequent, single particle-based, sensor-based separation steps. Prerequisites for high-sorting efficiencies are, e.g., the previous ejection of films or papers that exhibit low surface densities or partially considerable sizes and/or the avoidance of spontaneous movements of rollable particles on conveyor belt-supported sensor sorters. Ballistic separations consisting of parallelly arranged “paddle” segments (a) inclined up to 25 degrees (α) move circularly in an offset way via an eccentric system (compare with the principle of a “stepper”; (b). The paddle segments can be up to 8 Air separators ( Air separators are often employed as so-called The limiting factor of the separation quality in the separation channel is the solid material loading of the separation air, which, for mixed municipal wastes, e.g., should not exceed values of 300 Disadvantages of air separators are their considerable demand for space for the large-dimensioned light fraction separator and the necessity to use a dedusting unit. Moreover, for moist materials and high-temperature gradients between the separation air and ambient air, condensations may occur in the mostly highly mounted pipes, which can lead to blockages or even to breaks.  Following the conditioning phase is the process target of generating recyclable preconcentrates. Here, the ferrous (FE, e.g., tinplate cans) and nonferrous (NF; e.g., aluminum packages) fractions are separated by physical properties (FE: magnetic susceptibility, NF: electric conductivity) through repulsive forces initiated from external magnetic fields. Plastics can be identified according to their polymer structure, i.e., chemical properties (absorption or near-infrared [NIR] radiation) as well as their article properties (i.e., shape and/or color). For this, sensor-based separation technology is employed. The distinguishing feature of sensor-based sorting in contradiction to metal separation is that no natural force Furthermore, manual picking can be used as simple alternative to sensor-based sorting. In plants of all enrichment levels, magnetic separators are used for machine protection as well as recovery of ferritic fractions from the waste stream (e.g., tinplate cans). By means of electro- or permanent magnets, a magnetic field is generated, which deflects magnetizable components from its pathway. In their simplest design, magnetic separators are implemented as band-roller magnetic separators in the head of a belt conveyer The separation effect of eddy current separators is based on physical phenomena that occur when an electrically well-conducting body is exposed to a temporally altered external magnetic field. Due to interactions with the exciter field, a voltage is induced in the conductive body. This results in a current flow in self-contained pathways, the so-called The alternating magnetic field is generated by a fast-rotating permanent magnet (a; Due to the numerous parameters that affect the separation, only an NF preconcentrate can be generated in the eddy current separator; a separation according to metal types, e.g., Al, Cu, is impossible because of the manifold factors influencing the trajectory (e.g., conductivity, density, shape, and moisture). As Eddy current separators are offered in machine widths of 0.3–2.8 As the result of technological developments in the field of sensor technology, measurement data acquisition, and evaluation, sensor-based sorting systems ( Characteristics of sensor-based techniques are the consecutive distribution, detection, recognition, and separation of valuable materials. In addition to providing a monolayer on the delivery unit, a sufficient spatial delimitation of the particles to be detected and sorted is required. In the case By means of a vibration chute (a), the material stream is first spread evenly over the belt width at speeds of 0.3 With emitters (c), the particles on the belt are irradiated with light of a particular wavelength range. The radiation reflected by the particle surface is recorded by a detector system (d) and evaluated by relevant algorithms. Based on the digital separation decision from the control unit (e), in the last step, the particles can be separated through the activation of compressed air nozzles (f). Like the eddy current separation, the deflected particles are separated over a slide plate (g). In NIR sorting machines, the spectrum is located in the NIR wavelength range of ca. 780 In the Extended sorting options result from combining NIR- and VIS technology (multisensor technology) by exploiting various properties such as polymer type, shape, and/or color In the simplest case, the separation according to types or article properties can be performed by manual sorting. This method, however, is almost only employed for quality control because of limited throughputs (maximum 1800 grabs per hour) and low sorting efficiencies, together with high costs for wages and occupational protection standards (ventilation system). However, in countries with correspondingly reduced costs and protection standards, the manual sorting can partially or entirely replace the function of sensor-based sorting. After the material flows had been separated according to polymer classes and/or article properties, these materials need to be transported to the actual recycling plants. For this, the preconcentrates are generally compressed into bales of defined dimensions, with specifications about the number of bales that can be loaded per truck as well as the maximum load weight. The compaction typically occurs in Under optimal conditions, the sensor-based sorting can attain a yield of 80%–85%. In practice, however, the yield values fall short, sometimes considerably MT plants are designed for average material conditions and quantity flows. Notable deviations from this generally result in processing outside the proper area, which, in turn, causes reduced efficiencies in the separation or leads to increased specific operational costs per unit (e.g., in case of underfilling or machine idling). Here, influencing factors are the heterogeneity of the input material, waste quantities, and the quality of the plant feeding. Waste compositions reflect the individual consumption and disposal habits and are determined by many sociocultural influences as well as by alternative disposal pathways. Waste compositions and quantity flows in individual collection areas often vary considerably Overfilling in the feed line to the first separating unit (drum screen) is not compensated during the course of the process Moreover, the inventory of existing sorting plants varies considerably; while the product flow in modern production plants is increasingly subjected to a multistage sorting, the older plants are often limited to a single-stage sorting treatment. As single-stage processes can only be The preconditioned material stream is directed to a “rougher” stage, parameterized for maximum yield. The resulting flow of recyclable materials, which is still highly impure, is then treated in the “cleaner” stage to separate out the contained impurities. Both discharges still have valuable materials that are recovered in a “scavenger” step and that can be recirculated. The corresponding three-stage sorting concepts for single substance flows for valuable mineral raw materials have been practiced for a long time. Up to now, however, such a multistage sorting in sorting plants occurs only in exceptional cases, especially due to economic reasons. Even so, if a sorting is operated only as a single-stage process, no high expectations can be met regarding the yield or product quality. New composite materials and contaminants pose further challenges that limit the efficiency of sorting plants. Thus, the increasing circulation of such multilayer composite materials (consisting of layers of several kinds of plastics and/or of plastics/metals) inevitably reduces the quality of the plastic preconcentrates. Moreover, the conventional sensor technology (NIR and VIS) installed in the sorting plants can detect the particles only close to the surface. Since damp or dirty surfaces can mask sorting characteristics such as polymer type or color, these features cannot be recognized. In conclusion, the operation of sorting plants faces considerable challenges, especially affected by the material composition and mass flow of the Even for monosystems such as deposit bottles, impurities such as surface dirt, bottle labels, bottle caps (PE), residual contents, and remaining overpackaging or sleeves still exist and diminish the quality; thus, it is crucial to remove such debris in order to ensure high qualities of secondary raw materials. In this part of the processing chain, “plastics recycling,” the reference system switches from “raw” to dry matter “DM,” which means that the impurities carried along in the material flow are removed and that a dry plastic exits the system toward recycling. Through the change in the reference system, the mass flow between the output “sorting” and the input “treatment” changes as shown in The process “refinement” has addressed this issue accordingly. Compared to the technological preenrichments from MT, MBT, and sorting plants, refinement differs as follows: Destruction of article properties for the all-round cleaning, separation of foreign matter (e.g., PE bottle caps), and the generation of bulk properties of the materials for subsequent processing steps, Removal of adhesive impurities by dry or wet methods via intensive friction stress, Substance density separation by exploiting density differences between polymer types in the air stream or in water or salt solutions, Optional separation according to color or material thickness, Use of dewatering and drying processes following wet treatment, and Directed shape alteration by plastic deformation by melting for preparing processable agglomerates or regranulates. In addition, a so-called “food grade” quality requires a deep cleansing of recycled materials by alkali addition or decontamination in a vacuum in connection with melt filtration. There are various processing options for generating “nonfood” qualities. For example, the following sequence can be selected: Precomminution (bale opening and particle size reduction) Removal of impurities and foreign substances from the upstream chain (sorting) Cleaning of dirt, residual contents, and adhesives (washing) Size reduction and homogenization of piece sizes Sorting according to polymer types Extensive removal of moisture (dewatering, drying) Final shaping (comminution/agglomeration/extrusion). The bales are mostly opened with single-shaft shredders ( The comminution takes place quasi continuously; a mostly hydraulically operated stamp system (a) pushes the material into the loading zone between a rotating roller (b) equipped with blades (c) (400–500 Before further steps are taken and also to protect machines, it is recommended to remove magnetic contaminants and exposed bale wire by magnetic separation. VA metals, which are not or only weakly magnetic can be separated, are especially problematic. These can be separated by inductive sorters (see Wet methods are standard in the refinement of plastics. While these techniques are expensive because of energy-intensive drying processes and the water treatment required, particulate and liquid impurities are separated to a high level in combination with friction processes. By means of intensive mechanical stress (friction at high frequency), the plastic surfaces are first cleaned of adhesives and glued-on labels, for which dry-mechanical and wet-mechanical methods are available. In the wet-working Wet washes are often operated with detergents and at high temperature (hot wash). If wastes are wet-mechanically cleaned, this is often done in combination with a wet density sorting. For the separation of polyolefins (PE, PP), the simplest option is static floating sink density sorting in the separation medium, water (ρ Metallic and mineral impurities, besides “heavy” plastics (e.g., PET, PVC), accumulate in the “sink” fraction (see In so-called Alternatively, the wet density sorting can occur in an amplified gravitational field in For treatment in hydrocyclones ( Sorting centrifuges separate most selectively because of their high acceleration rates. The centrifuge consists of a drum with tapered ends; in the inside is a two-part screw ( The feed material (I) is fed axially (c). After the separation process, the solid flows leave the front of the centrifuge (1and 3), while the process water (2) is circulated. The sorting centrifuge separates particles of 4–20 A dry MT is applied alternatively or complementarily to the wet MT. Similar to the principle of the wet friction washer, during the dry cleaning of, e.g., flakes ( Often For high-quality requirements, sorting products must be cleaned from impurities with the same density. Due to the technical pretreatment, the particles to be treated have a pronounced 3D structure that makes the flowing and the dosage easier. Sensor-based chute sorters ( Like belt sorters, a monolayer and its spatial delimitation in pixel range is also a prerequisite for good sorting results with chute sorters, see In Various dielectric constants and conductivities of plastic types are exploited for separation by using free fall or corona roller electrostatic separators. The prerequisites of this technique are a narrow particle range of 6–12 Cutting mills ( After passing through treatment, the pure, homogeneous plastic products show partially low bulk densities of 20–100  In the extruder ( For low-value materials such as mixed plastics, a material recycling can take place via Generating food-grade qualities places the highest demands on deep cleansing. Here, established methods are, for example, the degassing or separation of particulate impurities combined with vacuum treatment and extrusion or the surface treatment of flakes with alkali. The degassing action of an extruder can be intensified by treatment of vacuum reactors, which are placed either upstream or downstream from the extruder. The position considerably affects the parameterization of the residence times and temperatures. A disadvantage of this established method is a certain restriction of the material properties by shortening of the molecular chains that causes a reduction in the intrinsic viscosity during the melting process. Moreover, remaining adhesive residues can create point-by-point discolorations In the surface treatment ( The operators of plastic waste treatment plants are technically and economically geared to special input materials and special products. They have complete influence over the quality of the input material, when they acquire ownership of the raw material. However, their influence on the input quality is limited if they act as service providers for third parties, who make available quantities in a minimum quality from a system of upstream chains. Occasional activities of wholesale chains regarding the construction of their own recycling chains and adapted recycling-friendly design lead to higher uses of recycled material in the PET bottle production. By contrast, high-quality recycling for postconsumer wastes is reaching its technical limits because of specific additives as well as the increasing amount of complex multilayer products. Developments in chemical recycling or in the raw material recovery of plastics can lead to complementary recovery paths,