The work addresses phase transformation of titania slag using microwave irradiation. Properties of samples before and after microwave irradiation including thermal stability, crystal structures, microstructure, surface chemical functional groups and molecular structures, have been investigated by TG/DTA, XRD, SEM, FT-IR and Raman, respectively. The results of TG/DTA showed that titania slag have two phase transformation, one at 578.0°C and another at 850.0°C. It was confirmed that at roasting temperature in excess of 600°C, anatase starts to transform as rutile. The property changes can be attributed to microwave irradiation, which causes the crystal transformation.Titanium is the ninth most abundant chemical element and the fourth most abundant usable metallic element in the Earth’s crust Microwave irradiation technology is one of effective routes in realizing energy saving and green production The objectives of present work are to: (1) preparation of synthetic rutile from high titania slag under microwave irradiation; and (2) assess properties of samples before and after microwave irradiation, including thermal stability, crystal structures, microstructure, surface chemical functional groups and molecular structures, systematically. Titania slag was obtained from Kunming city, Yunnan province, China. The slag contains 72.33% TiO The thermogravimetry and corresponding differential thermal analysis were carried out simultaneously using a thermal gravimetric analyzer (NETZSCH STA 409, Germany). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a X-ray diffractometer (D/Max 2200, Rigaku, Japan) using Cu Kα radiation ( The microwave irradiation experiments were carried out in a self-made microwave muffle furnace. An industrial microwave muffle furnace typically consists of a magnetron to produce the microwaves, a waveguide to transport the microwaves, a resonance cavity to manipulate microwaves for a specific purpose, and a control system to regulate the temperature and microwave power. The power supply of the microwave muffle furnace was two magnetrons at 2.45 100 The TG and the DTA curves of the samples are shown in On the basis of experimental results, the following mechanism of the weight gain of titania slag could be proposed: The following mechanism of decomposition reaction of Fe The crystal structures of titania slag are characterized by XRD, and the results are illustrated in The anatase structure belongs to the tetragonal space group The surface chemical functional groups of the samples are characterized using FT-IR, and the spectra results are shown in SEM of titania slag before and after microwave irradiation is characterized, and the results are shown in In summary, paper offers a convenient method for the preparation of synthetic rutile under microwave irradiation. This technique is interesting not only for the shorter processing time and low temperature, but also for the possibility to control the microstructure and crystal structural properties of samples. Based on the XRD results, it was confirmed that, at microwave roasting temperature higher than 600 The authors acknowledge the financial supports from the National Scientific Foundation of China (No. 51090385), the International S&T Cooperation Program of China (No. 2012DFA70570), Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (No. 20125314120014) and the Applied Foundation Fund of Yunnan Province of China (No. 2012FD015).