Researchers from the Ramazzini Institute have reported that lifespan dosing of rats with aspartame treatment is associated with an increased overall incidence of malignant tumors, including leukemias/lymphomas, transitional cell carcinomas of the renal pelvis/ureter, and malignant schwannomas of the peripheral nerves. Other carcinogenicity studies conducted on aspartame have shown no such carcinogenic potential in any organ system. Additional data to assess the carcinogenic potential of aspartame, especially in relation to the publications of the Ramazzini Institute, were obtained from a third-party histological evaluation of tissues from a carcinogenicity study previously conducted to assess the potential for aspartame to induce tumors of the brain. The results of this histological evaluation provide no evidence of a tumorigenic effect of aspartame in any organ group, including those organs/tissues reportedly affected in the Ramazzini Institute's studies. The only effects identified were an increased incidence of renal pelvic mineralization and renal pelvic hyperplasia secondary to the irritant properties of the mineralization process. The toxicological significance of these particular findings is widely considered minimal. There is no evidence that aspartame is carcinogenic in rats, at least to doses of 4 g/kg body weight/day administered over a 2-year period.Doctor of Veterinary Medicine European Food Safety Authority United States Environmental Protection Agency United States Food and Drug Administration Good Laboratory Practice hematoxylin-eosin Japanese Society of Toxicologic Pathology Japanese College of Veterinary Pathologists National Toxicology Program Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development United States Aspartame, a non-nutritive intense sweetener that is approximately 200 times sweeter than sucrose, is an α-methyl ester of a dipeptide comprised of aspartic acid and phenylalanine. Aspartame is approved for use in a wide range of food products in more than 90 countries around the world. Its safety has been evaluated by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA), as well as by numerous national food safety authorities, including the United States (U.S.) Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) ( As part of the safety assessment process, aspartame was tested in several carcinogenicity bioassays by Searle Co. ( Subsequent to the work of the NTP, 3 lifetime rodent (2 in rats and 1 in mice) carcinogenicity studies were conducted by the Ramazzini Institute in Bologna, Italy ( The carcinogenicity studies conducted on aspartame by the Ramazzini Institute have been subject to extensive review and criticism regarding flaws in study design, methodology, and reporting. In particular, these studies suffered from lack of peer review, misdiagnosis, high incidence of respiratory infections, and significant loss of tissues to autolysis ( While leading regulatory authorities consider aspartame safe and free from concern about carcinogenic activity, the Ramazzini Institute publications continue to be cited as evidence to indicate carcinogenic potential. From a public perception point of view, this situation is concerning since few of the other carcinogenicity studies conducted on aspartame have been published in the public domain. Summaries of studies are available, but not with extensive tabulated histopathological data ( It is therefore considered important, for the sake of balance, to have in the public domain detailed results of carcinogenicity studies other than those conducted by the Ramazzini Institute. The carcinogenicity study conducted by The methods (test diet, mode of administration, number of animals, dose groups, animal husbandry) used in the conduct of the original study have been describe previously ( In this study, specific pathogen free Slc Wistar rats were obtained from Shizuoka Agricultural Cooperative Association for Laboratory Animals (Shizuoka, Japan) at 4 weeks of age and acclimated for 2 weeks. This strain of rat is genetically similar to the F344 rat ( Paraffin blocks containing tissue, and their associated prepared slides from the Since deterioration in the preserved hematoxylin-eosin (HE)-stained slide mounted specimens stored at the Ajinomoto Co., Inc. facility was observed (air bubbles, discoloration, The computer-assisted data in this study were recorded and processed by Biosafety Research Center's computer system. The differences in incidence of neoplastic and non-neoplastic findings between the control group and each treatment group were analyzed by Fisher's exact test. The data were analyzed by two-tailed analysis at the 5% and 1% levels of significance. As reported by The HE slides re-prepared for this study were in a good condition suitable for histopathological evaluation. Analyses of the results of the histopathological examination failed to detect any evidence of a tumorigenic effect in any organ or tissues (see Supplemental Data With respect to non-neoplastic findings, the histological analysis of the tissues did reveal an increase in the incidence and severity of pelvic mineralization of the kidneys in the high-dose groups (p < 0.01) and in the mid-dose males (p < 0.01) ( There were no other non-neoplastic lesions that could be attributed to aspartame treatment. A few other statistically significant findings were noted, including: decreased lymphocyte cellular infiltrate in the bladder of mid-dose males (p < 0.05) (incidence values of 8/53, 2/53, 2/57, and 6/58 in control through high-dose groups, respectively), decreased incidence of epididymal atrophy in mid-dose males (p < 0.05) (incidence values of 28/58, 20/60, 16/58, and 23/60 in control through high-dose groups, respectively), and decreased incidence of Harderian gland metaplasia of the lacrimal gland in low-dose males (p < 0.05) (incidence values of 31/45, 22/47, 31/48, and 27/46 in control through high-dose groups, respectively). The results of the present histological evaluation of all organs and tissues from the stored samples of the Ishii study (as per OECD guidelines), showed no evidence that aspartame, even at doses of up to the high dose of 4 g/kg body weight/day for 104 weeks, has carcinogenic activity in rats. This finding is consistent with the results of previous carcinogenicity studies published in summary form and reviewed by authoritative regulatory bodies ( It is difficult to reconcile the reports of increased incidence of total malignant tumors ( The Ramazzini Institute studies have been subject to extensive criticism that undermines their credibility and validity ( With respect to the carcinogenicity findings in the  Given that the Ramazzini Institute has published a number of lifetime rodent studies that allege carcinogenic activity of substances previously demonstrated to be non-carcinogenic, the work of the Ramazzini Institute became the subject of several investigations/audits undertaken by regulatory bodies and experts alike including EFSA, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the FDA, and the NTP. A consensus has been reached that the exceedingly high incidence (lymphomas/leukemias) reported in most of their studies are the result of chronic infection and have no relationship to the treatment substances (  With regard to the schwannomas of peripheral nerves noted in the first rat Ramazzini Institute carcinogenicity ( The only notable finding in the histological evaluation of the tissues in the current study was an increased incidence of renal pelvic mineralization and associated increase in transitional cell hyperplasia (synonymous with the more recent term urothelial cell hyperplasia) of the renal pelvis. It has already been reported that pelvic mineralization occurs spontaneously, but is frequently exacerbated by slight dietary imbalances with respect to electrolyte (calcium, phosphorus, magnesium) intake ( While aspartame is well-absorbed in the rat at least to doses of 1000 mg/kg body weight ( Urinary tract carcinogens can induce transitional cell hyperplasia with cell atypia ( In summary, the results of the re-evaluation of the tissues and organs from the The Ishii (1981) rat study was conducted by Ajinomoto Co., Inc. The authors Yusuke Shibui and Shoji Fujitani are employed by Ajinomoto Co., Inc, a supplier of aspartame. The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at  Transparency document related to this article can be found online at