Storage is the critical operation within the biomass supply chain to reduce feedstock supply risks and to manage smooth year-around operations of a biorefinery or a bioenergy plant. This paper analyzed the economic and environmental impacts of four different biomass storage systems for woodchips (Outdoor-open, Outdoor-tarped, Indoor, and Silo) and two systems for pellets (Indoor and Silo). Storage cost includes the costs for handling (including ventilation in case of silo storage), infrastructure investment, and dry matter loss (DML) for each system. The estimation of total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions includes the fugitive emissions from storage piles and emissions due to electricity and fuel consumption for each system. Among four storage systems, the outdoor-tarped ($15.0 ODMT−1, ODMT: Oven Dry Metric Ton) and silo ($5.8 ODMT−1) storage were the least-cost options for woodchips and pellets respectively. However, silo-storage could be the most promising option for storing woodchips ($5.8 ODMT−1) and pellets ($2.3 ODMT−1), if it is used for short-term (two months) and frequently (at least six times) in a year. The total GHG emissions for six-month storage were 2.8–11.8 kgCO2e ODMT−1 for woodchips and 8.6–42.0 kgCO2e ODMT−1 for pellets. During Outdoor-open storage, the lower heating value of woodchips could drop to 37% due to increased dry-matter loss (DML) and moisture content. The initial moisture content, bulk density, DML, and resource required during handling were the most sensitive parameters influenced the storage performances of both woodchips and pellets. This study has demonstrated that a combination of different storage options along the supply chain could reduce the total biomass storage cost for a biorefinery or power plant.Forest biomass and short-rotational woody energy crops are typically delivered to a biorefinery or a bioenergy plant in the form of chips, chunks, or logs A typical biorefinery or a bioenergy plant requires a reliable, year-around supply of high-quality feedstock with consistent size, moisture content, and homogeneous compositions Usually, low-bulk density woody biomass such as woodchips and sawdust are densified into high-quality pellets, which reduces the logistics and handling cost for long distance transport, e.g., between counties or sub-continents Woodchips are typically stored in outdoor-open Stored woodchips can emit a number of off-gases due to natural or microbial degradation. In addition to high storage cost, emissions from biomass storage can cause related to health hazards There is a multitude of factors that affect the emissions rate of stored biomass. They include the biomass type, initial moisture content, local storage temperature, rain/snowfall, relative air humidity, storage type, pile size, ventilation, location, and many more In the United States, paper and pulp industries incur millions of dollars lost every year due to the high rate of biomass deterioration/dry matter loss from short-term outdoor pulp-woodchips storage Large-scale bioenergy plants require a large and consistent biomass supplies for year around plant operations and longer-term biomass storage is unavoidable due to seasonal availability In this study, woodchips refer to comminuted forms of forest biomass from logs or forest residues. Pellets refer to densified biomass produced using pelleting technology mainly from sawdust or woodchips. Four primary storage methods were considered to store woodchips: (i) Outdoor-open, (ii) Outdoor-tarped, (iii) Indoor, and (iv) Silo ( In an outdoor-open storage facility, woodchips are in trapezoidal-shaped piles on the well-drained level ground. An outdoor-tarped storage facility uses a tarp The outdoor and indoor storage facilities’ capacities are assumed to be about 20,000 ODMT (Oven Dry Metric Ton) of woodchips/pellets A facility's annual capacity is a function of its size, the frequency or number of times that biomass is moved into and out of the facility in a year, and the amount of time that woodchips or pellets are held in the facility. It is also possible for a storage facility to be empty for part of the year. For the base case study, the facility use frequency of twice per year was assumed. Biomass with higher moisture content adversely affects bioenergy supply chains producing either liquid biofuel or heat and electricity If the high-moisture woodchips are stored in piles, the inside pile temperature will increase due to the microbial and chemical degradation Theoretically, the temperature increase due to microbial and chemical degradation inside the pile of stored biomass causes a drying effect A comprehensive review of available literature was performed to collect experimental moisture variations and dry matter loss with respect to storage time and storage methods. A detailed statistical analysis was performed with those collected data and is presented in the supporting document ( Both in outdoor-tarped and indoor storage of woodchips/pellets, biomass moisture content decreased due to transpirational moisture losses. However, the outdoor-open storage method showed two trends: both increasing The moisture content of outdoor storage piles varies by moisture migration due to the drying effect and the external addition of water during precipitation. Therefore, two trends of variations in the moisture content were used to estimate the final energy values in the outdoor-open woodchip storage. The decrease in the moisture content depends on the EMC of biomass The moisture content of woodchips in a silo depends on the input ventilation parameters such as the amount and the initial condition of air passed through the column of woodchips and their EMC. However, in this study, the moisture removal from silo storage was calculated based on a fixed rate that was estimated by an experimental work for woodchips. It was assumed that two grams of water is removed per cubic meter of air passed through the silo Compared with woodchips, pellets are considered to be more stable products with very low initial moisture content (~ 8% wb) Biological and chemical processes are responsible for physical losses of a certain portion of biomass, i.e., dry matter loss (DML) during storage. Usually, the DML rate is higher during the initial few weeks of storage and is often very high compared with the rest of the storage period The maximum dry matter loss (  DML for wood pellets during storage (indoor or silo) could be insignificant due to their very low moisture content (~ 10%). Chemical degradation can be the only cause for DML during wood pellets storage. The DML during storage is transformed into major emissions in the form of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, methane, and other emissions. The DML during storage is directly proportional to emissions While experimental information about the DMLs for wood pellets stored for longer duration was not available in the literature, nor was there information on DML for wood pellets in indoor storage, it was assumed that the maximum DML ( The extractable energy from biomass is measured as LHV, which depends on its Higher Heating Value (HHV) and moisture content. The impact of changes in the chemical composition of biomass during storage on the variation in HHV is negligible Energy loss also occurs in a storage facility ( In this study, storage costs were modeled as a function of storage time. Machine rate models were used to estimate costs. The biomass storage includes various costs incurred due to land, infrastructure, dry matter loss, labor required for covering and uncovering woodchip piles with a tarp, ventilating (only in silo storage), handling to unload-load trucks and build piles, and facility management. The loading, unloading, and piling costs at each storage facility were assumed to be part of a storage cost. Eq. It was assumed that biomass can be stored for 1–12 months in a storage facility. The storage frequency (that is, the number of times that biomass is moved in and out-biomass turnover) can vary from 1 to 6 per year based on the biomass availability and an associated biomass conversion facility's daily supply requirements Therefore, the total biomass handled by a storage facility in a year will be a multiple of storage frequency ( Eq. In Eq. In the next set of equations, the annual capital cost ( The value loss due to DML in a storage system increases with storage time. Similarly, ventilation is necessary for biomass stored in a silo and it incurs a time-dependent cumulative cost to the system. In Eq.  Self-ignition can be for a problem in large woodchip piles with higher pile height stored outdoor-open for relatively long time Additional hidden cost parameters (e.g., quality loss The major gases emitted during storage of woodchips and pellets are carbon dioxide (CO There are multiple factors that affect the emissions rate. These include initial moisture content biomass, temperature, climate, pile size, biomass and storage type and location, ventilation, the storage pile orientation, and many more Experimental studies detected methane emissions during wood pellets storage along with CO Eq. The quantity of methane ( A detailed sensitivity analysis was conducted for each storage method and feedstock type to assess the impact of various input parameters on the storage cost and GHG emissions. The storage facility capacity varied between 1000 and 40,000 ODMT for outdoor and indoor storage types A frequent turnover of biomass in a storage facility can reduce the storage cost especially in a pole barn or warehouse or silo – storage methods having high infrastructural capital costs storage frequency = 1 and storage time = 6 months or less (i.e., the facility will always be empty for part of the year); storage frequency = 2 and storage time = 6 months or less (base case); storage frequency = 3 and storage time = 4 months or less; storage frequency = 4 and storage time = 3 months or less; and storage frequency = 6 and storage time = 2 months or less.   After six months, pellet storage costs in indoor and silo storage were about $6.00 ODMT The short-term storage cost of pellets at the port was estimated to be about $12.6 ODMT To reduce storage cost, stakeholders such as a biorefinery or power plant and feedstock suppliers will be interested in the selection of suitable storage method to store woodchips or pellets. Pellet storage costs in indoor and silo are similar ( The total energy use and GHG emissions (i.e., methane and fuel/power used during handling of biomass) from storing woodchips and pellets are presented in GHG emissions during woodchip storage were lower (~ 1/10th of silo storage) in outdoor and indoor storage compared with silo storage. These emissions were mainly due to fuel or power use during woodchips handling and ventilation. There is conflicting evidence concerning GHG emissions of woodchips during storage. Wihersaari Pellets have consistent properties and are usually stored in a more controlled climate than woodchips. There are many experimental studies that have measured fugitive emissions from pellet storage systems Storage costs consistently increased with storage time in all storage methods for both woodchips and pellets ( Silo storage of pellets costs less than indoor storage. In spite of lower infrastructure cost and no ventilation cost, the indoor storage cost was higher than that of silo storage cost due to higher handling costs ( Lower heating value (LHV) of biomass is very important for heating and power generation from woodchips and pellets. It determines how much biomass must be burned to produce a given amount of heat or to generate a given amount of electricity. There is mixed evidence relating to changes in biomass moisture content with respect to storage time for woodchips stored outdoors. A number of experimental studies measured a decrease in the woodchips’ final moisture content due to drying in outdoor-open storage In areas with higher precipitation and humidity, woodchips stored outdoor-open will increase in moisture and have higher DML the longer that they are stored. Whittaker et al. In six-month storage, the total energy loss in woodchips tarped storage was much lower than outdoor-open. Net energy loss in woodchips stored indoors was negligible. But silo-stored woodchips gained energy due to low DML and a decrease in the moisture content with storage duration. The energy loss in outdoor-tarped and indoor-stored woodchips was reduced by a gain in LHV due to the drying effect. Pellets stored either indoors or in silos have similar DML and drying effects. That is, DML is low and there is little variation in the MC of the low-moisture pellets when they are stored indoors or in silos. Also, the long-term pellet unit storage costs are similar for both indoor and silo storage. Therefore, either of these two storage methods can be appropriate for longer-term storage, if biomass is stored as pellets. The annual demand for biomass by a biorefinery or combined heat and power plant can be very high (i.e., 2000 ODMT day  For frequent short-term storage of woodchips, the unit storage cost is much lower in silos than that of other woodchip storage methods. Moreover, indoor or silo storage can maintain a higher quality of woodchips, which can have further additional benefits such as lower energy input for grinding in the downstream bioenergy supply chain. Pellet storage costs (54–66% reduction) also follow a similar pattern to that of woodchips.  A 20% increase or decrease in the infrastructure cost in silo storage can increase or decrease the storage cost of woodchips and pellets by 13% and 10% respectively. Except for silo storage, storage cost was insensitive to a storage type's physical capacity. Doubling a silo's capacity could reduce the costs of storing woodchips and pellets by 20% and 16% respectively. The most influential factors affecting the GHG emissions were the input parameters associated with fugitive emissions (i.e., CH Moisture content is also a key factor affecting the storage cost, especially for woodchips. A 20% decrease or increase in the initial moisture content of woodchips could decrease (~ 16%) or increase (~ 24%) the net GHG emissions for both outdoor and indoor storage types. In a silo storage, the combined effect of daily ventilation duration (± 20%) and its required power (± 20%) on total GHG emissions were higher for woodchips (± 36%) than for pellets (± 20%). There is little experimental evidence for significant fugitive GHG emissions in woodchip storage piles Biomass storage has been envisioned at multiple echelons along the supply chain such as intermediate storage and plant storage. Biomass export, especially pellets may require additional storage, i.e., short-term storage at the ports. The duration of biomass storage depends on its availabilities during the year which is dictated by local policies related to harvesting activities (restrictions for movement of logistics equipment in forest and road). Other influencing factors include its end use (production of electricity, cellulosic bioethanol, etc.) and overall supply chain objective (minimization of cost, carbon footprints, etc.). For long-term biomass storage, the least cost storage options for woodchips and pellets are outdoor-tarped and silo respectively. However, for short-term storage, the silo is the least cost storage option for both woodchips and pellets. The data used in this study were derived from previous experimental studies (publications and reports). Not all reports gathered data consistently. Methodologies were inconsistent and the collection errors were not reported. As a result, there were wide variations in reported data that had an impact on the data accuracy. Although it was suggested in the literature that silos could be used for woodchip storage, and conceptually there seems to be no reason why woodchips could not be silo-stored, there were no experimental studies on woodchips being stored in large capacity silos. It is suspected that higher moisture content of woodchips will require more ventilation than for wood pellets in order to keep the biomass from decomposing and possibly self-igniting. However, without data, attempting to model these interactions was beyond the scope of this study. Similarly, the impact of local weather and climate on storage systems performance is obvious. The development of a model to measure local climate and weather impacts on changes in biomass moisture content, DML and fugitive emissions require a wide scale storage experiments around the different climatic zones, which was out of the scope of this study due to lack of sufficient availability of experimental studies. But if local experimental data on moisture content variations, DML, and fugitive emissions are available, the developed models in this study can be used to precisely estimate biomass storage cost, energy value and GHG emissions for that storage system. The impact of local weather on biomass storage is significant and more experimental studies, especially in large-scale should be conducted in multiple climatic conditions to generate consistent data on dry matter loss and fugitive GHG emissions. Therefore, climate-smart storage studies are required for real-time decision making and reducing storage cost for a bioenergy plant. The cost due to dry matter loss is a substantial part of the total storage cost. However, biomass preprocessing such as torrefaction can reduce the dry matter loss as well as emissions. Therefore, the developed storage models in this study to can be used to analyze the benefit of storing torrefied-biomass compared with raw-biomass. The utilization of storage infrastructure, especially for indoor storage can be very low, which is the main reason for high indoor storage cost. There can be a situation where a storage facility can remain unused for most of the time in a year The temporal variations in the storage cost are substantial and the most suitable storage option (i.e., least cost and emissions) for biomass, especially woodchips is depended on the storage time. For example, outdoor-open and outdoor-tarped woodchips storage methods are the least cost options for a duration up to 3-months and 3-months onwards respectively ( Large-scale woodchips or pellets storage is necessary to absorb supply and demand risks along the biofuel supply chain and will allow uninterrupted biorefinery operations. Biomass storage can have a substantial influence on the bioenergy or biofuel economic feasibility and environmental benefits. This study estimated the woodchips and pellets storage costs, energy usage, and emissions from four different storage systems: outdoor-open, outdoor-tarped, indoor, and silo. We concluded that long-term and less frequent biomass storage incurred a considerable cost ($15 ODMT The unit cost of storing pellets is about three times less than that of woodchips due to comparatively high bulk density and low moisture content. Considering only the storage cost, it is less costly to store biomass as pellets but there is an additional cost for making pellets. Therefore, a lifecycle costing for the complete supply chain is required including storage. The storage capacity and infrastructure cost did not affect the outdoor-open and outdoor-tarped storage costs, but it did affect the indoor and silo storage costs. For a silo, about 16–20% reduction in the storage cost could be achieved by doubling its biomass storage capacity. For woodchips, a large portion of the total storage cost was due to DML (20–50%) and handling (25–45%). Further research is required to get in-depth knowledge on the biological and chemical process of DML and potent emissions (e.g. methane and nitrous oxide), which may help to reduce uncertainties and place better limits on the wide range of variations for assessing the storage system performance. A climate-smart storage study is required to exploit the local weather conditions to reduce storage cost for a biorefinery. In the future, biomass storage cost could also be updated to account for qualitative cost factors such as biomass quality loss, fire insurance, and labor health and safety hazard insurances for large-scale biomass conversion facilities. This project was partly supported by the USDA – NIFA Biomass Research and Development Initiative ( Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 