The main aim of this study is the identification of potassic, phyllic and propylitic alteration zones in the hypogene zone of the Sungun Cu porphyry deposit (NW Iran) based on drillcore data, utilizing sequential geostatistical simulation (SGS) and concentration–volume (C–V) fractal model. C–V log–log plots were generated for the results obtained by 10 realizations and the average of those realizations (E-type) which was used for the determination of Cu threshold values for the alteration zones. Based on correlation between geological models and the results derived via SGS and C–V fractal modeling by log ratio matrix, the propylitic zone has Cu values <0.005% as a result of simulation numbers (sims) 1, 5 and 9 with overall accuracy (OA) of 0.94. Additionally, the phyllic alteration contents of Cu values between 0.25% and 0.63% with OA of 0.70 are delineated by E-type. Moreover, a correlation between C–V fractal modeling of realizations and the potassic alteration zone derived via the geological model reveals that this alteration zone has Cu values higher than 2.23% (sims 1, 5 and 9) with OA of 0.816. The results of this research reveal that phyllic alteration due to having many existing geological samples with the grades close to the average ore grade (0.44%) of the Sungun deposit has a proper overlap with E-type; however, potassic and propylitic alterations containing the highest and lowest ore grades have a strong overlap with sims 1, 5 and 9.Different alteration patterns and their spatial variability have vital roles in grade distribution within an ore deposit. In the other hand, the grade variability would be affected by rock type and alteration changes. For better understanding of these grade dependent processes, it is very important to predict the spatial distribution of the grade within the desired ore deposit ( Geostatistics has been used for spatial variability characterization and prediction of grade over the last three decades. Ordinary kriging (OK) is the most useful geostatistical estimation technique which is also called the “best linear unbiased estimator” ( Geostatistical stochastic simulations have the ability not only to estimate the spatial distribution of the regionalized variable but also to assess both local uncertainty and spatial uncertainty about the estimates ( The simulation algorithms take into account both the spatial variation of actual data at sampled locations and on the other hand, the variation of estimates at unsampled locations ( Many stochastic simulation algorithms have been proposed and among them Sequential Gaussian Simulation (SGS) is widely used because it is fast and straightforward in reconstructing conditional cumulative distribution function (CCDF: In most interpolation algorithms such as OK, the aim is to provide the “best” local estimation of the variables without consideration of spatial conditions. The whole point of geostatistical simulation is to reproduce the variance of the input data, both in a univariate (histogram) and spatial (variogram) sense. Consequently, simulations provide an appropriate platform to study any problem relating to variability ( Kriging is used for the local set of data and conditional statistics as an interpolation method which gives a simple numerical method in the sense of local precision. Simulation provides several alternatives but equally probable models all of which are the “best” reflection of the reality in a certain global sense. The differences between the realizations offer an opportunity for measuring the spatial uncertainty ( The geostatistical simulation methods employ simple kriging at a voxel to estimate the posterior mean and variance, with random sampling of the posterior distribution to create a realization at the corresponding voxels ( Fractal/multifractal modeling, established originally by Fractal dimensions in geological and mineralization processes correspond to variations in physical characteristics such as rock type, fluid phase, alteration zones, vein density or orientation, and structural feature or dominant mineralogy (i.e., Different geochemical processes can be defined based on variations in fractal dimensions derived via analysis of relevant geochemical data. Fractal dimensions in geological and geochemical processes correspond to differences in physical characteristics such as lithology, vein density or orientation, fluid phase, alteration phenomena, and structural feature or dominant mineralogy ( In this paper, Sequential Gaussian Simulation (SGS) and C–V fractal modeling were utilized for delineating various alteration zones (potassic, phyllic and propylitic) based on Cu values in the hypogene zone of Sungun Cu porphyry deposit, NW Iran. Main porphyry copper mineralization in Iran occurs in the Cenozoic Sahand–Bazman orogenic belt ( The Sungun porphyry copper deposit (PCD) is located about 100 The NNW–SSE trending dykes dip steeply to the west and have thickness from a few centimeters to several tens of meters ( Different alterations and related mineralization in the Sungun PCD have been studied by geological investigations ( The earliest alteration is represented by potassic mineral assemblages developed pervasively and as halos around veins in the deep and central parts of the Sungun stock. Potassic alteration is characterized by the occurrence of K-feldspar and displays a close spatial association with copper and molybdenum mineralization ( Phyllic alteration is characterized by the replacement of almost all rock-forming silicates by sericite and quartz and overprints the earlier formed potassic. Pyrite forms up to 5 Propylitic alteration is characterized by the chloritization of primary and secondary biotite, amphibole and groundmass materials in rocks peripheral to the central potassic zone. Minor minerals associated with propylitic alteration are albite, calcite, sericite, anhydrite (gypsum), and pyrite. The propylitic type of alteration is restricted to peripheral porphyry stocks and some dike series ( Within some areas, 80 Two distinct supergene enrichment mineralized zones are recognized at Sungun (1) oxidized and leached zone and (2) supergene sulfide zone. The thickness of the supergene zone is non-uniform and it could be seen that the eastern part contains higher thickness and Cu grade compared to the western part. This can be structurally controlled by numerous NEE and NWW-trending faults. Meteoritic water leaches the copper from the oxide zone and while passing the faults beneath the water table, precipitates the copper in the form of native copper and secondary sulfides. Supergene enrichment zone determined by geological studies indicates the presence of chalcocite, chrysocolla, azurite, malachite and digenite ( Hypogene copper mineralization was introduced during potassic alteration and to a more extent during phyllic alteration ( Sequential simulation is a stochastic modeling algorithm that obtains multiple realizations based on the same input data ( The most straightforward algorithm for generating realizations of a multivariate Gaussian field is provided by the sequential principle ( The conditional simulation of a define a stationary domain. draw the univariate Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the domain after having done the declustering if the data are not in a regular grid. transform the z data into y (a standard normal) using the CDF Fz(z). Draw a random path which meets all nodes of the grid in each realization. At each node (u): define a search ellipsoid to find adjacent data and previously simulated values, use SK with the normal score variogram model to determine the mean and variance of the CCDF of the RF Y(u) at location u. perform Monte Carlo simulation to obtain a single value from the distribution ( add the simulated value to the data set proceed to the next node, and loop until all nodes are simulated backtransform the simulated normal values into the original unit ( Regarding a transformation to Gaussian and then backtransform to an original unit, statistical fluctuations are inherent in simulation but the fluctuations should be reasonable and unbiased in the mean and variance ( The following checks should be performed after having all nodes simulated: reproduction of (1) the data values at data locations, (2) the original histogram, (3) the original summary statistics, and (4) the input covariance model ( The C–V fractal model, which was proposed by Descriptive statistics and the histogram of copper grades from 19,605 samples in the hypogene zone of the Sungun PCD are presented in The Cu data have been transformed by using a normal score transformation and the statistics of transformed data (i.e. the mean value close to 0 and the variance of about 1) check the correctness of the transformation. The display of the histogram of new Gaussian variable also checks that the distribution is symmetric with minimum and maximum values of − Anisotropy has also been investigated and modeled based on calculating the experimental semi-variograms of Cu and normalized value among horizontal directions with 30° angular increments and ± The isotropic semi-variogram of raw data follows a spherical structure with a nugget effect of 0.038 (%) Based on SGS modeling, ten realizations of Cu spatial distributions are generated on a 25 Four randomly selected realizations are checked to examine the sample statistics reproduction. The CDFs of all realizations of Cu distribution and also E-type and kriged map are displayed, as depicted in Some discrepancies between different realizations and sample models called ergodic fluctuations are acceptable which may have different reasons such as the algorithm used for the simulation, the semi-variogram model parameters and the amount of conditioning data to be utilized for the simulation ( In the case of SGS algorithm, the histogram and semi-variogram models reproduced over a number of realizations should be, on average, equal to the sample statistics ( Each realization well preserves the range of variation of the measured Cu data compared to OK map which is illustrated in Based on the results obtained from SGS, volumes corresponding to different Cu values were calculated to derive C–V fractal modeling. Threshold values of Cu are identified in the C–V log–log plots ( Based on the C–V modeling, 3D models of hypogene zone were generated in different realizations ( Based on the Results of C–V modeling of the different realizations and E-type are correlated with the 3D alteration zone models of the hypogene zone of Sungun deposit consisting of potassic, phyllic and propylitic zones. These were generated by utilizing RockWorks™ v. 15 software and geological drillcore data (  Based on C–V fractal modeling in different simulations (sims), propylitic alteration zone was correlated with Cu values lower than 0.01%, 0.003%, 0.005%, 0.007% and 0.25% ( A comparison between C–V fractal modeling of sim and the potassic alteration zone in the 3D geological model indicates that high value of OA (0.816) exists between Cu values higher than 2.23% (sims 1, 5 and 9) and potassic alteration zone, as shown in Moreover, correlation between geological data and results obtained by C–V fractal model represents a cross-section ( Conventional geological modeling based on drillcore data is fundamentally essential for the determination of ore zone spatial structures, but ore grades are not observed in the methods. The ore grade variations in an ore deposit are obvious and salient features. Given the problems as mentioned above, using a series of mathematical analyses such as geostatistical simulation and fractal modeling seems to be inevitable. In many cases, drillcore logging in the geological study deals with the lack of proper diagnosis of geological phenomenon to identify alteration zones due to a series of established modeling based on mathematical analyses such as geostatistical simulation and fractal modeling. The Gaussian simulations honor the covariance models of the data point and that is why they are appropriate for modeling of processes with extreme large continuity. The SGS is useful in generating relatively various realizations in the ore deposits, where computational efficiency and effective implementation are important. In this paper, the SGS and C–V fractal models were utilized to delineate different alteration zones in the hypogene zone of Sungun Cu porphyry deposit, NW Iran. Investigation of the deposit indicates that the results derived via geostatistical simulations can be used for the separation of alteration zones by fractal modeling. Furthermore, the three realizations (sims 1, 5 and 9) show the proper results for delineation of potassic and propylitic alteration zones. Moreover, C–V modeling on E-type data is suitable for phyllic alteration. On the other hand, C–V fractal modeling based on E-type data is proper for moderate Cu values. Correlation between results and alteration zones obtained by geological model of the hypogene zone reveals that propylitic alteration has Cu values lower than 0.005% and potassic alteration zone correlated with Cu values higher than 2.23%. There is a good relationship between phyllic alteration zone and Cu values between 0.25% and 0.63% derived by E-type data. Moreover, the voxels with high values of Cu (> The authors would like to thank Mr. Amir Bijan Yasrebi from Camborne School of Mines for his remarkable contribution. The authors would like to thank the editors and reviewers of this paper for their comments and valuable remarks.