The transporting of slurries in pipelines depends largely on rheological behavior of the solid–liquid suspension. These rheological properties of slurries are very much influenced by the slurry concentration, particle size distribution and, surface characteristics. The present invention is concerned with the effect of these parameters on slurry rheology using microwave (MW) energy. Microwave pre-treatment for rheological behaviour of iron ore-water slurries (IWS) were carried out in an online Bohlin viscometer. Detailed experimental work for Indian iron ore were conducted at power level of 900W and 30, 60, 90 and 120s various exposure times in microwave oven. The microwave treated and untreated test samples were ground for rheological characteristic of slurries. It was seen that microwave-treated ore have better rheological properties as compared to untreated ore. This type of slurry is shear thinning and easy to transport as it exhibited pseudo-plastic behavior. The result showed that microwave-treated iron ore have a density lower than that of untreated ore after grinding. Statistical design analysis was employed to develop empirical equations and found to be encouraging and highly considerable.Recently, study has shown the importance of measurements of physical properties of solid–liquid slurries. Flow of these slurries is frequently encountered in many industrial and nature applications. The effect of slurry parameters is required to design such physical and engineering systems The pseudo-plastic characteristics were exhibited by slurries having high solid content and a low proportion of fines, such as primary or secondary mill products The power requirements for pumping of solid–liquid suspensions depend largely on rheological behavior of solid–liquid suspensions. The nature of the suspending medium, solid concentration, shape, particle size distribution, surface characteristics, additives, pressure and temperature influence these rheological properties of suspensions very much. The rheological characteristics of coal–water suspensions were enhanced by microwave pre-treatment Microwave energy is derived from electrical energy with a conversion efficiency of approximately 50% for 2450 The present study focused on influence of microwave energy on rheological characterization of iron ore slurries. The rheological behavior of slurries has been deliberated by laboratory viscosity measurements. Slurries with solid concentrations of hematite were varied from 20–40%. The microwave energy enhanced the rheological performance of slurries and found to depend mainly on solids concentration, particle size distribution and surface characteristics. Statistical design analysis was used and theoretical models developed for predicting viscosity of hematite ore slurry and the effect of various parameters. The material used for this investigation was an iron ore obtained from Joda mines, Keonjhar (India) prior to further processing. It was a most commonly naturally occurring ore averaging iron content of 64% and a density of 4.63 The system illustrated as Original sample (iron ore) of 15 The viscometer is the Bohlin Visco 88 BV, a portable viscometer for laboratory use. This viscometer directly measures the rotational speed of a rotor, Iron ore-water slurries are concentrated suspension of iron ore particles in water. About 10 MAL1017204 type Mastersizer 2000 E Ver. 5.20 was employed to measure the particle size distributions of the samples. The instrument was produced by Malvern Instruments Ltd., Malvern, UK. The dispersion medium used here was water. The measuring range of the automatic particle size analyzer is 0.1–1000  The effect of duration of microwave treatment on temperature of iron ore was shown in Infrared spectroscopy deals with the interaction of infrared light with matter. The energy of an infrared photon can be calculated using the Planck energy relation, FTIR analysis determined the surface functional groups by using a UV–visible Spectrophotometer (supplied by M/s Perkin Elmer, CT, model: Lambda 35) at wavelength 280 Apart from these, it is believed that the slurry rheology behavior may be influenced by some findings by various authors as follows. The energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis showed that the elemental composition in the microwave untreated and treated iron ore sample is dominated by alumina and silica. The scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of iron ore characterized micro cracks and fissures developed along grain boundaries after microwave treatment, resulted in smoothing of surface. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) measurements confirmed that microwave treated sample has peak more than that of untreated, which indicated the increase of crystallinity with the microwave exposure time    The effect of slurry volume concentration on average viscosity for microwave untreated ore of different fractions was shown in The values of constants “ Factorial design analysis Where The calculated values of average viscosity from Eq.  The deviation of the model from the experimental values of apparent viscosity for iron ore was found to be within ±20% and it is shown in Detailed experimental investigations on the influence of microwave pre-treatment on rheological characteristics of iron ore-water slurries were studied. The viscosity of slurry sample was measured using an online Bohlin viscometer and these viscous slurries of iron ore-water have up to 40% solids (by weight). The values of The authors thankfully acknowledge the reviewers for suggesting valuable technical comments of this paper. The author is very much thankful to the sponsor