Substituted ferrites [Mn1−
                     
                        x
                     Zn
                        x
                     Fe2O4 (0⩽x⩽0.8)] of nanoscale dimensions have been prepared by a novel microwave refluxing method. The effect of different parameters [such as pH, reflux time, presence of PEG (MW-3350) molecules] on particle morphology and size has been studied. Characterization of the above capped particles was done by XRD, FTIR, TEM and SQUID magnetometry. The as-prepared particles were further used for magnetoliposome preparation.The synthesis of monodispersed magnetic nanoparticles has been an interesting area of study because of its possible applications in a variety of widely diversified areas ranging from information technology to nano-biotechnology. Fe The long reaction time at low temperatures (below 200 In our previous paper, we successfully synthesized ultra-fine Co–Zn ferrite and investigated the influence of different synthesis parameters on microstructure-related properties Mn Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was done on the air-dried precursor using a Thermowage L 81 (LINSEIS, Germany) TGA unit. Phase identification of the samples was done by X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies using a Philips powder diffractometer PW1710 with CuK  The formation mechanism of nanoparticles in glycothermal reaction may be similar to that of hydrothermal reaction    The blocking temperature ( In When the particles are chemically coated with EG/PEG, i.e. capped, the blocking temperature is suppressed to a lower temperature. In the case of TSH5, there is a tendency towards agglomeration as is observed from the TEM micrographs. These agglomerated particles act as a cluster, resulting in an increase in the blocking temperature. For TSH4, which appears to be capped, the total magnetic moment decreases due to the contribution of the volume of the diamagnetic mass (coating/non-magnetic materials) to the total sample.  Ultra-fine Mn–Zn ferrites have been successfully synthesized by a microwave refluxing method. The particle morphology and size depend on different parameters such as pH, refluxing time, and the presence of long chain molecules (PEG). PEG improves the water dispersity of the as-prepared particles. The extent of capping on magnetic particles increases with refluxing times and pH, leading to lower particle sizes. This method of microwave refluxing provides an edge over other chemical methods in terms of energy conservation efficiency and particle size distribution. The author wish to thank both the Department of Science and Technology (DST) and Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India for financial assistance.