The effect of LiCe(BH4)3Cl on the hydrogen storage properties of Mg(NH2)2
                     2LiH system was studied systematically, which has a high Li ion conductivity. The hydrogen desorption temperatures for LiMgNH system shift to lower temperatures by 0.05LiCe(BH4)3Cl doping with the onset temperature of dehydrogenation decreasing by 40 °C and the peak temperature decreasing by 30 °C. The Mg(NH2)2
                     2LiH–0.03LiCe(BH4)3Cl composite exhibits an improved comprehensive hydrogen storage properties, which can reversibly store about 5.0 wt% hydrogen at 160 °C, and released hydrogen as much as 8.6 times faster than that of the Mg(NH2)2
                     2LiH composite at 160 °C. The results indicated that the LiCe(BH4)3Cl-containing sample exhibited much better cycling properties than that of Mg(NH2)2
                     2LiH sample. XRD and FTIR results show that the structure of LiCe(BH4)3Cl does not change before and after hydrogen absorption/desorption, indicating it plays the catalytic effect. The hydrogen desorption activation energy of Mg(NH2)2
                     2LiH doped with 0.03LiCe(BH4)3Cl was reduced by 37.5%. The rate-controlling step of desorption shifted from the diffusion to the chemical reaction by the addition of LiCe(BH4)3Cl, indicating that the diffusion rates of small ions like H+, Li+ and Mg2+ in LiMgNH system are significantly enhanced, which could be well explained by the improved ionic conductivity of LiCe(BH4)3Cl doped sample.Hydrogen storage materials as an important technology for hydrogen storage are one of the key issues for the realization of hydrogen economy. Tremendous research efforts have been paid to the hydrides of light weight elements, such as Mg-based materials However, the operating temperature for the hydrogenation/dehydrogenation (H/D) of the Mg(NH In 2007, Matsuo et al. LiH (98 wt% purity) was purchased from J&K Chemical Ltd. Mg(NH Samples composed of Mg(NH In order to explore the role of LiCe(BH The phase structures of the samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Cu Kα radiation (D/max 2550). The samples were put into a glass board with 1 mm thickness and sealed with an airtight hood made of amorphous membrane in order to protect the samples from oxygen during the XRD measurement. Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR, TENSOR 27) was employed to examine the existence of N Temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) and isothermal H/D kinetics properties were carried out using a volumetric method through an automatic apparatus (SUZUKI HOKAN. CO., LTD). For TPD measurements, the samples were vacuumed first and then heated up to 400 °C at 5 °C/min. The isothermal sorption kinetics of samples The ac impedance method was employed to measure the conductivities of the samples with an applied frequency range from 1 Hz to 1 MHz using a CHI660C electrochemical working station. The sample was pressed into a pellet (diameter 10 mm; thickness 1.5–2 mm) in an Ar atmosphere. It was then sandwiched between lithium electrodes and heated to 120 °C before measuring the ionic conductivity in order to eliminate the defects caused by ball milling. To understand the effect of the content of LiCe(BH The TPD measurements ( The isothermal hydrogen desorption curves for samples After dehydrogenation, sample  In order to investigate the effect mechanism of LiCe(BH In order to confirm the different effect of LiCe(BH Meanwhile, the intensity of bands at 3330 cm As the sample was heating up to 250 °C, two diffraction peaks at 30.5° and 51.5° corresponding to cubic Li Since the synthesized LiCe(BH In order to deeply understand the effect of LiCe(BH As described in the introduction, LiCe(BH The hydrogen storage properties of the Li This work was financially supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at