This study presents a novel process integration scheme between CO2 mineralization and brackish water reverse osmosis (BWRO). The integration is based on the reciprocal nature of these two processes: While CO2 mineralization needs metal ions such as Na+ to convert CO2 into mineral carbonates like sodium bicarbonate, BWRO is designed to reject such ions to produce fresh water. Thus, there is a potential synergy that can be gained through their integration. To examine the feasibility of such process integration, techno-economic analysis (TEA) and CO2 life cycle assessment (LCA) are conducted for various possible configurations of the integrated process. A key requirement for TEA and CO2 LCA is the availability of mass and energy balance data. Therefore, the process is simulated with the commercial simulation software tool of Aspen Plus combined MATLAB. Another requirement is the selection of appropriate evaluation scenarios. Based on a market analysis, the proposed process is assumed to be installed either in the US or in the China to replace a respective conventional benchmark process. Also, two sources of electricity (coal and wind onshore) are considered in the evaluation in order to investigate the sensitivity of the process performance on the type of electricity used. As a result of the analysis, the CO2 avoidance cost of the designed process is calculated to be 132˜245$/metric ton of CO2 with wind-based electricity. Given other advantages of the mineralization over the geological storage, the presented process integration between CO2 mineralization and BWRO deserves further investigation as a means to produce useful chemicals and fresh water while curbing CO2 emission.Void fraction of ion exchanger Mass transfer coefficient [min Concentration of i component in liquid phase [mol⁄cm Dispersion coefficient [cm Superficial linear velocity [cm⁄min] Mass transfer rate of i compoent from liquid to resin phase[mol⁄(cm Concentration of i componet in resin phase[mol/cm Concentration of i componet in resin phase at equilibrium state[mol/cm Ion exchange equilibrium constant when cation k is exchanged with Na Ion exchange equilibrium constant when anion a is exchange with CL Valence of cation k Valence of anion a Mass transfer rate of is compoent from liquid to sediment phase[mol⁄cm Mass transfer coefficient for sediment formation[min Local current utilization of i component Diffusivity of i component[cm Faraday constant[C/mol] Current density[Amp/cm Packing ratio Fraction of total ion exchange resin surface area accessible for exchange of ions Ratio of cation to anion exchange resin [cm] Bulk concentration of species i [mol⁄cm Film concentration at the interface between liquid and resin particle of species i [mol⁄cm Feed flow rate [cm CO By contrast, the latter option, reacting CO Motivated by the commercial success of these alkaline solution based CO The objective of this research is to assess the economic feasibility of the proposed integrated process by conducting a techno-economic analysis (TEA) and a CO The proposed scheme of CO In summary, for both process integration strategies, brackish water and flue gas from cement kiln are used as feedstock, resulting in the production of sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO As a CO The compositions of brackish water and seawater are described in Ion exchange (IEX) is used to remove Ca To operate this IEX in a self-sustainable manner, a process scheme proposed in [ Operation of the IEX involves a cycle composed of three steps: feeding, regeneration, and washing. In the feeding step, undesirable cations and anions in the feed water are exchanged with Na Electrodeionization(EDI) is a hybrid technology which combines advantages of electrodialysis(ED) and ion exchange(IEX) [ In this research, EDI is used to extract parts of the ions from brackish water and produce the sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution required for the subsequent CO To design an alkaline solution based CO To obtain mass and energy balance information required for the process evaluation, the overall process is modeled and simulated using the commercial software tool of To simulate the IEX operation, the modeling methodology suggested in [ The primary purpose of EDI modeling is to obtain two crucial information for the evaluation: 1) the amount of electrical energy needed to achieve a target degree of deionization, 2) the conversion rate & selectivity of each electrochemical reaction. As these two are dependent on the current density, the required current density to accomplish a target degree of deionization should be calculated first. Thus, a mathematical model to compute the current density is developed using Electrical energy consumption, the first key performance number in the EDI operation, is computed by Eq. For simulation of the CO The Desalination Economic Evaluation Program version 5 (DEEP 5) is used to model the reverse osmosis (RO) unit. This Excel-based spreadsheet tool developed by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) allows the user to compare performances and cost estimates of various desalination and power configurations [ In order to assure evaluation consistency, the geographical location of the suggested integrated process should be specified. The result will clearly depend on the choice of location, and the question arises as to which countries are best suited for the evaluation. For this, we consider three factors, which are the country’s need for reduction of CO Mass and energy balance information required for the techno-economic analysis (TEA) and CO Scale of the CO In Section To calculate the total capital investment (TCI) of the process, the so called Based on the aforementioned explanation, the evaluation approach is divided into two: the pessimistic approach and the optimistic approach. The former indicates the case when the maximum electricity price and the maximum Feasibility of the proposed process integration is evaluated by carrying out a techno-economic analysis (TEA) and a CO In the TEA, the total capital expenditure (CAPEX), the variable and fixed operating cost (OPEX), and the revenues from selling the products and byproducts (REVENUE) are considered. It is noteworthy that all of the process options produce useful byproducts (FC&BC: H In rigorous CO Process performance for the US case is depicted as a function of two key feasibility metrics: net profit and net CO Similarly, feasibility of the suggested process integration is evaluated when the process is installed in CN ( From the above evaluation result, it is found that, while the proposed integrated processes can accomplish relative CO CO In the same manner, CO Adopting the suggested CCU processes instead of the CCS process may be beneficial considering some additional advantages of the CCU process. Firstly, whereas the CCS process is only applicable to a site where CO In brief, although the performance of the suggested CCU process is slightly inferior to the conventional CCS process at the moment, the CCU process has extra merits and improvement potential to deserve further investigation. A novel process integration between an alkaline solution based CO Results of the TEA and the CO As future work, optimization of the EDI unit should be considered since its huge electricity consumption and high equipment cost have a dominant effect on the process performance. In addition, more reliable economic data and lifecycle CO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study is financially supported by Detailed model development and validation for each unit operation is presented below. Three types of equations are solved simultaneously to simulate the IEX operation: component mass balance (Eq. To validate the developed model, the breakthrough curve of the model is compared with that in [ In this study, two IEX columns packed with CER and AER respectively are connected in series to remove undesirable ions in the feed water. During the regeneration, desorption of Ca The dilute compartment of the EDI is modeled as a packed bed between two membranes [ To check the validity of the developed EDI model, the model’s simulation results are compared with corresponding experimental results provided by a collaborating research team in Environmental BioTechnology and BioEnergy Laboratory (EBTEL) at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). Operating and design parameters used for the experiment are applied to the developed model ( Based on the above EDI model, the current density required to achieve a target degree of deionization can be calculated. Flue gas from a cement kiln is cooled down to 40℃ to remove a condensate stream, which is mainly water. This process is simulated using the The main purpose of the CO Price and lifecycle CO  Detailed evaluation results are described below. FC, BC, and BM indicates forward configuration, backward configuration, and benchmark process, respectively. 