The current ongoing transition in the energy and mobility sector is partially based on elements which can be classified as critical, like rare earths and cobalt. For these elements recycling can be one option to lower the demand on primary raw materials. Nevertheless the complexity of devices is high making recycling for technology metals complicated. Therefore the generation of concentrated fractions is an important step in the process chain of treating secondary raw materials. In addition to the established classification and sorting processes based on physical principles there is an increasing demand for intelligent solutions to meet the growing complexity and heterogeneity of material flows. Conventional recycling strategies based on pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical processes can quickly become costly due to a high energy requirement and usage of chemicals. Bioleaching offers a green recycling strategy, where leaching of waste material is performed by microorganisms. In this study the recycling potential of end-of life magnets was investigated by means of bioleaching with various bacteria. The experiments were done in shaking batches, whereby in parallel the chemical leaching represented by abiotic controls was followed. As sample material magnets with different alloy composition and particle sizes were examined. The experiments were quantified using ICP-OES, µ-XRF, XRD and SEM with EDX. All samples could be successfully bioleached. The highest leaching efficiencies were determined in approaches with Acidithiobacillus and Leptospirillum ferrooxidans . Leaching efficiencies up to 100% (Dy, Pr) were achieved. According to leaching efficiencies of the abiotic controls were in the same range as in biotic batches a chemical leaching by acids was detected as dominant. However, batches with an iron addition showed higher leaching due to the catalytic effect of Fe3+ ions. On the other hand bioleaching was exposed as more efficient due to lower costs, a less use of chemicals and lower pollution due to emissions and contaminated residues. An up-scaling of the investigated process was done in a bioreactor, wherein no loss in efficiency was recorded. The obtained solution was further purified by processes to extract the rare earth elements. The precipitation with oxalic acid and a two-step extraction was identified as the most efficient methods. Extraction rates of the REE up to 100% with a purity of 98% were achieved.Due to the growing market of consumer goods, the criticality of many raw materials rises based on the increase of their demand. The European Union allocate the rare earth elements to raw materials with the highest supply risk ( For identification of the most effective microorganism strain regarding to the bioleaching of magnetic material, new MQU-F sintering powder (Molycorp Magnequench) was used as a reference material in experiments. Different waste magnets were used to determine the influencing variable and to investigate the recycling efficiency of real waste streams. For comparison purposes due to different alloys, magnetic powder was processed by means of a hydrogen decrepitation (HD) process from hard disc drives. In order to determine the influence of the size, small plates out of magnetic blocks were sawn (Accutom-50, Struers) and also whole magnetic blocks of end of life electric motors were used. The chemical composition of these different sample magnets was analysed by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) (Optima 8300, Perkin Elmer) after aqua regia or hydrochloric acid digestion at room temperature ( For experiments different acidophilic microorganism strains were selected. All strains have been successfully used in literature for bioleaching of primary or secondary materials (survey: Bioleaching experiments were performed in 100 ml Erlenmeyer flasks using 40 ml of the media and were done in triplicates. The flasks were inoculated with 10% from a tightly-grown preculture. After the growth of the microorganism 10 g l Microbial growth has been traced microscopically (Axio A1, Zeiss). In addition to microscopic observation by the light microscope (also by means of staining by the fluorescence microscope), the microbial growth in the bioreactor was recorded by determining the cell density by means of protein analysis according to The resulting liquid phase after bioleaching of magnetic material was treated with different techniques to separate and purify the leached rare earth ions from disruptive elements like Fe. Therefore various preliminary experiments indicated best separation efficiencies by chemical methods. First a precipitation with concentrated oxalic acid solution took place. For this purpose 100 ml of the bioleaching solution after treatment of waste magnet powder with The different magnetic materials were analysed regarding their element composition by means of ICP-OES after aqua regia digestion ( For identification of the most effective bioleaching microorganism various bacteria and fungi were tested. In this study only the best cultures were represented. The qualitative observation of the various approaches showed a difference based on the microorganism strain. The most drastic changes in color and sample material have been observed in approaches with The history of the pH value indicated a stable growth for most of the microorganisms, because of a constant almost horizontal trend. A decrease in the pH value for example for The sulphuric acid producing bacteria strain The quantitative analysis of the remaining residues was done by µ-XRF, wherein a standardisation of detectable elements has been carried out. Accordingly to the leached concentrations in the residues after the bioleaching with In the following, the influence of the element composition of the magnetic samples and their particle size on the leaching was analysed. Therefore Here also high leaching rates for the rare elements Nd (80.2%) and Pr (97.7%) were achieved. Additionally the rare earth element Dy was found in the magnet sample and In comparison to the original sample ( Previous studies were done in batch shake experiments. It was investigated whether it would be possible to scale up the bioleaching process in a bioreactor without loss of efficiency. Besides the large volume rate, the bioreactor also offers the advantage of automatic monitoring and regulation of growth parameters. Therefore the acidophilic bacteria Since no selectivity towards rare earth elements was observed, a subsequent purification and separation process took place. In various preliminary investigations with biological and chemical element separation methods, the chemical precipitation by oxalic acid and a twostep chemical extraction were found to be the most efficient ( The supernatant (filtration) after bioleaching in the bioreactor was harvested and used without alteration for the separation processes. 100 ml of the supernatant was treated with 5 ml of a concentrated oxalic acid solution, whereby a white-yellow precipitate was formed ( The magnet material could be easily leached in aqua regia or low concentrated mineral acids at room temperature, whereby a 100% leaching was achieved with aqua regia followed by leaching in 0.5 M HCl (∼90% Nd, 100% of remaining elements). This was in accordance to several studies, who reported a completely leaching of magnet material with different mineral acids ( Bioleaching of magnet materials has not been investigated yet. For this purpose first experiments were done with a well-known sintering powder to identify the most efficient microorganism for bioleaching. The microorganisms were selected according to whether they were used already successfully in the context of bioleaching of secondary resources. Therefore the well-known acidophilic bacteria Lower leaching rates for the elements were observed with the bacterium The formed sulphuric acid by the bacteria In comparison to other studies dealing with bioleaching, for the magnet material quite high leaching efficiencies for the rare earth metals were achieved with the acidophilic bacteria ( Different alloys and particle sizes were tested with No significant differences in leaching efficiency between the powder and the slices were observed ( Besides the discussed particle size also other parameter can be used for process optimization. The bioleaching is influenced by temperature, inoculum quantity, time, pH value and pulp density. An increase in temperature accelerates the leaching kinetic and therefore the leaching time, but on the other hand the bacteria could be hindered in growth up to the extinction of the complete culture ( The up-scalability of the developed process was investigated by the usage of a 3.5 l bioreactor. First the bacteria were grown in the medium until arriving their stationary phase. The lag-phase growth could be tracked via the oxygen consumption via respiration. Here a linear decrease in oxygen content was observed; this graph flattens off after 13 days and remained constant, which indicated the transition to the stationary phase where the synthesis of new cells and the death of others were balanced ( The bacteria in the developed bioleaching process were not able to leach the rare earth elements selectively. Also all other elements of the alloy were leached. Therefore an additional separation and purification process was necessary. Several preliminary investigations indicated the treatment with a concentrated oxalic acid solution and a twostep extraction process followed by a precipitation as the most promising method ( A different method also turned out to be efficient. Therefore the bioleaching solution was treated with an ionic liquid and afterwards with DEHPA to remove all impurities and leaving behind only the rare earth elements. Extraction using ionic liquids has been under research for some years. This method offers high separation efficiency because the extractants can be arbitrarily designed and synthesized to integrate binding sides for the targets extracts. As a result, even multicomponent systems can be reliably separated from each other. For the purification of rare earth elements some ionic extractants are already known including trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride (Cyphos IL 101) ( The separation of Fe was comparable to separation ratios reported in other studies ( In this study a green recycling process of end-of-life magnets based on bioleaching was investigated. The results can be summarised as following: The bioleaching of end-of-life magnets with different bacteria was feasible. Highest leaching efficiencies were obtained with The abiotic controls without bacteria also showed high leaching efficiencies. Therefore it was assumed that leaching of the magnets mainly took place by chemical processes due to the presence of H Different magnet alloys and particle sizes were examined. It was found out that the investigated process was feasible without losses in efficiency for different alloys. End-of-life magnets in slices could be leached without significant loss in efficiency. Whole magnet blocks showed only low leaching efficiency, but for this size the benefit of the bacteria in comparison to a chemical leaching was detectable. A higher ratio of oxidic compounds in biotic batches was detected by means of REM and EDX analysis. The automation and up-scaling of the investigated process was tested by the usage of a bioreactor. No significant loss in leaching efficiency was recorded. Due to the non-selective leaching of the magnet waste by the bacteria a further separation and purification process for the rare earth elements was investigated. A precipitation with concentrated oxalic acid solution as well as a two-step extraction process with the ionic liquid Cyphos IL 101 and a following treatment with DEHPA was identified as the most efficient method. Extraction rates up to 100% with a purity of 98% were achieved. The whole recycling value chain was reproduced in this study. Bioleaching as the basis for the leaching of end-of-life magnets provides a manageable, cost-effective and environmentally friendly alternative for conventional processes. A REE recycling complement also the primary mining of ores and can help to solve the balance problem of producing a large supply of La and Ce for the Nd production. The recovered rare earth elements can be re-supplied to the magnet manufacturing or used in other technical fields such as the production of fluorescent phosphors. This work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: