Ammonium acid fluoride (NH4F·xHF) has been identified as an alternative fluorinating agent for zircon, and may provide a method by which a wide variety of anhydrous metal fluorides can be synthesized. Data on the kinetics of the reaction of NH4F·xHF with plasma-dissociated zircon, combined with the thermodynamic parameters, are essential for the development of an industrial process for the production of a precursor for the manufacture of zirconium metal, viz. anhydrous ZrF4. The reaction yields (NH4)3ZrF7(s) and (NH4)2SiF6(s), the latter forming volatile products at relatively low temperatures, affording easy separation of silicon from the zirconium compound. Another useful aspect of the process is the possibility of recycling, since the ammonia and hydrogen fluoride in the waste stream can be recombined, making them available for re-use as the acid fluoride. It was found that the reaction constant k″ varies exponentially with temperature at a set value of x, but linearly with changes in x at a set temperature. The activation energy for the digestion is between 20 and 47kJ·mol−1 for the values of x investigated.South Africa is currently the world's second largest producer of zircon (ZrSiO Zirconium and hafnium always occur together in nature in a ratio of roughly 50:1. These two elements have near identical chemical and physical properties, but are opposites in terms of their thermal neutron capture cross section. For this reason hafnium, a strong neutron absorber, finds application in nuclear reactors as control rods, while zircalloy is used as cladding for fuel rods. It is therefore imperative that hafnium is only present as trace amounts in zirconium alloys and vice versa. Another important specification for nuclear-grade zirconium metal is that the levels of oxygen, hydrogen and nitrogen are extremely low to prevent brittleness of the zircalloy tubes. A product that conforms to this specification can be more efficiently manufactured by implementation of a dry, anhydrous processing route. Ammonium acid fluoride (NH Zircon is notoriously difficult to process because it is chemically inert and insoluble in most conventional acids under normal conditions ( Plasma-dissociated zircon has been studied by several researchers over the last four decades ( For reasons of efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and environmental friendliness, a dry processing route for PDZ is preferred. Candidates are treatment with elemental fluorine, anhydrous hydrogen fluoride, or NH The reaction of NH The stoichiometric reaction of plasma-dissociated zircon with ammonium acid fluoride to produce ZrF For 0 For The product NH The two reaction equations assume that only the HF is involved in the dissolution of the oxides. The reagent and product phases are dependent on the temperature regime one is working in. In general it is preferred to have the ammonium acid fluoride as a liquid to prevent mass transfer problems. Therefore, the upper and lower temperature bounds are the melting and decomposition temperature of the acid fluoride, which are determined by the value of PTFE containers each containing about 10 The chemical-reaction controlled, shrinking-particle model ( The fluid–solid reaction, where The rate of fluorination is assumed directly proportional to the available surface area of the plasma-dissociated zircon particles, therefore: With The fractional conversion (1 A plot of (1 Differentiation of Eq. which is simply the well-known solid-state kinetics expression for a shrinking particle. ( with When PDZ is reacted with ammonium bifluoride ( Plots of (1 The calculated By relating the value of Specific concentration dependence constants are given in It is clear that an increase in Considering the effect of The reactions of ammonium bifluoride with a variety of metal oxides are described in the literature. In this paper we pin down the exact kinetic parameters for different values of Activation energy for the digestion reaction is 21, 35 and 47 The