This paper presents results from a laboratory study on the influence of crushed fine aggregate on the rheological properties, i.e., yield stress and plastic viscosity, of the mortar phase of concrete. The effect of grading, particle shape, etc. of the fine aggregates has been evaluated with the use of a viscometer suited for coarse particle suspensions. The evaluation has been done at different dosages of superplasticizer and paste volumes by the use of an inert artificial “cement paste”.
                  The results show that the properties and amount of fine aggregate have a strong influence on the water demand and workability of the mortar, i.e., the rheology. The large amounts of fines often found in crushed fine aggregate primarily increases the yield stress of the mortar. The amount of fines also contributes to the plastic viscosity by increased interparticle friction. However, the results clearly show that the particle shape of the fine aggregate strongly contributes to the plastic viscosity.
                  The influence of the properties of the fine aggregate is largely dependent on the paste volume of the mortar. Thus, by increasing the paste volume, negative effects of poorly graded and shaped aggregates can be eliminated or significantly reduced.In Sweden most crushed rock is of granitic origin and there is a demand for using fine aggregate (0–4 In this article some results from a Swedish research programme (MinBas) on the use of crushed fine aggregate in concrete are presented. The fine aggregates have been analysed thoroughly, both regarding their material properties, i.e., petrography, particle shape, grading and sand equivalent value, and their rheological behaviour in micromortar, mortar and concrete. This article presents results from the mortar tests and describes the influence of the physical properties of the fine aggregate on the rheological properties of the mortar phase of concrete. Results from the micromortar and concrete experiments are presented separately in A Swedish cement (CEM II/A-L 42.5 R), was used throughout the investigation. The cement, with 13% co-ground limestone, was delivered by the Swedish cement producer Cementa AB. The specific surface area, according to the BET method, of the cement is approximately 1740 Normal cement reacts, stiffens and hardens with time. Consequently, the rheology of cement based mortars change with time due to the cement hydration. In some experiments, paste was added successively to the mortar in order to evaluate the effect of a change in paste volume. Fore these experiments an artificial paste was developed and used as a substitute of the cement paste. The artificial paste consisted of a blend of dispersed silica fume, fine quartz and water. The silica used is marketed by Elkem ASA Materials under the brand name Elkem Microsilica A total of 14 fine aggregates (0–2 0 0.25 0.50 0.75 The specific surface area and the particle size distribution of the fines, i.e., particles smaller than 0.25 In addition to the mentioned analyses the fine aggregates were also analysed with the sand equivalent test (SE-test). The test was done in accordance with the European standard EN 933-8. Further details on the properties of the fine aggregate and the methodology are given in the research reports In From The grading curves of the fine aggregates in this investigation are shown in The superplasticizer used in this investigation was Glenium 51 from Master Builders. Glenium 51 is based on a modified polycarboxylate ether type of polymer and the dry content is approximately 35%. The mortars were designed to represent the mortar phase of a hypothetical concrete with a given mix design. In this work we chose to work at a constant water to cement ratio and constant cement content. The mix design of the mortars is described in Furthermore, in one series of experiments we worked with mortars containing an inert artificial paste. The paste volume of these mortars was successively increased, i.e., in three steps from a paste volume of 57% to 68%, by adding more of the artificial paste. Thus, the mortars can be considered to represent mortars which contain different amounts of cement at a given w/c-ratio. The artificial paste was used to avoid any time dependence effects due to cement hydration during the experimental time. The composition of the initial mortar and the paste added are shown in The mortars and the artificial paste were mixed for four minutes in a Hobart mixer equipped with a paddle stirrer ( The rheological properties of the mortars were studied with a rotational viscometer (Contec 4) suited for measurement on coarse particle suspensions ( During measurement, the sample is sheared in the gap between the cylinders by the rotational motion of the outer cylinder. The outer cylinder is rotated according to a predefined velocity profile which is described by an up and down curve where the speed is first increased stepwise from zero to 0.45 During the measurement the generated torque is continuously registered by the inner cylinder. The torque and speed of rotation are recalculated to shear stress ( The rheological properties of mortars containing different types of fine aggregates, i.e., fine aggregates from crushed bedrock, have been evaluated with a viscometer suited for coarse particle suspensions. The fine aggregates displayed different grading curves, particles shapes, specific surface area of the fines fraction and SE-values. The mortars were analysed both with and without addition of a superplasticizer and at different paste volumes by utilising an artificial paste. In one set of experiment the grading curve of a few selected fine aggregates were standardized, i.e., made similar, in order to study the influence of the particle shape. Furthermore, the amount of fines was varied in order to study their influence on the rheology of the mortar. The results clearly show that the properties of the fine aggregate strongly influence the yield stress and plastic viscosity of the mortars ( However, since the fine aggregates used in this investigation displayed large variations in the amount of fines, specific surface area and particle shape it is difficult to find clear correlations between these parameters and the rheological properties of the mortar. Regarding the SE-value, it was not possible to find any correlation between the rheological parameters and SE-values above 75%. But for lower SE-values, i.e., ⩽75%, a significant increase in the yield stresses and, thus, water demand could be observed with decreasing SE-values. In Saudi Arabia the SE-value must be ⩾75% in order to fulfil the regulations for fine aggregate used in concrete for bridges and road constructions The relationship between the SE-values and the plastic viscosity was more unclear. However, all the crushed fine aggregates contained relatively large amounts of fines and consequently have a larger surface area which needs to be wet in order for the mortar to be workable. The large amounts of badly shaped fines are believed to be the major reason for the higher water demand of the mortars with crushed fine aggregates, i.e., higher yield stress and plastic viscosity. This is clearly true for fine aggregate C2 which suffers from very high amounts of fines, especially in size fractions smaller than 0.125 The mortars with fine aggregate C7 and C9 displayed a high yield stress and a relatively low plastic viscosity. This differs from the general pattern in In order to evaluate the influence of particle shape on the rheological properties of mortars the grading curves of a few fine aggregates were standardized. This was done by combining different fractions of the fine aggregates to a grading curve similar to the one for fine aggregate N1 (see The results show that the major difference between the mortars with glaciofluvial fine aggregate (N1) and the crushed fine aggregate can be seen in the plastic viscosity. The difference can be considered to be a particle shape effect, i.e., the higher viscosity of the mortars with crushed fine aggregate is a result of increased particle interference between non-spherical particles. It is well known that any deviation from a spherical particle shape results in an increase in viscosity if the measurement is done at the same phase volume The corresponding correlation coefficient values for the yield stress are 0.09 and 0.31 ( Moderate amounts of fines generally have a positive effect on the properties of concrete, i.e., consistency and workability The effect of the fines content on the rheological properties of mortars is shown in The effect of the fines content on the plastic viscosity of the mortars appears to be more complicated than the effect on the yield stress. For the mortar with fine aggregate N1 virtually no effect could be observed within the studied range of fines content ( Similar effects have been observed for concrete, where the fines content at which the viscosity passes through the minimum has been found to depend on both the w/c ratio and the aggregate to cement ratio (a/c ratio) However, the phenomenon could be explained in terms of particle friction. At the lowest fines content there is not enough fines to fill out the voids between the larger aggregate particles which results in a high internal friction and thus a high viscosity. As the fines content increases the friction between the larger aggregate particles decreases and consequently, the viscosity is reduced. When the fines content increase even further the plastic viscosity may increase due to the increase in the total surface area of the fine aggregates. The magnitude of the increase might also depend on the particle shape of the fines. The fines (C3) which resulted in the most significant increase in plastic viscosity displayed the lowest The results in Concrete with crushed aggregate often requires slightly higher cement content in order to reach the same workability as a concrete with glaciofluvial aggregate. The effect of increased cement content at constant w/c-ratio on the rheological properties of mortars is shown in In this paper, results from a study of the influence of crushed fine aggregates on the rheological properties of the mortar phase of concrete have been presented. The results show that the rheological properties and water demand of mortars are strongly dependent on the properties of the fine aggregate. The higher yield stress of the mortars with crushed fine aggregate is believed to mainly originate from the relatively high amounts of fines often found in crushed fine aggregate. This was clear for the mortars with fine aggregate C2 and C3 which displayed very high yield stresses. The high amount of fines also contributes to the plastic viscosity by increasing the interparticle friction. However, the results also show that the higher viscosity of the mortars with crushed fine aggregates is a particle shape effect. A change in the The results also show that the effects of poorly graded and shaped fine aggregates can be eliminated or reduced by increasing the paste volume of the mortars. This is consistent with the results from concrete tests and can partly be considered to be a result of decreased interparticle interference with increased paste volume. Furthermore, the high yield stress and the plastic viscosity resulting from the high amounts of fines can effectively be reduced by the use of an effective superplasticizer. The Consortium for Financing Basic Research in the Concrete Field (CFBRC), MinBaS and Agricola Research Center (ARC) is acknowledged for the financial support. CFBRC constitute of six companies (Abetong AB, Betongindustri AB, Cementa AB, AB Färdig betong, AB Strängbetong and Swerock AB) which support research at the Swedish Cement and Concrete Research Institute. MinBaS is a Swedish development project carried through during the years 2003–2005. The project was financed by the government and the aggregate, concrete and mineral industry. ARC is research programme in mineral technology located at Luleå Technical University. It is financed by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research and the Swedish mineral and mining industry.