Composite tailings (CT) technology allows Alberta’s oil sands industry to reduce its volume of extraction tailings and accelerate the process of reclamation and revegetation of affected sites. Wild raspberry (Rubus idaeus) is desired on reclaimed sites; however, its sensitivity to ions in CT complicates its successful establishment. Hypoxia is another challenge for plants in CT, and is known to affect plant salt resistance. This study examined responses of raspberry exposed to CT release water under well-aerated and hypoxic conditions. Unlike many long-lived woody perennials that have been studied, raspberry did not accumulate Na and Cl in roots and therefore, the ability of roots to store these ions was not affected by the hypoxic conditions. This response suggests that the strategy of raspberry plants to cope with moderate salinity may be to protect roots, rather than shoots, against salt accumulation and possible salt injury. Contrary to Na, Cl, and S, well-aerated raspberry exhibited exclusion as a means of regulating B uptake by the roots. We suggest that the ability of roots to store salt should be used as an indicator of salt resistance in woody perennials designated for reclamation on saline sites.The extraction of oil from oil sands produces large amounts of tailings, the disposal of which requires significantly more land than is the norm for other forms of mineral processing ( Composite tailings (CT) technologies are being developed as a means of addressing this problem. By mixing tailings sand and fine tails and then adding a coagulant, a non-segregating mixture is produced in which the fines are trapped within the sand fraction and low turbidity water is released (CT water) ( The phytotoxicity of tailings and CT has been studied for several years and is becoming better understood ( Wild raspberry ( We kept raspberry in either well-aerated or hypoxic solution culture of Hoagland’s solution #1 ( The raspberry ( Two treatment solutions were used in this experiment: Hoagland’s solution #1 prepared with deionized water (control, The 56 plants used in this experiment were randomly assigned to one of eight 10 The plants were subjected to the above treatments for 2 weeks before harvesting. Leaf injury was assessed by the electrolyte leakage method ( The remainder of the plant was separated into roots, stems, and leaves, frozen at −85 Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 8 (SPSS Inc. Chicago, IL). Analyses included general linear model procedure, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and bivariate correlation. An ANOVA was conducted for all the plants with electrolyte leakage as the dependent variable and solution type and aeration as factors. Similarly, after tissue analysis of the randomly selected subset, an ANOVA was performed with each of Na, Cl, S, and B content as dependent variables, and solution type and aeration as factors. Correlations were then run for each of the tissue types (roots, stems, and leaves) to test for relationships between ion concentrations and electrolyte leakage. Following 2 weeks of treatment, most of the raspberry exposed to CT showed visible signs of stress including leaf necrosis and wilting, regardless of aeration. There were no visible symptoms of plant injury observed in the non-CT hypoxic treatment. Leaf electrolyte leakage increased as a result of hypoxia and CT treatment ( Tissue analyses performed by ICP-OES provided data on a wide spectrum of elements. Of interest were those found at elevated concentrations in CT water, listed in The concentrations of Cl in plant tissues increased significantly in 50% CT water treatments among roots ( Sulfur concentrations increased in raspberry stem ( Boron concentrations in tissues of well-aerated raspberry treated with 50% CT water were significantly elevated in roots ( The initial pH in 50% CT water was relatively high (about 8.5). This pH likely even increased over time as the plants took up NO Osmotically-induced water deficit and ion excess are the two main ways in which salt affects plants ( Electrolyte leakage was used as a means of quantifying injury because it is a sensitive test that detects damage to cell membranes even before visible injury can be observed ( By disrupting cell metabolism, hypoxia affects many physiological processes in plants, including transpiration, photosynthesis, water relations, carbohydrate metabolism, nutrition, and hormone synthesis ( Chloride is an essential micronutrient with tissue concentrations ranging from 1 to 10 These results lead us to reject our hypothesis that well-aerated raspberry would sequester salts in the roots in order to protect sensitive leaf tissues and that the ability of these tissues to do so would be linked to root metabolism. Instead, the data suggest that the apparent sensitivity of raspberry to salinity ( Earlier work with both black spruce ( Failure to compartmentalize excess ions causes salt toxicity, with protein synthesis, energy metabolism, and lipid metabolism all potentially disrupted by ion activity ( A possible explanation for the lack of root storage of Na and Cl is that, unlike long-lived woody perennials, shoots in raspberry live for only several years and new shoots can be produced relatively quickly following injury. Individual raspberry shoots typically live for 2 years, and die in the second year, after fruiting ( Similarly to Na and Cl, hypoxia had little effect on concentrations of S in plant tissues in plants treated with CT water. As a macronutrient, S is required at concentrations of about 1 Unlike the other elements studied, the response of raspberry to B was modified by hypoxia. Hypoxic 50% CT water-treated plants took up more B than those that were well-aerated, with significant interactions detected between hypoxia and solution chemistry, indicating a possible synergistic effect ( Boron is an essential micronutrient in higher plants, and in woody species is often required in tissue concentrations of about 20 Boron uptake by plants has long been considered passive, as it often increases linearly with increasing external B concentrations ( In the present study, the external concentrations of B were similar in the two CT water treatments, but plants exposed to root hypoxia contained higher tissue B concentrations than the well-aerated plants ( Injury, measured by electrolyte leakage, was positively correlated with increased concentrations of Na and B in roots; Na and S in stems; and S and B in leaves. Most importantly, there were no differences in tissue concentrations of Na, or Cl, between well-aerated and hypoxic plants. This inability of raspberry roots to protect shoots by storing Na and Cl may be partly responsible for the observed sensitivity of raspberry to saline CT substrates. Planting of raspberry should be limited to less saline substrates, such as tailings sand. Generally, we suggest that the ability of roots to store salt should be used as an indicator of salt resistance in plants designated for planting in saline reclamation sites. This study was funded by the Environmental Science and Technology Alliance Canada, and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. The authors thank Akiko Ichikawa, Megan Stoker, and Dr. Tawfik Muhsin for technical assistance and Dr. Michael D. MacKinnon of the Syncrude Canada Ltd. Edmonton Research Centre for help with ion analysis.