The red mud is an abundantly generated by-product of the aluminum industry rich in iron values mainly in the form of hematite and goethite phase. The favorable dielectric properties of iron oxide enable efficient microwave heating of red mud, and ~750 °C is achieved in 10 min with 10.7% C at 800 W. The heating rate in the mixture depends on the charcoal dosage and phase composition. The theoretical thermal decomposition kinetics suggest that the hematite to magnetite conversion in the red mud is chemically controlled and requires activation energy of 20.95 kJ/mol. The carbon gasification findings suggest that the CO formation is initiated below the bulk temperature of 700 °C during microwave heating, possibly because of accelerated microwave-induced heating in carbon having a significant effect on the reduction reaction mechanism. Volumetric heating enables efficient reduction and iron enrichment in magnetic concentrate with iron grade 52% and ~98% recovery constituting the magnetite phase majorly in 10 min, consuming 478.8 kJ energy. The iron metallization is dependent on the charcoal dosage, and ~15% metallic iron is formed in 30 min with 1435.4 kJ energy expenditure. The non-magnetic fraction is leached in 0.5 M HCl to recover alumina values in the mullite phase with an Al purity of 48% suitable for refractory applications. The non-magnetic residue containing iron values can be mixed with magnetic fraction to increase the Fe-product yield to ~84%.Red mud is a by-product generated during the alumina production by the Bayer process ( The red mud is a potential polymetallic source with iron as a major constituent. Iron bearing phases constitute approximately 35–50% of the red mud, primarily in the hematite and goethite phases. The iron recovery can help in partial consumption of red mud while simultaneously reduction in the caustic nature of the remaining red mud can help in mitigating concerns regarding disposal and storage. The hydrometallurgical routes are reported for selective dissolution of Al and Na values using organic and inorganic acids ( Several approaches are investigated for iron extraction, such as smelting reduction, physical beneficiation, and solid-state reduction ( The microwave heating occurs by in-situ heat generation in the mixture, and volumetric heating resulted in a rapid increase in temperature and prevented the generation of a temperature gradient, which reduces the overall reduction duration ( Our previous study about the reduction of iron values from red mud compared the conventional heating with microwave heating and is summarized in The red mud sample was procured from the alumina refinery situated in eastern part of India. The received sample was in a dry state with false agglomerates. The sample was homogenized in a laboratory ball mill for 15 min with very ceramic balls followed by oven drying at 110 °C for 12 h to remove the surface moisture. The sample was sieved to minus 100 µm to nullify the effect of particle size during experimentation. The as-received sample comprises hematite, goethite, gibbsite, anatase, calcite, quartz, sodium aluminosilicate, and olivine phases, as shown in The carbothermal reduction experiments were conducted in a microwave furnace fitted with a single magnetron of 0.8 kW, generating microwaves at a frequency of 2.45 GHz. The chamber volume of the furnace is 5.6 L fitted with a K-type thermocouple and exhaust valve for gaseous emissions. A hemispherical flat bottom alumina crucible is used for reduction experiments to ensure minimal microwave absorption by the crucible wall. The alumina has a high microwave penetration depth of 5.84 m and acts as a microwave transparent material ( The reduction degree (RD) is defined as the ratio of the weight loss during reduction to the oxygen mass in the Fe The red mud contains mainly hematite, quartz, rutile, gibbsite, and aluminosilicate phase. The free energy change of oxide reduction and temperature relationship indicates that the hematite can be reduced above 700 °C ( The TG plot of red mud feed depicts material decomposition in three stages, as shown in The activation energy for the reduction of hematite (Fe The heat generated in the material by microwave irradiation depends on the dielectric properties such as dielectric constant (ε′), loss factor (ε″), and dielectric loss tangent (tan δ = ε″/ε′) and these properties depend on the temperature and microwave frequency. The microwave absorption behavior of the material is evaluated by the microwave penetration depth (D The heating of the mixture can be divided into different stages based on the temperature gradient and are shown in The carbon gasification during microwave heating is investigated by measuring the CO and CO The microwave-induced carbothermic reduction of pure hematite powder was elucidated using gas analysis previously, and the emitted gaseous emissions were used to estimate the weight loss incurred in the sample, thereby determining the reduction extent ( The microwave heating has a profound effect on the boudouard reaction, which resulted in the formation of CO gas responsible for the gaseous reduction. The apparent activation energy required under conventional heating of 118.4 kJ/mol is dropped to 38.5 kJ/mol under microwave irradiation (  Similarly, the red mud-carbon mixture containing 8.02% C in 20 min and 10.70% C in 10 min attained a temperature of 700 °C, and simultaneously the corresponding reduction degree is ~50% in both experimental conditions. On further increase in temperature to 800 °C, the reduction degree reached 61–67%. Prolonged heating had a minimal effect on temperature increment at 10.75% C; meanwhile, the reduction degree increased significantly from 67% to 77%, as seen in The reduced phases were separated from the gangue particles by magnetic separation, and the iron values are enriched in the magnetic concentrate for iron making applications. The phase composition of magnetic concentrate is evaluated to find the correlation between the temperature rise, iron grade-recovery trend, effect of reduction time, and reductant dosage on the extent of reduction. The majority of paramagnetic iron-bearing phases such as hercynite and titanomagnetite ends up in non-magnetic tailing fraction. The optimal conditions for maximum iron grade-recovery of 52% and 95% respectively in the magnetic concentrate are 10 min exposure with 10.7% C at 800 W. The concentrate is rich in magnetite and wustite phases suitable as feedstock for electric arc furnace. The prolonged microwave exposure leads to metallization at higher charcoal. The metallic iron content in the magnetic concentrate at 10.7% C is ~9% and 14.5% in 20 min and 30 min, respectively. The lower charcoal addition of 8.02% leads to metallization only at 30 min exposure time with metallic iron of 7.4%. The metallic iron trend indicates the charcoal dosage is the governing parameter for ferrite formation. The addition of higher charcoal for producing ferrite rich products can be the scope for future work. The non-magnetic tailing with a product yield of 28% rich in alumina and silica values can be processed by mild hydrochloric acid leaching to recover mullite rich product suitable for refractory applications and the residue constituting hematite and magnetite phase, which can be used with the magnetic concentrate, thereby increasing the iron-producing feedstock yield. The detailed mass flow and the corresponding Fe, Al, and Si values in the product obtained during various processing stages at optimal conditions are shown in The actual energy consumption for reduction of red mud at 800 W, 10 min is 19.15 MJ/kg of red mud or 40.06 MJ/kg of Fe In view of the cost-effectiveness, the reduction is also attempted with coking coal containing 67% fixed carbon. The comparative reduction experiment was conducted at 10.7% carbon equivalent (Charcoal:12.1%, Coal: 16%). It is observed that the maximum temperature attained with coal during heating is ~800 °C compared to 900 °C with charcoal ( The CO emission was detected above 300 °C in the case of both the reductants; however, the slower temperature rise in coal-based reduction leads to delayed CO formation. The peak CO concentration in the red mud-coal mixture is expected at a similar temperature (~800 °C) as in the charcoal mixture. Alternatively, the CO The extent of reduction in the red mud-coal mixture is evaluated by the phase composition of the magnetic concentrate of the reduced product ( The hematite and goethite present in the red mud are reduced to magnetite using microwave-induced heating. The kinetic study concluded that the activation energy required for the hematite to magnetite reduction in red mud is 20.95 kJ/mol of hematite. The reaction is controlled by a chemical reaction between the gaseous carbon atoms with solid iron oxide particles. The charcoal dosage possesses a significant influence on the heating rate of the red mud-charcoal mixture, and the temperature gradient increased with carbon dosage achieving a saturation temperature of 910, 846, and 696 °C with 10.75, 8.02, and 5.35% C, respectively. The differential rise in temperature is due to the reduction and formation of reduced iron-bearing phases such as magnetite, wustite, and devolatilization of charcoal. The gaseous emissions indicate that that carbon gasification is initiated at a much lower temperature during microwave heating. The delayed gasification at 8.02% C resulted in higher CO concentration. The magnetic concentrate obtained in 10 min at 10.7% C comprises an iron grade of 52% with an iron recovery of 98.7%. The iron metallization using microwave heating is dependent on charcoal dosage, and ferrite formation is observed at 10.7% C. The ferrite fraction increased with exposure time and attains maximum metallic iron of 14.5% at 30 min at 10.7% C. At lower carbon dosage, the prolonged exposure resulted in limited phase reduction with iron enrichment of 45.7 and 46.8% at 5.35 and 8.02% C respectively. The theoretical energy consumption for hematite to magnetite reduction is calculated as ~17.7 kWh while the actual energy consumption estimated during microwave heating is ~53.8 kWh per ton of red mud. The market value estimation and cost analysis of the process yielded a net profit of ~93 INR per ton of red mud. The non-magnetic tailing was acid leached at 0.5 M HCl to recover 42% alumina values in the form of the mullite phase, which is suitable for refractory applications. The non-magnetic residue constituting hematite and magnetite can be mixed with magnetic fraction increasing the overall iron recovery to 98.7% with an iron grade of ~53%.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the