Silver (Ag) inoculation was found to significantly reduce the average grain size of cast zinc (Zn) by up to 90%. The mechanism of such grain refinement in cast Zn was investigated through varying the addition level of this peritectic-forming solute. The reduction in grain size was sensitive to Ag content due to its large growth restriction factor. When the Ag content was over its maximum solid solubility in Zn, the in situ formed nucleation particles, with dendritic morphology (different from the previously reported faceted/spherical shape), were reproducibly observed near the grain centres in the refined alloys. These particles were determined to be pro-peritectic AgZn3 phase based on the information from the Zn–Ag phase diagram, results from thermal analysis, phase identification and chemical composition. The high potency of the in situ formed AgZn3 particles, as nucleation sites for Zn grains, was further verified by electron backscattered diffraction analysis and crystallographic calculation using the edge-to-edge matching model. A new reproducible hexagonal close packed–hexagonal close packed orientation relationship between AgZn3 particles and Zn matrix was experimentally determined for the first time. In addition, the effect of the particle size and size distribution on the microstructural refinement was also investigated. Finally, the grain refinement mechanism was elucidated in terms of the nucleation crystallography and the interdependence theory.During casting of metals and alloys, inoculation is generally practised as an important technique to promote microstructural refinement, i.e. reduction in grain size and/or transition of columnar structure to equiaxed grains Peritectic solidification plays a significant role in the manufacture of many cast products Nucleation crystallography, involved with the interfacial structure, atomic matching and interface orientation between nucleant and nuclei, affects grain refinement efficiency through changing the potency of nucleants (or particles) The work of Wang and co-workers on binary Al–Zr/Nb alloys In order to investigate the effect of Ag on the grain refinement of cast pure Zn, various amounts of Ag were added into pure Zn in the form of master alloys. The master alloy (Zn–10 Metallographic samples were transversely sectioned ∼10 Crystallographic data of the nucleant and Zn matrix were determined using Kikuchi diffraction patterns, which were acquired through EBSD with an Oxford Instrument AZtecHKL® system at 20 The aim of grain refinement in cast metals is to achieve small, uniform and equiaxed grains The variation of the average grain size of the cast Zn with Ag addition level is plotted in Two typical cooling curves and To specify the morphology and location of the AgZn In addition, another weak peak can also be observed at ∼325 In order to experimentally verify the role of the pro-peritectic AgZn So as to ensure the experimentally determined ORs are reproducible, 20 pairs of Kikuchi patterns and the corresponding Euler angles were collected from various grain-centred AgZn The E2EM model Based on the calculated These roughly predicted ORs in terms of the close packed planes and directions can be further refined using the Δ As shown in The growth restriction factor ( The interdependence theory, When the Ag addition is below It should also be noted in In Eq.  The grain size of as-cast Zn–Ag alloys was significantly reduced as the Ag content was increased. The smallest grain size was obtained at 4.5 Ag-enriched dendritic particles were reproducibly observed at or near the centres of η-Zn grains in the refined alloys with Ag content over 3 Based on the crystallographic calculations using the E2EM model, the interatomic spacing misfit and the interplanar spacing mismatch were found to be small enough, compared with other reported efficient nucleating systems, leading to high potency of AgZn For the first time, a new hcp–hcp OR has been experimentally determined using EBSD and further confirming the predictive capability of the E2EM model. This OR is In terms of the interdependence theory and the solute model of grain refinement, the effective grain refinement achieved by adding <3 The smallest grain size achieved within the hypoperitectic zone is proposed to be resulted from the interdependent effects from the specific Ag solute and the in situ formed potent AgZn The Australian Research Council is gratefully acknowledged for funding support. Z.L. would like to express appreciation to the China Scholarship Council and The University of Queensland for providing his scholarship. The authors are also indebted to the Central Analytical Research Facility (CARF) at Queensland University of Technology for their EBSD facility, and the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis (CMM) at the University of Queensland.