Processing of nickel laterite ores is complicated by the slurry’s non-Newtonian rheological properties, which can range from shear-thinning to shear-thickening and from thixotropic to rheopectic. Rheological studies on materials from the Ramu deposit support findings that laterite suspensions exhibit rheopectic properties. Adding a dispersing agent or by lowering the pH was found to reduce the apparent viscosity and the degree of rheopexy. Since both of these actions would increase the particles’ electrostatic repulsion and dispersion, it is proposed that the rheopectic response is due to shear induced (secondary minimum) coagulation. In practice, these results could be exploited to increase the maximum solid content for pressure acid leaching.Metal enrichment in nickel laterite deposits occurs in colloidal minerals, such as goethite, smectite, nontronite, talc and antigorite. These minerals cause slurries to exhibit highly viscous non-Newtonian rheological properties even at relatively low solid concentrations (30% solids by weight). The high viscosity adversely affects handling, particularly through the slurry section of pressure acid leaching (PAL) processing plants ( Due to variations in mineralogy, the rheological properties of laterite suspensions may vary significantly between ores from different deposits and even between different zones within a single deposit. The non-Newtonian properties are reported to vary from yield shear-thinning to shear-thickening with time dependent properties ranging from thixotropic to rheopectic ( A nickel laterite sample from the Ramu deposit, referred to as Limonite B, was processed by slurrying in a rotating drum scrubber, size classifying, gravity concentrating (to remove chromite), grinding of material >2 mm to pass 150 μm, and thickening. No flocculant was added for thickening. Water from the site was analyzed and found to be of similar low hardness to water used for processing. The mineralogical composition was determined by X-ray diffraction Rietveld analysis, which indicated a high goethite content (91%) and small amounts of gibbsite (4.9%), talc (2.2%), and quartz (1.7%). Particle size analysis (Malvern Mastersizer) determined that 42% by weight are finer than 5 μm and 8% are finer than 1 μm. Scanning electron microscopy revealed that most of the goethite was present as needle shaped particles, often occurring in clusters. Zeta potential versus pH measurements as determined by Malvern Zetasizer indicated an iso-electric point (iep) at about pH 7 ( Rheological measurements were conducted using a Haake RV20 concentric cylinder viscometer with a cup and bob fixture designed for measurements on mineral suspensions (  The addition of 1000 ppm sodium hexametaphosphate significantly lowered the apparent viscosity ( Lowering the pH to 3.0 has a similar effect to adding a dispersant ( The test results indicate that the surface properties of the goethite particles dominate the rheological responses. Increasing the electrostatic repulsion by adding a dispersant or lowering the pH, caused decreases in the apparent viscosity and the magnitude of the rheopectic response. The results imply that increasing the electrostatic repulsion reduces shear induced particle aggregation. The results of stress-decay tests at shear rates ranging from 25 to 400 s The equilibrium flow curve (  The benefits of adding a dispersant or lowering the pH to reduce the apparent viscosity and magnitude of rheopectic response can be exploited during processing. For example, a portion of the acid could be added upstream of the PAL autoclave to lower the pH. The potential benefits are: enable the use of indirect heat exchangers due to reduced risk of plugging, and operate at higher maximum solid to increase autoclave throughput per unit volume. Operating at a higher solid content would have the additional benefit of reducing the acid used per unit capacity since extraction requires a fixed residual free acid of 30–40 g/l H The Ramu nickel laterite limonite ore zone is composed primarily of goethite, gibbsite, talc, and quartz. Suspensions at 30% by weight have a yield stress and exhibit shear thickening properties low shear rates (below 200 s Increasing particle dispersion by adding a dispersant or increasing/decreasing the pH reduced the apparent viscosity and magnitude of the time dependent response. These results may be applied to improve material handling or increasing the maximum slurry solid content during processing. The results demonstrate that the rheology of the nickel laterite suspension is affected most by the surface properties of the goethite. The other minerals seem to play a less significant role. While similar studies have shown the relationship between surface chemistry and rheology for pure mineral suspensions, very few studies demonstrate this relationship for real mineral systems. The mechanisms described above apply to ores with mineralogical compositions similar to that of the Ramu ore and relatively soft water. Ores containing clays and greater amounts of other minerals such as serpentine may respond quite differently. As demonstrated in this study, pH and dispersing agents can affect rheology, therefore water chemistry would also play an important role. More research is required to evaluate the effects of dissolved species such as metals, salts and sulfates on the rheology of the laterite slurries. The authors wish to express appreciation to the supporters of this research including the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Fluor Daniel Wright, Highlands Pacific Group and Lakefield Research.