Mastocytosis is a myeloproliferative disorder characterized by neoplastic proliferation of mastocytes that infiltrates tissues such as skin, liver, spleen, intestines and manifests clinically as anemia, abdominal pain, pruritus, anaphylactoid reactions and hepatosplenomegaly [ Secondly, these same mediators as well as stromal cells and osteoblasts activate the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANK-L) pathway that increases osteoclast differentiation and activation. Overall, these effects result in a hyperactive bone remodeling process that leads to a deteriorated bone microarchitecture [ Atypical femur fractures (AFF) have been described as insufficiency or fatigue fractures and arise in the subtrochanteric or diaphyseal regions of the femur lateraly. The American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR) has defined AFF as atraumatic fractures with a transverse fracture line without comminution and originating at the lateral cortex [ A 62-year-old woman with longstanding indolent systemic mastocytosis was referred to our outpatient department for evaluation and management of a recent low-trauma vertebral compression fracture following a minor fall on her buttocks. Along with back pain, she reported a progressive 12- month history of bilateral thigh pain upon weight bearing worse upon climbing stairs and rising from a chair. Zoledronic acid, which she had received for prevention of skeletal complications of her mastocytosis over the past 7 years (4mg every 4 months for cumulative dose of 84 mg) had recently been discontinued by her physician prior to referral. Prior to this agent, she had received intravenous pamidronate (60 mg) at the same dosing interval for 4 years (cumulative dose: 720 mg). There was no drug holiday in between the use of these two agents. The patient also had a history of well controlled hypertension, migraine headaches and gastroesophageal reflux for which she took ramipril, pantoprazole, valproic acid and amitriptyline. She received vitamin D supplements (10,000 international units per week) and calcium carbonate supplement (500mg daily). On physical examination, she had an obese body habitus (79kg, 163cm, BMI 30 kg/meter square) with decreased flexion and extension at the lumbar spine, but no point tenderness. There was no evidence of skin abnormalities. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan at the lumbar spine revealed a T-score of −0.6 and at femoral neck a T-score of −0.02. Initial radiographs of the femurs ( Prophylactic femoral nailing was not recommended by the consultant orthopedic surgeon in view of absence of a fracture line. Though there is limited evidence to support its use in cases of AFF [ We described the course of a patient with indolent systemic mastocytosis and incomplete AFF following prolonged bisphosphonate use. AFF have been documented in patients with hematological malignancies such as multiple myeloma and in patients with solid cancer who receive bisphosphonates for osteoporosis or to prevent cancer-related skeletal complications [ A second major concern in this case was the possibility of mastocytosis re-activation following initiation of the anabolic agent teriparatide. No reports exist of such an occurrence but a report of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) transformation into malignant myeloma following teriparatide treatment has been reported [ This case-report is of interest as it highlights many unique clinical situations. Firstly, to our knowledge this is the first case report of AFF in a patient with mastocytosis in whom we used teriparatide. From a practical standpoint, we demonstrate that teriparatide was not associated with adverse events such as reactivation of mastocytosis. Patients who receive bisphosphonates for prolonged periods of time or at high doses should be carefully monitored for the presence of thigh and groin pain, an early symptom of AFF. No funding was obtained for this case report. Neither authors report conflicts of interest. We thank the patient for allowing us to present her case and radiographic studies. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at