The exceptional diversity of ecogeographical conditions of Armenia and the richness of non-ferrous metals represent a great and valuable potential for the investigation of the biodiversity of acidophilic chemolithotrophic bacteria as well as for the isolation of new highly efficient strains and their communities. The studies of physiological and biotechnological properties of these relevant strains from the bioleaching communities will allow us to achieve comprehensive insight of interspecies relationships as a substantial prerequisite for the enhancement of the efficiency of biohydrometallurgical processes.
                  In this study, novel strains of acidophilic chemolithotrophic bacteria belonging to genera Acidithiobacillus as well as Leptospirillum and Sulfobacillus have been isolated from sulfide ores of different geoformations in Armenia. The results showed that: (1) high efficiency of the isolated bacteria in bioleaching of pyrite was determined by their biochemical properties, especially enzyme activities involved in oxidation of ferrous iron and reduced inorganic sulfur compounds (RISCs). (2) Bioleaching of pyrite was directly connected with the ability of isolated strains to adhere on pyrite surfaces. Moreover, the efficiency of bioleaching of pyrite was correlated with the amount of adhered/attached bacterial cells of the isolated strains.Bioleaching is an alternative resource-saving and environmentally friendly method for metal recovery ( Previously, bioleaching of metals and acid mine drainage (AMD) production has been more often found associated with bacteria from the genus An important group among chemolithotrophic bacteria are sulfur oxidizing bacteria. In contrast to natural ecosystems the main sulfur oxidizing bacteria in commercial biooxidation reactors are The exceptional diversity of ecogeographical conditions of Armenia and the richness of non-ferrous and rare metal ores give great possibilities to investigate the biodiversity of chemolithotrophic bacteria (CB). The determination and description of CB included in the bioleaching processes are essential to enhance the bioleaching in biomining systems and to reduce mineral oxidation in waste dumps. Revealing the mechanisms of biooxidation of sulfide minerals is one of the most important problems of biohydrometallurgy (metal technology). Currently, it is widely accepted that the oxidation of sulfide minerals mainly occurs by indirect “contact” and “non-contact” mechanisms ( Microorganisms produce extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) which mediate cell attachment on the substrates: the particles of ores, concentrates, and render irreversible attachment ( The importance of CB for metal biotechnology depends on their biochemical peculiarities and abilities to catalyze the dissolution of sulfide minerals and oxidize reduced inorganic sulfur compounds (RISCs) to produce sulfuric acid. In this context, the well-studied bacteria are thiobacilli. Other representatives of CB such as moderate thermophilic acidithiobacilli, sulfobacilli, leptospirilli and heterotrophic sulfur and iron oxidizing bacteria which often exceed the activity of In this paper we have carried out investigations studying communities of chemolithotrophic bacteria in different natural ecosystems and technological conditions, as well as revealing physiological and biochemical peculiarities of isolated original and active strains. The peculiarities of adhesion of the isolated moderately thermophilic gram-positive Various samples from mining as well as AMD sites in Armenia were collected to study and assess microbial communities during bioleaching processes. Details of the samples including sampling sites, temperature and pH are listed in For enumeration of iron oxidizing bacteria, the method of ten-fold serial dilution was used. Dilutions (10 Pure cultures of iron oxidizing bacteria were obtained by transferring the yellow and yellow-brown colonies growing on For bioleaching experiments new isolated strains The crushed pyrite (∼94% FeS Pyrite grains were placed into 250 For the attachment experiment The attachment experiment on pyrite was done in Erlenmeyer flasks containing 50 The protein determination was performed according to the previous descriptions ( For the determination of enzymatic activity involved in oxidation processes of ferrous iron and RISCs cells were collected in the logarithmic phase of growth and washed in phosphate buffer (pH 7.6). Afterwards they were suspended in the same buffer and subjected to ultrasonic treatment for 10 Iron oxidation activity was determined calorimetrically in accordance with the decrease of ferrous iron concentration in aerated 0.5 Enzyme activity was assayed in micro-tubes following the reduction of ferricyanide as described ( The enzyme activity was determined following the rate of reduction of ferricyanide at 420 The rhodanese activity was determined by the rate of thiocyanate (KCNS) generated from thiosulphate and cyanide (KCN) ( For the determination of sulfur:ferric ion oxidoreductase the residue or membrane fraction was used ( Ferrous iron and ferric iron ions were determined by complexometric titration by Trilon B ( The dissemination of chemolithotrophic iron oxidizing bacteria in sulfide ore deposits of Armenia from different geoformations was studied. By using the current enrichment media and isolation techniques, several strains were isolated ( Ecological studies were carried out using five strains of Comparative activities of pyrite oxidation have been determined. As seen from However, when grown at the optimal temperature (37 Pyrite oxidation by For the attachment experiments three strains from different genera of isolated CB were selected. The studies showed that the adhesion of A pure culture of The results allow us to conclude that the colonization of pyrite surface by the cells occurred within the first 3–5 Our finding that the cells of Taking into account the combination of the results of pyrite leaching rate and attachment behavior tests, it can be observed that pyrite oxidation activity is correlated with the ability of isolated strains of CB to adhere on pyrite surface. Most likely a link exists between colonization rate and pyrite oxidation. In addition, the efficiency of bioleaching of pyrite seems to be correlated with the amount of adhering bacterial cells. The Comparable activities of enzymes involved in RISC oxidation, such as sulfite:oxygen oxidoreductase, thiosulfate dehydrogenase, rhodanese (thiosulfate–cyanide sulfurtransferase), sulfite:ferric ion oxidoreductase, as well as iron oxidase of isolated strains of As shown in Although the strains were grown in the medium containing Fe  The presence of sulfite:Fe (III) oxidoreductase in cells of In this study we showed that natural and technogenic biotopes of sulfide ores in Armenia were colonized by genera The studies carried out allow us to conclude that isolated A correlation between abilities of the strains of Pyrite oxidation efficiency of the isolated CB directly depended on their biochemical peculiarities especially the abilities to catalyze the oxidation of ferrous ion and RISCs. Thus, A.V. acknowledges the Short Term Conference and Travel Grants program by Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation (Lisbon, Portugal) for financial support to participate in the 7th International Symposium on Biohydrometallurgy (Biohydromet ’14) held in Falmouth (Cornwall, UK) in 2014. This work was supported by the project “Armenische Biolaugung Mikroorganismen” (01DK130009) from Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF, Germany). R.Z. acknowledges China Scholarship Council (CSC) for financial support (No. 2010637124). In particular we would like to thank the reviewers for critical and constructive suggestions. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 