In this study, the biodiesel properties and effects of blends of oil methyl ester petroleum diesel on a CI direct injection diesel engine is investigated. Blends were obtained from the marine dinoflagellate Crypthecodinium cohnii and waste cooking oil. The experiment was conducted using a four-cylinder, turbo-charged common rail direct injection diesel engine at four loads (25%, 50%, 75% and 100%). Three blends (10%, 20% and 50%) of microalgae oil methyl ester and a 20% blend of waste cooking oil methyl ester were compared to petroleum diesel. To establish suitability of the fuels for a CI engine, the effects of the three microalgae fuel blends at different engine loads were assessed by measuring engine performance, i.e. mean effective pressure (IMEP), brake mean effective pressure (BMEP), in cylinder pressure, maximum pressure rise rate, brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), brake thermal efficiency (BTE), heat release rate and gaseous emissions (NO, NOx, and unburned hydrocarbons (UHC)). Results were then compared to engine performance characteristics for operation with a 20% waste cooking oil/petroleum diesel blend and petroleum diesel. In addition, physical and chemical properties of the fuels were measured. Use of microalgae methyl ester reduced the instantaneous cylinder pressure and engine output torque, when compared to that of petroleum diesel, by a maximum of 4.5% at 50% blend at full throttle. The lower calorific value of the microalgae oil methyl ester blends increased the BSFC, which ultimately reduced the BTE by up to 4% at higher loads. Minor reductions of IMEP and BMEP were recorded for both the microalgae and the waste cooking oil methyl ester blends at low loads, with a maximum of 7% reduction at 75% load compared to petroleum diesel. Furthermore, compared to petroleum diesel, gaseous emissions of NO and NOx, increased for operations with biodiesel blends. At full load, NO and NOx emissions increased by 22% when 50% microalgae blends were used. Petroleum diesel and a 20% blend of waste cooking oil methyl ester had emissions of UHC that were similar, but those of microalgae oil methyl ester/petroleum diesel blends were reduced by at least 50% for all blends and engine conditions. The tested microalgae methyl esters contain some long-chain, polyunsaturated fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) (C22:5 and C22:6) not commonly found in terrestrial-crop-derived biodiesels yet all fuel properties were satisfied or were very close to the ASTM 6751-12 and EN14214 standards. Therefore, C. 
                     cohnii- derived microalgae biodiesel/petroleum blends of up to 50% are projected to meet all fuel property standards and, engine performance and emission results from this study clearly show its suitability for regular use in diesel engines.Microalgae oil Methyl ester combustion performance is comparable with petroleum diesel. Very long chain fatty acids increase the fuel density and decrease the cetane number. Microalgae oil methyl ester reduce unburned hydrocarbon emission significantly. Ever-diminishing global fossil fuel resources are increasing pressure to find sustainable alternative fuels and reduce dependency on fossil fuels. Mono alkyl esters of fatty acids traditionally obtained from vegetable oil are referred to as biodiesel. Biodegradability, renewability and low net carbon emission characteristics of biodiesel have generated significant interest in biodiesel, as a replacement option for petroleum diesel Various chemical and physical properties of biodiesel contribute to engine performance and emission characteristics. Biodiesel often contains around 10% oxygen by mass, which influences its combustion performance and emissions significantly. In addition, biodiesel use results in reduction of emissions of unburned hydrocarbons (UHC), particulate matter (PM) and carbon monoxide (CO) A significant amount of publications report on the possibility of using microalgae as a potential source for biodiesel Therefore, the main objectives of this study are to detail the physical and chemical properties of the microalgal biodiesel and to investigate engine performance, which is then compared to petroleum diesel and a 20% waste cooking oil biodiesel/petroleum diesel blend. Biodiesel blend B20 is recognised an optimum-level blend because it represents a good balance of engine performance, fuel consumption, emission reduction and long-term storage ability than any other blend The performance of the engine output is presented in terms of engine cylinder pressure, maximum pressure rise rate, indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP), brake mean effective pressure (BMEP), brake specific fuel consumption (BSFC), brake thermal efficiency (BTE), and heat release rate. Gaseous emissions of nitric oxide (NO), nitrogen oxide (NO Dry microalgae biomass (heterotrophic dinoflagellate Fuel properties, engine performance and emissions of microalgae biodiesel/petroleum diesel blends were compared with a 20% blend of waste cooking oil methyl ester/petroleum diesel and petroleum diesel. Microalgae biodiesel was prepared in three different blends by weight 10%, 20% and 50% and designated as D90A10, D80A20 and D50A50, respectively. A single blend with 20% waste cooking oil methyl ester was prepared and designated as D80WCO20. Microalgae fatty acid methyl ester composition was determined by GC/MS in the Plant Science Laboratory of Southern Cross University, NSW, Australia. Dry microalgae biomass was extracted in pilot-scale with the non-polar solvent n-hexane. The extracted lipid was transesterified and converted to fatty acid methyl ester. The EcoTech Biodiesel Company in Brisbane supplied waste cooking oil methyl esters. The composition of the pure fatty acid methyl esters of these two biodiesels were measured according to the procedure detailed in Biodiesel properties of the extracted pure methyl esters were analysed at the Caltex Refinery Laboratories in Wynnum, Brisbane, according to standard test procedures. The results are shown in All experiments were conducted with a four-cylinder, turbo-charged diesel engine (specifications as per All engine tests were run with a Froude Hofmann AG 150 eddy current dynamometer, which was embedded with TEXCEL-V12 software for precise digital control and sophisticated data acquisition. An open Simtek Bodylogic Engine control module (ECU) + IDM (Injector driver module) was used. Engine and injection parameters were carefully controlled during the experiment by use of a constant engine map. The measurement accuracy for the torque was ±1.25 To measure engine emissions, exhaust gas was sampled after it had passed through the exhaust manifold. A fraction of the sampled gas was delivered to the gas analysers via flexible copper tubing, equipped with a water trap for NO The impact of microalgae biodiesel/petroleum blend fuel was compared with a 20%waste cooking oil methyl ester/petroleum diesel blend and petroleum diesel. Engine performance at partial to full load conditions was studied based on combustion characteristics. Cylinder pressure, maximum pressure rise rate, indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP), brake mean effective pressure (BMEP), brake specific fuel consumption (BSFC), brake thermal efficiency (BTE), heat release rate (HRR) and the cylinder pressure-crank angle indicator diagram were investigated with different blend percentages and different loads. The pure microalgae oil methyl ester of Variation of cylinder pressures with respect to crank angle for the different blends of microalgae biodiesel D90A10, D80A20 and D50A50, waste cooking oil methyl ester D80WCOB20 and petroleum diesel (D100) at different engine loads (25%, 50%, 75% and 100%) are presented in The pressure rise rate is a parameter closely related to ignition commencement. The microalgae biodiesel blends and waste cooking oil blend had a higher pressure rise rate than D100 at 25% engine load ( The uniform pressure that would be required throughout the power stroke of an engine, to do the same amount of work as is done by the varying pressures that are obtained during the stroke, is called indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP), whereas brake mean effective pressure (BMEP) is the work done per unit displacement volume of a single cylinder. IMEP, BMEP and frictional mean effective pressure (FMEP) were analysed to determine the effect of microalgae biodiesel blends in relation to a 20% waste cooking oil methyl ester/petroleum diesel blend D80WCO20 and petroleum diesel D100. IMEP and BMEP obtained from biodiesel blends did not vary by more than 3% compare to that of petroleum diesel D100 (  BSFC is a parameter quantifying fuel efficiency. In Brake thermal efficiency (BTE) is a parameter to represent how efficiently an engine transforms the chemical energy of the fuel into useful work. This parameter is the ratio determined by brake power in the output shaft divided by the amount of energy delivered to the system The heat release rate is another important parameter for evaluating combustion characteristics of a fuel. Formation of NO  Thermal NO An inability to reach the ignition temperature of fuel to be oxidised or a lack of oxygen have been reported for the presence of UHC in the exhaust gases In this experimental study, microalgae biodiesel blends were used in a modern diesel engine and compared with another biodiesel blend, made from waste cooking oil and petroleum diesel. The following major conclusions can be drawn. The physical and chemical properties of microalgae fatty acid methyl esters (microalgae biodiesel (B100)) were within biodiesel standards ASTM 6751-12 and EN 14214, except for the cetane number and density. However, the performance of the microalgae oil methyl ester is comparable with other microalgae oil methyl esters with fuel properties within the biofuel standard. Microalgae methyl ester blends generate slightly lower cylinder pressures when compared with petroleum diesel, and pressure rise rate was increased. The indicated mean effective pressure and brake mean effective pressure were also slightly reduced with the microalgae methyl ester/petroleum diesel blends, especially at 75% engine load, potentially due to lower calorific value and higher viscosity, but frictional losses were reduced potentially due to higher viscosity of the blends. The brake-specific fuel consumption of microalgae biodiesel methyl ester blend D50A50 increased 9.3%, compared to that of D100. This reduction is due to the 11% less calorific value of pure microalgae methyl ester than petroleum diesel. Due to higher fuel consumption, the brake thermal efficiency of all biodiesel blends was reduced. The heat release rate represents the net energy released as heat during combustion. As such, it is a critical parameter to evaluate the suitability of a fuel for use in an internal combustion engine. Most of the tested biodiesel blends were not significantly different to petroleum diesel. An exception was the waste cooking oil blend, which was slightly higher at full load Biodiesel blends have significant variations compared to petroleum diesel with regard to gaseous emissions. Increases in NO, and NO The data suggest that despite the highly unsuitable fatty acid profile of the source organism, The authors acknowledge the North Queensland Algal Identification/Culturing Facility (NQAIF) at James Cook University, for providing the microalgal biomass and access to their analytical facilities. The authors also acknowledge EcoTech Biodiesel Company for providing waste cooking oil methyl ester for this experiment and Caltex Refinery for their valuable fuel property tests. MAI also acknowledges financial support from a postgraduate research scholarship provided by QUT.