The photocatalytic degradation of two selected insecticides (dimethoate and methyl parathion) has been studied using the photo-assisted Fenton reaction. The degradation kinetics were studied under different conditions such as iron's and oxidant's concentration, temperature and inorganic ions. The degradation rates proved to be strongly influenced by these parameters. The replacement of hydrogen peroxide with peroxydisulfate was also tested in a photo-Fenton-like reaction. This system achieved high degradation rates of the selected compounds. Intermediate products formed during photocatalytic treatment were identified by means of solid-phase extraction (SPE) coupled to gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy techniques (GC–MS). Eight possible by-products were identified for parathion methyl and three for dimethoate formed through mainly oxidation and dealkylation reactions. Mineralization studies showed also that the photo-Fenton and the photo-Fenton-like systems are able to achieve mineralization of the insecticides. However, complete detoxification is achieved only in the presence of the photo-Fenton reagent.Pesticide pollution of surface waters and wastewaters has increased sharply and it constitutes a major pollutant problem due to an extensive use of these substances. In response, the European Community has implemented programs for the development of technologies which are useful for reducing pesticide input into water runoff. Their concentration in water can vary between a few ppb to ppm levels that have to be removed in order to achieve drinking water quality or to protect the water resources ( In the recent years, the Fenton process has been extensively used with success for the oxidation of many classes of organic compounds due to its high efficiency to generate hydroxyl radicals during decomposition of H The purpose of this study was to evaluate the Fe Previous studies have used the Fenton reaction for the degradation of other organophosphorous compounds ( Dimethoate and methyl parathion, all analytical grade (99.9% purity), were purchased from Riedel-de-Haen (Germany) and they were used without any further purification. HPLC-grade solvents (acetonitrile and water) were supplied by Merck. Hydrogen peroxide (30%) was obtained from Panreac and K Irradiation experiments were carried out in a 500 The pesticide solution (10 At specific time intervals, the samples were withdrawn from the reactor. Pesticides concentrations were determined by a Shimadzu 10AD liquid chromatograph equipped with a variable-wavelength UV detector using a 250×4.6 In order to evaluate the extent of mineralization, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) measurements were carried out by a Shimadzu V-csh TOC analyzer. Phosphate, sulfate, nitrate and ammonium ions were analyzed spectrophotometrically (with a WTW spectrophotometer) using cuvette tests supplied by WTW. For the examination of the toxic properties of the samples collected at specific time intervals throughout the photocatalytic treatment, the luminescent bacteria For the gas chomatography-mass spectroscopy (GC–MS) analysis, the solid-phase extraction (SPE) method was applied to the samples previous to the injection. Volumes of 50 Samples were also extracted using pre-packed reversed-phase octabenyl bond silica (RP-C GC–MS analyses were performed on a Shimadzu QP 5000 instrument, equipped with a DB 5-MS column (J&W Scientific) of 30 The photo-Fenton reaction has already been used with success for the decomposition of organic compounds ( The photodegradation of dimethoate and methyl parathion by the photo-assisted Fenton reaction is presented in Assuming that among the reactions that take place at the photo-Fenton process, the reaction between OH Under the assumption that OH Accordingly, in order to evaluate the kinetics of the pesticides disappearance the logarithm of the ratio of the initial concentration to the concentration at a given time {ln( Previous studies demonstrated the ability of the Fenton reaction to degrade a variety of organic compounds rapidly and effectively. However, as already mentioned in the introduction, the presence of light can enhance the whole process as it can generate a circle of reactions and convert the process to a catalytic one. In order to evaluate the effect of light and to compare the effectiveness of the Fenton reaction with the photo-Fenton reaction, experiments were carried out in the absence of light by employing either the Fe According to background chemistry, both Fe However, both systems (Fe In order to examine the effect of iron on the photodegradation kinetics, experiments were carried out at different initial concentrations of ferric ions [Fe The dependence of the initial reaction rate on Fe This parameter is crucial for a large-scale wastewater treatment plant since it can influence not only the application costs as it determines the size of the photoreactor but also the operating costs as shorter reaction times are required. However, if iron concentration is high, the problem of the resulting iron-separation step arises at the end of the photocatalytic process. Consequently, it is preferable to select a smaller concentration by which it would be possible to achieve as short reaction time as possible without further treatment to be required for iron removal ( Moreover, at very small concentrations of iron, the reaction rate is almost negligible as it can be observed in The effect of the amount of oxidant was examined by employing different initial concentrations of peroxide varying from 0 to 100 In small concentrations, increase of the amount of peroxide causes an increase of the reaction rate since more hydroxyl radicals are produced ( At high dosages of the oxidant, the observed decrease of the photodegradation rate is due to the hydroxyl radical scavenging effect of H The fate of Fe As a consequence, aeration of the wastewater can be a promising option in order to reduce chemical costs in a wastewater treatment plant ( Previous studies showed that photodegradation rate is sensitive to the anion that is present in the solution ( In the present study, examination of the effect of anion that originates from the iron salt or the acid used for acidification was carried out. The initial photocatalytic degradation rates of the selected insecticides in the presence of sulfate, chloride and perchlorate ions are presented in Similar results were also obtained by the degradation of 2,4-D pesticide by Fe On the other hand, the chloride ligand has minimal effect on Fe Scavenging of OH With the exception of the Fenton reagent, the potential of generating highly reactive radical species by coupling transition metals with electron acceptors and hence degrading organic contaminants in water, has not been adequately explored in the field of environmental chemistry. However, a significant effort has been made by In this study, the activation of K The photocatalytic degradation of the selected insecticides in the presence of the UV/Fe The higher reactivity of the UV/Fe The variation of the initial degradation rates of the insecticides as a function of temperature was also studied. Therefore, experiments were conducted at different temperatures varying from 15 to 65 The identification of intermediates was carried out in the presence of the classical photo-Fenton system UV/Fe The photo-Fenton oxidation of insecticides by hydroxyl radicals (and ferryl species) yielded a number of organic intermediates. Three by-products were identified for photo-Fenton degradation of dimethoate and eight for methyl parathion. The determination of the derived intermediates was conducted either by using the identification program of NIST library with a fit value higher than 70% in all cases, or by interpretation of the mass spectra and investigation of their characteristic ions. The degradation products of dimethoate were rationalized by the continuous In contrast, photo-Fenton oxidation of methyl parathion proceeds via similar mechanisms to TiO The study of the photoproducts evolution profiles offers useful information to support the proposed mechanisms and the results from mineralization and toxicity studies. The temporal evolution profile of dimethoate photoproducts is presented in The timecourse evolution of methyl parathion intermediates is presented in The above results are also consistent with the mineralization studies ( Complete degradation of an organic molecule by photocatalysis will lead to the conversion of all its carbon to gaseous CO Mineralization studies were carried out in order to examine the effectiveness of three reacting systems: (a) The classical photo-Fenton system UV/Fe Mineralization of dimethoate in the presence of system A is presented in It is obvious that system A is not very effective on dimethoate mineralization. Although dimethoate oxidation proceeds very rapidly in the first 30  Finally, dimethoate and DOC reduction along with the release of inorganic ions in the presence of system C is presented in  Similar to dimethoate, methyl parathion cannot be mineralized in the presence of system A. Although a rapid decrease is observed in the first minutes, degradation of the insecticide proceeds rather slowly after the first 30 The mineralization of methyl parathion in the presence of system B is presented in Finally, the mineralization of methyl parathion in the presence of system C is depicted in The effectiveness of three different oxidation systems on degradation and mineralization of the selected insecticides was tested in this study. However when partial oxidation takes place, it is almost obligatory to conduct toxicity measurements since more toxic compounds may be formed or synergistic effects between the oxidation products may take place ( In our study, toxicity measurements of the treated solutions were carried out in order to give a more complete evaluation of the efficiency of the technologies that have been used. The toxicity of the samples collected from different stages of the treatment was measured using the Microtox test. The results obtained after 15 In Finally, the variation of % inhibition of the bioluminescence as a function of irradiation time during the photocatalytic treatment of methyl parathion is presented in It is obvious that system B is more effective since it is able to achieve complete detoxification of the treated solutions. However, all the oxidative systems that have been used are able to achieve a reduction of the toxicity during or at the end of the treatment. This is very important since homogenous photocatalysis can be used as a pretreatment method in combination with biological treatment methods. In this case, complete mineralization is not mandatory since photocatalysis can be used in order to reduce toxicity and to increase biodegrability of the organic contaminants before treatment with cheaper processes like the biological treatment ( The photocatalytic degradation of two selected insecticides has been studied using the photo-assisted Fenton reaction. The degradation of the insecticides follows pseudo-first-order kinetics while parameters like the iron's or the oxidant's concentration and temperature play an important role in the reaction rate. The presence of inorganic ions in the solution affects also the degradation kinetics. When perchlorate ions are present, higher reaction rates are achieved since sulfate or chloride ions take place in complexation effects or scavenging of hydroxyl radicals. With the replacement of peroxide with another oxidant as peroxydisulfate, high degradation rates were achieved. Eight possible by-products were identified for methyl parathion and three for dimethoate formed through mainly oxidation and dealkylation reactions. Mineralization studies showed also that both photo-Fenton system (in the presence of perchlorate ions) or the photo-Fenton-like system are able to achieve mineralization of the insecticides. However, complete detoxification is achieved only in the presence of the photo-Fenton system (in the presence of perchlorate ions). Nevertheless, all reactive systems that have been used are able to achieve a reduction of the toxicity thus enabling the use of these methods as pre-treatment methods of biological treatment reducing the operating costs and the prolonged duration of the treatment. This study was financed by EPEAEK under the framework of the scholarships program “HRAKLEITOS”.