Introduction
                  With people living longer and healthier lives, acetabular fractures in the elderly are becoming more common. But these fractures are still much less common than proximal femur fractures. Because of an insufficient number of cases, prospective studies with good statistical power have not yet been performed. Nevertheless, a collective, multicentre analysis of these injuries and their prognosis would help to define clinical practice recommendations.
               
                  Material and methods
                  As with younger subjects, the initial assessment for acetabular fractures in the elderly must be comprehensive and include detailed radiological evaluation and precise analysis of the fracture. Accurate diagnosis of the fracture type and displacement will allow the surgeon to follow a decision tree, with options ranging from functional treatment to emergency total hip arthroplasty (THA), depending on the patient's condition.
               
                  Conclusion
                  THA treatment of these fractures is challenging for the surgeon in several aspects. These include determining the waiting time before the procedure, selecting the surgical approach, problems related to any existing hardware, need for bone grafting, primary fixation of the cup, dislocation risks, and the patient's ability to recover from an extensive and often complex surgery.
               
                  Level of proof
                  Level V: expert opinion.Elderly patients with an acetabular fracture must undergo the same preoperative assessments as younger patients, so that an accurate fracture diagnosis can be made. This evaluation consists of an A/P view of pelvis, an anterior oblique view and an iliac oblique view Over the past twenty years, many studies have shown that elderly subjects have the same fracture pattern. In most cases, the anterior wall is fractured in combination with the back of the acetabulum being opened In these elderly (70+ years old) patients suffering from acetabular fractures, it is important to make the right decision at the right time and to base this decision on the patient's general condition, vitality and treatment options. Practical recommendations range from early surgery on an acute fracture to secondary arthroplasty later on after the fracture. Many surgeons who frequently treat fractures of this type believe that indications for immediate total hip arthroplasty are rare and require significant experience with pelvis surgery and hip replacement. Without this experience, some recommend waiting for bone union, which happens fairly quickly (45–90 days). All are aware that secondary arthroplasty also has significant technical challenges and that selecting which case would benefit the most from a certain treatment is difficult (magnitude of displacement, patient activity level and autonomy, comminution, associated femoral head fracture) When an elderly person presents with an acetabular fracture, the surgeon is faced with several scenarios. The fracture could be nearly congruent in the vertical and horizontal planes on CT scan and there could be minimal sinking of the femoral head. In this case, neither fracture fixation nor arthroplasty surgery may be required. Functional treatment is recommended for two weeks using light traction, or immediate mobilisation so the fragments can mould themselves around the head It has been suggested that the surgery should be delayed so the fractured bones have time to heal. But in cases where the fracture is painful and/or has caused non-anatomical bone alignment that is not well tolerated, this first impression should be reconsidered. THA must be performed more quickly in these cases. If the THA will be delayed until the fracture heals, rehabilitation is essential because the patient has no autonomy and proper hip mobility must be maintained A priori, there are no contraindications to any of the currently used THA approaches (anterior, anterolateral or posterior) The choice of approach may be driven by the need to remove fixation hardware identified on CT scan that could potentially interfere with total hip arthroplasty. Nevertheless, it is best not to reuse the ilio-inguinal approach. The fibrosis between blood vessels and plate, and between the psoas, crural fascia and plate, which is in part due to the resection of the iliopectineal strip during the initial procedure, make this hardware removal dangerous because of the significant risk of vascular or nerve injury. The central protrusion of the femoral head leads to medialisation, which cannot be tolerated during THA. This bone defect is the result of acetabular widening due to the fracture and it must be filled. This graft is harvested from the femoral head, which is always available No matter which technique is used, the primary stability of the cup must be good enough to allow immediate weight bearing Multiple conditions come together to increase the dislocation risk: elderly patient with weakened musculature; fracture and initial bleeding sequence, with secondary fibrosis and stiffness having reduced the range of motion; immobilisation having weakened the entire structure. Faced with this increased risk, some groups recommend using a dual mobility cup Recovery from THA following acetabular fracture is different than the one following THA for more typical hip osteoarthritis. Hip function is greatly disrupted, mainly due to the delay between when the fracture occurred and when the THA is performed. Patients require intensive, controlled and monitored rehabilitation to regain their autonomy. Hospitalisation in a rehabilitation centre for a couple of weeks is recommended to help patients regain their mobility and steadiness during walking without being apprehensive. THA for acetabular fracture in the elderly, either as a primary or secondary procedure, puts the patient's functional prognosis and survival into play, since this procedure is more involved than for femoral neck fracture. The decision to perform THA for an acetabulum fracture must be made collectively, with the patient and his/her family being informed of the technical challenges and potential risks. Performing THA on an acute fracture requires a carefully thought out indication and favourable experience in pelvis surgery and arthroplasty. It is easier to perform THA on a healed bone and to manage the healing period on the condition that local factors will not add to the operative challenges when the THA is performed later on. The surgeon must be prepared for a difficult THA procedure that will require grafting and an appropriate reinforcement ring for this graft. Dual mobility cups must be considered and rehabilitation must be performed in a specialised centre. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.