The growing consumption of electric and electronic equipment results in creating an increasing amount of electronic waste. The most economically and environmentally advantageous methods for the treatment and recycling of waste electric and electronic equipment (WEEE) are the thermal techniques such as direct combustion, co-combustion with plastic wastes, pyrolysis and gasification. Nowadays, this kind of waste is mainly thermally treated in incinerators (e.g. rotary kilns) to decompose the plastics present, and to concentrate metals in bottom ash. The concentrated metals (e.g. copper, precious metals) can be supplied as a secondary raw material to metal smelters, while the pyrolysis of plastics allows the recovery of fuel gases, volatilising agents and, eventually, energy. Indeed, WEEE, such as a printed circuit boards (PCBs) usually contains brominated flame retardants (BFRs). From these materials, hydrobromic acid (HBr) is formed as a product of their thermal decomposition.
                  In the present work, the bromination was studied of copper, silver and gold by HBr, originating from BFRs, such as Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) and Tetrabromobisphenol A-Tetrabromobisophenol A diglycidyl ether (TTDE) polymer; possible volatilization of the bromides formed was monitored using a thermo-gravimetric analyzer (TGA) and a laboratory-scale furnace for treating samples of metals and BFRs under an inert atmosphere and at a wide range of temperatures. The results obtained indicate that up to about 50% of copper and silver can evolve from sample residues in the form of volatile CuBr and AgBr above 600 and 1000°C, respectively. The reactions occur in the molten resin phase simultaneously with the decomposition of the brominated resin. Gold is resistant to HBr and remains unchanged in the residue.A broad range of goods is classified as electrical and electronic equipment, including large and small household appliances such as refrigerators, washing machines and air conditioners; information equipment including computers, computer games and their peripherals, cellular telephones and portable electronic devices; video products such as television sets or TVs, videocassette recorder (VCR) decks, hard disc drive (HDD) recorders and camcorders; audio equipment including compact disk players, rack audio system and compact audio system. Once these products reach the end of their useful life, they become waste electric and electronic equipment (WEEE) ( According to the European Topic Centre on Resource and Waste Management (ETC/RWM), non-ferrous metals, including precious metals, represent approximately 13% of the total weight of WEEE (with copper accounting for 7%), and plastics are the second largest component by weight representing approximately 21% of WEEE ( Printed circuit boards (PCBs) is the essential parts of electronic devices and contains a major rich fraction of the metals present in WEEE, particularly enriched in copper and precious metals ( Various options are in use to separate or recover metals from WEEE, based on conventional mechanical, physical, pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes ( Typical plastic components of electronic scraps are, e.g., high impact polystyrene (HIPS), acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene (ABS), polycarbonate (PC) enriched in brominated flame retardants (BFRs) ( Therefore, the behavior of these metals during thermal treatment with Tetrabromobisphenol A-based resin is subject of the present study. Thermal analysis, including thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) and a laboratory-scale furnace were used for evaluating the decomposition of BFR resin and the volatilization of the bromides formed under inert atmosphere. The materials used in this study are presented in Copper was mixed at its stoichiometric mass ratio with TBBPA (TBBPA:Cu 4.28:1 w/w), and with TTDE (TTDE:Cu 5.16:1 w/w), assuming that all bromine present in the flame retardant would react with all copper present in the mixture. Silver was mixed with TBBPA at mass ratios of (TBBPA:Ag 1:1 w/w) and (TBBPA:Ag 10:1 w/w), and with TTDE (TTDE:Ag 10:1 w/w). Gold was mixed with TBBPA at a mass ratio of 1:1 All mixtures were prepared by mechanical mixing of the chemicals using a laboratory mortar. Thermo-gravimetric (TG) analyses of an individual mixture and the pure compounds (TBBPA, TTDE, CuBr The experimental setup was shown schematically in previous works ( Complex analytical procedures were applied to analyze the solid residue, the vaporized (condensed) and gaseous phases. The total amounts of Cu and Ag in the solid residue were dissolved in acid by using microwave digestion (ACTAC, Speedwave®4) to prepare samples for inductively coupled plasma with atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES-Perkin Elmer Optima 3300 SYS) analysis. About 80–100 The metals and bromine recovered from the filter and from the inner wall of the reaction tube were quantified by using ICP-AES and IC methods. Distinction was made between vaporized bromide and metal by using different solvents (i.e. water for CuBr, 0.1 The Products of the TBBPA-based resin decomposition trapped in the solid residue, vaporized (condensed) phase and hexane trap were analysed using a gas chromatograph (GC-Rigaku, 6890N) coupled with a mass spectrometer (MS-Jeol, JMS-AMSUN200S). The gas chromatograph was equipped with a HP-5 capillary column (30 Results from a thermo-gravimetric analysis of pure TBBPA and TTDE are shown in Decomposition and vaporization of pure TBBPA started at about 220 Thermal treatment of pure CuBr In case of the mixtures studied, two stages of weight loss were distinguished. For TBBPA:Cu (4.28:1 Similar behavior was observed during the first stage of the thermal treatment of TTDE:Cu (5.16:1 Comprehensive data on the thermal decomposition pathways of TBBPA ( In wastes of PCB ( The TG profile of the TBBPA: Au (1:1 w/w) showed weight loss within 220–320 Changes in the copper and silver distribution during heating with BFRs in quartz tube reactor in laboratory-scale furnace are presented in Thermal treatment of TTDE:Cu (5.16:1 w/w) up to 320 and 340 A significant (31%) change in the weight of residue was observed at 370 Thermal treatment of the mixture up to 600 The weight of solid sample decreased by 68% at 1000 The amount of CuBr formed during thermal treatment of TTDE:Cu (5.16:1 w/w) at the furnace experiments was higher by about 10% of that estimated from TG profile (40%). The increase results probably from different preparation of samples for both experiments. Firmly compressed (pelletized) samples were applied in furnace experiments, while powdered samples were used in TG analysis. The sample compression might favor degradation of TTDE over its partial evaporation from the sample in un-decomposed form, as well as might increase effective contact between the copper and TTDE particles in the sample. Therefore, the pelletized sample seemed to make both debromination of TDDE and bromination of copper more efficient. The inorganic bromine released from TTDE during its thermal decomposition predominantly reacted with copper present in the mixture. Along with an increase in temperature of thermal treatment, however, portion of un-reacted inorganic bromine surpassed the portion of bromine reacted in form of copper bromide ( Fate of silver during its thermal treatment with BFR at laboratory scale furnace was investigated using mixture of TTDE:Ag at a mass ratio of 10:1 At 600 At least 50% of the silver reacted with the HBr evolved during decomposition of the flame-retarded resin, and all of the silver bromide (AgBr) formed remained in the residue ( At 1000 The reactivity of Cu, Ag, and Au with HBr during the thermal decomposition of BFRs was thermodynamically considered. The bromination reactions of metallic compounds such as Cu, Ag and Au were expressed as in Eq. (3). The Gibbs energy changes of each reaction  (HBr gas equilibrium partial pressure; (H The The TG investigations on the thermal behavior of mixtures of the metallic Cu with TBBPA and TTDE indicated that the HBr evolved during decomposition of these flame retardants reacted with the metal forming volatile bromide. The bromination proceeded with an effectiveness of 67% and 40% for in mixtures of TBBPA:Cu and TDDE: Cu, respectively. Detailed investigations of TDDE:Cu using a laboratory-scale furnace revealed that the bromination of Cu proceeded simultaneously with thermal degradation of the flame retarded resin, and achieved an efficiency of 27% at 370 Bromination yields of Ag obtained during thermal treatment of TTDE:Ag at 600 and 1000 TG investigations on the reactivity of Au with HBr originating from the thermal decomposition of TBBPA revealed a high resistance of Au to reaction with bromine. None of the Au can be brominated inside of the decomposing BFRs. The bromination reactivities of Cu, Ag and Au were thermodynamically estimated, and the thermodynamic results were comparable with these experimentally obtained. From a practical point of view, the obtained results suggest that during thermal treatment of WEEE containing BFR plastics and especially PCBs, significant amounts of Cu and Ag can be vaporized as bromide compounds and concentrate in the vaporized (condensed) phase. Therefore, not only solid residue (bottom ash) and also condensable phase (fly ash) should be considered for further processing such as hydrometallurgical treatments to wash out bromine and to recover metal compounds to increase recovery rate of these valuable metals. This study is supported by the High Efficiency Rare Elements Extraction Technology Area in the Tohoku Innovation Materials Technology Initiatives for Reconstruction from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Japan.