To test whether an integrated passive and active aeration system could be an effective solution for aerobic decomposition of municipal waste in technical conditions, a full-scale composting reactor was designed. The waste was actively aerated for 5d, passively aerated for 35d, and then actively aerated for 5d, and the entire composting process was monitored. During the 45-day observation period, changes in the fractional, morphological and physico-chemical characteristics of the waste at the top of the reactor differed from those in the center of the reactor. The fractional and morphological analysis made during the entire process of stabilization, showed the total reduction of organic matter measured of 82wt% and 86wt% at the respective depths. The reduction of organic matter calculated using the results of Lost of Ignition (LOI) and Total Organic Carbon (TOC) showed, respectively, 40.51–46.62% organic matter loss at the top and 45.33–53.39% in the center of the reactor. At the end of the process, moisture content, LOI and TOC at the top were 3.29%, 6.10% and 4.13% higher, respectively, than in the center. The results showed that application of passive aeration in larger scale simultaneously allows the thermophilic levels to be maintained during municipal solid waste composting process while not inhibiting microbial activity in the reactor.Active aeration is typical in mechanical–biological treatment (MBT) systems based on aerobic stabilization and biodrying. At larger scales (full to industrial), however, one-way aeration of municipal waste without mixing the waste creates a temperature gradient, which leads to a lack of homogeneity in the moisture and energy content of the final product ( For this reason, various attempts have been made in recent years to improve techniques for aerating organic waste. A simple alternative for waste aeration may be passive aeration. Effectiveness of passive aeration is fairly well recognized ( Relatively few studies have focused on the use of passive aeration for the stabilization of municipal solid waste. Our previous work ( The aim of the present study was to analyze the effectiveness of aerobic stabilization of municipal waste in a large scale passively aerated reactor supplemented by two short active aeration modes. The scope of the investigation included the following: (a) monitoring the physico-chemical, fractional and morphological changes of the waste at two depths in the reactor during the process of municipal waste biodegradation; (b) monitoring and measuring the volume and physico-chemical characteristics of the leachate generated during the process; (c) evaluating the effectiveness of the process by calculating the loss of organic matter based on the physico-chemical characteristics of waste before and after stabilization. The test was performed in closed technology hall of the Department of Municipal Waste Management of Olsztyn, Poland, which ensured the stable values of the air temperature (around 20 The waste mass was aerated by two fans, with a total capacity of 0.72 The aerobic stabilization of municipal waste was carried out in three stages. As the study was primarily concerned with passive aeration, it was desirable to bring the active stages down to a minimum. Although based on Smet et al.’s findings ( During aerobic stabilization of the <80 Due to the size of the tank, monitoring of mass loss was undertaken only once, based on the results at the start and at the end of the experiment. Taking into consideration the stability criteria of the The main composition of the initial feedstock is presented in In closed reactor systems airflow rate may affect the physical and chemical changes of waste, which could influence the microbial effect. For example, increased aeration may significantly lower the moisture content of waste and consequently reduce the microbial activity (observed as the temperature drop). On the other hand, the decrease of temperature might simply be attributed to heat loss due to an increased aeration strength and have nothing to do with variation of microbial activity. To establish the above-mentioned relationship between the way of aeration and the physico-chemical changes, the temperature and moisture content were measured during the whole, three-stage investigation ( On day 0, the moisture content was 48.45 To determine the progress of biodegradation in the reactor, changes in the volume and in the composition of leachate were monitored. Leachate was emitted during the passive aeration stage and for one day after the stage finished. Initially the emission did not exceed 2.5 During stage II, the pH of leachate slowly decreased from pH 8.7 to pH 8.36, with a simultaneous increase in conductivity and chlorides concentration from 7.5 to 12.1 To examine how the biodegradation process affected the physical properties of the waste, the fractional and morphological changes of the <10 In the center of the reactor, the morphological and fractional changes were greater during the active aeration stage (stage I and III of the experiment) than during passive aeration (stage II). The immediate cause of these changes seems to have been the relatively rapid decrease in moisture content of waste in the first five days of the experiment (6.91 To determine the efficacy of the stabilization process, changes in the chemical properties of waste, including indicators of the degree of stabilization, were observed. Throughout the 45-day experiment, measures of the amount of biodegradable material were almost always higher at the top of the reactor than in the center ( Because the top layer results differed from the center layer results there was little, if any, benefit in calculating the loss of organic matter based on the average. Analysis of the mass balance based on measurements from the top of the reactor indicates that the loss of the water from the reactor was about 1785 Because there is no legislation defining the manner or the intensity of aeration of waste, this aspect of the process requires more consideration. Although the rules governing the biological treatment process specify the duration of the active phase of aeration (at least the first two weeks; An additional aspect to discuss is the possible relationship between moisture content and metabolic activity, which is described in this study. In view of the reports of It should be noted that no leachate was observed in the outflow of the reactor during active aeration in this study. This is noteworthy because, during aerobic biodegradation, around 0.5–0.6 Another point of interest is that the highest concentrations of COD and BOD The measurements of physical and chemical characteristics at the monitored depths of waste showed the existence of environmental differences between them. Throughout the whole period of waste treatment, including the passive aeration stage, the top of the reactor was characterized by higher moisture content, AT4, LOI and TOC, but also by smaller fractional-morphological changes. While the higher moisture content may indicate an outflow of moisture due to the chimney effect, the measures of AT4, LOI and TOC demonstrate that the stabilization process at the top of the reactor was less effective. These results indicate that analyses of stabilization processes in technical conditions may have a high uncertainty of measurement when these measurements are based only on surface characteristics. This may serve as an indication for teams involved in the physico-chemical analysis of waste that is treated biologically in industrial conditions. When determining the effectiveness of aerobic stabilization, the conditions in the center of the reactor are more important than those at the top because they better reflect the state of most of the waste in the reactor. In the present study, the criteria for effective stabilization were almost met in the reactor center, and probably would have been met within a few days. The criteria of the The presented studies aimed to examine the viability of an integrated active/passive aerobic stabilization process of municipal waste and how active aeration may benefit the passive process. The results showed that moisture content in the composting reactor might be controlled in some way by the regulation of the intensity of aeration. Application of active aeration may contribute to remove an amount of water from the reactor that exceeded the amount of metabolic water formed during the mineralization process. On the other hand, application of passive aeration may cause an opposite effect in the form of some regulation of formerly dried composting mass. Passive aeration allows maintenance of the thermophilic levels in larger scale and, simultaneously, maintenance of conditions in which microbial activity is not inhibited. Organic matter progressively degraded during the process of passive stabilization. The results demonstrate that the stabilization process at the top of the reactor was less effective. In the center of the reactor, the morphological and fractional changes were greater during the active aeration stage. These values indicate that stabilization was easier to achieve in the center. Thus, the assessment of waste stabilization should be based on random, representative sampling from different points of the reactor, due to marked environmental differences at different depths of the reactor. However, the overall results suggest an effective combination of both systems can achieve acceptable results with economic advantages. With a slightly longer time for stabilization, an integrated passive and active aeration system can be an effective and money-saving method for MBT of the organic fraction of municipal solid waste. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 