This study analyzed various significant parameters of the low-rank coal (LRC) grinding process, which involves a hammer mill and prepares coal for the KBR transport gasifier (TRIGTM). In order to decrease product loss, an attempt has been made to optimize the settings of the LRC grinding process. Effective particle sizes for TRIGTM range from 0.043mm to 1.0mm. The parameters considered by this study included the aperture size of the screen in the first and second hammer mill, moisture content, and the Hardgrove Grindability Index. The effects of the main parameters and their interactions on the ratio of product loss were investigated using Taguchi’s experimental design methods. The selected parameters significantly affected the ratio of product loss, and all interactions were insignificant. Among the parameters, aperture size of screen in the second hammer mill was the most significant factor.Coal is a valuable and plentiful natural resource. Not only does coal provide an electric power source, but coal is also an essential resource for the production of steel and cement. Coal is one of the most important sources of energy, fueling almost 40% of the electricity worldwide Due to the ready global availability of coal, as well as its mitigated environmental effects relative to other combustion technologies, coal gasification is gaining popularity as a source of electric power generation. Common coal gasification performance is dependent on the composition and rank of the coal, particle size, gasification conditions, and plant configuration. KBR’s transport gasifier (TRIG Comminution, performed in a mineral processing area, is a process involving a sequence of crushing and grinding operations. There are many kinds of equipment used for coal grinding, including pulverizers, hammer mills, roller mills, ball mills, and stirred ball mills, each of which is classified in one of three categories of comminution mechanisms: abrasion, compression, or impact The grinding efficiency of the hammer mill can be optimized by the Taguchi method of robust experimental design Two samples of coal (Indonesian and Chinese) were used to optimize the grinding conditions of the hammer mill. The results of the proximate analysis and the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) of coal samples are provided in Design of experiment (DOE) methods are extensively used to optimize the critical parameters of various processes. A DOE was assembled for the grinding conditions of a hammer mill with the objective of achieving maximum productivity. Thus, the goal was to measure the percentage of products not meeting the requirement for particle size distribution that is necessary for TRIG A swing hammer mill (H-12, Hosokawa Micron Co. Ltd., Japan) was used for this study. The experimental setup is shown in An The results obtained for the DOE of  The point estimator in the predicted optimum condition for TRIG The CI value at the 95% confidence level is calculated as In this study, we investigated the significance of grinding parameters on hammer mills and the interactions of those parameters with the ratio of product loss. In doing so, we determined the optimum levels for TRIG Based on the pilot data on incorporating possible parameters, the significant optimum condition was predicted to decrease the ratio of product loss within acceptable accuracy. The contributions of the aperture size of the screen in the 1st hammer mill and the HGI value were less important than both the aperture size of the screen in the 2nd hammer mill and the moisture content. In particular, the aperture size of the screen in the 2nd hammer mill was the most significant factor, and its maximum percentage contribution on the ratio of product loss was 79.72%. The best aperture size for the screen in the 2nd hammer mill was 1.3 The third significant factor was HGI, and the fourth factor was the aperture size of the screen in the 1st hammer mill. The percentage contribution of these factors in combination, however, was less than 5%. The percentage contribution of all interactions throughout the experimental period was insignificant. Under the best levels, the ratio of product loss was 10.18%. These confirmation results were found to be within the 95% confidence interval, and they demonstrate that the pilot-scale hammer mill is effective in producing ground coal for the TRIG This research was supported by a Research Project of the Korea Institute of Geoscience & Mineral Resources (KIGAM) and the Energy and Mineral Resources Engineering Program Grant funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy, Korea.