0.5%–2% gross power generation of coal power plant is consumed by vertical spindle pulverizer (VSP), and it is essential to select a VSP with better operational performance. Simulated studies of lab-scale mills, which show the similar breakage mechanism with VSP, and industrial sampling on VSPs are conducted to compare energy efficiencies of E and MPS type VSPs (with the grinding media of balls and tread rollers, respectively). The classical energy-size reduction model is modified with the addition of particle size in the exponential form to compare the grinding energy efficiency (product fineness for the certain specific energy) of two lab-scale mills. Also, differences in structure and operational parameters of lab-scale mills are considered. For the industrial sampling tests of two VSPs, recorded data and size distribution of sampled materials are preliminarily compared. Product t10 is selected as the bridge to connect the specific grinding energy and size distribution of products. The modified breakage model is combined with the King’s equation to compare the energy efficiency on the premise of feed in the same fineness. Comprehensive comparison of the results obtained from both lab-scale and industrial-scale VSPs suggests that the MPS type VSP shows the higher grinding energy efficiency and lower total energy consumption.Particle breakage is a common and important process in the treatment of metal ores, raw coal, cement, colorant, pharmaceutical powders and other materials. But the high energy consumption is also an obsessional and headache problem for operators and researches. For instance, comminution activities account for nearly 30% of the total energy consumption in a cement plant The development and evolution of grinding equipment are conducted based on the principle of improving the grinding performance Vertical spindle pulverizers (VSP) are widely used in coal power plants and cement plants, but the comparison of grinding efficiency among various VSPs is less common. Energy consumption in the grinding process accounts for 0.5%–1% of the gross power generation Since the VSP plays an important role in the pulverizing system in a coal power plant, it is critical to select the type of VSP reasonably. In present work, the comparison of energy efficiency between E and MPS type VSPs was conducted. Lab-scale experiments have been designed on the Hardgrove machine and lab-scale ring-race, which represents the E and MPS type VSP respectively. Grinding energy efficiencies of two simulated devices were also compared by the composite analyses of both the modified energy-size reduction model and the differences in structure parameters. As to sampling tests, both feed and PF samples were obtained from the industrial operated E and MPS type VSPs. Size distributions of sampled feed and PF are analyzed and recorded data during the sampling process of two VSPs are contrasted. Energy efficiencies of industrial VSPs were then discussed based on the sampled data and the differences in operational and design parameters. Raw coal, sampled from a coking coal preparation plant, was used in the experiments. Hardgrove machine and lab-scale roller mill were applied to represent the grinding process of E and MPS type VSP, respectively. In order to ensure the repeatability and correctness of results, some exploratory experiments were first conducted. As the roller diameter of the lab-scale roller mill is relatively larger, the upper size limit of samples was determined as 11.2 mm. In the Hardgrove machine, large particles would start to accumulate on the bulge of grinding table and cannot be broken regardless of longer grinding time. Hence, the upper size limit is decided to 4 mm. The lower size limit of particles used in the roller mill was kept the same with the upper size limit of the Hardgrove machine, which is beneficial for the comparison of grinding efficiency between two mills. Raw coals of −11.2 + 8 mm, −8+5.6 mm, −5.6 + 4 mm were separately ground in the lab-scale roller mill, and samples in size of −4+2.8 mm, −2.8 + 2 mm, −2+1.25 mm, −1.25 + 0.71 mm and −0.71 + 0.5 mm were comminuted in the Hardgrove machine. Narrowly sized particles are in the size ratio of For the industrial VSP, the mass flow rates of raw coal and PF are the same after the VSP operates steady. Materials on the grinding table consist of the feed, and the rejects from elutriator and separator, with a mass ratio (fresh feed to the total material) in the range from 1/13 to 1/9 For the industrial E type VSP used in the Yulin Energy and Chemical Company Ltd, raw coal was fed by a belt conveyer. Sampling tool of feed moved across the section of belt to insure the representativeness. While, for the industrial MPS mill of Xutang Power Company, materials were fed by the closed weighting coal feeder to avoid the overflow of pressure air. Hence, a homemade sampling equipment was designed, made and installed into the feeder. During the sampling process, this tool was shifted tardily into the feeder by the hand shank and to get the raw coal efficiently. Upon finishing, the hand shank was dragged out and screw was rotated downward to insure the seal and therefore avoid the escape of PF. As the sampling port is relatively small, this procedure would be repeated for several times to get enough samples. Sampling process of PF for two industrial VSPs were the same, and details could be seen in reference Previous studies have illustrated that the energy-size reduction of raw coal in narrow size in the Hardgrove machine and lab-scale roller mill can be described by the classical breakage model developed by JKMRC. Namely, As the breakage experiments were conducted for narrowly sized coal, various fitted values of A*b were calculated and it is difficult to directly compare the grinding energy efficiencies of two simulated VSP. Particle size has an effect on the energy-size reduction process and affects the positions of trend lines of fineness t Based on the new model, data of breakage tests on two simulated devices are refitted and results are shown in The Hardgrove machine and roller mill show similar breakage mechanism and energy-size reduction process, it is therefore possible to describe their breakage with the same model, although the differences in structural parameters may lead to the variation of energy efficiency. Structural and operational parameters and part of fitted results of two mills are presented in During the industrial sampling of feed and PF of VSP, operation data were also recorded and shown in Industrial sampling experiments were conducted at five different operational conditions for two VSPs, and the running parameters of each survey are shown in Detailed size distributions of feed and PF of represent industrial sampling surveys are described in The structures of grinding zone in two VSPs as shown in The specific grinding energy of industrial E type VSP is 10.9 kWh t Calculated results of grinding energy efficiencies for three represent surveys are shown in Size distributions of PF of the selected three surveys are fitted by this model and the results are shown in Parameters in equation According to industrial sampling data of two VSPs, energy efficiencies are compared. It is found that more energy is consumed by the air blower because the relatively compact internal structure of E type VSP increases the ventilation resistance of air flow. In addition, analyses of size distribution of feed and PF indicate that the breakage performance in the MPS mill is better, due to a finer PF and a larger breakage ratio. Moreover, the MPS mill applies less energy to yield PF in the same fineness, showing a higher grinding energy efficiency. Comprehensive analyses of classification and grinding process demonstrate that the MPS mill shows a higher energy efficiency and can help realize the purpose of energy saving. In this study, over one hundred lab-scale grinding tests were conducted, and ten industrial sampling experiments were performed on the E and MPS type VSPs. Also, size distribution of more than 100 ground products were analyzed. Hence, it is important and essential to make error analysis to ensure the correctness and repeatability of results. Duplicate grinding tests were conducted for the lab-scale roller mill and Hardgrove machine, and the confidence analysis of experimental data is made. As discussed in reference The energy efficiencies of E and MPS type VSPs were compared based on experimental grinding tests and industrial sampling experiments. Though the particle size and feed rate of MPS type VSP are larger, the yield of −75 μm PF is larger and the PF P Since the MPS mill shows a higher energy efficiency according to the comprehensive analyses of the classification and grinding process, it is sensible and essential to the popularize the utilization of MPS mill in coal power plants to improve the operational efficiency and reduce the raw coal consumption. This work is a preliminary attempt to compare different VSPs, and more efficiency studies, which are directly based on mathematical models of industrial VSP, still should be conducted further. Works in this paper were supported by the