Understanding the mechanical behaviour of jointed rock particularly under uniaxial compression is so important for an appropriate design of structures on or within a rock mass. Jointed rocks may consist of persistent or non-persistent joints. Typically, the persistent joints can dominate the whole mechanical behaviour of jointed rocks while the effects of non-persistent joints on the rock masses require careful consideration during the characterisation process. Majority of the earlier studies on the non-persistent jointed rocks have included the joints with open smooth surfaces while the behaviour of jointed rocks with non-persistent rough joints has been explored very limitedly. Therefore, in this study, a number of artificial jointed rocks with non-persistent rough joints were tested under uniaxial compression. With the aid of 3D printing technology a wide range of joint roughness has been accommodated inside the artificial samples. The joints were parallel or coplanar. The influences of four different parameters including Joint Roughness Coefficient, bridge length, bridge angle and joint angle on the uniaxial compressive strength, the deformation modulus and the crack coalescence stress of jointed rocks were investigated through multivariate statistical analysis using Response Surface Methodology. In total, 30 experiments were conducted and the resulting failure patterns were classified into six different categories based on their crack coalescence conditions. A number of samples revealed a specific failure pattern known as “fish eye” due to the development of “asperity interlocking cracks” which were associated with the high range of joint roughness. From Response Surface Methodology it was found that all the four parameters had individual and interactive effects on the uniaxial compressive strength and the deformation modulus of jointed rock. Also, it was concluded that the overall mechanical behaviour of a jointed rock with non-persistent rough joints is mainly controlled by the joint angle under uniaxial compression.Discontinuities are the most important component of rock masses which can appear in different forms including natural fractures, joints, bedding planes and faults. These discontinuities can be either persistent or non-persistent. Majority of the earlier studies have focused on the jointed rocks with persistent discontinuities ( The earliest study on the characterisation of jointed rock subjected to uniaxial compression was conducted by Due to the advancement of computer technology and numerical software some recent works have examined the mechanical behaviour of jointed rock masses under uniaxial compression through building some complex rock mass models known as Synthetic Rock Mass (SRM) ( Despite the extensive studies on the mechanical behaviour of non-persistent jointed rocks, still our understanding regarding the effects of non-persistent rough joints on the rock masses is very limited. In fact, most of the earlier works in this regard have focused on the non-persistent joints with open smooth surfaces. As a result, in this study, a unique set of laboratory experiments were carried out to comprehensively investigate the mechanical behaviour of jointed rock-like material with non-persistent rough joints (coplanar and stepped) under uniaxial compression. This was feasible through applying the 3D printing technology leading to an accurate accommodation of the non-persistent joints with a wide range of roughness inside the casted samples as one the important novelties of this research. Perhaps the only study with a minor similarity to the scope of this work was conducted by The artificial slab-shaped rock samples were casted with the dimensions of 300 × 300 × 120 mm Also, a number of uniaxial compressive tests was performed on the cylindrical artificial samples according to International Society for Rock Mechanics ( A number of sheets with different JRC profiles were designed and made using 3D printing technology with the dimensions of 150 × 100 × 1 mm The uniaxial compressive tests were performed using a servo-controlled loading frame with the maximum loading capacity of 400 ton. The axial displacement rate was constant at 0.005 mm/s in all the experiments. Such a loading frame was used to perform the uniaxial compressive tests on both intact and jointed samples. To minimize the end surfaces effects, two brushed steel platens were used in addition to two 2 mm thick Teflon sheets at both end surfaces (see In total, 30 jointed samples were tested (see For the optimum selection of number of experiments that provides a sound understanding of the effects of independent parameters on the dependent ones in an interactive manner, the Response Surface Methodology (RSM) was adopted ( Apart from the intercept, the terms in these models fall into one of the following categories: Linear terms (main effects) of form Two-factor interactions of form Quadratic terms of form Models for the categorical controls often involve a set of terms to represent a single main effect or two-factor interaction, but the interpretation of the effects is similar. The codes and the levels of independent parameters in this study are given in JRC 0–2 = 1.0. JRC 4–6 = 5.0. JRC 10–12 = 11.0. JRC 14–16 = 15.0. and JRC 18–20 = 19.0. From the given coded values in It is evident from Eqs. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to assess the confidence level on the resulting functions (Eqs. ANOVA was also performed to quantify the weighting contribution of individual and interactive effects of the independent parameters (e.g. JRC, L, γ and θ) on the dependent ones (σ From Overall, six different failure modes were identified for the samples tested in this study based on A digital camera with 18MPix resolution and capability of capturing 22 frames per seconds was used to record the cracking process. Tensile cracking was considered when the resulting cracks at the tips of the joints were opened. Those newly created cracks at the end of tests were categorized as shear cracks if they were filled with the crushed materials or the trace of slickensides was observed. According to From each category the resulting failure mode of a representative sample along with its detailed sketch of failure pattern is presented in The objective of   Considering the earlier findings in this regard (e.g. It is noteworthy that although the above findings obtained from the uniaxial compressive tests on the artificial jointed rocks, due to the similarity between the mechanical behaviour of natural rocks and the tested samples; the results can be applicable to rock masses. It is worth mentioning that for the accommodation of such rough joints inside the sample, the use of artificial rock-like material was essential as with the current technology, it would be very difficult and costly to make the non-persistent rough joints inside the natural rock. The RSM results are presented along with the detailed explanations on the potential physical reasons for the effects of each independent parameter (θ, JRC, γ and L) on the dependent ones (σ From MRM (Eq. From For the case where the interaction among L and JRC is considered, it is evident from As it can be seen in The resulting effects of γ on σ From Eq. From In Similar to σ  A unique set of uniaxial compressive tests were performed on 30 jointed rock-like material (artificial) samples with non-persistent rough joints to assess their mechanical and cracking behaviours. The interactive effects of four different parameters including Joint Roughness Coefficient (JRC), bridge length (L), bridge angle (γ) and joint angle (θ) on the uniaxial compressive strength (σ Overall six different failure modes were identified based on the resulting crack coalescences including: (1) pure tensile, (2) pure tensile and shear, (3) mixed mode of tensile-shear, (4) pure tensile and mixed mode of tensile-shear, (5) pure shear and (6) failure mode with no crack coalescence. The third category was classified into two sub-categories exhibiting “ From RSM it was found that all the four independent parameters (JRC, L, γ and θ) had substantial effects on σ The findings from this study and the proposed multivariate statistical methodology (RSM) can assist the geological engineers to better analysis the complex mechanical behaviour of rock masses during the design stage. This is due to the similarity between the mechanical behaviour of tested artificial jointed rocks and the natural jointed rocks with non-persistent rough joints.