Accurate sampling methods are critical to obtaining meaningful analytical data in the gold industry. The basic rule for correct sampling and sample processing is that all parts of the ore, concentrate or slurry being sampled, must have an equal probability of being collected and becoming part of the final sample for analysis. If this is not the case, bias is easily introduced that cannot be eliminated by simply averaging replicate measurements. Special care must also be taken to ensure that sample masses are adequate at each stage of sampling and sample preparation to achieve the required precision. Different sampling basics, components of sampling, and how to process the samples are described in this chapter.It is still surprising that sampling is often not given the attention it deserves and the task is delegated to personnel who do not fully appreciate the significance and importance of sampling. Yet correct sampling and sample processing practices are critical to accurate delineation of ore resources as well as the evaluation and control of subsequent processing operations from mining through to delivery of the final product ( Samples are taken from a range of locations, including percussion and diamond drill holes, blast holes, relevant feed and product streams, trucks, trains and stockpiles. The fundamental rule for correct sampling and sample processing is that all parts of the material being sampled must have an equal probability of being collected and becoming part of the final sample for analysis ( The presence of bias is a major problem in sampling, because it does not average out over time. In contrast to poor precision, which can be improved by calculating the average of replicate sampling, sample preparation and analysis, no amount of replicate sampling and analysis will eliminate bias once it is present. The final result is just a more precisely incorrect analytical value. Consequently, minimizing or preferably eliminating biases is in many respects more important than improving precision. Sources of bias that can be eliminated at the outset by correct design of sampling and sample processing systems include sample spillage, sample contamination and incorrect extraction of increments, such as by taking a grab sample. Sources of bias that can be minimized but not completely eliminated include change in moisture content, size degradation and dust loss. Samples for determination of moisture content require special attention and must be extracted as quickly as possible with minimum handling and placed in impervious airtight containers or bags. They should then be returned to the laboratory without delay for weighing and moisture determination and not stored for long periods near the sampling point, particularly when the ambient temperature is high. Once bias has been addressed, precision can be assessed by determining the overall variance of the final analysis This approach is particularly useful for designing, optimizing and assessing sampling schemes, because the contribution of each stage to the overall variance can be examined; it already appears in a number of ISO (International Standards Organization) sampling Standards ( A better understanding of the sources of sampling errors and how to eliminate sampling bias and minimize variance is obtained by splitting the total sampling error This equation is strictly applicable to sampling from moving streams, so not all of the above components of error apply to every sampling situation. For example, the long-range and period quality fluctuation and weighting errors do not apply to percussion and blast-hole sampling, but the fundamental error, increment delimitation, increment extraction and preparation errors do apply. The last three components require special attention, because they can result in the introduction of sampling bias. Fortunately, these biases can be eliminated by the use of correct sampling equipment and procedures. The others are largely random errors that can never be completely eliminated, but they can be reduced to acceptable levels by careful design of the sampling system. Preparation errors in the sampling context are non-selective operations without change of mass, such as crushing, grinding, mixing, sample transfer, drying, Increment delimitation errors arise from incorrect geometrical definition of the increment to be taken, When sampling an ore deposit using percussion drilling, the drill hole must have parallel sides (correct When sampling an ore deposit using diamond drilling, the drill hole must have parallel sides (correct When sampling a blast hole cone, a complete sector of the cone of cuttings must be selected (correct When sampling concentrate in a truck using a spear sampler, the spear must be pushed down to the bottom of the truck (correct When sampling from moving streams, all parts of the stream cross-section must be diverted by the sample cutter for the same length of time (correct The weighting error largely relates to sampling from moving streams and is usually not a major problem. It arises from variations in the flow rate of the stream, so that individual increments do not carry with them the correct weighting information when they are combined into partial samples and gross samples, particularly for time-basis sampling. However, the problem can be overcome by regulating the flow rate prior to sampling. Periodic quality variations also relate to sampling from moving streams and may arise from bucket-wheel reclaimers, pumps, The fundamental error is a critical consideration in designing any sampling scheme, whether it is for sampling drill holes, process streams, trucks or wagons. It results from the differences in composition between the individual particles being sampled, and as a consequence, for a given particle size, there is a minimum mass of sample, Determination of this minimum mass is covered in considerable detail by The mass of cuttings extracted from percussion holes is generally quite manageable, so it is possible to collect all the cuttings for subsequent sample preparation. The best method is to use reverse-circulation drilling to automatically collect the cuttings, where compressed air is pumped down the drill hole to force the cuttings up the centre of the drill stem and through a cyclone. The cuttings are then passed through a suitable divider, Blast-hole sampling practices have changed relatively little in recent years and continue to be problematic. Analyses of the samples collected are becoming increasingly important for grade control, however, as mining companies continue to push down operating costs by reducing the number of mining machines, the size of blending stockpiles and sample stations in the processing plant. This places much more pressure on the operators to feed ore of the required grade to the primary crusher, which in turn requires better estimates of the grades of ore blocks that are derived from blast-hole analyses. When the diameter of blast holes is relatively small (below ∼200 The second method is to manually take two complete radial cuts from the blast-hole cone at 180° spacing after drilling has been completed and divide the cuttings down to an appropriate mass on-site using a riffle. There are several technical difficulties with this approach. Radial cuts, rather than being sector shaped, generally have parallel sides. Also, making allowance for sub-drill cuttings by removing the top of the blast-hole cone can be problematic. However, the accuracy of this approach is superior to the more conventional approach of taking vertical cuts from near the centre of the blast-hole cone, as used for larger diameter blast holes. The third method is to use an automatic vacuum extraction system and cyclone on the drill rig to pick up the cuttings around the top of the blast hole and pass them through a suitable divider, such as a riffle or cone divider, to extract a sample of appropriate mass. In principle, this approach sounds good, but in practice a substantial proportion of the cuttings are left around the blast hole (usually the coarser particles). A substantial amount of dust (the finer particles) completely bypasses the sampling system and goes directly to the dust filter, and substantial material build-up occurs on the sample divider, particularly when the drill cuttings are wet. Once again, some of the sample dividers do not conform to correct sampling principles. As for percussion holes, the best approach is to use reverse-circulation blast-hole drilling to automatically collect the cuttings (see For larger diameter drill holes (∼300 Taking two complete radial cuts from the blast hole cone 180° apart after drilling has been completed and divide the cuttings down to an appropriate mass on-site using a suitable divider. Installation of an automatic vacuum extraction system on the drill rig to pick up the cuttings around the top of the blast hole and pass them through a suitable divider to extract a sample of appropriate mass. By far the best way of sampling a moving stream of ore, concentrate or slurry is using a correctly designed sample cutter at the discharge point of a conveyor belt, chute or slurry pipe. The stream can be intersected at pre-selected times or tonnages, and representative samples, or increments, can be collected by taking a complete cross-section of the stream with a sample cutter ( When sampling from moving streams, the stream is divided into strata of equal time or mass, and increments are then taken from a fixed point of time or mass in each stratum ( For mass-basis sampling, the increment masses should be almost uniform to ensure that each increment carries the correct weighting information, for example, by using a variable speed cutter that adjusts its speed increment by increment so that it is proportional to the flow rate at the time the increment is taken. For time-basis sampling, the increment mass must be proportional to the flow rate, so a fixed speed cutter is required. Unless these conditions are met, weighting errors will be introduced. Time-basis sampling is the easier to implement, but variations in flow rate should not be excessive, otherwise the increment mass may not be proportional to the average flow rate during the sampling interval. Sample cutters for sampling moving streams must satisfy the following design rules to eliminate increment delimitation and extraction errors: The cutter must collect a complete cross-section of the stream, both the leading and trailing edges of the cutter (lips) completely clearing the stream at the end of each traverse. Cutters that collect only part of the stream on a continuous or periodic basis, The sample cutter must be non-restrictive and self-clearing, discharging completely each increment without any reflux, overflow or hang-up. This is particularly important for The geometry of the cutter opening must ensure that the cutting time at each point in the stream is equal. Hence, for linear-path cutters, the cutter edges must be parallel, while for cutters travelling in an arc, such as The cutter should intersect the stream either in a plane normal to, or along an arc normal to, the mean trajectory of the stream. The plane of the cutter lips must not be vertical or near vertical, because particles that strike the inside edge of the cutter lips, and which should appear in the sample, are deflected away from the cutter aperture by gravity into the reject stream. The cutter must travel through the stream at a uniform speed, accelerating up to its cutting speed before entering the stream and then decelerating to a stop after leaving the stream. The cutter drive must also have sufficient power to ensure that the cutter does not slow down as it enters the stream and speed up as it leaves the stream. The cutter aperture must be at least three times the nominal top size ( Bucket-type cutters must have sufficient capacity to accommodate the increment mass obtained at the maximum flow rate of the stream without any reflux or overflow of material from the cutter aperture. No materials other than the sample must be introduced into the cutter or the sample delivery chute. If necessary, both need to be covered when the cutter is parked between increments to eliminate ingress of dust or spillage. If a belt scraper is required to remove material adhering to the belt, the scraped material must fall within the area traversed by the cutter. When sampling slurries, the cutter lips must be sharp and the sample cutter streamlined to minimize turbulence as it cuts the slurry stream ( The cutter speed is important for cross-stream cutters and The A very useful parameter for checking the design and operation of sample cutters is the While taking representative samples from a stockpile may at first sight appear straightforward, this process is at best very difficult and often impossible. Samples are commonly taken from the side of the stockpile with a shovel or scoop (see Because of their smaller size compared to stockpiles, it is possible to sample fine concentrates (<1 As for the other stationary sampling situations described above, it is impossible to reliably extract representative samples of solids or slurries Full-depth sampling in which a number of full vertical columns are extracted from the vessel (usually impossible). Sampling from moving streams as the vessel is filled or emptied. After collection, samples may be processed individually or combined into gross samples if necessary. In both cases, they are crushed, dried and divided as necessary in a number of smaller scale sampling stages to produce test samples. At each of these stages the aim is to maintain the overall variance at an acceptable level and minimize bias. As already discussed above, for a given particle size, there is a minimum mass of sample that must be retained after division to obtain the required division variance. A common fault during sample processing is to reduce the sample mass too far before crushing and grinding, resulting in unacceptable overall variance. Other problems that can occur and can be eliminated through proper training of sample preparation personnel include: Discarding part of a sample prior to division, because it is too heavy to lift or carry. Incorrect use of sample dividers, particularly riffles, resulting in bias. Sample contamination due to inadequate cleaning of equipment between samples. Sample loss via the laboratory dust extraction system. Accurate sampling methods are critical to obtaining meaningful analytical data in the gold industry. The basic rule for correct sampling and sample processing is that all parts of the ore, concentrate or slurry being sampled must have an equal probability of being collected and becoming part of the final sample for analysis. If this is not the case, bias is easily introduced that cannot be eliminated by simply averaging replicate measurements. Special care must also be taken to ensure that sample masses are adequate at each stage of sampling and sample preparation to achieve the required precision.