The magnetoelastic properties of nano-crystalline zinc ferrite (ZnFe2O4) thin films prepared by Pulse laser deposition on amorphous fused quartz substrates have been investigated by means of the strain-modulated ferromagnetic resonance, as a function of the substrate temperature during the deposition, and as a function of the annealing temperature. Magnetoelastic constants reveal the same trends as the magnetization, showing correlation between these two parameters. The results are similar to that obtained earlier for the Y3Fe5O12 ferrite.Magnetostriction is an important property of magnetic materials and arises out of the interaction of the crystal field with the energy levels of the magnetic ions, which possess a spin orbit coupling. It has a similar origin as that of the magnetic anisotropy. This property is important both from the fundamental and application points of view. There is a plethora of studies of this property in ferrites and garnets. However, S state ions such as Fe It is well established that bulk zinc ferrite (ZnFe Investigating the magnetic property such as magnetostriction in this material is of great academic interest because this is a novel material exhibiting magnetic properties unlike the bulk counterpart. Also the magnetostriction arises entirely from the magnetic S state Fe Determination of this property is a bit delicate because one measures changes in length on the order of one part in a million. When it comes to thin films it is out of question to use classical techniques. One of the methods of measurement in thin films is to observe the changes in the resonance field under the application of a stress. The dynamic version of this method was known as the strain modulated ferromagnetic resonance (SMFMR) ZnFe Structural properties of the as-deposited and annealed ferrite thin films were investigated by XRD using Cu K The investigations of the SMFMR were performed at room temperature in an X-band spectrometer at the frequency of about 9.1 GHz. This spectrometer is equipped with both magnetic (100 kHz) and strain (48 kHz) modulation systems. The periodic in time strain is applied to the sample, placed in a microwave cavity, which causes a modulation of the ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) line position. Due to the magnetoelastic coupling, the intensity of the signal obtained after phase-sensitive detection is proportional to the strain modulation depth The FMR and SMFMR spectra are analyzed using a coordinate system in which the magnetization of the film For the strain modulated FMR the magnetoelastic energy should be added to the free energy of the system: The free magnetic energy For uniaxial symmetry the magnetoelastic tensor has five independent components (in Voigt notation): To calibrate the system, the SMFMR of a polycrystalline nickel layer was measured, simultaneously with the SMFMR studies of the investigated films. The results of the magnetoelastic tensor components The maximum value of the For both substrate temperatures Assuming isotropic character of magnetoelastic tensor the value of saturation magnetostriction ( The results are presented in It is well known, that stoichiometric bulk ZnFe It is expected that, when the samples are annealed after deposition, Fe On the other hand, an increase of magnetoelastic constants with initial increase of annealing temperature is not observed. The magnitude of magnetoelastic constants decrease monotonically with the increase of annealing temperature (see Our result of magnetostriction studies in nano-crystalline zinc ferrite films are similar to that obtained for bulk single crystal yttrium-iron garnet system (YIG), for which magnetostriction constants λ The nano-crystalline PLD ZnFe Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 