A novel carrier, N,N,N′,N′-tetra-(2-ethylhexyl) thiodiglycolamide, T(2EH)TDGA has been studied for transport of Pd(II) from nitric acid medium across a supported liquid membrane (SLM). Pd(II) was found to be almost quantitatively transported (∼99.9%) within 2h from 3.0M HNO3 medium using 0.05M T(2EH)TDGA in n-dodecane as carrier and 0.01M thiourea in 0.2M HNO3 as strippant. Pd(II) transport was also studied against various parameters like feed acidity, carrier concentration, membrane pore size, etc. Palladium transport was found to be diffusion controlled and the diffusion co-efficient value was found to be 3.56×10−5
                     cm2/s. Selectivity of T(2EH)TDGA for palladium over other fission products was found to be quite high, with the separation factors for Pd, with respect to different fission products being >103. With respect to leaching out of carrier from the membrane support, the membrane was found to be stable for six consecutive cycles. Thus, T(2EH)TDGA can be used as an efficient carrier of Pd(II) from nitric acid medium.The platinum group metals (PGMs) namely palladium, rhodium and ruthenium have found extensive applications in chemical, pharmaceutical, electronic and petroleum industries Recovery of PGMs from HLW has been extensively studied with particular interest in separation of palladium. Kolarik and coworkers have reviewed, in detail, the methods and materials reported to date for the separation and recovery of fission PGMs from spent nuclear fuel Liquid–liquid extraction has been the most widely used technique to process HLW. But for low concentration of metal ions this method is not suitable due to generation of large volume of secondary waste and handling of large volume of inflammable diluents. Moreover, the use of exotic reagents used for very selective separations necessitate a drastic reduction in the extractant inventory. Thus, it is imperative to look for alternative methods which can reduce the ligand inventory as well as generate small volume of secondary waste. In this regard, membrane based methods are becoming increasingly popular A prime requirement for a successful liquid membrane system is the choice of a selective and efficient carrier for the species to be separated. Among various extractive ligands used in extraction of palladium from HLW, T(2EH)TDGA was found to be most promising in view of its high extractability and selectivity over other metal ions The current study deals with a detailed investigation of the transport of Pd(II) from nitric acid feed solutions using T(2EH)TDGA/ T(2EH)TDGA was synthesized by the condensation reaction of sodium sulphide nonahydrate with corresponding Throughout this study, flat-sheet type PTFE hydrophobic microporous polymeric membranes were used which were procured from Sartorius AG, Germany. The membrane thickness was measured using the procedure given elsewhere The SLM studies were carried out using a Pyrex glass cell consisting of two compartments having volume 16 Quantitative determination of palladium was carried out using Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry technique (AAS Avante 1.31, GBC). Detection limit for palladium was 0.06 Transport process in the supported liquid membranes mainly involves three steps, viz. extraction at the feed–membrane interface, diffusion inside the membrane phase and stripping at the membrane–receiver interface. The transport experiments are carried out under the conditions that the distribution coefficient is much larger at the feed–membrane interface as compared to the membrane–receiver interface. Under steady state condition, by ignoring the concentration of the metal ion in the receiver phase one can get the flux ( Solvent extraction studies of Pd(II) using T(2EH)TDGA as an extractant has been earlier reported by us in detail Earlier, it has been reported that for liquid–liquid extraction system involving T(2EH)TDGA as extractant, It is generally seen that transport of metal ion through supported liquid membrane (SLM) depends on the concentration of carrier molecule in the membrane phase The effect of membrane pore size on the transport of Pd(II) using T(2EH)TDGA/ It is known that the diffusion controlled transport of metal ion across a SLM is inversely proportional to the thickness of the membrane, as described in Eq. To evaluate the diffusion co-efficient of Pd(II) across the SLM, transport experiments were carried out for varying membrane thicknesses from 80 to 400 Earlier, it was observed that for liquid–liquid extraction system employing T(2EH)TDGA as an extractant, the distribution ratios ( Large scale industrial application of SLM is restricted mainly due to the problem of instability associated with it, which may be primarily due to the cumulative effect of various parameters like chemical degradation, loss of carrier and/or solvent in adjacent aqueous phases, leaching out of the membrane carrier by an osmotic or hydro-static pressure gradient, etc Supported liquid membrane (SLM) containing