This paper presents a laboratory investigation into the development of a low-pH cementitious material in order to enlarge bioreceptivity. Two different options were tested; reduction of Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) pH and assessment of the suitability of another hydraulic binder with lower pH, Magnesium-Phosphate Cement (MPC). Regarding OPC, additions of acidic compounds such as boric acid and oxalic acid were investigated. Furthermore, an in-depth characterization of MPC was carried out to evaluate its suitability as a binder for concrete. For this purpose, physico-chemical as well as mechanical properties were tested.In 1995, Guillitte Modifications of primary bioreceptivity of cementitious materials could be interesting in order to stimulate natural colonisation. It is known that organisms could act as a protection of ancient sculptures as well as provide improvements on air quality and water retention capacity likewise an additional aesthetical value However, it is important to delimit which are the interesting groups of organisms. Subsequently, appearance of significant pathologies should be avoided. According to this, microalgae, lichens and mosses are the most interesting living organisms because none of them have a real root system which could seriously damage concrete structures. Damage produced by plant roots is well-known and appearance of other organisms is also seen as pathological due to changes in colour and modifications on surface properties The most popular hydraulic binder in construction is Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC). Building materials made of OPC have an initial pH between 12 and 13, although it might decrease during service life. However, other hydraulic binders as acid–base cements could be an alternative for this purpose. The latter group of hydraulic binders were developed in the 19th century and depend on the interaction between an acid and a base compound. Their reaction results in the formation of a cementitious saline hydrogel. Acid–based cements are used for medical applications as well as in construction Accordingly, the present investigation is part of a larger framework which aims at the development of a multi-layer concrete panel with enhanced bioreceptivity  In the current study, two different ways to obtain a low-pH cementitious material were tested. First, effect of OPC pH reductions by means of additions was evaluated. A comparison between two different acidic chemicals was carried out. Given the general classification of chemicals according to their acid strength, two compounds were selected (a weak acid and a strong one). Second, Magnesium Phosphate Cement (MPC) as an acid–base cement was chosen and a complete characterization of different formulations was carried out to evaluate their suitability as a binder for concrete. Based on the above, this paper aims to propose the development of a low pH cementitious material in order to increase bioreceptivity of building materials. In the framework of the mentioned objective, the following methodology was developed. On one hand, evaluation of the effect of acidic additions to OPC properties was carried out. On the other hand, a complete characterization of different MPC formulations was developed. Since MPC pH is suitable for use, an evaluation of this formulations’ suitability as a cementitious material was necessary ( According to the standard, CEM I 52.5R as a cement, silica aggregates and distilled water was used for specimens’ production. Additives used for the fabrication of OPC samples were boric acid (H On the other hand, three compounds were used to produce MPC specimens. These cementitious materials are mainly produced as a mixture of magnesium oxide and a phosphate source. For this research, Magnesium Oxide with low reactivity (MgO), Ammonium Dihydrogen Phosphate (ADP, NH There is little knowledge about variations on OPC pH due to additions as well as on MPC as a result of changes on components’ percentage. Consequently, an initial test to evaluate how the pH is affected was carried out. Additionally, it was possible to select different acid concentrations as well as different formulations of MPC for further research. First, different percentages over cement weight (% ocw) of both acids were diluted in distilled water, and then mixed with the dry cement in triplicate (w/c of 0.5). Afterwards, pH measurements of fresh mortar were taken in 10 After selection of different percentages of addition, OPC mortars according to the pertinent standard Ultrasonic pulse velocity was determined using direct transmission of longitudinal waves by means of a tester with transducers of 37.5 For the magnesium phosphate cement, after selection of different P:M ratios, tests on the hydraulic binder, cement pastes and mortars were carried out ( This particular section includes all the results obtained in the OPC experimental program. As mentioned before, the purpose was to clarify the effect of boric and oxalic acid additions on OPC properties as was shown in Previous pH determination for both additions is given in First, pH measurements of acids dilutions in distilled water were carried out. Due to the ease and low cost, a great number of dilutions were measured in order to reduce the number of cement pastes and mortars to test. Boric acid curves show different behaviour, especially between dilutions and cement mixtures. The pH of boric acid dilutions in distilled water shows a decreasing curve, reaching the equilibrium at a concentration of around 5% of addition. However, curves corresponding to cement pastes and fresh mortar behave differently. The cement paste curve shows a first stage with a slight drop for additions lower than 4%. However, a second stage displays a sharp drop in pH for bigger concentrations, reaching a pH around 8 for additions of 8%. Regarding to fresh mortar, only results of the mixture without diluting the acid in the mixing water are shown. The above is due to non-significant different results between both mechanisms of addition. Subsequently, curves for fresh mortar show a similar trend despite of a displacement in the inflection point from 4% of addition in cement pastes to 2% in fresh mortar. Furthermore, stabilization at a pH around 7.5 is noticeable in fresh mortar although this equilibrium is not reached in the cement paste curve. As mentioned previously, a low effect of small percentages of boric acid on pH was observed. The following equation is proposed to correlate these different inflection points depending on the nature of the mixture: The curve corresponding to dilutions reached the inflection point sooner than for the other two mixtures and this is reasonable because there are no other components interfering in the chemical reaction. Moreover, this first stage could be related to the strength of the acid. However, adding cement and aggregates to the mixture displaces the inflection point, since a higher percentage of addition is needed. For cement paste mixtures, addition of an alkaline compound, Portland cement, might produce a buffer effect. This buffer effect is also observed in fresh mortar although it is achieved earlier than in cement paste mixture. The above might be caused by addition of aggregates. Despite the aggregates are chemically inert, from a physical point of view, available water should react with more compounds (wetting aggregates and dissolving anhydrous cement as well as boric acid). This fact may favour dissolution of boric acid instead of Portland cement, reducing the inflection point from 4% to 2%. Furthermore, this inflection point could also indicate the ceasing of the hydration process due to the low permeability of the calcium borate. Depending on the nature of the matrix an increase from 2% to 4% for cement pastes and fresh mortars respectively was observed. As shown before by van Eijk and Brouwers as well as Lieber and Richartz On the other hand, the oxalic acid dilutions curve shows a similar behaviour than the one corresponding to boric acid dilutions. The main difference is the stronger character of the oxalic acid showing a sharper drop in pH. The pH equilibrium was not achieved until around 9% of oxalic acid addition and the 0.5 of pH were reached. However, both cement pastes and fresh mortar illustrate a slight linear drop in pH with the addition of oxalic acid, featuring a difference of pH of less than 1 point between 0% and 13% of addition. The high permeability of a precipitates layer could be the cause of this limited drop: when the water easily passes through this layer, the hydration process is allowed to continue. According to Ramachandran Finally, it is important to remark how different both acids act upon OPC. Boric acid acts as a retarder of hardening, arriving to stop the process with additions up to 2%. Nonetheless, oxalic acid seems to produce the opposite effect, acting also as a water reducer with the consequent impact on workability. From this test, percentages of addition to produce standardized mortar were chosen (   Comparing specimens at the same age, a drop in velocity with the increase of addition percentage is evident for samples up to 2.5%. This reduction could mean existence of the evolution of the hydration process and also some negative effect on the matrix due to calcium borate coating. Therefore, the hydration process is retarded for 2.5–4% and completely blocked for bigger additions. On the other hand, no significant effects were obtained for samples with addition of oxalic acid. This implies that oxalic acid addition has no significant effect on compactness or hydration evolution.   Furthermore, constant pH values for specimens with higher amounts of boric acid were expected due to the detention of the hydration process. However, the methodology to prepare the sample to pH determination could affect the results. As mentioned before, pieces of the specimens were crushed and suspended in distilled water. This process could favour the contact between anhydrous particles and distilled water and consequently the reaction would distort pH values. On the other hand, no significant differences were observed for samples with addition of oxalic acid.  Analysing first reductions in peak intensity of portlandite in Lastly, As mentioned before, MPC can be formed by different compounds and also ratios between them can vary. According to this, a characterization of five different P:M ratios was carried out. As it was shown in pH evolution until 28 Comparing both graphs, different behaviours between samples with highest and lowest P:M ratios were observed. This fact could be attributable to formation of different crystalline structure depending on P:M ratio and some masking effect of borax addition. Based on the results, five different P:M ratios were selected (1:1, 1:1.25, 1:1.5, 1:1.75 and 1:2). Addition of 6% of borax was chosen in order to improve production conditions, mainly regarding setting times. Moreover, selection of the mentioned P:M ratios was based on production, where was evident that not all NH Concerning MPC real densities, different results were obtained depending on P:M ratios. Higher real density was obtained for the lower P:M ratio (2.69  Subsequently, setting times were determined. MPC samples presented markedly shorter setting times than OPC, final setting times being shorter than 30 Despite of previous works Accordingly, new mortar mixtures were produced using the w/c ratio of 0.28 and the consistency of fresh mortar was determined. Considering a consistency of 45% for standardized OPC mortar, it was observed that only P:M ratios between 1:1.25 and 1:2 allowed to obtain a similar consistency.  Hydration heat tests showed higher thermal peaks for MPC samples as well as earlier maximum temperature. Maximum temperatures registered for 1:1.25 and CEM I 52.5R were 48  The last physical test carried out was drying shrinkage of samples with P:M 1:1.25 and 1:2. Results are shown in     Comparing different formulations, a significant decrease in signal strength for dittmarite seems to be related to a decrease of P:M ratio. In order to justify these results, the stoichiometric water necessary for the hydration process was estimated. The main reaction is as follows: From Eq. Related to results observed in the drying shrinkage test and taking into account the dosage used, the molar mass of available water was estimated. Subsequently, both quantities were compared and results showed a deficit in water for mixtures 1:1, 1:1.25 and 1:1.5, concurring with higher signal strength of dittmarite. Mixtures with P:M ratios of 1:1.75 and 1:2 had a slight excess of water and the intensity of the dittmarite peak was significantly lower. Therefore, presence of dittmarite could be associated to a minimal loss of water. Moreover, results shown regarding to the heat of hydration test, reveal maximum temperatures lower than 100 Furthermore, this hypothesis is more consistent taking into account results from the drying shrinkage test. According to Wagh  In the present research different methods to develop a low-pH cementitious material have been studied. Trials to decrease pH of OPC and characterization of MPC to evaluate its suitability for construction and industrial applications were carried out. Concentrations lower than 2% of boric acid slowed down the setting and also affected significantly the physico-chemical properties of the OPC mortar although its pH is still too alkaline. Furthermore, concentrations up to 2% had the effect of stopping the hydration process. On the other hand, oxalic acid presented a totally different behaviour, not showing any significant damage nor decrease in pH. According to results and analysis of trials to reduce the pH of OPC mortar, the use of OPC with acid additions was discarded. The final pH which was not low enough for the material to be used as a biological support and the negative impact on the specimens’ properties, mostly mechanical properties, were the main reasons for the rejection. MPC characterization showed different interesting properties of this material. First, the pH range is acceptable according to the application (5.8 and 7) and comparatively to OPC (CEM I 52.5R), MPC requires lower amounts of water for hydration. Consequently, this fact is positive in order to reduce the amounts of water in industrial production. However, a slightly bigger water demand was observed for lower P:M ratios than for higher ones. Therefore, low setting times were obtained, being still lower for lower P:M ratios. Furthermore, good results for volume stability were obtained. Results were constant independently of P:M ratio and significantly lower than the maximum limit for OPC. A w/c ratio of 0.28 was fixed thinking of an industrial application. Formulations with lower P:M ratios were the most interesting ones mainly for economic reasons as well as for better workability, so a w/c ratio to obtain similar consistency as with OPC was selected. Consequently, better results were obtained in all characterization test for formulations with lower P:M ratios. Furthermore, chemical analysis gave an idea about different compounds present in the sample, including percentage, and crystalline products after the hydration process. No presence of dangerous compounds for human health (while in production) or structural durability were observed. To summarize, in order to produce a low-pH cementitious material in compliance with requirements of use, MPC mortar is the most suitable binder. Its pH is closer to neutrality independently of the P:M ratio within the investigated range. Furthermore, it is important to remark that lower P:M ratios are more interesting due to better physico-mechanical properties as well as from an economic point of view. The authors of this paper want to acknowledge the economic support received by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through the Spanish Research Project BIA2010-17478. Dr. I. Segura is supported by the postdoctoral Juan de la Cierva programme of the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness.