Reverse cationic flotation is a very efficient method of beneficiation of oxidised iron ores when you need to separate hematite and quartz. This method can be also applied to reduce silica content in the magnetite concentrates obtained by wet low-intensity magnetic separation. However, cationic flotation in this case is less effective due to the presence of Fe–Mg–Al-bearing silicates as amphiboles in magnetite ores. These silicates are concentrated in magnetic products and determine the difficulties of their separation from iron oxides when amines and starches are used as collectors and depressants, respectively. The recalculation of the results of the electron microprobe analysis of five calcic Fe–Mg–Al-bearing amphiboles used to characterise cation distributions in structural units and to obtain structural formulae in accord with stoichiometric limits was conducted. The Mössbauer spectroscopy was used to examine the validity of the empirical estimation of cation distributions in amphiboles. The studied samples are metamorphic pargasite, ferrotschermakite and magnesiohornblende and volcanic kaersutite and magnesiohornblende. The crystallographic analyses of the amphibole samples exhibited their heterogeneous surfaces explaining worse floatability of amphiboles with amines at pH10. The electrokinetic measurements showed that the position of the isoelectric point of amphiboles is related to a substitution of Al3+ for Si4+ in tetrahedral sites and to an amount of Mg2+ cations in octahedral sites. Thus, the amine adsorption onto amphiboles through electrostatic interactions is mainly affected by a distribution of these cations in tetrahedral and octahedral sites of amphiboles. In addition, the effect of starch on the depression of Fe–Mg–Al-bearing amphiboles during flotation can be attributed to the presence of metal ions on the amphibole surface, which are capable of forming strong chemical complexes with starch molecules.Iron formations are the most important sources to economic iron ore deposits, which account for the majority of current world iron ore production. Iron formations are from the Early Proterozoic or Achaean. However, a part of iron formations is from the Late Proterozoic or Early Palaeozoic. Most are banded and are known as Banded Iron Formations (BIFs). In general, iron formations can be divided into three major classes: (1) unenriched primary iron formations with typically 30 to 45% Fe; (2) martite–goethite ores formed by supergene processes, with abundant hydrous iron oxides containing 56 to 63% Fe; (3) high-grade hematite ores are of supergene modified hypogene or metamorphic origin with 60 to 68% Fe ( Reverse cationic flotation remains the most popular flotation route used in the iron ore industry ( The main goal of the investigations presented in this paper was to find an interrelation between surface crystal chemistry of calcic amphiboles and their electrochemical and flotation properties. Amphiboles are inosilicates with a basic structural unit (Si The T(1) silicate tetrahedrons are bound together in a chain through the bridging basal oxygen O(7). The chains of silicate tetrahedrons in turn are bound through the apical oxygens O(4) with the chains of cations in octahedral coordination, which form nonequivalent M(1), M(2) and M(3) sites. Thus, the double chains of silicate tetrahedrons in the crystal structure of amphiboles are bonded each to other laterally through the octahedral strips. The M(1) and M(3) sites are bound through O(3) anion site in the The classification of amphiboles is based on the chemical contents of the standard amphibole formula ( The components of the formula described as A, B, C, T and OH correspond to the following crystallographic sites: A — to one site per formula unit suited to K The cleavage of monoclinic amphiboles is perfect on a (110) plane with intersections at approximately 56° and 124°. They may also show partings on the (100), (010) and (001) planes. Orthorhombic amphiboles have a perfect cleavage on a (210) plane with intersections at approximately 54° and 126°. Partings on the (113), (112), (100), (010) and (001) planes are also observed. The studied samples are natural metamorphic pargasite, ferrotschermakite and magnesiohornblende (M) and volcanic kaersutite and magnesiohornblende (V). The high-grade amphibole samples were crushed with hammer and were screened in a stainless steel screen. To achieve the pure minerals, the amphibole samples were passed through a Five-Cail Babcock electromagnetic separator to eliminate non-magnetic impurities because Fe-bearing amphiboles are paramagnetic. The purified amphibole samples were stored in the glass bottles. The chemical composition of the amphibole samples was obtained when using ICP–AES (Jobin-Yvon JY 70 Type II). Mineral impurities were found via an X-ray diffraction technique (Bruker D8 Advance powder diffractometer with Co-Kα radiation). All of these details are summarised in The flotation collectors studied were a 98%-purity dodecylamine, purchased from Acros Organics and a 97%-purity 3-(isodecyloxy)propylamine supplied by Ceca (France). The acetate salts of these amines were prepared in deionised water by mixing equimolar amounts of the amine and acetic acid. Non-modified corn starch, provided by Sigma, was used as a flotation depressant. The starch's amylopectin and amylose contents were 73% and 27%, respectively. The gelatinisation of the starch was achieved by adding of a predetermined amount of NaOH and deionised water. The starch solution was designed to yield a concentration of 0.1%. The starch solution was freshly prepared daily to avoid the degradation discussed by The Mössbauer transmission spectra of Fe-bearing amphiboles were collected on a PC-based Ortec system operated in constant acceleration mode. A The electrophoretic mobility of the amphibole particles was measured by timed image analysis on Zetaphoremetre IV (CAD Instrumentation, France). The ζ-potential was calculated after the Helmholtz–Smoluchowski and Hückel equations modified by Henry, as developed by The single-mineral flotation tests were conducted in a laboratory Minemet flotation machine with a 180 The real chemical composition of the studied amphiboles was determined via electron-microprobe analysis due to the presence of impurities in the amphibole samples. Not a less than 5 grains of each amphibole were analysed with a Cameca SX 100 electron microprobe. In fact, electron-microprobe analysis cannot distinguish between valence states. However, knowledge of amphibole stoichiometry and ideal element distribution was used to estimate contents of ferric iron and a range of permissible structural amphibole formulae using calculation procedure described by Schumacher ( The agreement between Fe Theoretically, typical spectra of calcic amphiboles may give eight unique doublets due to Fe The Mössbauer data show that some amphibole samples have Fe-bearing minerals as impurities. In the spectrum of magnesiohornblende (V) the weak peaks are readily applied to magnetite and hematite. The doublet, which has an I.S. The Fe The distribution of cations in the octahedral M(1), M(2) and M(3) sites of amphiboles can be evaluated according to a hypothesis proposed by On the basis of size considerations and the observations of In fact, monoclinic amphiboles have a perfect cleavage on a (110) plane because the chains of silicate tetrahedrons and the chains of metal cations in the octahedral coordination, those are bound together through covalent and ionic bonding, are bonded each to other through weak Van der Waals' interaction in the direction perpendicular to the (110) crystallographic planes. The surface atomic sites of the cleavage (110) plane after the amphibole fragmentation can be considered as follows: three M(1), six M(2), four M(3), four M(4), three T(1) and six T(2) sites per unit cell area (  The isoelectric points (IEPs) of the amphiboles were achieved at the following pH values: 3.2  In fact, magnesium oxide as a basic oxide naturally has a high affinity for protons. Its PZC is achieved at pH The IEPs of the amphiboles are shifted to pH The maximum changes in zeta potential magnitudes of the amphiboles, occurred at pH Thus, it can be concluded that the higher adsorption of protonated amine species is observed on the amphiboles which surfaces are more negatively charged, i.e. on amphiboles, which have a high share of Si The relationship between the cation distribution on surfaces of amphiboles and their flotation behaviours was shown on an example of pargasite and ferrotschermakite, which have a significant difference in Si The flotation responses of the amphiboles as a function of the concentration of the dodecylamine acetate salt (DDA) and the 3-(isodecyloxy)propylamine acetate salt (PX 4815) at pH The flotation results show that the floatability of the amphiboles is very sensitive to the amine surface coverage. It can be assumed that the flotation of the amphiboles is limited at an amine concentration below 5 As can be seen in The recent studies showed that starch is an effective depressant in the flotation of diaspore [AlO(OH)] at pH The flotation results demonstrate that the addition of starch to the system depresses the floatability of the amphiboles. Pargasite is not floated (recovery is near zero percent) with dodecylamine. Its flotation recovery with PX 4815 is not more than 21%. Moreover, the starch adsorption on pargasite does not avoid the adsorption of dodecylamine that was confirmed by infrared spectroscopy ( The decrease in the ferrotschermakite flotation recovery from 74.3% to 21.4% with dodecylamine upon the addition of starch is also shown in The structure and site occupancy refinements of natural calcic amphiboles, such as volcanic magnesiohornblende and kaersutite and metamorphic pargasite, magnesiohornblende and ferrotschermakite were performed. The amphibole compositions were determined with the electron-microprobe analysis. Knowledge of amphibole stoichiometry and ideal element distribution was used to estimate contents of ferric iron and a range of permissible structural amphibole formulae using calculation procedure. The Fe The electrophoretic mobility measurements of the amphiboles confirmed that the position of isoelectric point (IEP) of amphibole is related to a ratio of tetrahedral Si The flotation results showed that the floatability of the amphiboles is very sensitive to the amine surface coverage. Ferrotschermakite is more floated with dodecylamine than pargasite, while the pargasite floatability is higher with ether amine. The significant decrease in the amphibole flotation recovery with amines upon the addition of starch is achieved. It was concluded that the density of Mg surface active centres plays a key role in the adsorption of starch onto amphiboles and decreasing of their floatability. A significant difference between the amphibole floatability at pH Authors gratefully acknowledge the partial financial support from We would also like to thank Professor B. Malaman and his research team from Université de Lorraine, Nancy for performing the Mössbauer measurements.