CaCO3 mineralization was carried out using cellulose nanocrystal (CNC)/polymer composites wherein a chiral nematic structure of CNC assembly was immobilized in advance via a polymerization process of the precursory aqueous CNC/vinyl monomer lyotropics (7–11 wt% CNC in feed). Two series of polymer composites were prepared: CNC/poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (PHEMA) and CNC/poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate-co-acrylic acid) (P(HEMA-co-AA), HEMA:AA = 95:5–70:30 in mol). The mineralization was allowed to proceed solely by soaking the composite films in a salt solution containing Ca2+ and HCO3
                     − under a low-basic condition (pH ≤ 9). Polymorphism of CaCO3 deposited inside the films was examined by X-ray diffractometry as a function of the soaking time (1–5 day) and also of the matrix composition. In the CNC/PHEMA series, the polymorphic form changed from amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) (1-day soaking) to metastable crystalline vaterite (3-day soaking) and then to a mixture of vaterite and aragonite (5-day soaking). In the mineralization of the CNC/P(HEMA-co-AA) series, the formation of stable calcite was prominent besides minor appearance of vaterite. It was deduced that the mesofiller CNC and the AA unit in the vinyl polymer, both bearing an anionic group (-SO3
                     − or -COO−), contributed to capturing Ca2+ to facilitate the CaCO3 deposition in the swollen film matrix. The pre-invested chiral nematic organization was kept in any of the mineralized films (dried); however, the helical pitch was appreciably reduced relative to that observed before the mineralization, attributable to the increase of ionic strength in the CNCs' surroundings accompanied by the wet process. Thermogravimetry showed that the mineralization definitely improved the thermal performance (heat/flame resistance) of the mesomorphic order-retaining CNC/polymer composites.Cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) are highly crystalline rod-like particles typically with 100–200 nm lengths and 5–10 nm widths, conventionally obtained by sulfuric acid-hydrolysis of native cellulose fibers (e.g., cotton or wood pulp) [ The chiral nematic structure of cellulosics can be made permanent in polymer films or gels [ Calcic mineralization in cellulosics-derived chiral nematic layered matrices can also be an interesting assignment to develop a new class of cellulosic composites [ Against the background stated above, the present paper deals with CaCO Cotton-derived fibrous cellulose was obtained by cutting and milling of Whatman filter paper No. 5 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences Corp.). Sulfuric acid (Nacalai Tesque, Inc.) and polyethylene glycol (PEG; molecular weight = ~20,000, Wako Pure Chemical Ind., Ltd.) were used as received. Monomers, HEMA (Wako Pure Chemical Ind., Ltd.) and AA (Nacalai Tesque, Inc.), were purified by vacuum distillation before use. A photopolymerization initiator, 2-hydroxy-2-methylpropiophenone (HMPPh; Sigma-Aldrich), and a cross-linking agent, ethylene dimethacrylate (EDM; Tokyo Kasei Kogyo Co., Ltd.), were used without further purification. Calcium chloride dihydrate (CaCl CNCs were isolated from the powdered cellulose (Whatman, No. 5) by acid hydrolysis with 65 wt% sulfuric acid, with mechanical stirring at 70 °C for 15 min [ The preparation of CNC suspensions in aqueous monomer (HEMA/water or HEMA/AA/water) was done by reference to a procedure described in an earlier paper [ The CNC suspensions in monomer/water (1:1 in wt) were allowed to stand in the dark quiescently for 1 week. Most samples of CNC = 7 and 9 wt% separated into isotropic (upper) and anisotropic (lower) phases in a glass container, but 11 wt% CNC suspensions were totally anisotropic. An adequate quantity (~2.8 g) of the respective anisotropic parts, pipetted off from the parent suspensions, was poured into a Teflon-coated dish ( For convenience, a code For both the CNC/HEMA and CNC/P(HEMA- In what follows, the sample codes, Optical characterization of CNC/aqueous monomer suspensions and CNC/polymer composites was made using a polarized optical microscope (POM), Olympus BX60F5 equipped with a digital camera (DP50-WMED). For observations, the suspensions (anisotropic) were sealed in a glass cell of rectangular shape (ca. 40 mm × 10 mm × 1 mm) and the composite films were put directly on a slide glass. Fracture surfaces of CNC/polymer composites and their mineralized ones were observed by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM), Hitachi S-4800, after sputter coating with platinum. For the mineralized samples, energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis was also conducted using an EDAX Genesis XM2 to examine the distribution profiles of elements C, O, S, and Ca in the inside of the inorganic-hybridized films. Wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) measurements were made on a Rigaku Ultima IV diffractometer, to examine CaCO Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out for 20 mg of film fragments by using a Shimadzu TGA-51 apparatus in an atmosphere of N When mineralized samples were subjected to the TGA, WAXD, and EDX measurements, the film surfaces were usually polished with a sheet of sandpaper (#2000; grain size <20 μm) in order to remove a possible contribution of surface-deposited minerals. CNC/polymer composites were successfully obtained in a form of optically clear film by polymerization of the monomer solvent (HEMA or HEMA/AA) constituting the precursory anisotropic aqueous CNC suspensions. The visual appearance of as-prepared films is exemplified in  Similar morphological observations by POM and FE-SEM were made for many samples which included When film specimens of CNC/polymer composites were soaked in the salt solution for mineralization, they swelled and gradually turned into a translucent gel within 12 h. Even though the swelling was almost equilibrated in 1 day, the optical turbidity of the gelatinous films more or less increased with the passage of immersion time. The swelling degree of CNC/PHEMA films was controlled in a level of 1.15–1.2 times in the sides of the surface square and 1.3–1.4 times in the thickness. As to the CNC/P(HEMA- In the course of mineralization for 5 days, the pH of the salt solution at work was measured every 24 h just before the exchange for fresh one. It was confirmed from the monitoring traces that the pH value, initially set at 9.0, was lowered and stabilized at 8.5–8.6 (compared at 25 °C). In the use of the AA-containing copolymer, however, a still lower pH value (≲8.4) was noted in the first trace, probably due to ionization of the AA unit. In such a low-basic condition (pH ≤ 9) of the salt solution, the ion species taken in the swollen films for mineralization should be Ca If the matrix polymer has a functional group such as -COO In the following two subsections, the successful CaCO EDX measurements were made using fracture surfaces of mineralized CNC/polymer films. The cross-sectional analysis by EDX also offered numeric data (atom (At) %) about the allocation of four elements C, O, S, and Ca in the mineralized CNC/polymer films (see Supplementary Materials, Table S1). For example, using the samples shown in In a similar EDX analysis for mineralized P(HEMA  In Concerning the CNC/P(HEMA- The transition scheme of CaCO In the mineralization of the CNC/P(HEMA-  With regard to the dimensions of the CaCO  After mineralization of the pristine composite films, the primary degradation stage of CNCs disappeared and the onset temperature of decomposition ( In the meantime, we can find a large difference in the weight retention behavior above 500 °C between the two mineralized series of CNC/polymer composites. In this kind of TGA test, the so-called flame resistance of polymeric materials is evaluated usually from the weight residue at such high temperatures. As seen in Partly biomimetic CaCO The mineralized films, In the present study, the helical pitch of the chiral nematic structure preserved in the mineralized CNC/polymer composites was in the range of a few to 10 μm. If the effect of electrolytic additives is used more positively in artifice, the pitch would be further shortened to a scale of several hundreds of nanometers; then the resulting hybrid materials should be iridescent. The preparation and characterization of such mineralized and colored composites are topics that remain to be described in the near future. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was partially financed by Grant-in-Aids (KAKENHI) for Young Scientists (B) (No.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at