To predict the performance of a large diameter circular saw (LDCS) is among the fundamental steps that are required for determining the practicability of stone production. Natural stone processing plants were visited to measure the areal slab production rate (ASPR) of LDCS in different operational conditions. Neural network toolbox in MATLAB is applied in order to develop a model to predict ASPR of LDCS. An artificial neural network is trained with physical and mechanical properties of eleven stones as input parameters and their associated ASPR values as the target. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), Brazilian tensile strength (BTS), Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI), porosity, and density are the physical and mechanical properties that are used as input parameters. In view of its speed, robustness, and the fact that it is very well renowned compared to the other learning algorithms, the Levenberg–Marquardt propagation algorithm is used to train the network. It is explained in detail that a neural network with the previously mentioned input parameters and only one hidden-layer can successfully estimate ASPR for LDCS. It is noticed that, while the number of neurons is less than eight in the single hidden-layer, the network generalizes better than when the number of neurons increases. However, beyond that point, not only the number of neurons does not have any positive effect on performance of the network, but it may also cause the network to memorize the results instead of generalizing them. It can be declared that using ANN to predict ASPR of LDCS may lead the engineers toward a more reliable design and planning.Large diameter circular saw ( Artificial neural network ( This study investigates the application of Kahraman et al. Block samples with the minimum size of 25 The outcomes of the performed tests show that uniaxial compressive strength ( The life of a diamond segmented circular saw and its sawing performance are functions of several factors the most important of which are: peripheral speed of the saw, feeding rate, diamond properties, matrix properties, cutting depth, machine specifications, physical and mechanical properties of natural stone, mineralogical and petrographical properties of the stone, operator skill, cooling efficiency, etc. The vast number of effective parameters demonstrates the intricacy of the system and the extreme difficulty of performance prediction. In order to measure/record the areal slab production rate ( Since peripheral speed is dependent on characteristics of the stone, proper sawing speed must individually be determined for each stone type. While very low speed blunts the segments, a very high speed burns or breaks the diamond particles. A substantial decrease in the saw blade’s life is the result for both cases. An optic tachometer was used to measure the number of saw revolutions per minute (rpm). The recommended peripheral speed for saws falls in the range between 50 and 60 Regression analysis was conducted to study the connection between physical and mechanical properties of natural stones and An artificial neural network ( Neurons have their own input and output. Neuron inputs can either be the weighted input parameters or the weighted output of the neurons in the previous layer. In each individual neuron, the sum of weighted inputs is combined with a real number the value of which is decided by the training procedure (bias). The result passes through an activation function. The output of the activation function, which usually is tan-sig function, is the output of the neuron. The training process is performed by a learning algorithm. There are different learning algorithms. However, Levenberg–Marquardt, which is the most popular option, is chosen as the learning algorithm in this research. In this algorithm, all the weights and biases are initialized randomly. Next, with respect to mean squared error ( Afterwards, the study was concentrated on the networks with 5 neurons in its hidden-layer. This time, the training process was performed for 1000 times. The network with the least In this study, the Since regression models are independent of any special software, simpler to use, and require less time to produce an answer, they are usually preferred over The performance and quality of any predictive model is largely dependent on its reliability, range of application, quality and quantity of the input parameters considered. In this research, five natural stone properties that affect sawing efficiency were selected as input parameters to predict the With very encouraging results, this research precisely identifies and explains the sawability performance estimation of large diameter circular saw ( To predict the sawability performance of the large diameter circular saw using an The author is grateful to