The sintering behavior of commercially available granulated ZrO2–3mol% Y2O3 (3Y-TZP) powder compacts with an aggregate size of 75nm was studied. The shrinkage response of the powder compacts during non-isothermal sintering was measured in a sensitive dilatometer at different heating rates. Densification and grain growth were also studied after isothermal firing in air according to different sintering cycles. The sintering and grain growth activation energy was estimated to be Q
                     S
                     =485±12kJmol−1 and Q
                     G
                     =546±23kJmol−1, respectively. Using the estimated Q-values, the master curves for sintering and grain growth were established and used for prediction of the densification and microstructural development under different thermal histories. A good agreement between the model predictions and experimental result was obtained.Since the innovation of the transformation-toughening phenomenon in tetragonal zirconia ceramics, these materials have gained much interest for industrial applications The sintering of ultrafine and nanocrystalline ceramics exhibits certain specific features From the earliest quantitative sintering studies over the past five decades, many models have been derived to relate the sintering rate to the particle characteristics, compactness and sintering atmosphere and temperature. Simplified geometries were considered for the sintering process to readily identify driving forces, mass transport paths, and geometric factors. Attempts made to extend the models for both spherical and non-spherical powders have been of a limited success The master sintering curve is derived from the densification rate equation of combined stage sintering model proposed by Hansen et al. It is well known that grain growth during sintering occurs and affects the sintering response at high temperatures and eventually influences the final properties of sintered ceramics. Therefore, it is important to study this phenomenon, particularly for nanocrystalline ceramics as the extensive grain growth upon sintering is expected to occur. Isothermal grain growth behavior can be described by the following equation ZrO The powder was compacted in a cylindrical die at 150 A TMA 801 sinter-dilatometer (NETZCH, Germany) was used to study the non-isothermal sintering behavior of the powder compacts at different heating rates. Small pieces (≈2 Microstructure of the sintered compacts was observed by SEM (Philips XL30, Netherlands) after sequential mechanical polishing using diamond pastes (3, 1 and 0.05  The sintered density of fired specimens at different temperatures with various dwell time is shown in  By using the experimental results and the The sintering activation energy for nanoscale 3Y-TZP powder compact (75 Using experimental data for the grain growth ( In order to examine the validity of the models, the isothermal sintering cycles described in the previous section were modeled by the master sintering curve. The In order to examine the validity of master curve for grain growth, additional sintering cycles at different dwell times have been experimented. The results are compared with the outcome of the model and shown in In this work, the master sintering curve has been applied to 3Y-TZP powder compact with an average aggregate size of 75