Three main principles towards sodium reduction in food products can be discriminated: chemical stimulation to increase the saltiness perception peripherally, cognitive mechanisms towards increasing awareness or shifting the saltiness preference, and designed product structures that attempt to optimize the delivery of salt to the taste buds. Such designed product structures affect the way salt is released from the product structures or transported to the taste receptors during mastication and may be based on the format or the spatial distribution of the salt, its encapsulation methods or the bulk texture of the product. This review provides an overview of the different principles for sodium reduction in food products, with further elaboration on the third principle which has gained increasing attention in the past few years. In particular, the different methods and mechanisms underlying these product structure designs and their reported successes and challenges are discussed.The major source of sodium in our foods is the common salt or sodium chloride ( Salt is commonly used to provide saltiness and to improve flavour although it also has other technological properties such as contributing to structuring in meat and bread, preservation in meat and pickles, prevention of spoilage in margarines and bread, and modification of enzyme activity in cheese ( When a food product is eaten, the sodium and chloride ions are released into the mouth. The rate of release depends on the structure and composition of the food as well as on mastication and salivation ( Thus, taste perception can be influenced at different levels, peripherally at the level of the receptor and centrally in the brain ( One of the main cognitive approaches for sodium reduction is to create wide-spread willingness and a consumer need for sodium reduction. In Finland, the increased awareness and education of the population, together with legislation of salt on product labels, are claimed as success factors for the decreased salt intake across different segments of the population, irrespective of gender and educational groups (e.g. The shift in consumers' sodium intake may also be achieved Sodium reduction in small incremental steps requires considerable time before the desired sodium levels are reached. Therefore stealth reduction may be combined with other product reformulation approaches that maintain perceived saltiness. This can involve the usage of salt replacers, i.e. ingredients that taste salty but do not contain sodium. A common salt replacer is potassium chloride ( Taste-aroma interactions ( Structural elements in food products range from those that can be seen with the naked eye, e.g. foams, to those at the micro- and nano-structural levels such as oil droplets, fibres, gel and crystal networks ( To achieve optimal product structures, it is important to consider the interactions between the shape and distribution of the salt in the food and the breakdown of the food in the mouth. These interactions include how the salt is distributed within the product, how the salt dissolves and mixes in saliva, how it is released from the food product and how it is subsequently transported to the taste buds (see For products that are consumed dry such as crisps and other snacks, the salt is maintained in the food product in a solid crystal state. It will first have to be dissolved in the mouth before the sodium ions can be detected by the receptors. Since salt crystals are typically produced through the evaporation of brine ( Many studies have shown that flavour release is related to the texture of the food, which in turn is dependent on the way the food structures change during eating. However, the influence of texture on saltiness perception differs between liquid and solid products. An early study of the effect of viscosity on sensory perception in liquid foods was performed by The influence of texture of solid products on taste perception has also been reported in the literature, although the studies tend to focus on the aroma or the overall flavour release rather than on taste alone and there are considerably more studies on sweetness than on saltiness. The dependence of taste perception on hardness per se has not necessarily been clear as perceivable differences in sweetness have been observed in gels with similar hardness but containing different hydrocolloids ( In addition to texture, the presence of structuring agents may also affect the physicochemical properties of food systems. Since a number of structuring agents are anionic molecules, the sodium ions from salt may interact with the molecules and affect taste perception. For example, The studies discussed above on the taste perception of solid systems are primarily consistent with each other, particularly regarding the importance of the contact surface area between the food product and the tongue (taste receptor cells). The increase in contact area may be achieved with liquids with a lower viscosity or with solids which breaks down more easily into small particulates. In practical terms, the size of the effects that these discussed optimizations of structurants and perceptual texture–taste interactions may have with regards to salt reduction tends to be relatively small. This is because in a real product the change in texture required to obtain significant reductions in salt is often too large to be applicable. Furthermore, the extent of manipulation will be highly dependent on the specific food product and its functional and taste needs, which will require tailor-made solutions. It may, nevertheless, be deduced that the breakdown of products in the mouth may be optimized for maximum saltiness perception through judicious selection of the structuring agent. Starch based products degrade in the mouth as a result of amylase degradation and this may lead to better flavour and taste perception compared to products prepared with other thickeners ( Changes to the perceived structure of food (i.e. texture) can affect taste perception at the cognitive level as well. Taste perception normally takes place within a complex field of mechanical stimulation. The presence of tactile stimulation in parallel with taste stimulation creates the opportunity for perceptual interactions between the modalities. Several examples that suggest ‘tactile capture’ have been reported. Localization and selective removal of a tasteless gelatine cube from taste-containing ‘distractor cubes’ appeared to be more difficult than removal of a taste-containing cube from tasteless (tactile) distractor cubes ( Generally, the contribution of texture–taste interactions in (semi-)solid systems has yet to be considered systematically and the role of physicochemical effects The distribution of salt within the food matrix and how this affects saltiness is an area increasing in interest. For example, a solid product, which otherwise would contain a uniform distribution of salt, may instead be made of two different portions containing different levels of salt. The approach to redistribute the salt in different layers in a product has also been investigated for sweetness. A common observation in studies on the layered distribution of tastants is that large concentration gradients of the tastants are necessary to achieve significant taste enhancement. In the case of salt, a result of the large concentration gradient is that the salt is concentrated in a much smaller volume in the product. Thus, additional technological solutions will be required to compensate for the impact on product structure because of the variation of the salt concentration within the food product. Additional manufacturing steps may also be required to prepare and combine portions that contain different salt concentrations. A further complication for manufactured foods is the effect of salt migration throughout the food product during shelf life which lowers the initial sensory contrast of any solid product that is constructed with different spatial distribution of salt. Further studies are also required as the consumer acceptance of products with such sensory contrasts will need to be optimized in order to define the commercially feasible operational window ( In foods with substantial water amount, the salt is dissolved and hence fairly equally distributed throughout the food ( With the addition of particulates to liquid products (e.g. soups with particulates) salt can be ‘immobilized’ to some extent if it is contained in the particulates. It has been shown, with consumers, that a soup with salted particulates is perceived as saltier than a soup of the same overall sodium content but with unsalted particulates ( Laboratory equipment such as the Gustometer, which enable the controlled injection of pulses of different liquids into the mouth, has provided useful model systems to investigate the effects of inhomogeneous distribution of salt on perception ( Taste enhancement in inhomogeneous systems is thought to be a result of a discontinuous stimulation of taste receptors ( Contrast effects in mouth during mastication of inhomogeneous products are considered as a more likely mode of action for enhanced perception, in line with the notion that most sensory receptors are contrast detectors (e.g. A further mechanism underlying the effects of inhomogeneous tastant distribution may be Generally, the relationship between the distribution of salt in a product and the effect on saltiness perception has not been quantified extensively, nor systematically. The studies discussed in this paper typically employ a range of different sensory methods that make comparison difficult. Moreover, there is an influence of the usage of trained panels or (naïve) consumers on perception, a topic which has been extensively studied in the context of aroma–taste interactions ( The concept of optimizing the delivery of salt through inhomogeneous distribution of the salt in the food may also be extended to the use of fillers. The role of the fillers is to fill up the volume so that less water is required and hence less salt is also required to obtain the same salt concentration in the aqueous phase. Some of the approaches discussed elsewhere in this review may rely to some extent on the concept of fillers, i.e. high polymer concentration ( The concept of fillers may be applied to an oil-in-water emulsion, where the oil droplets form a filler phase in the continuous water phase. A number of studies ( The concept of fillers may also be realized by using other types of fillers. For example, solid particles may also be used. However, in a study by A more promising filler type has been found in the use of air bubbles. In recent examples ( One disadvantage of adding fillers to foods is that other sensorial qualities may be changed. For example, the thickness may increase ( Approaches for sodium reduction that function From a scientific angle, future studies in this area should focus on integration of different effects and hypotheses into the same system, e.g. textural properties, oral breakdown, and cognitive interactions, and to develop generic understanding independent of specific biopolymer systems. The relationship between the release of sodium from the food matrix and saltiness perception has been studied, e.g. for model cheese systems. We envisage that further understanding can be gained from improved The authors would like to thank MOSTI for their support of the project 03-02-07-SF0019, and Garmt Dijksterhuis for critically reading the manuscript.