Coal permeability models based on constrained conditions such as constant volume theory can successfully match unconstrained experimental data and field observations. However, these models have a boundary mismatch because the boundary of permeability models is constrained while experiment boundary is free displacement or unconstrained. What the mechanism is to require such a boundary mismatch has not been well understood. In this study, a full coupled approach was developed to explicitly simulate the interactions of coal matrixes and fractures. In this model, a matrix-fracture model is numerically investigated after incorporating heterogeneous distributions of Young's modulus, Langmuir strain constant in the vicinity of the fracture. The impact of these local heterogeneities of coal mechanical and swelling properties on the permeability evolution is explored. The transient permeability evolution during gas swelling process is investigated and the difference between the final equilibrium permeability and transient permeability is compared. With the heterogeneity assumption, a net reduction of coal permeability is achieved from the initial no-swelling state to the final equilibrium state. This net reduction of coal permeability increases with the fracture (injection) pressure and is in good agreement with laboratorial data under the unconstrained swelling conditions. Coal local heterogeneity in vicinity of fracture can therefore be the mechanism of the above mismatch.The permeability of coal is a key attribute in determining coalbed methane production and CO Significant experimental efforts have been made to investigate coal permeability and its evolution. Laboratory measured permeabilities of coal to adsorbing gasses, such as CH A number of proposed coal permeability models have been developed to match experimental data ( A few studies were carried out on either improving current permeability models or explaining why permeability models developed under uniaixal strain condition are capable of matching experimental data. However, these studies still have three limitations that need to be improved: (1) they were generally carried out on the assumption of homogeneity, where coal properties were assumed to be same throughout the whole domain; (2) permeability value is assumed to be only related to pore pressure and effective stress, so with the same pore pressure the permeability value is same; and (3) permeability is independent of time. These assumptions have been conflict with many experimental observations. For instance, The non-homogeneous feature of coal swelling has also been observed by other approaches ( As summarized above, the real behaviours of the sorption-induced swelling/shrinkage of coal are far different from the homogeneous assumption that is generally made for theoretical permeability analysis. The effects of coal chemical heterogeneity and swelling are mutual. The heterogeneity of coal brings the non-homogeneous distribution of coal swelling strain, and meanwhile coal swelling causes the heterogeneous distribution coal physical property (e.g. Young's modulus). In this study, it is considered that the heterogeneities of coal physical properties and swelling strain are responsible for the enigmatic behaviour of coal permeability reduction with adsorbing gas injection under unconstrained conditions. To prove this, a fully coupling numerical model is conducted to simulate the dynamic interactions between coal matrix swelling and fracture aperture alteration, and translate these interactions to transient permeability evolution. In this numerical model, swelling coefficient and Young's modulus are assumed to vary spatially, and numerical predictions are then compared with observed magnitudes of permeability change in coal. This work is trying to explain why permeability changes with absorbing gas injection even under stress controlled conditions. It is clear that there is a relationship between porosity, permeability and the grain-size distribution in porous media. When the porosity is much smaller than 1 (normally less than 10%), the second term of the right-hand side asymptotes to unity. This yields the cubic relationship between permeability and porosity for coal matrix Coal porosity can be defined as a function of the effective strain ( Substituting Equations Equations Coal porosity and permeability can be defined as a function of either effective strain (Eq. When the change in total stress is equal to zero, i.e. Δ Assuming coal sample is under conditions of uniaxial strain and the overburden load remains unchanged, they can also be defined as a function of gas pressure only. However, as the total volumetric strain is different from the zero total stress case, the effective volumetric strain value will be different as well, as illustrated in Eq. When the impact of coal fractures and gas compositions is considered, coal porosity and permeability models can be linked to fracture parameters and gas concentrations. In this section, general coal permeability models are evaluated through comparing laboratorial and in-situ measurements with theoretical solutions of the two extreme cases: the unconstrained shrinkage/swelling case and the constrained case, as illustrated in We assume that matrix blocks are completely separated from each other in a coal sample. For the unconstrained model, matrix swelling does not affect coal fracture permeability, because for a given pore pressure coal matrix swelling results in swelling of the blocks alone, rather than changes in fracture aperture. The ambient effective stress also exerts no influence on matrix swelling, due to the complete separation between matrix blocks caused by through-going fractures. However, when coal sample is completely constrained from all directions, coal matrix swelling will be completely transferred to the reduction in fracture apertures. For the constrained model, the entire swelling/shrinkage strain contributes to coal permeability change provided the fractures are much more compliant than coal matrix. Equation Solutions of these two cases and their comparisons with typical observations are illustrated in The influence of coal matrix shrinkage on coal permeability has also been widely studied and an increase with decreasing pore pressure due to matrix shrinkage was observed ( The analysis above showed that current coal theoretical permeability models have so far been unsuccessful to explain the results from stress-controlled shrinkage/swelling laboratorial tests, and only some limited success has been achieved in explaining and matching in situ data. The most recent viewpoints ( In this work, coal permeability at the state of achieving a uniform matrix swelling/shrinkage is defined as the final equilibrium permeability, but this condition may never be achieved for real coal samples. A difference of the final equilibrium (or ultimate) permeability between an ideal homogeneous coal and a real heterogeneous coal is expected. In the following sections, a simulation model is constructed to investigate the transient permeability evolution during gas swelling process and to study the difference between the final equilibrium permeability and transient permeability, from which the possible mechanism for permeability reduction under unconstrained conditions is discovered. Based on this approach, the important non-linear responses of coal matrix to the effective stress are quantified through the incorporation of heterogeneous distributions of coal properties into complex mechanical coupling with gas transport, where swelling coefficient and modulus vary spatially relative to the fracture void. Over the past few years, a series of advanced modelling tools has been developed to quantify the complex coal–gas interactions ( In the numerical model, the interactions of the fractured coal mass is considered by assuming that cleats do not create a full separation between adjacent matrix blocks but solid rock bridges are present, as illustrated in The finite-element numerical tool Comsol Multiphysics 3.5 was used to address this issue. The model considers the following coupled processes: geomechanical deformation of coal matrix, gas flow in coal matrix, and coal matrix adsorption. The model development and implementation details can be found in our other published work (e.g. For this case, coal matrix is assumed to be homogeneous, where Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio are constants and the Langmuir strain constant is same throughout the whole domain. The simulation scenarios are listed in Typical evolution of coal permeability is shown in The conceptual understanding on the modelling processes is illustrated in Based on the above analysis, the final equilibrium permeability is always higher than the initial equilibrium permeability if a uniform swelling state is achieved within a coal sample. However, laboratorial measurements show that coal equilibrium permeability is generally much lower than the initial equilibrium permeability in low pore pressure range, may recover but rarely exceeds the initial equilibrium permeability even at high pore pressures. This distinct discrepancy points to a conclusion that a uniform matrix swelling state is rarely achieved in real coal sample tests. Therefore, a difference between the ultimate permeability for an ideal homogeneous coal and that for a real heterogeneous coal is expected. As summarized in the introduction part, adsorption and swelling processes have been shown to be heterogeneous in coal ( Initial distributions of key parameters, including coal Young's modulus ( Swelling/shrinkage dependencies of these key parameters, including coal Young's modulus ( The ultimate distribution of pore pressure ( How to represent these heterogeneities more accurately is the key to reduce the difference between the modelled coal permeability and the measured one. In the following section we represent the heterogeneity through spatial distributions of two key parameters – Young's modulus and Langmuir strain constant. We generalize changes in permeability that accompanies gas adsorption under conditions of constant applied stress and for increments of applied gas pressure for fractures. Specifically we explore the relations between coal dynamic (or transient) permeability and equilibrium permeability, and how these relations are controlled both by the distributed coal Young's modulus and Langmuir strain constant, and by the fluid injection pressure. The scenarios simulated in the model are listed in The numerical results are summarized and divided into three groups. This division is based on the reasons for heterogeneity. Cases 1–3 are for the heterogeneous coal represented by the spatial distribution of coal Young's modulus. In all three cases, coal Young's modulus is considered to decrease linearly from outer boundaries to the inner fracture walls, and its values at the outer boundary and fracture wall are As shown in Cases 4–6 are for the heterogeneous coal represented by the spatial distribution of Langmuir strain constant. This constant is considered to decrease linearly from the inner fracture walls to outer boundaries, and its values at the outer boundary and fracture wall are Cases 7–9 are for the heterogeneous coal represented by the spatial distributions of both coal Young's modulus and Langmuir strain constant. For this scenario, coal Young's modulus is considered to decrease linearly from outer boundaries to the inner fracture walls, and its values at the outer boundary and fracture wall are In this section, two sets of experimental data measured under stress controlled conditions are used to verify our assumptions. The first experimental data comparison is based on the work of Both homogeneous and heterogeneous models are used to match two sets of data. As only very limited parameters are available in both references, only the CH In the homogeneous model, constant Young's modulus and swelling strain capacity are used. In the heterogeneous model, the same assumptions for both coal Young's modulus and Langmuir strain constant is adapted as illustrated earlier. The Young's modulus softening coefficient, Gas flow in the coal matrix only is simulated, and dynamic coal fracture permeability is calculated based on the fracture opening change. For the comparisons, only the final permeability values are used. Take The performance of current coal permeability models was evaluated against analytical solutions for the two extreme cases of either unconstrained swelling or constrained swelling. Constrained model predictions are apparently consistent with both typical laboratory measurements and in-situ observations. However, this apparent consistency is due to the mismatch between model boundary condition assumptions (constrained) and experiment boundary condition (unconstrained). This conclusion demonstrates that current permeability models are incapable of explaining net reductions in coal permeability where swelling is unconstrained. With the inclusion of the heterogeneous distributions of coal physical and swelling properties, a fully coupled approach was applied to investigate coal permeability response under the unconstrained swelling conditions. Based on our model results, the following major conclusions were drawn: Both homogeneous and heterogeneous models experience the swelling transition from local swelling to macro swelling. At the initial stage of gas injection, matrix swelling is localized within the vicinity of the fracture compartment. As the injection continues, the swelling zone is widening further into the matrix and becomes macro-swelling. Coal permeability experiences a rapid reduction at the early stage, a switch in behaviour from permeability reduction to recovery is observed, and coal permeability finally recovers until it reaches the final equilibrium permeability. For the homogeneous case, the final equilibrium permeability is always higher than the initial value, but the opposite is obtained for the heterogeneous case. With the heterogeneous distributions of coal physical and swelling properties, this numerical model matches with the experimental data reasonably well, which demonstrates that heterogeneity assumption of coal properties is reasonable in explaining the permeability reduction under unconstrained conditions. This work was partially supported by new staff start-up grant from the