This work reports the results about the determination of mean activity coefficients and relative partial molar free energies for copper sulfide mineral bioleaching solutions by potentiometric method at 25 °C. The experimental potentiometric data were obtained by combining a diamond film—cupric ion-selective electrode (Cu(II) ISE), containing a KNO3 filling solution, and an Ag/AgCl electrode. The measurements were performed, at constant ionic strength, in different series of copper sulfide mineral bioleaching solutions. The non-ideal behavior of the system was described on the base of the Pitzer ion-interaction model for mixed salts. Meanwhile, the relative partial molar free energies of bioleaching solution were obtained. The determination of the thermodynamic properties offers a basic data for the study of copper sulfide mineral bioleaching solutions.Bioleaching is a new technology to extract metals from the minerals, which utilizes bacteria to break down the mineral matrix, liberating the useful metals from the raw minerals into solution for subsequent solvent extraction and recovery processing. The technology is especially suitable for dealing with low-grade ores, waste ores, sub-marginal ores and refractory mineral resources. Bioleaching is presently a successful and expanding area for the recovery of metals from low-grade ores and minerals ( Moreover, the determination of activity coefficients for the aqueous multicomponent electrolyte system is of much interest in applied fields such as the separation and purification of leaching solutions. In extractive process, the phenomenon of third phase formation has a detrimental effect on solvent extraction separation and has been extensively investigated ( In this respect, the potentiometric method is a useful experimental technique due to rapidity and possibility of measurements in a wide concentration ranges from 10 (NH The original mesophilic strain of Leaching experiments were carried out in 250 cm The solution samples were all taken at regular intervals to determine Cu(II), ferric iron ion, ferrous iron ion, pH and The measurements of electromotive force were performed, at constant ionic strength, in different series of copper sulfide mineral bioleaching solutions. The non-ideal behavior of the system was described on the base of the Pitzer ion-interaction model for mixed salts. Boron-doped diamond film electrode, fabricated by chemical vapor deposition methods, possessed electronic properties ranging from semiconducting to semimetallic and were highly useful for electrochemical measurements (in The electrode was immersed in the solution. In each mixed solvent system, data acquisition were performed every 4 s interval. From data processing, a resulting final potential mean value with a standard deviation never exceeding 0.1 mV during 1 min was accepted for each concentration. Pitzer ion-interaction model has been successfully applied to modeling various high concentrated pure and mixed electrolyte systems (    where the constants In this work, the mean activity coefficients for CuSO   The slope and intercept ( The leaching behavior of bioleaching solution was investigated by comparing twelve parallel leaching samples. The evolutions of pH and redox potential during the leaching process are shown in Comparing with freezing point lowering and conductivity methods, the EMF method shows some advantages such as rapidity and practical simplicity to generate experimental data for the thermodynamic investigation of electrolyte systems. The ion-selective electrode is an indictor electrode capable of selectively measuring the activity of a particular ionic species. From As can be seen from Generally, in the appointed solvent and temperature, the relative partial molar free energies were calculated ( The investigation showed the difference between the relative partial molar free energies of practical electrolytes and standard state, which is important to the ionic solvability, ionic association and solution theory. The thermodynamic properties of bioleaching solutions at different concentration of Cu(II) ion were compared. In This study discussed the mean activity coefficients and relative partial molar free energies for copper sulfide mineral bioleaching solutions during the bioleaching process by potentiometric method at 25 °C. The non-ideal behavior of the system was described on the base of the Pitzer ion-interaction model for mixed salts. In the present study, the variations of thermodynamic properties were discussed. With the increase of mean activity coefficient values, the quantity of jarosite increased at 25 °C for bioleaching solution. When the concentration of ferric iron ion increased, the mean activity coefficient values decreased. This can be attributed to the enhanced electrostatic attractive force with increasing concentration and the concentration of solvated free ion debased. The relative partial molar free energies decreased with the leaching time. The absolute value of We thank the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant 2004CB619206) for financial support. The values and units of all the parameters used in the model equations.