Displaced radial head fractures are treated with open reduction and internal fixation using implants. Failure of fixation may occur in the presence of comminution and in multifragmentary fractures; open surgical approaches are necessary for removal of the implants and radial head resection. Arthroscopic radial head resection has been described as a minimally invasive and effective treatment for failed radial head fracture fixation; however, periarticular adhesions and prominent implants add to the complexity and technical difficulty of the procedure. The described technique uses 3 portals for adhesiolysis, implant removal, and radial head resection. Resection is performed in stages; smaller-diameter instruments are used to gain and improve access, and larger resectors are used subsequently. Adequacy of resection is assessed arthroscopically and with biplanar imaging. The arthroscopic technique avoids the need for an open surgical approach and prevents subsequent morbidity. In addition, the rehabilitation time is shorter and patient satisfaction is high.Radial head fractures may be isolated or associated with elbow dislocations. Displaced or comminuted radial head fractures are usually treated with operative fixation, and associated fractures and ligament ruptures are treated simultaneously. The purpose of this report is to describe an arthroscopic procedure for resection of the radial head and removal of the fixation implants. This technique involves initial capsular excision and circumferential radial adhesiolysis to permit visualization and to gain working space. Thereafter, a combination of small and large resectors is used to identify and loosen the implants for removal. The preoperative imaging is studied, and the number and position of implants are noted ( The elbow joint is insufflated with 20 mL of saline solution by a needle placed through the posterolateral “soft spot.” An anteromedial portal is placed approximately 1 cm anterior and proximal to the medial epicondyle and is the primary viewing portal throughout the procedure. A 3-mm small-joint shaver blade (Arthrex, Naples, FL) is introduced into the elbow joint through the anterolateral portal and is used to perform a circumferential radial adhesiolysis. The direct lateral portal is useful for circumferential access to radial head adhesions. The lateral and anterior capsules are excised, and intra-articular adhesions are debrided. Next, radiocapitellar adhesions are resected, and adhesions between the radial head and annular ligament are excised. ( After creation of adequate working space, a 4-mm burr (Arthrex) is used through the direct lateral portal, and the superficial articular surface is debrided. A switching stick is used as a retractor through the anterolateral portal to assist visualization and working ( A 4- or 5-mm burr (Arthrex) is used to resect the radial head. The 2 lateral portals permit adequate access to all regions of the radial head. The peripheral cartilage rim is difficult to excise with a burr and is usually excised piecemeal at the end of bony resection. The cartilage rim is excised with a combination of punches, graspers (Acufex; Smith & Nephew), and small-joint shavers (Arthrex). Loose pieces of the rim may persist as loose bodies, and meticulous removal is crucial ( A bulky dressing and sling are used in the postoperative period for 2 to 3 days. The rehabilitation protocol involves early passive and active range-of-motion exercises (weeks 1 through 6) and simultaneous gradual strengthening. Achievement of full range is dependent on the initial severity of the problem and may vary from 4 to 8 months. Light work is permitted after 6 weeks, and a return to heavy work is permitted only after 3 months ( Arthroscopic radial head resection has been described before, and the results of this procedure have been comparable with those of the traditional open surgical approaches. Arthroscopic resection of the radial head is a difficult procedure with a steep learning curve. Capsular hypertrophy and intra-articular adhesions that occur from previous extensive surgery result in elbow stiffness, and this reduces the intra-articular working space for resection. The presence of fixation implants adds to the technical difficulty; these implants need meticulous removal before resection to avoid the risk of losing the implant in the deeper recesses of the complex anatomy of the elbow joint. The technical steps described in this report permit minimally invasive implant removal and bone resection. In addition, the adhesiolysis described is crucial to achieving the desired improvement in range of motion and pain relief. The overall advantages and pitfalls of the procedure are summarized in 