Three methods of automated characterisation of visual texture—spatial grey-level dependence matrix (SGLDM), grey-level run length (GLRL) and grey-level partial derivatives (GLPD)—have been applied to assess indirectly the wear of grinding media from series of grey-level photographs obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) at different magnifications (between 350× and 5000×). The three methods are complementary, but for a routine analysis, the use of a single intermediate magnification (≈1500×), combined with the SGLDM method, could be advocated to compare the degree of wear.Fineness, smoothness, coarseness and regularity are among the properties used in image analysis to define the textural appearance of materials. Visual texture is related to the idea that a lateral illumination of the object by some electromagnetic wave will reveal, by shading effects, the topography of its surface. A rough structure gives an image with large grey-level variations over a short distance. When the structure is smooth, the grey-level variations are smaller. It is an indirect method which does not require any contact between the surface to examine and a sensing device. This approach has been largely used in spatial and aerial imaging ( Many methods are available to characterise the texture of materials directly from grey-level images: the principal approaches are statistical, structural, morphological, fractal and spectral ( Various grinding media, either new or used, have been visualised ( The beads were fixed on a support and gold-plated prior to visualisation by scanning electron microscopy (TM330, Jeol). The SEM is equipped with a secondary electron detector and is connected to a PC via a ImageSlave (Melbourne) grabbing board. Series of images with magnification varying from 200× to 5000× were captured. The percentage of the bead total surface visualised varies between 10 and 4.10—3% for a bead diameter range between 0.6 and 2 mm. The 592×386 images were analysed using Visilog 5 (Noésis, Les Ulis, France) or in-house software. Test images from the Brodatz collection ( This method ( Due to the circular symmetry, the descriptors are averaged with respect to There is unfortunately no direct physical meaning to this criteria. It can be said however is that, energy is a measure of the texture homogeneity: the more homogeneous the image, the larger the energy. Contrast is a measure of local variations. Entropy is related to the texture disorder. A coarse texture contains large number of neighbouring pixels of the same grey level, when a fine texture contains small numbers of these pixels. The primitive or run will be here the maximal contiguous set of pixels of the same grey level ( Different descriptors are usually computed but those used in the present study were: The topography of a surface can be quantified by the height and facet slope distributions. In function of the reflectivity and angle of illumination, these distributions are translated into variations of grey levels, i.e., grey-level partial derivatives, As the surfaces are globally flat, The three methods have been initially applied to the set of Brodatz test images with the following settings for SGLDM ( in the GLRL method: SRE and LRE are very highly correlated, RLU is very highly correlated with SRE and LRE, LGRE and HGRE are highly correlated (| in the SGLDM method, the SGLDM and GLRL descriptors are moderately correlated, which means they describe different aspects of the texture and are complementary  In order to limit the number of descriptors, only SRE, GLU, LGRE and HGRE will be further discussed for the GLRL method. The effect of the number of grey levels considered has been tested on the Brodatz test images for the SGDLM method between There is an optimal value of Subsequently, all the presented results have been obtained with Finally, the effect of the number of beads examined was investigated: obviously, a compromise should be reached between the statistical meaning of the results and the time spent for image grabbing.  In However, it seems difficult to extract a general law of variation of the textural signature in function of the number of grinding operations. Energy exhibits the largest coefficient of variation (between 40% and 70%), which tends to increase with magnification but is relatively constant in function of the number of grinding operations. GLU and energy ( For new and little used beads (such as ER_A and B beads), uniformity (measured by GLU and energy) increases with magnification: the zones are getting more homogeneous as the visualisation area size decreases. On the other hand, contrast and The textural signatures of all used grinding media have been gathered in As seen in the previous section, each textural signature can be represented by the variation of a descriptor with respect to magnification. There is of course a decrease of the amount of data between the series of corresponding images and those curves. Nevertheless, it might be still difficult to compare the textures based on the set of curves. Statistical methods of data reduction, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) ( Three methods of automated characterisation of visual texture (SGLDM, GLRL and GLPD) have been applied to assess the wear of grinding media from series of photographs obtained by scanning electron microscopy at different magnifications. It could be shown that it was indeed possible to assess quantitatively a change in surface topography of the grinding media by these methods. If a single method should be used, SGLDM seems the most appropriate. The procedure is not very expensive in terms of time for sample preparation as the beads were just deposited on a sticky surface. The time necessary for image grabbing depends of course upon the available equipment. The methods such as spatial grey-level dependence matrix and grey-level run length have primarily been developed initially for military applications such as target recognition. With the actual computer speed, the calculations are very fast and are not the limiting factor, which remains image grabbing. The question remains about the use of a single magnification or of a series of magnifications. The use of a single magnification would allow to examine more beads, which increase the statistical representativity of the results. This brings another question: how to select the magnification: it should be a compromise between the size of details and the size of the visualised zone. In the case of small beads, magnifications in the range of 750× to 1500× could be selected. With small magnifications and small beads, the sphericity of the surface becomes apparent ( Assessment of wear by visual texture is of course a very indirect technique. The three tested methods allow only a comparison between textures: it is their main disadvantage, which is recognised in many of their application fields. On the other hand, the technique does not require any contact between the grinding media and a sensing device, which could, itself, interfere with the surface and damage it. The authors are thankful to Mr. Becker and Mr. Nebelung for providing the grinding media.