The introduction of nitrogen-fixing trees in a mixed system with Eucalyptus can improve soil chemical and microbiological properties, especially C-N contents and microbial diversity. However, the effects of this forest management on soil mesofauna remain poorly understood. Thus, we hypothesized that higher mesofauna abundance and diversity, microbial activity and soil quality are greater in the mixed plantation of Eucalyptus grandis and Acacia mangium than in pure Eucalyptus plantations. We aimed at evaluating the density and diversity of soil mesofauna, and its interaction with microbiological and chemical soil attributes in pure Acacia mangium (AC), Eucalyptus grandis (EU) and mixed E. grandis and A. mangium plantations (M). We also intended to adapt a general indicator of soil quality for such forest plantations. It is common for soil macrofauna studies to employ the general indicator of soil quality (GISQ). Since our study did not comprise soil macrofauna, but included only soil mesofauna, we adapted the GISQ to contemplate mesofaunal attributes, introducing the great interaction between them and microorganisms. Soil samples (0–5 cm) were collected at 2015, when trees were six years old. The only faunal order to show a higher density is Diplura. Our results show that the metabolic quotient (qCO2) is lower in AC, while the cation exchange capacity (CEC), H + Al and soil moisture are higher in AC than in EU and M. We verified that intercropping of A. mangium in E. grandis improves soil quality and our indicator showed that soil mesofauna correlates with soil microbial attributes density. Thus, our results provide a novel evidence of ecological interactions between soil mesofauna and microorganisms under field conditions for pure and mixed plantations of Eucalyptus grandis and Acacia mangium.Eucalyptus is a very important tree, favored by tropical climate and planted in many regions of the world because of its rapid growth cycle, producing multipurpose wood ( In this context, The term soil quality is defined as the capacity of a soil to sustain vegetal and animal life, improving water and air quality, and, in consequence, ensure human health ( The soil mesofauna should be considered a component of soil quality, since these small invertebrates actively participate in the initial fragmentation of organic matter and consequently favor microbial decomposition, nutrient cycling and soil aggregation, especially in the first 5 cm of the soil ( Due to a greater microbial activity reported for mixed plantations of Thus, the objective of this study is to evaluate the mesofaunal density and diversity and their interactions with microbial and chemical soil attributes in pure and mixed Soil samples were collected at the Experimental Station of Forest Sciences located in Itatinga, São Paulo state, Brazil (23°02′01″S and 48°97′30″W). The soil was classified as a Geric Rhodic Ferralsol (FAO) with a texture of 84% sand and 12% clay ( In the second rotation period, our study included three treatments consisting of pure We sampled soil and mesofauna on October 21, 2015, during spring, when the trees were six years old, during the final growth stage to obtain more stabilized systems with greater representativeness of each management system. At this time the mean temperature was 22 °C, while the mean precipitation of the month was 240 mm ( Since there is no specific sampling method defined for mesofauna, we made an adaptation of the TSBF (Tropical Soil Biology and Fertility) method for macrofauna combined with the Berlese filter extraction. The TSBF method, normally used for soil macrofauna sampling ( In our adapted sampling procedure for mesofauna we combined the TSBF method with Berlese filter extraction ( Richness corresponds to the mean number of orders per sample, while the diversity was calculated using Simpson’s Index (Is = 1-D), where D is the dominance expressed by Σpi2, where pi represents the relative abundance of each taxonomic group sampled. In addition, we calculated the total richness and total Simpson’s diversity. The closer the result to 1, the higher the diversity of the system, because the dominance decreases along with the numerical increase of the diversity index ( In a radius of one meter of the samples for mesofauna evaluation, four subsamples were taken to compose a sample for soil chemical analyses. These samples were sieved (2 mm) and homogenized for subsequent determination of the chemical attributes, as compiled by Four soil subsamples were taken to compose a sample for microbial carbon ( An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed, complemented with the Tukey test at 5%, to compare the means of the chemical, microbiological and soil mesofaunal attributes among forest systems. The Kolmorgorov-Smirnov test was used to verify the data normality. When data were not normal, we used the transformation log (x + 1) reaching the normal distribution. In order to obtain significant correlations between all variables, a redundancy analysis (RDA) with data transformation by √x completed with a Monte Carlo test ( When studying soil macrofauna it is usual to apply the general indicator of soil quality (GISQ), introduced by Following the same reasoning as was used to calculate the GISC by After the homothetic transformation, the values were multiplied by the number found for the explanatory variables on the first two PCA axes, and then they were all summed up. A new homothetic transformation was done for each kind of variable (chemical, microbiological and mesofaunal) to obtain the sub-indicators. These groups of sub-indicators were examined by a new PCA, and according to the contribution of each variable in the first two axes they were multiplied by the co-inertia, divided by 1000, and all values were summed up. Thus, we obtained a value, which was again dimensioned by a homothetic transformation to generate the soil quality indicator, based on the combination of chemical, microbiological and soil mesofaunal attributes. Thus, we found values ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 (considered as representative for low quality), 0.4 to 0.7 (medium quality) and 0.7 to 1.0 (high soil quality), according to Only a few microbiological and chemical variables presented differences from one treatment to the other ( Considering all treatments, we identified 22 orders, and Diplura presented higher numbers in AC than in other forest systems. Pseudoscorpionida and Blattodea were found only in EU, while Dermaptera was found only in AC. Isopoda and Thysanoptera were present in M and in EU, but never in AC, and Pauropoda were found in AC and EU, but never in M. Enchytraeidae were present in AC and M, but never in EU ( The redundancy analysis was significant for the explanation of the first and the other axes formed (Monte Carlo test The similarity analysis confirmed strong overlapping between the samples ( The PCA analysis for the soil attributes explained more than 50% of the data variability in the first two axes, but we verified large overlapping of samples, mainly for mesofaunal and microbiological attributes, which are the ones with the highest variability, even higher than the chemical attributes. However, most chemical attributes correlated with The soil quality sub-indicators “microbiology” and “mesofauna” were positively correlated ( Most of the tropical soils are oligotrophic, since they are highly weathered and present low nutrient availability ( Our research corroborates several previous studies, showing the importance of mixed plantations of The higher soil moisture verified in AC ( In this study, the forest systems were mature (around 7 years old) and in such conditions the systems are more stable than in younger plantations ( Orders as Pseudoscorpionida (predators) and Blattodea (saprophagous) were found only in EU, while Dermaptera (predators) were present in AC ( The relationship between the biological attributes (mesofaunal and microbiological soil attributes) and the chemical soil attributes explained 81% of the data variability, indicating that the soil chemical attributes influence the microbial activity and the structure of the soil mesofaunal community ( The sub-indicators of soil quality, when analyzed separately, show that Here, we provide a novel evidence of ecological interactions between soil mesofauna and microorganisms in field conditions. As expected, our results show that soil moisture is an important factor that favors positive correlations between mesofaunal abundance and diversity in The authors thank the Coordination of Superior Level Staff Improvement (CAPES) and the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) for a grant conceded to MRGZ. We would like to express our recognition to all members of the Itatinga Forest Sciences Experimental Station and some members of CIRAD/France for providing the infrastructure, respectively Prof. Dr. José Leonardo M. Gonçalves and Dr. Jean-Pierre Bouillet. We would like to thank Dr. Dilmar Baretta for providing support in statistical analyses and soil sampling methods for mesofauna extraction. This research was financed by