A one-dimensional model of the process of continuous sedimentation in a clarifier–thickener unit is presented. The governing model is expressed as a system of two nonlinear partial differential equations for the solids volume fraction and the varying settling velocity of the solids as functions of depth and time. This model extends the well-known model for the dynamics of a flocculated suspension in a clarifier–thickener advanced by Bürger et al. (2005). Operating charts are calculated to be used for the control of steady states, in particular, to keep the sediment level and the underflow volume fraction at desired values. A numerical scheme and a simple regulator are proposed and numerical simulations are performed.Water consumption has become an important problem in mineral processing, especially for countries where most plants are located in desert areas. The necessity to increase the capacity of metal concentrators, led by higher metal prices, calls for additional efforts in recovering the maximum possible amount of water in solid–liquid separation of the suspensions arising as tailings from froth filtration. Thickeners are widely used as a first stage in this process. They operate continuously, producing a concentrated underflow while particle-free supernatant water overflows. Similar devices are employed in wastewater treatment, and to emphasize their clarification purpose in addition to the thickening one, we name them clarifier–thickeners (CTs). Their principle of operation is well explained in handbook entries ( The performance of a CT depends on the settling velocity of solid particles. This velocity depends on the size of the particles and on the density difference between solids and liquid. For a single spherical particle of diameter Usually the effective particle sizes, thereby the settling velocities, are increased by addition of a flocculant, which causes small particles to aggregate into large units, called flocs. Since the flocculation process is fairly rapid, we assume in this paper that the suspension is completely flocculated before entering the CT. The dosage of the flocculant added to the feed suspension can be regarded as an independent variable that can rapidly be adjusted for purposes of CT control, for example to maintain the sediment level at constant height, in response to variations of the solid feed flux and concentration which cannot be controlled. This paper has three purposes: A new one-dimensional model for the continuous sedimentation of suspensions with time-dependent flocculation properties of the feed is introduced. This model is expressed as a system of two nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs). The possibilities and limitations for manual and automatic control of the CT by means of adjusting partly the flocculant dosage to the feed stream, partly the volumetric underflow rate, are demonstrated by operating charts and a simple regulator. A numerical scheme for simulations of the process is proposed. We emphasize that the reduction to one space dimension is common to most published treatments in the area, which reflects that the principle of the operation of most real clarifier–thickeners does not include lateral segregation and currents; these flow features are usually avoided by design or one tries to limit them to the clear liquid zone. More importantly, a spatially two- or three-dimensional description of sedimentation–consolidation processes entails the necessity to solve not only a multi-dimensional version of the governing PDEs, but one also has to solve additional equations for the motion of the mixture (e.g., a version of the Stokes or Navier–Stokes equations; see A seminal work in thickener modeling is the kinematic theory by The convective flux function In this work, we extend the CT model by It is common usage to treat a flocculated suspension as monodisperse, which is reflected by the characterization of the material by one scalar solids volume fraction, and where the particle diameter is often a nominal or effective one since the solid flocs contain liquid. Such a model is based on We recall that the flocculation process consists of three steps ( The authors are well aware that flocculation is a complex operation, which is however not part of the model. Rather, since the Stokes velocity depends on the aggregate diameter which in turns depends on the flocculant concentration, we assume that the settling velocity of a single particle (floc) that enters the CT, The model by As for the control of CTs modeled by PDEs, we refer to As stated above, the basic novelty in terms of the governing equations is an additional PDE that describes the transport of a scalar quantity that reflects a variable property by which the solid particles entering the CT are “marked”, and which in general influences the rheology of the suspension. A similar concept was advanced by This paper is organized as follows: Section We consider an idealized CT shown in The conservation of mass yields the PDE The effluent and underflow outlet concentrations are given by the respective expressions Here the notation Suppose now that some property of the solids that are fed to the CT changes with time. This property may be the color of the particles or, which we are interested in, the sedimentation velocity of each particle defined by the flocculant dosage. We let Replacing For the numerical treatment (see Eq. The conservation Eq. In the feed inlet, the time variation of the property is described by Dividing this equation by Our goal is to use the property described by Since the function During CT operation, let This function fits exactly in the framework of Section For the operation of a CT, it is important to establish the dependence of the steady-state solutions on the possible control variables Assume that Then the left equality of This equation is easiest integrated from the bottom, with the boundary value One should bear in mind that, for a given Since at steady state the value of To illustrate the connection between It can be observed that only a subset of the rectangle In the design of thickener controllers there are two independent variables, flocculant rate and underflow rate. The dependent variables include rake torque, underflow concentration, overflow concentration, sediment level, solids inventory, solids settling rate and underflow viscosity ( Finally, an operator would like to know the time-variation We illustrate the behavior of the model We perform three simulations. In all three, we start at steady state with  In Simulation 2 ( To keep both It should be noted that the process has not reached steady state in the simulations shown in In Simulation 3 of Example 3, it was shown that a manual control action by immediate changes of In Simulations 4 and 5, we start at a steady state with We thus have A widely accepted CT model has been extended to include the settling–compression process when the suspension fed to the CT has time-dependent settling properties. A novel numerical scheme for simulations has been presented as well as operating charts and a simple regulator for control of the process by dosage of flocculant and adjustment of the volumetric underflow rate We have shown how manual control of steady states can be made by changing the two control variables The well-posedness of the governing Eqs. The proposed model is built on the assumption that the suspension is completely flocculated before entering the CT and the model does not consider particle interaction during sedimentation. A more complete model should also include orthokinetic flocculation inside the CT. This effect has been considered, under different assumptions, in wastewater treatment by FB acknowledges support by Conicyt Programm “Inserción de Capital Humano Avanzado en la Academia” 791100041 and by Fondecyt project 11130397. RB is supported by Fondecyt project 1130154, Conicyt project Anillo ACT1118 (ANANUM); and Red Doctoral REDOC.CTA, MINEDUC project UCO1202 at Universidad de Concepción. FB and RB are also supported by BASAL project CMM, Universidad de Chile and Centro de Investigación en Ingeniería Matemática ( Before stating the numerical scheme, we rewrite the governing equations (cf. The source terms can be incorporated into the convective flux by noting that We remark that in regions where We divide the spatial axis into cells of depth Let The numerical scheme consists of two Eulerian time steps via an operator splitting, where the linear and nonlinear contributions to the fluxes are considered separately. With the notation The second step of the scheme is The following CFL condition guarantees that