The aggregation and flotation behavior of hematite and wolframite have been investigated through particle size analysis, flotation tests and measurement of energy input based on hydrodynamic interactions. In has been shown that when fine and coarse particles are mixed and conditioned in surfactant solution, the flocs with particle size greater than that of the coarse particle size and the flocs with particles size between that of the fine and coarse particle sizes are formed. The bigger size floc is attributed to the adhesion of fine particles onto coarse particles. The medium size floc may be the aggregation among fine particles themselves and detached flocs from the coarse substrate due to the shearing forces. Both cases depend on the state of turbulent flow of pulp and hydrodynamic conditions. The studies on the effect of particle size, agitating speed and time, and the structure of agitation tank on aggregation and flotation show the importance of hydrodynamic interactions in aggregation and flotation.Besides surface forces, hydrodynamic interaction also plays a very important kinetic role in determining the collision efficiency between particles, the state of particulate suspension and flotation. The extent of hydrodynamic effect is determined by the character of the liquid field flowing around the particles which, in turn, is dependent on the type of flow, i.e. the Reynolds number. Hydrodynamic forces influence the rate of aggregates growth and break-up in several ways Pure wolframite and hematite were taken from Yaogangxian Mine and from Dong Anshan Mine in China, respectively. The handpicked pure lump samples were crushed, ground in a porcelain mill and screened to the desired size fractions. The coarser fractions of different size were used as carriers in the tests. The fraction of −5 μm obtained by sedimentation was used as ultra fine feed. Double distilled water was used in preparing all solutions. The sodium oleate used was grade purchased from Hunan Chemical. The styryl phosphoric acid was laboratory grade supplied by Changsha Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. All other reagents used for the pH adjustment were of analytical grade. In flotation, the −5μm mineral samples of 5 g were fully dispersed with distilled water agitating 30 min at 2150 rpm using a common impeller in a beaker. The dispersed pulp was transferred into a baffled tank made of organic glass with a volume of 200 ml. The collector was added after coarse particle addition and then the pH was adjusted. The pulp was then conditioned for the required duration at desired speeds and the pH was measured. The conditioned pulp was then transferred to a micro-flotation cell with a volume of 100 ml, and floated at 1600 rpm for 5 min. Adsorption of styryl phosphoric acid (SPA) on wolframite was determined from the difference between the initial and equilibrium SPA concentrations. Preliminary kinetic studies showed that the adsorption of styryl phosphoric acid from the solution reaches equilibrium within 20 min. Therefore, 2 g of wolframite was stirred with 100 ml of a SPA solution at the desired initial concentration and pH in 200-ml beaker for 30 min. After equilibration, the suspension was centrifugalized. The supernatant was used for pH measurement and SPA concentration measurement, which was measured by a potential titration method. The effects of conditioning speed and time on the flotation of −5μm wolframite are demonstrated in The enhancement of fine mineral flotation requires the adhesion of fine particles onto mother particles, i.e. the aggregation between fine and coarse particles. On one hand the aggregation depends on the interaction forces between particles Obviously, the collision rate between fine and coarse particles is much higher than that between the fine particles, providing a basis for coarse particles serving as carriers promoting the aggregation between particles. Expressing The decrease in flotation recovery at a very high conditioning speed of 4000 rpm may be attributed to shearing forces causing floc breakage . The kinetic energy of the particles in mixing can be estimated using the equation below At The energy dissipation in the flow and the kinetic energy of the particles in the wolframite system of −5μm fine particles and 25–38μm carrier particles are calculated in terms of  As above, coarse particles can serve as carriers for fine particles because coarse particles have a greater collision rate with fine particles, and fine hematite and wolframite can adhere onto hydrophobilized coarse substrates. What size is then best for coarse particles used as carriers, i.e. what carrier size is the optimal to make the carrier action maximum? On the basis of the theories on particle collision, mass transfer and concomitance, the collision rate between fine particles and coarse particles will reach a maximum, producing optimum carrier action, when the size of the coarse particle is comparable to the turbulent microscale of the vortex, The reduced amount of the −5μm hematite by addition of various sizes The relative motion speed of coarse grain in turbulent flow is directly proportional to   The behavior of fine particles will be different when adding coarse particles into the pulp with fine particles. The collision rate and thereby the adhesion of fine particles onto mother particle will increase. The higher collision rate between coarse particles in strong stirring may result in the detachment of already adhered fine flocs. This is especially true when the coarse particle size exceeds the microscale of turbulence, the aggregates break due to attrition and shear forces generated in the liquid.  The turbulent flow state is very important to the collision and adhesion between fine particles and coarse particles in flotation, which is closely related not only to agitation intensity and pulp property, but to cell geometry including the structure of the stirring vessels and the shape of impellers. Two vessels with and without baffles were tested in the present research. At high speed agitation the deeper swirl and vortex were formed and pulp moved along the inside wall of the tank, the moving speed of particles and hence the collision rate between fine and coarse particles will be reduced due to the friction between the particles with various sizes. In the baffled tank, strong turbulent flow from top to bottom turnover will be produced, which will increase the collision rate between fine particles and coarse particles. The adhesion of fine particles onto coarse substrates is more effective and relative flotation recovery of fine particles by adding coarse particles into pulp is higher when the pulp is conditioned in the baffled cell than in the unbaffled cell (see The effects of different impellers of various shapes (see The important variables influencing hydrodynamic interactions in fine flotation include, the intensity and time of agitation, the size of coarse particles, the structure of agitation vessel and shape of impeller, etc. Agitation intensity plays a major role in flotation. In turbulent flow, a bigger floc is formed due to the adhesion of fine particles onto a coarse particle substrate, and some middle size flocs with sizes between that of coarse and fine particles are also formed. Suitable intense agitation can increase the collision rate between fine and coarse particles, and can also enhance chemisorption of collector on the mineral surface, via the accompanying increase in the temperature of the flotation pulp, which makes the hydrophobic aggregation between fine particles increase. These effects enhance the flotation recovery of fine particles. There exists an optimal coarse particle size, at which the collision probability between fine and coarse particles increases, the formation of flocs (i.e. the reduced amount of −5μm particles ) and thus the flotation of fine particles are greatly increased. The baffled stirring tank and double-bladed paddle impeller cause stronger turbulent flow, which is useful for the collision and aggregation between particles, providing improved effectiveness for fine particle flotation. The authors would like to thank the China National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars No. 59925412 and the National Key Fundamental Research Program G1999064901 for supporting this research.