Locked intramedullary fixation is a well-established technique for managing long-bone fractures. While intramedullary nail fixation of diaphyseal fractures in the femur, tibia, and humerus is well established, the same is not true for other fractures. Surgical fixations of clavicle, forearm and ankle are traditionally treated with plate and screw fixation. In some cases, fixation with an intramedullary device is possible, and may be advantageous. However, there is however a concern regarding a lack of rotational stability and fracture shortening. While new generation of locked intramedullary devices for fractures of clavicle, forearm and fibula are recently available, the outcomes are not as reliable as fixation with plates and screws. Further research in this area is warranted with high quality comparative studies, to investigate the outcomes and indication of these fractures treated with intramedullary nail devices compared to intramedullary nail fixation.Surgical fixation of clavicle fractures has been traditionally performed with use of plates and screws, utilizing Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Osteosynthesefragen (AO) techniques of anatomic reduction and stable fixation. However, intramedullary fixation is also possible, and different types of devices have been used for intramedullary fixation of the clavicle throughout the years, including smooth K-wires, Hagie pins (Smith & Nephew) Intramedullary fixation is thought to allow for a smaller incision, which can be more cosmetically appealing. It may also decrease soft tissue dissection and hardware prominence associated with plates, and may allow for easier hardware removal Biomechanical studies have shown that intramedullary nails are inferior to plates in resisting displacement with regards to maximal load and cyclical stress testing Intramedullary devices can also migrate, especially smooth Kirschner wires Intramedullary devices can cause local irritation and prominence at the insertion site A meta analysis investigating the complications of clavicle fractures treated with intramedullary nails noted a low risk of major complications such as additional surgery for nonunion ( Numerous studies have reported use of intramedullary devices for fixation of clavicle fractures, including several randomized controlled trials. In general, studies show that compared to non-operative treatment, intramedullary fixation leads to better outcomes, and lower rates of nonunion and malunion Several randomized controlled trials have also reported the results of intramedullary nails compared to plate fixation This meta-analysis was fraught with multiple shortcomings. The indications for surgery were not uniform across the studies included, some studies were based on elderly patients, or a combination of acute fractures and nonunions In general, intramedullary nail fixation of clavicle fractures is performed with open reduction techniques. Many authors report routine “opening of the fracture site”, to assist in reduction and nail placement In general, studies report good outcomes with intramedullary nail fixation of clavicle fractures compared to non-operative treatment. Clavicular nails may be used as an alternative in patients with simple clavicle fractures with a large canal, and should be avoided in comminuted fractures. However, there are still concerns regarding implant migration, implant irritation, routine hardware removal, and lack of stability causing shortening Single and both bone forearm fractures in adults are routinely treated surgically, due to high rates of complications with non-operative treatment (except for minimally displaced ulnar “night stick” fractures) Intramedullary nail fixation of forearm fractures has the potential advantages of smaller incisions, decreased periosteal stripping and hardware irritation Intramedullary nails do not allow for anatomic fixation, and restoration of length and rotation are difficult, especially in severely comminuted fractures. Biomechanical studies have shown that the ulna contributes more to forearm stability in bending and torsion than the radius. Therefore, in single bone forearm fractures, IM nailing of the ulna provides significantly less torsional stability, compared to IM nailing of the radius. Intramedullary nail fixation of both bone forearm fractures has significantly lower torsional stiffness compared to plate fixation (2% vs. 83% of intact forearm), as well as lower resistance to distraction and compression If the fractures are not reducible in a closed manner, an open reduction may be required, which has been shown to increase the time to union Early nailing techniques of forearm fractures included various non-locked implants, such as Rush rods, Kirschner wires, and elastic intramedullary nails The Foresight nail (Smith & Nephew) is a stainless steel nail that has interlocking capability both proximally and distally. They are straight, and require intraoperative contouring. The Acumed radius and ulna nails are titanium, pre-contoured, and have interlocking capability only at the insertion end (proximally in the ulna, distally in the radius). The other end of the nails is fluted and has a paddle-blade tip, which is driven into the metaphysis to provide rotational stability Several case series have reported on the use of locked intramedullary forearm nails for fixation of single bone and both bone forearm fractures Lee et al. Nail length and diameter must be carefully determined from preoperative radiographs of the unaffected side Ulnar nails are inserted through the tip of the olecranon. A 2-cm longitudinal incision is made over the olecranon, and a vertical split is made in the triceps insertion to allow placement of the opening awl Radial nails are inserted distally. The entry portal varies depending on the manufacturer’s implant design, however generally 5 Plate fixation of adult forearm fractures remains the gold standard. The use of interlocking intramedullary nails has been shown to be safe and effective in some small case series. However, they are inferior to plate fixation regarding biomechanical stability, re-establishment of the radial bow, and time to union. Open reduction may be required, as well as a period of immobilization post-operatively. Intramedullary nail fixation may be considered as an alternative for select diaphyseal fractures, such as those with extensive soft-tissue injury or pathologic fractures. However, the indications are limited at this time, and many advocate excluding Galeazzi, Monteggia, and severely comminuted fractures. Further research in this area is warranted, with randomized clinical trials comparing intramedullary nails to plate fixation, to help better understand their indications and outcomes. Unstable ankle fractures with displacement, talar shift or disruption of the mortise benefit from surgical fixation. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of the fibula is the gold standard of fixation. ORIF is performed using AO principles, through the use of compression screws and a neutralisation plate to obtain anatomic fixation Intramedullary fixation of the fibula has been performed in the past with use of Kirschner wires, or intramedullary screws Advantages of locked intramedullary devices include better rotational control, improved stability and reduced risk of nail migration Bugler et al. recently presented a randomized controlled trial, comparing the Acumed fibular nail to plate fixation A systematic review of 627 fibular fractures treated with a variety of locked intramedullary nail devices reported an overall union rate of 98% Bulger et al. discussed their learning curve with use of the Acumed nail, and noted that the surgical technique was progressively modified to improve outcomes Modern locked intramedullary fibular nails have been shown to be the most stable, and decrease the risk of fixation failure, loss of reduction and fibular shortening. Intramedullary nail fixation of fibular fractures provides high rates of union, however, complication rates are not insignificant, and there appears to be a learning curve in the use and application of these implants. Studies demonstrate that locked intramedullary devices may help lower the risk of infections and skin and soft tissue complications, compared to plate fixation, specially in the elderly population. The cost of intramedullary fibular nails is significantly higher than plate fixation, and a concern in the face of limited health care resources. Given the limited evidence, we recommend their use be considered as an alternative for treatment of elderly patients with concerns of soft tissue complications. Further high quality research in this area is warranted to assess the newer generation of commercially available intramedullary implants. The authors have no conflict of interests related to this manuscript.