Robots have been developed as a result of the merging of various sophisticated technologies such as mechanical engineering, control systems, electronics, and software and they have played a significant role in automating the manufacturing industry. However, their rate of introduction in service sectors, especially the medical and healthcare sectors, is much slower than expected. Technology convergence may be one of the keys to promote the introduction of robots in new sectors e.g., the medical & healthcare sectors.
                  Technological relatedness including technology convergence has been measured by various methodologies using citation network analysis, clustering, or technology similarity. Although these measurements could identify the overall characteristics of technology convergence, more detailed analyses are required to identify the specific patterns and instances of this convergence. The purpose of this research is first, to identify the technology convergence more precisely than before by using a new methodology named “module-based mining methodology;” second, to extract the patterns of technology convergence; and finally to examine the processes of technology convergence in the field of robotics research. This study would enable researchers and policymakers to achieve accelerated development of new products and services for new sectors including the medical and healthcare market.Robot technologies have been developed as a result of the merging of various sophisticated technologies such as mechanical engineering, control systems, electronics, and software for approximately half a century. Industrial robots, which have become indispensable intelligent machines as a tool of factory automation, have been introduced rapidly in various manufacturing industries such as automobile manufacturing and electronics, and are expected to contribute to healthcare & medicare, autonomous vehicles, the construction & maintenance of large infrastructure and plants such as bridges, tunnels, large buildings, agriculture, and other service sectors. In spite of high expectations, the implementation of robots in the medical & healthcare, construction, rescue, and other service fields has made much less progress than expected. In 2001, the Japan Robot Association (JARA) estimated the size of the Japanese medical and welfare market to be ¥260 billion (US$2.17 billion) The progress in the introduction of robot applications in these service sectors is much slower than expected and lags far behind the rapid introduction of robots and technology advancements of robotics to the manufacturing industries such as the automobile and electronics industries. Since robot technologies are composed of various technologies, the progress of technology convergence and the process whereby this occurs seems to be the key to promote the introduction of robots to the service sectors and to create new markets for robots in these sectors because technology convergence has been regarded as one of the innovation drivers. Since technology boundaries have become increasingly unclear and new products and services have evolved from the combination of different technologies, technology convergence becomes one of the key factors to drive innovation and develop new products and services ( However, it is increasingly difficult, not only for researchers in the academic and private sectors, but also for planners and developers of new products and services in companies and policy makers in both national and local governments, to comprehend technological advancements because of the speed of innovation and the uncertainty as to the combinations that would lead to innovation. Especially in new application and service areas for robots such as the medical and healthcare sectors, it seems insufficient to combine robot technologies with new scientific knowledge to address their needs and to overcome the obstacles. Advancements in bibliographic analysis and measurements of technology similarity or relatedness enable us to detect and evaluate emerging technologies. Technological relatedness including technology convergence has been measured with various methodologies by using citation network analysis, clustering, or technology similarity. However, the larger amount of data is, the more complicated and difficult it is to extract and identify relations among technologies in detail. More detailed analyses are required to identify specific patterns and instances of technology convergence in cases in which technological fields are relatively limited but varied within a certain area such as robotics. This prompted us to introduce a new measurement methodology we named “module-based mining methodology” to solve this issue. In order to proceed with this study, we need to address the problem relating to multiple sectors being assigned to papers. Sectors were assigned to the journals in which papers were published rather than to the papers themselves. This led us to propose a new methodology to factorize the overlapped sectors into a single sector by additionally using co-citation analysis to overcome the problem of overlapped scientific sectors. The purpose of this research is first to identify the technology convergence more precisely than before, second to extract the patterns of technology convergence especially in the medical and healthcare research sectors, and finally to examine the processes of technology convergence in several areas of the medical and healthcare sector. This study is expected to enable researchers and policymakers to identify instances of technology convergence in robotics research and help accelerate the development of new products and services for service sectors including the medical and healthcare market. Citation network analysis has been conducted in various research fields since Citation network analysis, which is a form of tech mining, is a combination of scientific research methodologies such as information retrieval, scientometrics, and content analysis. Tech mining has been expanding into various research fields, including technology futures analysis, research evaluation, and competitive intelligence ( Tech mining has also been applied to determine or detect new technologies, which is an important field to track emerging technologies, including citation network analysis ( For example, citation network analysis has been applied to various research areas such as obtaining an academic landscape of innovation research ( In this study, citation network analysis is utilized for categorizing papers, factorizing overlapped sectors into a single sector, and calculating and evaluating technology convergence. As technology convergence has been regarded as one of the innovation drivers in recent decades, researchers in academia and industry have increasingly been conducting interdisciplinary research and companies have been developing new products and services by combining or merging different technologies into new technologies or new applications. Governments in developed countries have introduced policies and measures to promote technology convergence through their various programs ( Researchers in the field of technology management have also investigated, analyzed, or examined the different aspects of technology convergence ( The convergence of industrial technologies was studied in the ICT industry ( Some studies identified the convergence of robot technology using patent network analysis ( Concerning the measurements of technology similarity, technological relatedness, or interdisciplinarity, several measuring methods were proposed and utilized. Small et al. introduced the cosine distance to measure the relationship between documents by the strength of co-citation ( Jaffe defined the technology proximities of firms and calculated them by using the cosine distance of the classes of the Patent Office ( Within this paper, we use the term convergence to indicate a blurring of boundaries between at least two hitherto disjoint areas of science, technology, markets, or industries including fusion, as defined by We refer to the procedure as “module-based mining methodology” (hereinafter denoted the “MM Method”). This is because Newman's clustering algorithm is used to categorize papers into characterized groups as modules, thereby allowing the technology convergence to be calculated on every module. As a result, the MM Method enables us to dissect and assess the technology convergence more precisely.  The number of scientific sectors to which robot technologies are applied has also been increasing. Until the early 1980s, the number of scientific sectors covered by research papers in robotics was fewer than 10, but this number also started increasing in the 1980s and has been expanding steadily. In the 2010s, robotics research covers over 100 scientific sectors. Although the sectors related to robotics research have expanded considerably to include wide-ranging fields, the relationship and its linkages among the scientific sectors should be carefully studied. Major scientific sectors in robotics research are engineering, robotics, computer science, and automation & control systems. Medical sectors such as surgery, urology & nephrology, and neuroscience & neurology are emerging in robotics research, and have become major research fields in robotics research. The analysis was conducted on the sectors of Web of Science subject categories and research areas. Both of these classification schemes are journal-based and do not necessarily reflect the content of articles except that the article was published in a journal, which was assigned to a single scientific sector. In our analysis, approximately half of research papers are allocated to a single scientific sector as shown in This study was conducted to identify the extent of technology convergence in the fields of robotics research. The research framework is shown in This clustering process enabled us to identify the technology convergence more precisely than before and to examine the technology convergence and its transition in the field of robotics research. Overlapped sectors assigned to papers were factorized into a single sector, as described in Third, we created citation matrices based on technology similarity measurements such as Citation Rate, Cosine, and Jaccard ( Finally, based on the results, we analyzed the degree of technology convergence in the field of robotics research from the values of citation matrices, chronological trends of technology convergence in every category of clusters. First, research papers concerned with robotics are retrieved from the Web of Science (WoS) with the query of “robot OR robotics” as shown in Before applying citation network analysis to papers on robotics, it is necessary to eliminate papers that contain no citation from or to any other papers and only the data of the maximum connected component is used for the analysis. ( As a result, papers relating to robotics are categorized into clusters. The bibliographic records of the papers retrieved as described above were also collected from the WoS for the analysis. The network of cited and citing papers is then divided into clusters in which papers are densely connected by citations from papers. Networks in the same cluster are visualized in the same color, as shown in The clustering algorithm is based on modularity Q, which is defined as follows: In this way, 140 scientific sectors were extracted from papers on robotics. These sectors, however, are journal-based and do not necessarily reflect the sectors of research papers because some journals in which the research papers were published are assigned to multiple sectors. The results in Since research papers published in journals with a single-sector account for only 51.7% of papers, overlapped sectors would need to be divided into each single sector. We propose a new method to factorize an overlapped sector into a single sector by applying co-citation analysis in Major sectors include engineering, robotics, computer science, automation & control systems, surgery, and urology & nephrology, which account for over 60% of all robotics papers. Because the remaining sectors cover a very wide range of fields and are finely segmented, we categorized them into a few sectors such as other engineering sectors, other medical sectors, biotechnology, pure science, social science, and culture-related issues, as in The trends according to which sectors were expanding were studied in more detail by additionally utilizing the results of the citation network analysis in this section. As mentioned in the introduction, research papers form networks that represent the relationships among citations, which can be used to analyze the relationships among scientific sectors. According to the bibliographic information available on the WoS, each research paper belongs to either one or a few sectors. Cited and citing papers can be assumed to have similar research topics and to share common research knowledge. Rather than assigning sectors to papers, they were assigned to the journals in which these papers were published, as mentioned above. Thus, we need to estimate which sectors among the overlapped sectors are assigned to papers. We observed that papers were connected to one another with citation relations. In a citation analysis, a co-citation is defined as a relation of nodes that were co-cited by other common nodes. We have developed a new methodology to factorize the overlapped sectors into a single sector by applying this definition of co-citation. This factorizing method overcomes the issue of overlapped scientific sectors and enables us to calculate the technology convergence between individual sectors.  When n and m are the sums of the cited and citing number between As and Ss and between As and Ts respectively, the number of papers of As can be divided into Ss and Ts at the ratio of n:m. The citation number, n, m are used to calculate the co-citation numbers between Ss and Ts. These numbers should be distributed among the sectors such that the total sum of the numbers does not change. This formula can expand to any number of overlapped sectors as long as the overlapped sectors cited a sector or sectors that are included within overlapped sectors if the total sum of numbers remains the same. However, if papers with overlapped sectors have no citations within the overlapped sectors, this formula cannot be applied. In that case, papers with overlapped sectors were eliminated from the analysis.  Technology convergence has occurred through interdisciplinary or collaborative research and interaction processes among different scientific sectors. Under this premise, various measures have been used to assess the technology similarity or technology relatedness such as Cosine, Jaccard, Pearson's r, and raw frequency ( We used the Citation Rate defined in this paper, and Cosine and Jaccard that Klavans and Boyack defined in their analysis ( The measures are calculated as follows. First, each of the overlapped sectors was regarded as being independent from the others, and distributed to an adjacent matrix of directed citations. Then, the adjacent matrix was transformed into a matrix of This calculation was conducted for every five years, the same as the duration in  Robotics research papers can be divided into three large clusters: robotics fundamentals (Cluster #1), robot control systems (Cluster #2), and surgery & medical issues (Cluster #3), in the order of descending size. Cluster #3 is the youngest of the three clusters with an average year of publication of 2011.0. Additional clusters are human-robot interaction (Cluster #4, Average year: 2009.3), systems for agriculture, food, etc. (Cluster #5, Average year: 2002.4), automation in the biological & chemical industries (Cluster #6, Average year: 2002.8), and inspection (Cluster #7, Average year: 2010.5). Most of those after the third cluster cover research into robotics applications. Papers from Cluster #1 to #3 account for 79.6%, and those of Cluster #1 and #2 amount to 61.2%. The average years of publication of Cluster #5 and #6 are relatively older than the other major clusters. That shows that applications for agriculture, food, or chemistry were developed from the early stage of robot development, but did not become the main stream of robot development. Instead, surgery & medical issues (Cluster #3) has grown rapidly since the mid-1990s. Cluster #4 forms a group of research related to human-robot interaction, which includes rehabilitation, therapy, or education using robots, the social impact of robots, or the psychological influence on humans. Rehabilitation related research papers are also included in Cluster #2 as a robot application to utilize robots for a supporting or training means of rehabilitation. The number of papers on robotics research has been expanding as mentioned in Although Cluster #1 and #2 have grown steadily and the share of #1 and #2 reached almost 70% until 2000, it has declined gradually to less than 60%. Instead, the share of Cluster #3 has grown rapidly since the 1990s, as shown in  According to The lower part of As for cluster #3 (surgery & medical issues), the share of engineering decreased from 36.0% in 1991–1995 to 10.3% in 2011–2015. Instead, the total share of medical sectors increased from 61.8% in 1991–1995 to 87.2% in 2011–2015. This shows that most research papers on surgery & medical issues are concentrated in Cluster #3. The shares of papers on surgery, urology & nephrology, and in all medical sectors of Cluster #3 were 89.5%, 99.1%, and 69.3%, respectively. In SC6 was cited by and was citing SC4, SC5, SC7, and SC8 to the number of 404, 57, 149, and 34, respectively. The sum of these citations is 644. Thus, the 644 citations of SC6 should be distributed into SC4, SC5, SC7, and SC8 as a co-citation. As explained in Consequently, all citation values of SC6 are distributed into the other sectors on condition that the sum of citations of SC6 remains unchanged. These processes were continued until all of the sectors became a single sector.  The graphs in This is understood to mean that the factorizing overlapped sectors constitute the co-citation relations among the overlapped sectors. As a result, the relationships among these major sectors were intensified. This seemingly reflects that journals assigned to multiple sectors themselves accommodate or facilitate interdisciplinary and collaborative research. The results on the left in The values of Cosine measurement are more meaningful than those of Jaccard to some extent. According to the definition of Cosine measurement, the distribution of citations could affect the values of Cosine if the distribution of citations was diversified. Conversely, in some pairs of sectors such as the pair of cardiovascular system & cardiology and surgery, the pair of general & internal medicine and surgery, the pair of oncology and urology & nephrology, and the pair of general & internal medicine and urology & nephrology, the values of Cosine were greater than the average of Cosine where the values of Citation Rate were smaller than the average Citation Rate as shown in The network graphs in Because the Citation Rate, The values of the citation matrix represent the relationship among selected sectors and are regarded as technology relatedness or technology proximity. ( Most of the high-valued pairs of sectors in Clusters #1, #2, and #3 appear in the values of sectors found in all the papers as seen in Rehabilitation, neuroscience & neurology, and general & internal medicine in Cluster #2, and engineering, robotics, and computer science in Cluster #3 also form a complete graph with the degree of three. Surprisingly, surgery, urology & nephrology, oncology, general & internal medicine, and obstetrics & gynecology constitute a complete graph of five degrees for the years 2011 and 2015. In Cluster #3, surgery & medical issues, the medically related sectors, have strong ties with each other for the years 2011 and 2015, and some of the medical sectors such as surgery have begun developing connections with the engineering sectors. For example, surgery has had ties with engineering and robotics, and radiology, nuclear medicine & medical imaging has connected with engineering.   This indicates that, in the most recent decade, robots for rehabilitation have been researched and developed intensively. Since rehabilitation aims to recover, regain, or improve motility and nerve functions that have been lost or diminished, it is understandable that these sectors have converged into Cluster #2, robot control systems. As shown in  The results in There are some reasons why robots have not found application in the medical & healthcare markets as rapidly as expected. First, in the medical & healthcare sectors, machines or equipment need to comply with stringent safety regulations because they might endanger the lives of human beings. Second, even if technologies were able to solve these safety issues, private companies would refrain from developing new technologies in the case of high development costs and a small market size in addition to having to carry the risk posed to the lives of human beings. Third, academic researchers, company executives, and developers who are experts in robotics are not familiar with the needs and practices of the medical & healthcare sectors, and, conversely, experts in the medical & healthcare sectors do not have robotics expertise. In the medical & healthcare sectors, before considering the safety of machines or equipment and the market size and cost, it might be necessary to first address the third problem, namely the knowledge gap between robotics and medical & healthcare. Although robotics research in the medical & healthcare sectors accounts for a quarter of the total papers on robotics, our research found that a close relationship between the engineering sectors and medical & healthcare sectors did not always exist. This study succeeded in revealing the existence of technological gaps between robotics and medical research even though medical research based on robotics has been conducted intensively in recent decades. This fact may be one of the reasons for the much lower than anticipated growth in the market for robots in the medical sector in the subsequent decades. Therefore, measurement of the degree of technology convergence is meaningful and important to identify the obstacles and to determine ways to overcome these obstacles. We aimed to identify technology convergence in the field of robotics research by applying both citation network analysis and measurements of technology similarity to estimate technology convergence by the MM Method. The use of indicators after clustering makes it possible to identify the trends in technology convergence more precisely, and to extract the pairs of sectors in which technology convergence has occurred. However, detecting and forecasting emerging technology convergence only with the proposed methodology is insufficient. Our approach offers the possibility to not only extract the relationship among different scientific sectors but also to identify the structures and characteristics of convergence among different sectors in detail. The number of sectors has been increasing in the most recent decade. Only a handful of specific sectors, such as robotics, engineering, surgery, and rehabilitation, have had strong ties with one another, whereas other medical sectors have had almost no connections with engineering sectors although robotics research in the medical & healthcare sectors has increased strongly. As collaborative research in robotics encourages the implementation of new applications in medical & healthcare, both sides in different sectors should communicate and exchange their needs and problems. These results need to be reviewed by experts and we need to conduct a more in-depth study of research structures in the research field of robotics. For example, Cluster #2, robot control systems, was a typical research field for robotics until the early 2000s. However, since then, rehabilitation and neuroscience & neurology have become the core sectors according to the results in In NEDO, the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization, Japan has formed a committee to stimulate interdisciplinary technology convergence and cross-sector discussion among academia, government, and industry through the development of technology roadmaps ( We only used information from research papers on robotics obtained from WoS to study technology convergence in the fields of robotics research, and extracted the data with the query “robot OR robotics” from the titles and abstracts. We assumed that most of the research on robotics was extracted. On the other hand, papers unrelated to research on robotics might be included because these papers might not use the words “robot or robotics” as their research theme. However, it is supposed that a citation network would eliminate such papers or categorize them as minor clusters. The MM Method, which combines citation network analysis and the measurement of technology similarity, could be an effective method to identify the relationship among different sectors. However, commonly shared sectors tend to increase chronologically: the more converged sectors increase, the more difficult it is to study the detail of structures and characteristics because the relationship among sectors becomes more complicated. In this analysis, aggregated data were utilized and the data represented only the average trends of relationships among research papers. We need to focus on the individual bibliographic data of each paper. In addition, this study utilized only the research data from WoS and mainly data pertaining to the scientific sectors. This suggests that using other bibliographic data such as countries, authors' names, their affiliations, and their abstracts would enable us to obtain more precise results, and that we cannot estimate the extent to which research on robotics impacted the industrialization of robotics. An analysis of robotics research in the medical and healthcare sectors would have to include the PubMed database, which contains most of the medical and healthcare research resources. Based on the results presented in this paper, this research approach could extract the following important information: The combined use of categorizing by citation network analysis and measuring technology similarity, an approach we named the “MM Method,” made it possible to extract technology convergence more precisely and effectively. This methodology enables the identification of the characteristics of the relationships among different sectors and their structures. The Citation Rate, Convergence among the scientific sectors in the field of robotics research has been expanding throughout the years. In particular, the sectors of engineering, computer science, and medical & healthcare sectors such as surgery, neuroscience & neurology, and oncology collaborate with a broad range of scientific sectors. Despite the fact that the sectors of surgery and urology & nephrology have grown and accounted for approximately 10% in robotics research during the past five years, the convergence extracted by this analysis shows that the medical & healthcare sectors mainly converged within the medical & healthcare sectors and especially, the engineering sector and the surgery sector could facilitate convergence among different scientific sectors. Although rehabilitation is one of the medical sectors, research for rehabilitation in robotics was conducted and has developed differently from the other medical and healthcare sectors. The sectors of neuroscience & neurology and general & internal medicine have strong ties with the rehabilitation sector according to the results in Overlapped sectors assigned to journals can be divided into a single sector by factorizing which sector it was derived from by using co-citation analogy. This formula consists of linear algebra, and then matches the calculation of the matrix of citation network analysis. The formula can be applied to any subgroup of papers that are clustered from original papers. In this study, we only used information of research papers on robotics from WoS and analyzed aggregated data. These results are summarized data of papers during a certain period, i.e., every five years. Therefore, we would need to expand our study by focusing on individual papers and by using patent information of robotics as well. In order to identify the way in which individual papers have influenced technology convergence among different sectors, we would need to focus on the data that represent the characteristics of individual papers as a future study. We appreciate the advice received from Dr. Sasaki, Dr. Yamano, Dr. Ochi, and members of the Sakata & Mori Laboratory in regard to the analysis presented in this paper, including the use of the Academic Landscape System, and for useful suggestions and discussions that enabled us to complete this paper.