One of the most important characteristics of naturally fractured rocks for simulating the flow in the hydrocarbon reservoir is permeability. There are two major approaches in modeling fluid flow in fractured rocks: the discrete fracture network (DFN) model which is a special case of DFM models where fractures and matrix of rock mass are treated explicitly. DFN models consider the flow only in fracture pattern and neglect the rock matrix conductivity, and the dual porosity (DP)/dual fracture (DF) model. In the latter method two overlaid media are considered: rock matrix and fractures. In this study the permeability of 2D fractured and permeable rock matrix is calculated using a distinct element method when the rock matrix is modeled by Voronoi tessellations. Totally 860 models of the synthetic fracture networks were generated based on different fracture features with different fracture densities and aperture patterns and different sizes of Voronoi tessellations that exemplify different grain sizes in rock matrix and micro-apertures. According to the literature, this is the first case which such sensitivity analysis about the effect of geometrical parameters of fractures and grain patterns is considered which is the main objective of this research work. The results show a significant difference between calculated permeability of dual fracture models and discrete fracture network (DFN) models. Using all calculated models permeability, a practical equation is proposed that consists of different statistical and fractal characteristics of fracture patterns using multivariate regression analysis (MRA). High correlation coefficient value was emerged between different input parameters. Thus the principal component regression (PCR) was used to eliminate this problem.Understanding the accurate value of permebaility in different rock engineering projects is so important. Numerical simulation of flow processes in fractured rock masses is a formidable task due to the often complex geological and hydrological characteristics of such formations. The specific geometry and other characteristics of the fracture system are generally not known; therefore it is not possible to model individual fractures or matrix blocks explicitly. To circumvent this difficulty, double porosity models are often used ( The fractured permeable rocks modeling in numeric analysis could be divided into two major and separate steps: generation of discrete fracture network (DFN) and simulating the rock matrix. Firstly, in order to simulate the granular texture of rock matrix and correspond porosity of it, the Voronoi tessellation is used. Using universal distinct element code (UDEC) randomly sized polygonal blocks are used to generate the rock matrix. These tessellations previously used to simulate the propagation of cracks between blocks, but here the appropriate size of them considering the limitation of software are used to shape the matrix. The size distribution of Voronoi blocks can be more uniform by increasing the iteration number ( To generate the synthetic models and fracture networks required parameters were collected and classified from Sellafield site, United Kingdom. From each model 10 realizations have been made, in each of the realization only the fracture pattern is changed so the randomness could be involved within the simulation process that could be seen in A fully coupled mechanical-hydraulic fluid flow analysis can be performed through the fractures (macro and micro-fractures) of impermeable blocks by UDEC for both transient and steady state problems. The equivalent permeability tensor, The flow rate in the case of an edge–edge contact can be obtained by cubic law for flow in planar fractures which is calculated in UDEC as Generally after generation of models, hydraulic aperture values are assigned for each individual macro and micro-fracture, based on the original trace length, according to the cases of correlated or uncorrelated as defined above, and the mass continuity equations are then established at the fracture intersections for fluid flow between intersections. These equations are solved through an iterative scheme with respect to the prescribed boundary conditions. The result of this work and previous study by Namdari in 2012 have revealed that considering the permeability of matrix could increase the total permeability of dual fracture models compared to DFN models. Depending on the fracture–aperture pattern the total permeability of the dual fracture model is higher than the same DFN model. Overally, permeability in the dual fracture model is increased about 23%, 39% and 6.7% when aperture and trace length are correlated, aperture and trace length are independently altering and aperture is uniformly distributed compared to DFN models, respectively ( (1) Permeability: according to the literature, when there are enough number of fractures (conductance) in a domain, it can be considered as a continuum medium ( Fractal dimension of the intersection point calculated by the Matlab code that works based on the logic of the box counting method. Multivariate regression is a model with one dependent and many independent variables. The main assumption of multivariate linear regression is that the response variable is a linear function of the model parameters. The general form of the multivariate linear regression models is as follows: It should be noted that the least square method works well under some circumstances and poorly in the others. The main assumption is that the dependent variable ( The Box–Cox transformation is one of the methods that can fit the distribution of a data set to a normal distribution ( In multivariate analysis, the least-square method is generally adopted in fitting a multiple linear regression model. But estimation of the least-squares is sometimes far from being perfect because of some violation in prior assumption. Eq. In Eq. The correlation coefficient matrix between variables ( Several techniques have been proposed for detecting multicollinearity. The tolerance and variance inflation factor (VIF) are widely used for detection collinearity between variables. The tolerance is defined as If a strong multicollinearity is appeared, statistical techniques can be result in biased estimators which are unreliable. There are many statistical procedures that were proposed to deal with this problem. Among these methods the principal component regression (PCR) is one of the most common methods ( A PCA is a method of transforming the original input variables into new and uncorrelated variables and also they became independent of each other (orthogonal) ( The PCR method can be summarized into following steps, first, performing the ordinary linear regression to reveal whether the independent variables have multicollinearity or not. Next, the principal component analysis should be done with standardized variables in order to transform the correlated variable into uncorrelated and orthogonal components. Then the regression equation is set up with a set of uncorrelated principal components in order to get the ‘best’ equation according to the maximum adjusted Finally equation of the model for the input variables shows Correlation coefficient between fitted and observed values ( Numerical modeling of dual porosity reservoirs is a complicated and time consuming process; therefore the closed form solution such as multivariate analysis can be helpful. Multivariate analysis is one of the methods that can include more parameters and capturing their influence compare to numerical methods. In this study first, the numerical modeling carried out to generate required data. Seven most important parameters on permeability of dual fracture models such as total flow channel area of macro-fractures, total projection length of the macro-fracture, fracture density mean area of grain size, micro-aperture and fractal dimension of intersection point of macro-fractures were calculated and the multiple linear regression models were fit to the parameters. In multiple linear regression analysis, when there is a phenomenon in which results differ from the fact, it will usually be suspected that there are multicollinearities among independent variables. Multicollinearity can be a serious problem in data analysis in which the contribution of each individual risk factor is being evaluated. The three methods that are commonly used for adjusting the regression coefficients for the effects of multicollinearity (Ridge regression, latent root and PCA), PCA is the only one which has a known distribution theory (