A new CO2 mineral sequestration process using the pH swing of a weak base–strong acid solution was proposed. In this process, an alkaline-earth metal was extracted selectively from silicate waste material, such as steelmaking slag or waste concrete, in an acidic condition using a weak base–strong acid solution. The reacted solution containing alkaline-earth metal ions and a weak-base, behaves as a CO2 absorbent. The acidic extraction solution was regenerated from the basic absorbent solution by precipitating the alkaline-earth metal with CO2 as the carbonate. The thermodynamic analysis of this process shows that a series of reactions proceeds spontaneously and the overall reaction is exothermic. The feasibility of the proposed process was confirmed using steelmaking slag as a silicate material and ammonium chloride solution as a weak base–strong acid solution. It was confirmed that this series of reaction proceeds successfully under mild conditions. Calcium ions were extracted selectively from steelmaking slag using an ammonium chloride solution, and the reacted solution absorbed CO2 followed by the precipitation of CaCO3 at 80°C. On the basis of these experimental analyses, the energy consumption of the proposed process was roughly estimated as 300kWh/ton-CO2.The increasing atmospheric concentration of CO In this paper, the feasibility of the proposed process for the industrial CO A pH swing reaction for the CO We propose a new process with a recyclable reaction solution, which is capable of swinging the pH of the solution spontaneously by extracting the alkaline-earth metal and precipitating the carbonate. The details of these reactions are described below. The process proposed in this paper consists of the following two steps (existing calcium is estimated from the amount of 2CaO·SiO  The advantages of the proposed process can be summarized as follows: CO Separation and fixation of CO Reuse and reduction of waste materials are possible. (A new treatment method for the waste materials.) The energy consumption involved in the CO In this study, converter slag was used as a calcium source, of which the particle size was smaller than 20 Calcium extraction experiments from steelmaking slag were performed as follows; 40 After the extraction of alkaline-earth metal, the change in morphology and chemical composition of the slag particle surface was analyzed with a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi Ltd., S-5000) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (EDX, HORIBA Ltd., EMAX-5770). Before analysis, the sample was embedded in epoxy-resin and cut with a diamond cutter, and then the piece was coated (Hitachi Ltd., E102) with conductive carbon. CO The cake was washed with distilled water and dried in an oven at 110 In this study, the calcium component in the steelmaking slag was selected as an alkaline-earth metal source. In Japan, the production of steelmaking slag (summation of Blast Furnace Slag and Steel Slag) is estimated to be approximately 39 million tons per year in 2005 First, the change in the conversion of extraction reaction versus reaction time was observed. The selectivity of the calcium extraction was 99% ( The conversion of the extraction reaction is strongly influenced by the particle size of the alkaline-earth metal source The solution obtained in the calcium extraction process reacted with CO CaCO Energy consumption of the proposed process was evaluated based on the assumption that this process was applied to the treatment of 100,000 The power consumptions for the Absorber and pumps were estimated from the existing plant capacity, estimating the scale factor=0.7. The power consumption in the crushing process was estimated using Bond's equation: The power consumptions for solid–liquid separation were estimated from the capacity and power consumption of existing equipment. The total power consumption was calculated by multiplying the power consumption of each unit equipment to the round out value of throughput/capacity. The heat duty for the solution was calculated as follows: the solution was cooled because of the evaporation of water in the CO Taking into account these values, the total energy consumption in this process is roughly estimated to be 300 A new CO This work was supported by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), Japan.