The evaluation of asbestos fibers by transmission electron microscopy requires that particulate be deposited on a filter and that the filter be prepared for analysis in a manner that retains the spatial characteristics of the particulate as it was deposited. Occasionally, the samples are prepared by redistributing the particulate onto a second filter. While numerous reports have described the effect of the redistribution of the particulate in terms of the number of particles or the resulting size of particles, no study has attempted to model the effect of redistribution. The effect of this redistribution on particle size is evaluated here and is described using standard comminution models. The proposed model is shown to reasonably fit the observed data.The microscopic evaluation of environmental asbestos fibers is a multi-step process requiring the deposition of particulate on a filter, preparation of the filter for analysis, and analysis of the prepared material. The particulate, whether airborne or surface dust, is collected by pulling air, using a vacuum pump, through either a polycarbonate or mixed cellulose ester filter. The preferred sample preparation procedure is to transfer the collected particles from the filter to a carbon film in a manner that preserves the size and spatial arrangement of the collected particles (termed “direct” preparation). The carbon film is then inserted into the microscope for analysis. Direct preparation, the preferred procedure for exposure assessment, was the procedure used for determining asbestos exposure in cohort health risk investigations A number of circumstances can occur that causes a sample to be collected that is overloaded with particulate. This may either prevent an acceptable particle transfer to the carbon film or the prepared sample may contain so many particles that the fibers of interest are obscured or otherwise hidden, thus potentially biasing the analysis. When this occurs, the samples are sometimes prepared using an intermediate step where the collected particles are suspended in water, agitated using an ultrasonic bath to disperse the particles, an aliquot transferred to a new filter, and the new filter prepared for analysis. This procedure is referred to as “indirect” preparation. The use of these intermediate steps has been examined by several investigators Other investigators Following the catastrophic collapse of the World Trade Center (WTC) towers on September 11, 2001, extensive sampling was performed in and around an adjacent, damaged commercial building to determine the scope and degree of asbestos contamination resulting from the catastrophic collapses. Samples of airborne asbestos fibers have been collected from various locations both inside and outside the building. The collected particulate is unique compared to airborne asbestos particulate usually observed in building atmospheres. In normal buildings, the asbestos fibers are often free fibers but include some that are bound in particles together with cement or other binding matrix materials (often of a non-respirable size). When this bound material breaks apart, large clumps and bundles of asbestos are liberated from the matrix material Early empirical breakage models showed that energy input and size reduction are related With the assumption that stressing and fracture of any particle occur almost independently of any other particle, breakage of particles of a given narrow size range will give a mean set of fragments irrespective of the number of particles under consideration. Let Particle breakage may be assumed to be normalized, which “means that all of the particles break into a fragment distribution with dimensional similarity, that is, the weight fraction of product less than, say, 1 The In this functional form, the three parameters (gamma, beta, phi) are said to be characteristic of the material being fractured, however, testing has also shown that these parameters are generally insensitive to the varying conditions of comminution One extension of the breakage model is to create a transformation matrix that relates the number distribution of length in the direct and indirect samples. Such a transformation matrix would be: Air samples were collected between March 2002 and October 2003 (approximately six months to two years following the collapse of the WTC towers) while surveys were conducted at the building to determine the extent of contamination by particulate from the WTC and while the clean-up of the WTC site was undertaken. The building air ventilation system was not operational; a portion of the building had been damaged and was open to the outside air. The samples were collected on mixed cellulose ester filters and prepared in general accordance with direct preparation methodologies The sampling cassettes were carefully opened after first removing the plugs. A portion of the filter was excised, attached to a clean glass slide, and transferred to a covered Petri dish containing a few milliliters of acetone absorbed in filter paper to partially collapse the filter media. The remainder of the filter was archived. The collapsed sample strip was next transferred to a carbon evaporator unit which had a rotating table. A carbon film of about 40 nm was evaporated onto the rotating sample strips. Because the filter material itself is too dense for an electron beam to penetrate during analysis, the filter material was carefully dissolved, depositing the carbon film onto an electron microscope grid. A portion of the carbon coated filter was excised and placed onto an electron microscope grid. The filter and grid were placed in a solvent washer where slow washing with solvent vapor dissolved the filter by a wicking action, leaving the particulate entrapped in the carbon film on the electron microscope grid. Multiple grid preparations were made for each sample and then dried and stored in a secure place until analysis. Portions of the samples were also prepared using a modified indirect preparation procedure described by Yamate et al. All samples were analyzed in the transmission electron microscope in general accordance with AHERA The model used in this study is based on the distribution of the mass of the particles. The mass of the particles was inferred using the volumes for each fiber, assuming each fiber is a right cylinder. The fiber data were divided into four classes, based on preparation procedure (direct, indirect) and sample location (indoor, outdoor). For each group, the cumulative volume distribution (and hence, the mass distribution) was determined at regular size intervals ( The usual procedure for determining breakage parameters is to use a very narrow size range of starting material, fracture it, determine the resulting distribution, and calculate the The initial estimates of the three parameters were taken from those reported in Austin et al. Confidence intervals ( All of the asbestos fibers observed during these analyses were chrysotile fibers which typically have minimum fiber diameters of around 0.02 to 0.05 μm The effect of sonication is illustrated by a comparison of the median lengths of the chrysotile for the direct and indirectly prepared samples (2 and 0.43 μm, respectively) and the 99th percentile of fiber length (24.3 and 10 μm).   The above calculations show that the volume distribution resulting from indirect preparation of samples can be explained as a fracture of the original particles. The breakage parameters are similar to other published values, suggesting that chrysotile, when subjected to the indirect preparation procedures, will fracture and behave in a similar manner to other minerals. These results are applicable to single fibers which would not be subject to issues of liberation from matrices and with little contribution from bundles of fibers. Olson et al. This model was developed using WTC particulate which is characterized by asbestos fibers that have been liberated from any embedding matrices. As such, the model is applicable to the WTC situation. However, the theory and procedures shown in this study can be used in other situations dependent upon validation testing at the new test site. The finding of few bundles and matrices in the air samples at this building differs from previously reported data The model used in these calculations does not include a time dependent parameter as other breakage models may use. Parameters that may be time dependent (ashing and sonication) were held constant in this study. It is known that longer sonication times will produce shorter fibers The fibers evaluated for these models all have, as a minimum, a 5 It is apparent in the width distribution that there is a step function at widths below about 0.1 μm. While this is, in part, reflective of the capability to measure widths at the magnifications used for analysis, it also reflects base unit dimensions of the fibers. There is a minimum dimension to the width that does not reflect a truncation due to the analytical procedure, but due to the way the fibers were formed. Chrysotile has been described as having fibril widths of about 0.02 μm. The steps shown in the width graph are unit multiples of this minimum width. Above 0.1, while still being multiples of the minimum width, this “unit multiples” is smoothed due to the packing of the particles into bundles of fibers. Though this model was developed using chrysotile asbestos, other regulated asbestos minerals will behave in a similar manner This testing has shown the necessity of analyzing worker exposure samples using a direct preparation procedure. As shown in this work, indirect preparation reduces the size of asbestos fibers, potentially biasing results by breaking fibers that are used for risk estimation (generally those longer than 5 μm, wider than 0.25 μm, and with a minimum aspect ratio of 3 This issue has also been especially critical for the interpretation of the number of asbestos fibers found on surfaces. The asbestos, deposited in some manner on a surface, is vacuumed or wiped off the surface and is subjected to the indirect preparation. Several values have been suggested A breakage model describing the effect of indirect preparation on environmental asbestos fibers was developed. For single chrysotile fibers, the data showed the fibers to be larger when comparing directly prepared samples with those that undergo an indirect preparation procedure. The model suggests that chrysotile behaves in a manner similar to other minerals when fractured by external forces, consistent with existing fracture mechanic theory. The model also provides a basis for making a reasonable estimate of potential exposure by estimating the direct structure count from an indirect preparation, in circumstances where the original fiber distribution and the effect of indirect preparation have been characterized. The sample collection and underlying analysis to produce the data used in this study were paid for by Taunnus Corp. as part of their evaluation of property damaged resulting from the September 11, 2001 event.