Biofuel is considered a promising alternative to traditional liquid transportation fuels. The large-scale substitution of biofuel can greatly enhance global energy security and mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. One major concern of the broad adoption of biofuel is the intensive energy consumption in biofuel manufacturing. This paper focuses on the energy efficiency improvement of biofuel feedstock preprocessing, a major process of cellulosic biofuel manufacturing. An improved scheme of the feedstock preprocessing considering work-in-process particle separation is introduced to reduce energy waste and improve energy efficiency. A scheduling model based on the improved scheme is also developed to identify an optimal production schedule that can minimize the energy consumption of the feedstock preprocessing under production target constraint. A numerical case study is used to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The research outcome is expected to improve the energy efficiency and enhance the environmental sustainability of biomass feedstock preprocessing.The energy crisis is one of the most serious threats challenging the sustainable development of human society due to the intricacies of energy issue itself and the associated climate issue. Reported in the 2014 World Energy Outlook, the world energy demand is projected to increase by 37% by 2040 Renewable energy, defined as the energy that comes from the resources which are naturally replenished on a human timescale Biofuel is generally made by converting biomass such as corn stover, sorghum stalks, big bluestem, and wheat straw into bioethanol or biodiesel through the different processes in biofuel manufacturing system. As shown in The biochemical conversion consists of acid pretreatment, enzymatic hydrolysis, and fermentation Various studies on biofuel manufacturing have been conducted. For the feedstock preprocessing, the relationships between energy consumption and particle properties under different comminution configurations (e.g., biomass types, machine types, and machine operating conditions) have been analyzed These studies have facilitated considerable technological advancement in biofuel manufacturing, however, the challenge regarding the intensive energy consumption in the manufacturing process does still exist, which greatly impedes the even wider substitution for the traditional liquid transportation fuel. It is estimated that 1.13 MJ fossil energy is used for producing 1 MJ corn-derived ethanol, among which more than 60% of the energy is consumed in the manufacturing process A more detailed scheme of the existing feedstock preprocessing can be illustrated by the upper part of The corresponding evolution of the particle size can be illustrated by the lower part of The major limitation of the aforementioned feedstock preprocessing is that there is no work-in-process particle separation after the stage I grinding based on different particle sizes. All the particles after stage I grinding are stored in the same work-in-process storage To address the aforementioned limitations and improve the energy efficiency of the feedstock preprocessing, an improved feedstock preprocessing scheme that incorporates the work-in-process particle separation after the stage I grinding is proposed. Two different dryer configurations for both coarse particles and fine particles are considered based on the separated work-in-process particles after the stage I grinding. Optimal production scheduling model based on this improved feedstock preprocessing scheme is also developed to minimize the total energy consumption under the throughput constraint. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section The proposed feedstock preprocessing scheme with the work-in-process particle separation after the stage I grinding is shown in the upper part of Considering the scheme demonstrated in We first model the particle size evolution as follow. The evolution of particle size distribution over time can be represented by differential equation as shown in Before we further derive the evolution of particle size distribution in different processes utilizing the aforementioned theory, we need to make an important assumption as follows: the particles in each work-in-process storage are well-mixed, and thus the size distribution of any batch of the particles selected from the storage is identical to the size distribution of all the particles in the storage at a given time point. Note that this assumption is also applied to the raw materials stored in the source ( Let Let Let For the dryer, it may have two drying modes, i.e., drying coarse particles and drying fine particles. In the interval when mode switch happens, the incoming particles scheduled to be dried cannot enter the dryer until the remaining particles that are scheduled in the previous interval are emptied out. Let Considering this empty out time Let The constraints are formulated as follows: Capacity constraint of each work-in-process storage Minimum duration of a specific drying mode It states that the dryer should spend at least Input material selection for the milling machines in the stage II grinding It states that machine Throughput constraint This scheduling model is formulated as an MIP. Commercial software packages are mature and convenient for this type of formulation. CPLEX A biomass feedstock preprocessing system with three grinders in the stage I grinding, one rotary dryer, and ten milling machines in the stage II grinding as shown in The particles are categorized into 6 ranges (>0.75 inch, 0.50–0.75 inch, 0.25–0.50 inch, 0.16–0.25 inch, 0.08–0.16 inch, <0.08 inch). The raw materials that will be used by grinders of the stage I grinding are assumed to be in the first range, i.e., Three scenarios are considered in this case. Scenario 1 represents a baseline situation, whose material flow is represented by CPLEX is used to solve the proposed formulation with the above given parameters on a desktop with Intel(R) Core As we can see from As mentioned in Section In this paper, an improved biomass feedstock preprocessing scheme considering the particle separation after the stage I grinding is proposed. The optimal production scheduling model based on the proposed scheme is also developed using mixed integer programming formulation to minimize the energy consumption of feedstock preprocessing without sacrificing production throughput. The identified optimal schedule can significantly reduce the energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions compared to the baseline model. Future extensions of this work could be the dynamic scheduling of the feedstock preprocessing considering random market demand and the integration of the feedstock preprocessing with biochemical conversion process to further enhance the energy efficiency and environmental sustainability of the biomass manufacturing. This work is supported by the