Bioactive ceramics developed during the past few decades have interesting properties from the biological standpoint, but their effects on cellular events remain partially unknown. In the current work, we investigated cellular viability, proliferation, morphology changes and metabolic activity of rat primary culture osteoblasts in contact with the ionic products from the dissolution of a bioactive glass with 60% of silica (BG60S) and a biphasic calcium phosphate (BCP). We observed that although osteoblasts cultured with BG60S showed vacuole formation, cell viability was increased when compared to BCP and control. The vacuole formation was not due to the presence of high calcium concentration in the ionic products from the dissolution of BG60S and was not related to nitric oxide production from the osteoblasts. We did find that high silicon concentration could induce cellular vacuole formation. Additionally, energy dispersive spectroscopy analysis indicated that vacuole contained 75% more silicon than other regions in the cell outside the vacuole. We further found that collagen production was higher in osteoblast cultured in the presence of BG60S compared to BCP and control, while alkaline phosphatase production was similar among cells incubated with BG60S, BCP and control. Together, our results indicate that osteoblast vacuole formation was due to high silicon contents in the dissolution of BG60S and we can suggest that despite the vacuole formation, there is no significant alteration in the bioceramic cell interaction.Bioactive ceramics have been developed over the last decades and the accomplishments in the field of biomaterial applications have attracted wide attention. The development of bioceramics has provided promising alternatives to healing, replacing or augmenting parts of the skeletal system. There are many principles that may be observed when testing a specific bioceramic. It may not be toxic or immunogenic, may allow or induce neoformation of the surrounding tissues and it should not inhibit the re-establishment of the normal function Two types of bioactive ceramics were used in the present study. A bioactive glass with 60% of silica BG60S and a biphasic calcium phosphate BCP. The composition of BG60S (in weight%): silica 60%, calcium 35%, phosphate 5%. The composition of BCP: calcium 67%, phosphate 33%. The bioceramics were used in an approximately particles size of 38 Osteoblasts were isolated from the calvaria of 1–5 days old neonatal Wistar rats Bioceramic were suspended in culture medium RPMI (0.5 Osteoblasts were plated 1×10 After 72 The alkaline phosphatase production was evaluated by BCIP-NBT assay. This assay is based on a chromagenic reaction initiated by the cleavage of the phosphate group of BCIP by alkaline phosphatase present in the cells. This reaction produces a proton which reduces NBT to an insoluble purple precipitate. Briefly, the supernatant of each well was removed and the cell layer was rinsed twice with PBS. Then, 200 Osteoblast nitric oxide production was indirectly measured by supernatant nitrite quantification, since it is one of two primary stable and nonvolatile breakdown products of NO. We used Griess assay, which relies on a diazotization reaction among 1% sulfanilamide, 0.1% naphhthylene diamine in 2.5% phosphoric acid and nitrite. This reaction forms a chromophore. A volume of 50 The osteoblast collagen production was analyzed by SIRCOL assay in the cultures supernatant and complemented with the analysis described by Tullberg Stainless metal plates of 1 To investigate the vacuole characteristics, Mytotracker (500 Calcium concentration in the culture medium and in the medium containing ionic products from bioceramics dissolution was measured by atomic absorption spectrometry using the AAnalist-300 analyzer (PerkinElmer, Boston, USA) and the standard addition method. ICP-AES was performed using a Spectroflame-ICP analyzer (Spectrocompany, UK) to quantify calcium, phosphorus and silicon in the culture medium and in the medium containing ionic products from BG60S dissolution. All results are expressed as means±SD for the numbers of experiments indicated unless stated otherwise. The statistical significance was measured by ANOVA and Bonferroni's post-test. We observed that osteoblast proliferation was 35% higher in the presence of ionic products from the dissolution of BG60S, when compared to control and to osteoblasts in the presence of ionic products from the dissolution of BCP ( Considering that nitric oxide plays an important role in the first stages of bone mineralization, the supernatant of our cultures were analyzed to measure NO production by the osteoblasts. Our data showed higher NO production in the medium containing ionic products from BG60S even without cells ( The medium containing ionic products from BG60S dissolution was analyzed by ionic coupled plasma method and we found that besides calcium, silicon ions were present in a significant amount, 8 times more than control medium ( To investigate the vacuole characteristics we used fluorescent selective probes to label and track organelles, search for calcium containing compartments, and check for apoptotic cells. The Mitotracker and Lysotracker probes showed that vacuole were neither hypertrophic mitochondria nor lysosomes ( To investigate if vacuole formation prevented or interfered with the collagen production, we quantified the secreted collagen in the supernatant of the cultures ( Osteoblasts are the basic structural and functional units in bone growth and metabolism Silicic acid release is also known to enhance the collagen type I production We observed osteoblast vacuole formation in the presence of BG60S. Vacuole is an intracellular structure delimited by a membrane We concluded that osteoblasts in the presence of ionic products from BG60S dissolution show high proliferation and collagen secretion when compared to control and BCP. This increased activity may be related to silicon contents of BG60S dissolution. The cell vacuolization observed, has no correlation to cell death and needs further investigation to a better understanding of the involved mechanisms.