The dynamic mechanical properties of the cemented tailings composites (CTC) is one of the major technical challenges in the mining engineering field. In this paper, the Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) impact loading and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) system were conducted to investigate the average strain rate (ASR) rate on the dynamic compressive strength (DCS), microstructure fractal dimension and failure pattern of the CTC specimens. The result shows that the DCS of the CTC increased exponentially with the increase of ASR value when the ASR was in the range of 10–100 s−1. The main hydrate productions of CTC are C-S-H and AFt. The pore size of CTC increased with increased ASR. The fractal dimension of the pore area increased linearly with increased ASR. According to the above results, it provides a reference for engineers of mine sites to reduce the blasting impact load utilizing discontinuous charging and differential detonation, thus achieving the goal of reducing the dilution rate of underground mining.Ore blocks were separated from the orebody using rock drilling and blasting during underground mining. With the vigorous development of China's metal mines, high-production capacity, large-scale stope structural parameters were applied in the underground metal mining. There are many metal mining methods available such as blocking caving, sublevel stoping, room and pillar mining, cut and fill stoping for excavating ore reserves from underground To date, lots of researches on cemented tailings backfill (CTB) or cemented paste backfill (CPB) have focused on its static properties, including rheology, uniaxial compression, triaxial compression, Brazilian split test, and three-point bending test It can be found that the above researches on CTC mainly focuses on its static characteristics, but the research on its dynamic properties is still rare. In this paper, a total of two solid density (SD) values (70 wt% and 75 wt%), three cement-to-tailings ratio (c/t) values (1:4, 1:6 and 1:8) and three curing time (CT) values (28 days, 56 days and 90 days) were selected as main variables. The SHPB experimental system was used to investigate the dynamical properties of CTC specimens, the microstructure of CTC was obtained utilizing the SEM system. The study results can enrich the research field of the dynamic properties of CTC. The gold mill tailings materials were derived from Shandong, China. The chemical composition of the tested tailings was listed in In this study, the Ordinary 32.5 R cement was used as a binder. The chemical composition was analyzed using the Supermini200 XRF testing system and listed in In this test, the solid density (SD) was set as 70 wt% and 75 wt%, the cement-to-tailings ratio (c/t) was 1:4, 1:6 and 1:8, and the CT was 28, 56 and 90 days. The tailings, cement and water were mixed for at least 5 min. The CTC specimens were shown in In this study, the cylindrical molds were used to prepare the CTC specimens, which were 50 mm in diameter and 25 mm in height. The CTC slurry was poured into these cylindrical molds and then the prepared specimens were placed into a curing box having a temperature of 25 ± 1 °C and humidity of 92 ± 5% for curing according to the standard ASTM-C192 and ASTM-C39 The SHPB dynamic testing system (as shown in The diameter of the incident rod and the transmission rod is 50 mm. The lengths of the incident bar, transmitted bar and absorbing bar were 3.0 m, 3.0 m and 0.5 m, respectively. The materials of bars and strikers were 35CrMn steel, and its density was 7800 kg/m Generally, the SHPB testing system has been widely used to investigate the dynamic mechanical characteristics of concrete or cement-based materials  As shown in  It can be found that the DCS of the CTC specimens with the SD of 70 wt% and 75 wt% gradually increases with the increase of the ASR. CTC, as a type of multicomponent material, shows similar characteristics with concrete, rock and ceramics materials To analyze to relations between DCS and ASR, dynamic mechanical data from Han  Generally, the SEM system is one of the important means to obtain the microscopic characteristics of rock and concrete materials The above findings have found that the DCS of the CTC increases with the ASR increases. Moreover, as the ASR increases, the shorter the time acting on the tested CTC specimen, the less the pores inside the CTC do not have sufficient time to close, which proves why the larger the ASR, the larger the pore size.   In this study, a series of laboratory test, including Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) impact loading and microstructural characteristics tests were conducted to obtain the average strain rate (ASR) rate on the dynamic compressive strength (DCS), microstructure fractal dimension and failure pattern of CTC. The main conclusions are shown as follows: The DCS of the CTC increased exponentially with the increase of ASR value when the ASR was in the range of 10–100 s The microstructural analysis shows that the main hydrate productions are C-S-H and AFt. The main shapes of C-S-H and AFt were flat, clustered particles. The pore size of CTC increased with increased ASR. Besides, the fractal dimension of the pore area increased linearly with increased ASR. This study shows that reducing the impact loading can effectively reduce the damage of the CTC. Besides, the engineers of the mine site can reduce the blasting impact load by means of discontinuous charging and differential detonation, thus achieving the goal of reducing the dilution rate of underground mining.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the