In this study, the cementation of copper ions on iron and zinc as sacrificial metals in a fluidized bed configuration was carried out. A preliminary hydrodynamic study checked the non-segregating behaviour of iron/zinc mixtures during fluidization experiments. The efficiency of the mixtures in copper recovery has been estimated in terms of kinetic and apparent mass transfer coefficients according to operating parameter modifications. The influence of temperature on the kinetics revealed a mass transfer limitation of the reaction, with an activation energy of 19.6kJmol−1. Maximum apparent mass transfer (13.6·10−5
                     ms−1) was obtained for a 1.5pH solution due to the presence of hydrogen bubbles that increase local mass transfer. Acid and sacrificial metal consumptions revealed an over-consumption of zinc compared to iron due to copper catalysed hydrogen evolution. The influence of initial copper concentration in the 50–1000ppm range shows that kinetic and mass transfer dependence is due to modifications of the copper deposit morphology.The spontaneous reduction of a metal ion contained in a liquid phase onto a more electronegative solid metal, known as cementation, has recently gained a renewed interest for its application to surface modification ( Although the literature abounds in peculiar hydrodynamic devices to carry out cementation reaction in a mass transfer study analysis: e.g. axial jet ( As cementation systems like the copper/iron or copper/zinc are known to be generally governed by mass transfer ( This work examines the influence of operating parameters, including hydrodynamic bed behaviour, temperature, pH, initial concentration of copper and iron and zinc mass proportion. It also examines the effect of electromagnetic field on the copper recovery by cementation with a mixture composed of iron and zinc shots in various fractions. This study builds on preliminary results obtained with a rotating disc electrode configuration ( The experimental device is presented in Copper solutions were made from copper sulfate pentahydrate (Fluka purity Before each cementation experiment and to ensure the reproducibility of the findings, particles were washed firstly with acetone for degreasing then tap water and finally sulfuric acid solution (0.05 To determine dissolved metal concentrations, solution samples (10 Iron, zinc and copper solid samples were withdrawn and observed by a LEO Stereoscan 440 scanning electron microscope; photographs and X-ray diffraction images were obtained. Apparent mass transfer coefficients were evaluated from experimental cementation kinetics and hydrodynamic flow modelling in the loop ( The hydrodynamic characterisation of beds composed of WS780, zinc particles or a mixture (50/50) was undertaken. It consisted of measuring pressure drop through the porous bed and observing their behaviour according flowrate as shown in Experimental and empirical minimum fluidisation velocities (calculated according to Kozeny and Burke Plummer constants of materials, according to an Ergun type law, Richardson–Zaki expansion coefficients. The main results are presented in Temperature is a key parameter in determining reaction rates and mechanisms, so cementation was performed at different temperatures: 20, 30 and 40 These values correspond with the results from the RDE configuration. This confirms that the reactions on an admixture bed are mass transfer limited in agreement with the results obtained by other researchers on the same couples ( Iron and zinc electrochemical couples are more electronegative than the copper and hydronium ion redox couples. Therefore, copper cementation onto iron and/or zinc substrate in an acid medium competes with an acid dissolution of the sacrificial metal. Oxidation by dissolved oxygen is also a competing reaction, for the same reason, but is limited by the oxygen supply. Those undesired reactions produce either molecular hydrogen or water and result in an over-consumption of iron and zinc. In the case of hydrogen evolution, the gas generated may have two opposite effects (  The undesirable proton reduction (or to a lesser extent dissolved oxygen reduction) results in an over-consumption of sacrificial metal compared to the cementation reaction stoichiometry which can be expressed as: In this situation it is impossible to differentiate the over-consumed zinc from the over-consumed iron since the only available amount is the sum of the two elements. However, it is possible to compare time dependence of the amount of over-consumed metal as a function of pH, as given in Due to the presence of zinc in the mixture bed, the amount of over-consumed zinc One of the main purposes of cementation in mixture bed is to provide iron with a cathodic protection via zinc. The realised galvanic coupling is intended to prevent iron from acidic attack and copper cementation and thus dissolution. If we look at iron transformation rate after 80 The first hypothesis couldn't be validated by SEM observations and X-ray diffraction images of the elements, no iron trace having been detected on zinc surface. On the contrary, zinc has been detected on the surface of the iron particles. Galvanic coupling could occur in the bed as zinc and steel particles enter into contact. However, this phenomenon, which has been studied previously on a rotating disc electrode, only plays a minor role ( Therefore, the use of a mixed bed does not seem to offer any particular advantages compared to single component bed. In fact the amount of over-consumed zinc increases. Nevertheless, the presence of zinc lessens acid attack on iron shot preserving the amount of the ferromagnetic iron material in the reactors designed for magnetic stabilization. Cementation experiments were carried with initial copper concentrations ranging from 50 to 1000 The mass fraction, X, of ferromagnetic material in the bed was another parameter tested. Apparent mass transfer coefficients presented in The use of a constant transverse electromagnetic field induces bed stabilization and creates a Magnetically Stabilized Fluidized Bed (MSFB) ( The growth of cathodic area results in visible bed clogging, consequent porosity decrease, and surface roughness augmentation phenomena which increases the pressure drop through the bed during the experiments for both single component and mixed beds ( The iron and zinc concentrations as a function of time for a mixture (50/50) bed under electromagnetic fields also differ from no field experiment results, as can be noticed in Mass transfer coefficients in porous media are generally represented by semi-empirical correlations such as: According to the Chilton–Colburn heat and mass transfer analogy ( Estimations of the copper ion diffusion coefficient and solution viscosity were carried out experimentally in order to obtain values related to our system. But comparison with other experimental works was not carried out due to different Reynolds number values, doubts on physical parameters and the correctness of the calculation. Due to our small Reynolds range and low number of experimental points, it was not possible to propose a new correlation adapted to the studied system. However, one can notice higher Chilton–Colburn factor, In this paper, attention was focused on copper cementation on admixture of zinc and iron as sacrificial metals, carried out in a semi-industrial prototype fluidized bed reactor (200 Mixtures of zinc and iron particles lead to non-segregating beds, as their physical properties are close, and can be utilised in magnetically stabilized fluidized beds. The use of zinc in cementation experiments increases copper recovery kinetics and hence apparent mass transfer coefficient due to hydrogen bubble evolution. In fact zinc metal appears to be the main site of hydrogen evolution and reduces the iron corrosion by hydronium ion. Copper deposit morphology which is modified by such factors as pH and copper concentration appears to be a crucial factor influencing overall recovery kinetics. Magnetically stabilized beds composed of iron and zinc prove to be usable and intensify copper recovery, provided consideration is given to the flowrate limitation according to electromagnetic field and magnetic particle mass fraction.  standard potential of the M/M cross section of the reactor (0.006 mass transfer coefficient (−) diffusion coefficient (m particle diameter (m) magnetic field intensity (A.m mass transfer coefficient (m.s initial bed height (cm) cemented copper (mol) iron amount in solution (mol) overconsumed zinc and iron amount (mol) zinc amount in solution (mol) minimum fluidization flowrate (L flowrate (L solution temperature (°C) superficial fluid velocity (=Q minimum fluidization velocity (=Q reactionnal volume (m ferromagnetic particle mass fraction (−) Reynolds number exponent in empirical mass transfer correlations (−) Schmidt number exponent in empirical mass transfer correlations (−) initial bed porosity (−) dynamic viscosity (Pa kinematic viscosity (m density (kg  Chilton–Colburn factor (−) modified Chilton–Colburn factor (−) Particle Reynolds number (−) modified Reynolds number (−) modified Reynolds number (−) Schmidt number (−) Sherwood number (−)