The conventional soft solder used in soldering electronic joints is made up of 63% Sn and 37% Pb. It has been established that Pb is harmful to the body. Therefore, there is an on-going research to find a replacement for Pb. AlZnSn alloy is considered here as a possible replacement for soft solder of Sn and Pb. Three compositions of the alloy (Al7Zn3Sn, Al10Zn5Sn, and Al13Zn7Sn) were sintered at the sintering temperatures of 300 °C and 350 °C (and the constant pressure of 40 MPa, time of 5 mins, a heating rate of 20 °C/mins). Temperature/displacement/time variation data during the sintering were collected. The three alloys were compared after sintering by checking their microstructure, their densities, their hardness, their porosity, and their tensile strengths. Results showed that Al13Zn7Sn sintered at 350 °C, 40 MPa, 5 mins, 20 °C/mins had the highest densification of 99.7%, the lowest porosity of 0.3%, least hardness and strength of 450.34 MPa and 147.84 MPa respectively. The data could be used to determine the response of the alloy being consolidated to the increase in temperature over time. It could be used to study the displacement (change in shape) of the samples over time when heat is applied. The data would help in predicting the best sample suitable to replace Pb solder based on their response to an increase in temperature and shape. The hardness/porosity data would help to determine the samples that are soft for replacing Pb solder yet having low porosity (absence of voids and impurities). The data in The experiment was designed as follows: Three sets of samples were planned; Al Aluminium (Al) of 45 μm particle size, 98.5% purity; Zinc (Zn) 60–100 μm particle size, 98% purity and Tin (Sn) of 60 μm particle size, 98.9% purity powders were used in this work to produce alloys of Al Consolidation method was SPS. Raw powders of Al, Zn and Sn were weighed out as required to produce 20 mm diameter Al The authors do hereby acknowledge The following is the transparency document related to this article: Transparency document associated with this article can be found in the online version at