Experimental laboratory work on leaching of low-grade wolframite concentrate has shown that the dissolution of tungsten with a high extraction (90%) can only be reached after mechanical treatment of the studied wolframite concentrate, following oxidative leaching at 170°C in an autoclave in the presence of oxygen partial pressure of 10 bar. The effects of grinding time, temperature, sodium hydroxide concentration and oxygen partial pressure on the oxidation rate as well as the kinetics of the leaching process have been determined.Tungsten is a metal of many superlatives. It has the highest melting point of all elements except carbon where it varies between 3.387°C and 4.422°C for tungsten. Tungsten is also among the heaviest of metals. Its electrical conductivity at 0°C is about 28% of that of silver, which has the highest conductivity of all metals. Tungsten is an essential commodity whose unusual properties make an important contribution, through its use in cemented carbide and high speed steel tools, to the achievement of high productivity levels in metal and wood working, construction, mining and wear protection, on which the world's economic well-being depends. Other applications include chemical uses, mainly in the form of catalysts Treatment and processing of tungsten ores involves sintering with sodium carbonate or hydroxide, which is carried out at 850–1000°C and 500°C, respectively. The acids (HCl, H Mechanical activation involving intensive grinding, which produces changes in the physico-chemical properties of the solid, is applied in the treatment of sulphide ores. Several investigations have documented the positive influence of mechanical activation on the rate of leaching of Cu ores and for processing sulphides containing precious metals Tungsten deposits are known in the Eastern Desert of Egypt and occur in association with basement rocks. The Igla deposit covers an area of 2.9 km The apparatus and techniques used in the present investigation have been described elsewhere Temperature: 125–200°C Sodium hydroxide concentration: 0.1–0.9 M Oxygen partial pressure: 5–20 bar. The dependence of the extraction of tungsten on grinding time is presented in The rate of tungsten extraction was studied over the temperature range of 125–200°C (for sample ground for 3 h). The results shown in The reaction of wolframite concentrate with sodium hydroxide in the presence of oxygen is given as follows: The leaching rate does not increase linearly with the concentration of NaOH above 0.3 M. The rate seems to be limited by the concentration of hydroxide adsorbed on the surface of wolframite. If wolframite reacts with hydroxides already adsorbed on the surface of the wolframite, then the rate of reaction at the surface of sphere of radius First-order dependence on  The surface reaction model was applied to determine the activation energy. The data presented in The activation energy was determined to be 34 kJ/mol and the magnitude of this value confirms the proposed surface reaction control mechanism. The data of The results suggest that a method comprising mechanical pretreatment of low-grade wolframite concentrate from Igla area, South Eastern Desert, Egypt and its subsequent oxidative leaching at relatively low temperature (190°C) has advantages in comparison with traditional pyrometallurgical pyro-hydrometallurgical processing of wolframite concentrate. The leaching rate increases as the concentration of sodium hydroxide increases from 0.1 to 0.3 M and tends to level off as the concentration increases further. The leaching rate is controlled by the surface reaction which has an activation energy of 34 kJ/mol.