Kinetics of the dissolution of particulate polycrystalline MgO in excess of hydrochloric acid were investigated, with special regard to the effect of activity of H+ ions, temperature and particle size. The results are presented in terms of the shrinking particle model. The overall process is controlled by the chemical reaction of MgO with H+ ions at the liquid–solid interface. The apparent activation energy was 58kJmol−1. Acid concentration (from 0.5M to 5.1M) was surprisingly found to have a decelerating effect on the dissolution rate of MgO, resulting in negative values of reaction order for H+ ions (from −0.16 to −0.18). We conclude that the regime studied here, characterised by decrease in the dissolution rate of MgO with an increase in H+ activity, occurs under far from mass-transfer control conditions in the solutions with low Mg2+:H+ molar ratio.activity of H initial activity of H activity of H concentration of H initial concentration of H concentration of H diffusivity of HCl (m apparent activation energy (J pseudo-first-order reaction-rate constant defined by Eq. rate parameter in Eq. frequency factor in Eq. external mass transfer coefficient (m parameter defined by Eq. radius of the solid particle (m) mean mole mass of solid (kg reaction order for H number of leaching runs rate of reaction coefficient of correlation original radius of the solid particle (m) gas constant Reynolds number Schmidt number Sherwood number time of leaching (s) time necessary to attain a complete dissolution of the solid (s) temperature (K) fraction of solid dissolved temperature (°C) bulk density of the solid (kg dimensionless time of leaching Understanding the mechanisms of the chemical dissolution of oxides in acidic aqueous solutions is crucial for a wide variety of processes, including, for example, environmental and geochemical processes, hydrometallurgy, corrosion, catalysis and drug design. More reviews on this topic were published during last three decades Chemical dissolution of periclase (MgO), which, due to its simple structure, serves as a model (ionic) oxide, has been intensively studied. Generally, a very good correlation between experiment and theory was observed. The overall rate can be controlled by diffusion of liquid reactants/products or by the surface reaction, dependent on the reaction conditions This study aims to investigate the rate and mechanism of MgO dissolution using concentrated hydrochloric acid, particularly to analyse the difference between the phenomena observed independently by Segall and co-workers MgO is one of the few oxides that allow investigation of dissolution rate and mechanism at near-room temperature. This fact turned up to be crucial for application of various modern (and complementary) experimental techniques, from continuous kinetic measurements using a pH-meter Chemical dissolution of MgO in hydrochloric acid is a liquid–solid reaction in which no solid product is formed. Due to sintering, porosity of polycrystalline periclase is less than 5%, which makes the model of non-porous shrinking particle applicable to describe the dissolution of the particulate solid. The overall process may be controlled by intrinsic chemical reaction or by external mass transfer diffusion of H surface chemical reaction according to Eq. diffusion of liquid products of the reactions The surface chemical reaction In the first approximation, the periclase particles were considered to be spheres with original radius High-grade synthetic polycrystalline periclase HAMAG 99.5 produced from Slovak magnesites Dissolution of the samples of periclase was tested in a 1.1 When the HCl solution in the reactor had reached the required temperature, a small amount (0.5–1.0 The experiments were carried out under reaction conditions, which were: temperature from 40 The rate of MgO dissolution is very sensitive to the temperature. A typical situation is shown in The experiments showed that the rate of transfer of magnesium to the solution decreased with increase in HCl concentration—an example is shown in From In selected experiments, two to three consequent runs were carried out under identical reaction conditions, using the product solution from each run as a lixiviant in the following one. It was observed that the rate of dissolution of the magnesium was not affected by the products of reaction Dissolution of the periclase was tested under reaction conditions which were characterised by a relatively high excess of the acid, to eliminate possible effects of the changes in lixiviant composition during individual runs on the dissolution rate. In this study, HCl:MgO molar ratio ≥40 was used and the concentration of hydrochloric acid in the bulk aqueous phase was kept constant within 0.1–5% relatively during each run. The value of heat-transfer coefficient for the transfer of heat through the liquid film at the surface of solid particles being ≈2 Applicability of the non-porous shrinking particle model (NSPM) to the reaction system studied was checked using graphical analysis. The scatter diagram shown in When the values of The decrease in the rate of transfer of the magnesium to the solution observed when increasing HCl concentration (see Since the reaction-rate constant The values of model parameters were obtained by a multiple regression using Eq. In general, fractional reaction order for H The dependence of initial dissolution rates on pH is either zero or very slight (kinetic order on H Likewise, the anion concentration is not important. The dissolution rate is sensitive to the concentration of dissolved cation; values of Mg The early dissolution rates are not particularly sensitive to the nature of the anion or to the particular cation. The values of the reaction order Kinetics of the dissolution of sintered polycrystalline periclase in excess of hydrochloric acid were investigated. The results are presented in terms of the shrinking particle model. Several facts indicate that the dissolution is controlled by the chemical reaction of MgO with H The reaction-rate constant The value of apparent activation energy is relatively high, Fractional reaction order for H The negative value of This work was supported by the Slovak Grant Agency for Science (Grant 1/0393/03). We thank Dr. Gabriel Sučik for diffraction analyses and INTOCAST MAGNEZIT Hačava for supplying the materials.