In this study, concentration of celestite particles was investigated by using oil agglomeration. For this purpose, effects of operating parameters were investigated, and zeta potential measurements and Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometry (FTIR) analyses have also been carried out. In the experiments, effects of operating parameters such as pH, stirring speed, amount of Na oleate as a anionic type collector and kerosene as a bridging liquid, solid ratio, agglomeration time, collector stirring time, conditioning time, and amount of EDTA were investigated to obtain optimum conditions. Zeta potential measurements were carried out for various pH values and amounts of Na oleate. FTIR analyses were investigated to determine the adsorption type of Na oleate on celestite surface. By evaluation of the experimental results, optimum oil agglomeration conditions of celestite were determined as follows: pH 7, stirring speed 1500 rpm, amount of kerosene 100 l/t, amount of Na oleate 10 kg/t, solid ratio 5 wt%, conditioning time 5 min, collector stirring time 1 min, agglomeration time 5 min, and amount of EDTA 1.0 kg/t. In the optimum conditions, celestite was concentrated with recovery of 89.47 wt%.In mineral processing, fine and ultrafine particles are inevitable because of mechanized mining methods, comminution processes, and greater size reduction needed to liberate the minerals From these methods, oil agglomeration, which advantages due to the simplicity of the process and mineral beneficiation with high recovery, gains importance Considered from the physicochemical point of view, oil agglomeration is a kind of aggregation The principles of the application conditions of oil agglomeration have been investigated by various studies. Most oil agglomeration studies have been performed with naturally hydrophobic particles such as coal Celestite is the principal and most abundant source of strontium. Celestite is particularly used for production of strontium carbonate, nitrate, and hydroxide. In this study, agglomeration behavior of celestite has been investigated using a classic flotation reagent (Na oleate) and optimum agglomeration conditions have been determined. In this study, a celestite sample taken from Barit Maden Türk A.Ş. in Sivas, Turkey, was used. The sample was ground and sieved to <212 μm for oil agglomeration tests. The particle size distribution and the chemical analysis result of the ground sample are given in In the experiments, Na oleate (C The experiments were performed in a 400-ml beaker having four baffles at the border to create turbulence by using an IKA-WERK RW 20 type mechanical stirrer. The agitation was provided by a centrally located flat blade turbine impeller (consisting of four blades) at a fixed distance from the bottom of the vessel. The experimental setup is shown schematically in It was shown that gypsum (CaSO The zeta potential of the celestite samples, a measure of surface properties of minerals, was determined depending on pH values (in the absence and presence of Na oleate) and amount of Na oleate using a Rank Brothers electrophoresis apparatus MKII. The spectra of the celestite samples were obtained in the absence and presence of collector with a Shimadzu Model 8300 infrared spectrophotometer. All spectra were recorded between 4000 and 400 cm As is known, the agglomeration recovery or the extent of agglomeration depends on the surface properties of the particles and the nature of the agglomerant. The surface properties of the particles are controlled by the pH value of the aqueous medium. Therefore, the control of the pH values of the aqueous medium is primarily important. The effect of the pH values on the oil agglomeration recovery of celestite is given in As can be seen in As can be seen in It can also be shown in In literature, oleic acid and its soaps have ionized forms as R In the light of the above findings, the decreasing agglomeration recovery at high pH values (pH 11 and above) and low pH values (pH 4 and below) may be based on the high electrostatic repulsive forces between kerosene droplets and mineral particles. The effect of stirring speed on the agglomeration recovery of celestite is shown in As can be seen in The effect of amount of kerosene on celestite agglomeration is shown in As shown in The statements mentioned above are in good agreement with the results given in the literature The effect of amount of Na oleate on agglomeration recovery and zeta potential of celestite are given in It is shown in The decrease in recovery at lower amounts of Na oleate was based on insufficient hydrophobization of mineral surfaces. At higher amounts of Na oleate, the decrease in recovery was attributed to oleate anions, which started to become micelles. But, as can be seen in In addition, the zeta potential change of celestite depending on the Na oleate amount is given in The results of FTIR spectra of celestite are given in The peaks at 650, 991.3, and 1093.6 cm From these results, it can be concluded that oleate anions chemisorb on the celestite surface. The obtained results are in good agreement with the results of Martinez and Urbine The effect of solid ratio on the agglomeration recovery of celestite is given in From The effect of suspension conditioning time on agglomeration recovery of celestite is given in As can be seen in The effect of collector stirring time is shown in From The effect of agglomeration time on agglomeration recovery is shown in As can be seen in Celestite was agglomerated with 78.67 wt% recovery at optimum conditions. The agglomeration recovery was not high. EDTA (chelating agent, modifier) was used to increase the agglomeration recovery. The change of celestite agglomeration recovery depending on the amount of EDTA is shown in As can be seen in The increase in the agglomeration recovery at 1.0 kg/t EDTA can be attributed to the existence of chelation complexes of EDTA molecules with Ca The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: Naturally hydrophilic celestite can be agglomerated with Na oleate as an anionic type collector and kerosene as a bridging liquid. pH and amount of Na oleate are primarily important. The oleate adsorption on celestite surface increases the negative zeta potential value. The reaction between oleate anions and celestite is of chemical type. The optimum oil agglomeration conditions are as follows: pH 7, stirring speed 1500 rpm, amount of kerosene 100 l/t, amount of Na oleate 10 kg/t, solid ratio 5 wt%, suspension conditioning time 5 min, collector stirring time 1 min, and agglomeration time 5 min. Celestite was agglomerated with 78.67 wt% recovery under optimum conditions. The celestite recovery by agglomeration increased to 89.47 wt% when 1.0 kg/t EDTA used as a chelating agent (modifier). The authors acknowledge the financial support of this study provided by Cumhuriyet University Research Fund Unit.