Hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbon (a-SiC:H) films were deposited using pure SiH4 and C2H2 without hydrogen dilution by hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HW-CVD) technique. The compositional, optical, and structural properties of these films are systematically studied as a function of process pressure. The device quality a-SiC:H films with ∼55% carbon content were deposited at a deposition rate 0.5Å/s at low process pressure. However, a-SiC:H films deposited at higher process pressures show degradation in their structural and its network properties. The FTIR spectroscopic analysis has shown that there is a decrease in Si–C, Si–H and C–H bond densities at high process pressure. The hydrogen content (C
                     H) in the films was found to be ∼8 at.% over the entire range of process pressure studied. The band gap, however was found ∼ 2.5eV higher. High band gap at low hydrogen content has observed which may be due to presence of higher carbon incorporation. Raman spectroscopic analysis showed that structural disorder increases with increase in the process pressure.Hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbon alloy thin films are important for various applications like thin film solar cells, light emitting diodes (LEDs), radiation detectors, antifuse technology protective layers in xerography and creation of a biocompatible surface for biomedical application Absence of the deleterious electrons and ions and surface charges. High dissociation rate of source gases. The former relates to the avoiding of powder formation at high pressure and filament temperature and the latter leads to higher deposition rate We have made various attempts to optimally synthesize a-SiC:H layers with the desired optoelectronic properties, and we have been able to synthesize a working LED based on HWCVD deposited a-SiC: H layers. However the efficiencies of the devices are quite low. The primary concern in fabricating the high band gap a-SiC:H layers is the drastic increase in the defect density of the material with increasing carbon The films were deposited simultaneously on corning 7059 The optical band gap of the a-SiC:H films was deduced from transmittance and reflectance spectra of the films deposited on fused quartz and Corning 7059 Raman spectra of the samples were recorded by a Labram-1 (Dilor–Jobin Yvon–Spex make) spectrometer in a back scattering geometry with a spectral resolution of 2 In HW-CVD, the process pressure is an important deposition parameter because of high deposition rate and hence the film properties. If the process pressure is too high, the impingement of SiH   With increase in process pressure, the concentration of SiH The increase in process pressure increases the dwell time of the radicals. This increases the probability that the generated radicals reach the substrate surface and contribute to the film growth. One SiH To reveal the hydrogen bonding configuration and total hydrogen content in the film, FTIR spectroscopy was used. The FTIR spectra (normalized for thickness) of HW-CVD deposited a-SiC:H films at various process pressure (   The intensity of vibrational band centered near 476  The second order Si–Si TO modes appears at 980 Carbon network was observed as a broad peak from 1300 to 1600  An attempt has been made to ascertain the role of process pressure on optical and structural properties of a-SiC:H films deposited from SiH The author would like to thank Prof. Rajiv O. Dusane, Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science, IIT Bombay for allowing to use HWCVD facilities.