Samples of low-grade flotation concentrate derived from Platreef ore were treated with a two-stage heap leach process to determine the potential to run this process parallel to the convential concentrate–smelt–refine process for extracting platinum group metals, thereby adding value to the convential process via economic treatment of low-grade materials. Using bench-scale columns, a first stage bioleach achieved extractions of 91.1% Cu, 98.5% Ni and 83.5% Co in a space of 88days at a temperature of 65°C. Samples of residual concentrate from this process were similarly treated via columns in a second stage leach using cyanide solution, achieving extractions of up to 96.5% Pd, 97.5% Au and 35% Pt in a space of 45days at 50°C. Mineral liberation analysis of a sample of concentrate from the cyanide leach experiment revealed that the bulk of the remaining Pt was in the form of sperrylite which appeared to leach very slowly in cyanide solution. Further to this, analysis of the cyanide leachate solution showed high levels of thiocyanate.The mineralisation of the Platreef ore is unique and distinguishes it from its counter-parts, the Merensky and Upper Group 2 (UG2) ore bodies, which all lie in the Bushveld Igneous Complex in South Africa. The reef is essentially a base metal (BM) and palladium resource rather than a traditional platinum resource. The platinum group metals (PGMs) in Platreef ore occur largely as Pd and Pt bismuth-tellurides and arsenides, which are observed to be slow-floating in comparison to the PGM sulphides ( A recent study on a low-grade PGM concentrate derived from Western Platinum Ltd ( The same study ( This paper will investigate the application of sequential stage heap leach technology to low-grade Platreef concentrates. These concentrates may be primary concentrates (i.e., all the concentrate is processed using heap leach technology), or secondary low-grade concentrates (where a concentrator produces a high-grade concentrate for smelting and a low-grade concentrate for heap leaching). Part of the focus will be on the changes taking place in the mineralogy of the ore, throughout the process, and its impact on developing the process for commercial application. The test work was conducted using a batch sample of flotation concentrate derived from a mill–float–mill–float (MF2) recovery process on Platreef ore as a proxy material. Samples for the leaching tests, size analysis, mineral analysis and PGM and BM solid assays were obtained using a 2-way riffle splitter and various size rotary splitters, from this batch sample after it had been thoroughly mixed and homogenised. The ore concentrate was sized using wet screening showing that it was 83% passing 38 The analysis showed that the base metal sulphides were not well liberated, with chalcopyrite at 61%, pyrrhotite at 44% and pentlandite at 43%. Pyrite at 33% has the lowest liberation. Chalcopyrite was associated mostly with silicates and to a lesser extent with pentlandite and pyrrhotite. Pentlandite was associated mostly with silicate gangue. Pyrite was associated with pyrrhotite, silicate gangue and to a lesser extent pentlandite and other BMS, while pyrrhotite was associated with silicate gangue, pentlandite and chalcopyrite. Bornite tended to be locked with chalcopyrite and non-silicate gangue, while millerite was associated with pentlandite and silicate gangue. The minerals, sperrylite (PtAs The aim of this experiment was to determine the effectiveness of using a thermophilic bioleach process to extract copper and nickel from a Platreef concentrate prior to a cyanide leach for precious metals. A low-grade flotation concentrate was used in this first test as a proxy, due to its immediate availability and to obtain results in a shorter period of time than would be obtained with whole ore leaching and thus pre-determine optimal operating conditions. Columns used to simulate heap leaching in this experiment were identical to the ones used in the earlier mentioned study on low-grade PGM concentrate ( On completion of the experiments, the columns were emptied, and the concentrate was washed off from the granite with water and recovered by sieving and pressure filtration. The concentrate was further washed with water to remove residual acid and then dried. From the dry samples, sub-samples were obtained for fire assays, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and MLA analyses, while the bulk of the samples were used in subsequent cyanide leaching experiments to extract the precious metals. This test work was conducted to determine the effectiveness of using cyanide solution to leach PGMs from the residual material of a thermophilic bioleach process, following a high degree of extraction of the BMs. Two samples of residual concentrate from the bioleach experiments were made into a slurry, coated onto granite pebbles and packed in columns as before. They were leached with 0.1 This test work was undertaken to understand further the impact of BMs on a precious metal cyanide leach on the present material, and compare the results to the literature on the same subject matter. Three different types of concentrate samples, as listed below, were leached in 0.1 Sample 1: a sample of fresh, untreated concentrate Sample 2: a sample of residue from the bioleach process described above Sample 3: a sample pre-treated with an acidic mixture of 40 Amongst the four columns operated ( It must be noted that the extractions from Co-leaching of PGMs was also observed, with the lowest degree of co-leaching being experienced in the 65 It was observed that after 43–46 There was considerable dissolution of the gangue elements Mg, Al and Ca ( The concentrate samples used from the bioleach experiment were as follows—column A consisted of a blend of samples from columns 1 to 3. After sub-sampling for assays after the bioleach, the samples had to be blended to generate a sample big enough to run the column at full capacity. Column B used the residual material from column 4 alone, and as a result it ran at two-thirds capacity. Assays conducted on the two residual samples from the bioleach experiment, which were subsequently used in the follow-up cyanide leach experiment, showed the following grades as reflected in The rate and extent of Pd and gold (Au) extraction were high ( A sub-sample of 100 The presence of sulphur, at a level of up to 5000 Although the percentage extractions of the BMs appear low ( The dissolution of gangue elements was relatively insignificant, and did not impact the leaching of precious metals ( The percentage extractions achieved from the leach test are presented below. The extraction levels of gold are not diminished by the presence of the BMs. However, the removal of these elements during pre-leaching has had a positive influence on the extraction of Pt. At first glance it may seem that the pre-treatment used on sample 3 is superior to the bioleaching, resulting in substantially higher Pt and Pd extractions; but the fact is that the aggressive hot nitric/sulphuric acid pre-leach for sample 3 had reduced the PGM grade by as much as half. The actual amounts of Pt and Pd extracted from the two samples were more or less identical. A two-stage heap leach process in which a bioleach process is used to first extract BMs followed by a cyanide leach to extract precious metals is a potential method for further exploration to accompany the conventional method of processing PGMs (concentrate-smelt-BM leach–PGM leach), to achieve full value of the Platreef ore considered here. However the slow extraction rate of platinum and high cyanide consumption via formation of thiocyanate presents a hindrance to the successful commercialisation of the process. Significant portions of the Pt have been identified as slow-leaching minerals in cyanide, especially in comparison with the Au and Pd minerals. Additionally, the leaching pattern of the bulk of the Pt showed indications of either equilibrium saturation or cyanide depletion due to the prolonged recycling of solution in the test work, accompanied by a suspected preferential reaction of cyanide with unidentified sulphur compounds, resulting from incomplete sulphur oxidation in the first stage bioleach. The sponsorship of A shorter version of this paper was previously presented at the International Conference on Percolation Leaching: The Status Globally and in Southern Africa, 7–9 November 2011, Misty Hills, Muldersdrift, South Africa, with permission by SAIMM.