Surface active agents (surfactants) are widely used to control the interfacial properties of the gas–liquid and liquid–1 interfaces in the froth flotation separation process. The dynamic adsorption of the surfactants is critical to flotation which is a kinetics-controlled process. This paper examines the dynamic adsorption of sodium dodecylbenzene sulphonate and Dowfroth 250, which is a commercial mixture of polyglycols used to control the dispersion of air in flotation. The dynamic adsorption process was modelled based on either the diffusion-controlled or kinetics-controlled theories. The numerical computation was applied to solve the non-linear governing equations. The dynamic adsorption of the surfactants was measured in terms of the dynamic surface tension using the pendant drop method. Comparison between the theoretical results and experimental data shows that the kinetics-controlled model for the surfactant adsorption describes the experimental data better for both surfactant systems.Surfactants, including frothers and collectors, are widely used in flotation to improve the selectivity and recovery of valuable minerals. The presence of these surfactants influences the properties of both the air–water and solid–water interfaces, and ultimately determines the interaction between particles and bubbles in the collection process. For this reason it is important to understand how the surfactants adsorb onto the interfaces. For the gas–liquid interface, two standard models are used to describe the adsorption dynamics. Firstly, in the diffusion-controlled model the adsorption is governed solely by the surfactant diffusion from the bulk to the sub-surface layer. No account is taken for the dynamics of the actual adsorption of the surfactant molecules onto the interface, i.e., the process is assumed to be instantaneous. The second model, referred to as kinetics-controlled as it is sometimes called ( The purpose of this study is to apply both the diffusion-controlled and kinetics-controlled models to the adsorption of sodium dodecylbenzene sulphate and Dowfroth 250 onto the gas–liquid interface. The suitability of the models is investigated by measuring the dynamic surface tension as a function of time and comparing the results with model predictions. Furthermore, the data was used to determine the effective diffusion coefficient and again compared to the calculated values based on the Wilke–Chang estimation method ( The dynamic adsorption of surfactant at the gas–liquid interface changes the interfacial properties, which can be described in terms of the surface tension using the generalised (Frumkin) adsorption isotherm by The dynamic adsorption density obtained from the diffusion equation can be described by the celebrated Ward and Tordai equation by ( If the adsorption process is considered instantaneous, then the surface concentration is always in equilibrium with the subsurface concentration. The Frumkin adsorption isotherm gives If the adsorption is not instantaneous, then the local equilibrium is no longer valid. The generalised adsorption kinetics gives ( The numerical computation has to be applied to solve the governing Eqs. For the diffusion-controlled model, Eq. For the kinetics-controlled model, Eq. Eqs. The surfactants used for this study were sodium dodecylbenzene sulphonate (SDBS, an anionic collector) and Dowfroth 250 (a mixture of polyglycols used as a flotation frother), which was supplied by Dow Chemical (USA). All solutions were prepared with deionised Milli-Q water. The experimental setup is shown in A micro syringe was use to form a droplet with volume of approximately 11 Images of the droplets were taken at the frequency of 50 Images were analysed by fitting the drop profile with the Young–Laplace equation to obtain the surface tension value. The time difference between the first recorded image and the starting time ( The dynamic surface tension was measured for both Dowfroth 250 and SDBS in wide concentration range (up to the critical micelle concentration ∼1 For SDBS, the values for both In contrast to SDBS, the model predictions do not fit the Dowfroth 250 experimental data very well, especially in the case of high concentrations. The adsorption–desorption kinetics, which depends on molecular structure and orientation at the interface, differentiates the behaviour of SDBS and Dowfroth 250. As an ionic surfactant, SDBS molecules can be oriented quickly in favour of adsorption at the air–liquid interface, resulting in faster the adsorption kinetics. Therefore, the overall process is controlled by the diffusion step only. On the other hand, the adsorption process of Dowfroth 250 at the interface is much slower after the initially stage and hence the overall adsorption is controlled by both the diffusion and adsorption–desorption processes. Further investigation into the molecular structure and properties is required to explain the evident differences in adsorption dynamics (the change in surface tension and the equilibrium time) of different surfactants ( The dynamic adsorption of SDBS and Dowfroth 250 was experimentally studied in terms of the dynamic surface tension measured as a function of time using pendant drop method. The experimental setup allowed long surface lifetime measurement. Two numerical models for adsorption dynamics were used to predict the experimental data for both surfactants. The diffusion-controlled adsorption model satisfactorily described the experimental data for SDBS at low concentration without the need for a kinetic equation. The best-fitting value of diffusion coefficient is quite consistent with the predicted value based on diffusion theory. Consequently, SDBS can be modelled based on diffusion-controlled theory below the CMC (critical micelle concentration). On the other hand, the adsorption–desorption rate of Dowfroth 250 was evidently slow and significantly differentiated from prediction based on the diffusion-controlled theory. Consequently, Dowfroth 250 can be classified as a weakly diffusive surfactant and thus modelled by the diffusion-kinetics-controlled theory. Further investigation into molecular structure and interaction at the interface is required to quantity the adsorption–desorption rate constants and understand the kinetic of adsorption at the interface. The final outcome would be helpful in characterizing surfactants to improve flotation effectiveness. The authors acknowledge the Australia Research Council for financial support.