Management of spine fractures among the elderly is complicated by preexisting comorbidities and increased risk of osseous nonunion. Whether operative treatment is superior for the management of thoracolumbar fractures in the aged is unknown. The purpose of this study was to investigate the rates of in-hospital medical complications after non-operative and operative treatment of thoracolumbar fractures in elderly patients. The Nationwide Inpatient Sample database from 2002 to 2011 was used to identify patients over 75 years of age with a principal discharge diagnosis of thoracolumbar fracture without spinal cord injury. Three treatment groups were compared: non-operative treatment, operative treatment, and minimally-invasive vertebroplasty/kyphoplasty (VP/KP). A total of 59,565 patients were identified; 46,962 treated non-operatively, 1,487 treated operatively, and 11,116 treated with VP/KP. Operative patients had the longest length of hospital stay (P < 0.001) and the highest injury severity scores (P < 0.001). The percentage of patients who developed at least one complication was highest in the operative group (16.3%), versus 8.7% in the non-operative and 8.1% in the VP/KP group (P < 0.001). Even after controlling for potential confounders such as injury severity score, surgical patients had significantly higher odds of complication occurrence (P < 0.001). Adjusted charges were highest for operative patients ($123,777 ± 135,997 vs. $27,116 ± 32,694 [non-operative] and $42,326 ± 31,984 [VP/KP]). Operative treatment for elderly patients has higher complication rates that need to be considered during preoperative patient counseling. Future research is necessary to elucidate the comparative rates of long-term complications and functional status outcomes for thoracolumbar fracture treatment among elderly patients.Thoracolumbar fractures make up ninety percent of all spine fractures Although trauma is a common cause of thoracolumbar fracture in youth, elderly patients with comorbidities such as impaired cognition and osteoporosis can develop fractures from even short falls to the ground Given the myriad treatment options for adults with thoracolumbar fractures and the complicating factors among elderly surgical patients, the ideal management of these fractures among aged patients has not been determined. The Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) facilitates an assessment of in-hospital surgical and non-surgical treatment outcomes in large cohorts of elderly patients at hospitals nationwide. In this study, we sought to investigate the inpatient clinical outcomes of operative versus non-operative treatment of thoracolumbar fractures nationally in patients over 75 years of age. The Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS), a database created by the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP), provides data on inpatient stays in a cross-section of U.S. hospitals Patients with a primary diagnosis of thoracolumbar fracture without spinal cord injury were identified via use of ICD-9 codes 805.2 and 805.4. Patients younger than 75 years of age (n = 65,960), with an associated diagnosis of vertebral column tumor (n = 778), or pathological fracture (n = 1554) were excluded. The final analytic sample consisted of 59,565 patients. The injury severity score is based on ICD-9 codes and is commonly used in administrative databases. The score ranges from 1 to 75, with 75 representing patients with the most severe injuries. The sample was stratified based on treatment modality as non-operative, operative (spinal decompression and/or fusion) and vertebroplasty/kyphoplasty (VP/KP). Patient demographics and outcomes were compared between the three treatment groups. Continuous data were compared via analysis of variance and frequencies via the chi-squared test. All analyses were performed in Stata 12 SE (StataCorp, College Station, Texas) and statistical significance was defined as a p-value lower than 0.05. A total of 59,565 elderly patients with thoracolumbar fracture without spinal cord injury were identified; 46,962 treated non-operatively, 1487 treated operatively, and 11,116 treated with VP/KP. Baseline characteristics are compared in The percentage of patients with pre-treatment osteoporosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), renal failure and hypertension was highest in the VP/KP group ( Post-treatment outcomes are shown for each treatment group in After adjusting for patient age, sex, race, insurance status, osteoporosis, COPD, renal failure, hypertension, malnutrition, injury mechanism, and injury severity score, patients who underwent surgery had significantly higher odds of complication occurrence (OR 2.09; 95% CI, 1.77–2.46; Our analysis revealed that among elderly patients receiving treatment for thoracolumbar fractures, operative treatment resulted in significantly higher rates of in-hospital complications. In addition to an overall significantly higher rate of any complication development, operative patients had higher rates specifically of stroke, unplanned intubation, myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, shock, and ARDS. Operative patients also had the longest hospital stays and highest overall costs of care. Even after controlling for potential confounders such as injury severity, operative patients had higher odds of complication occurrence than non-operative or VP/KP patients. Identifying disparities in clinical outcomes among treatment groups can help inform discussions between clinicians and patients as they weigh the risks and benefits of each treatment. Elderly patients with thoracolumbar fractures demonstrated fewer overall complications with non-operative or VP/KP treatment. Importantly for our study, these patients did not have neurological deficit. Other studies have shown that operative treatment is often the primary choice for patients with neurological decline Long-term functional outcomes are not represented by these data. However, several studies have suggested that degree of kyphosis, pain ratings, and return to work rates were similar or improved at 1- and 2-year follow-up for nonoperative versus operative groups among adult patients There are limitations in the present study that should be considered. Many of these have been addressed in prior studies that use the NIS database The ideal treatment method for thoracolumbar fractures among elderly patients remains unknown. Results from the NIS database suggests that potential complications need to be considered as clinicians and patients consider operative treatment for these fractures. Overall complication rates were highest for operative patients when compared to non-operative or VP/KP treatment. In particular, rates of stroke, unplanned intubation, myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, shock, and ARDS were significantly higher in the operative group. Length of stay and total costs were highest in the operative group. While the choice of treatment will be informed by the individual patient presentation, our results suggest that clinicians should be in conversation with their patients about potential risks of operative treatment. Our results will also stimulate future research that explores the comparative rates of long-term complications and functional status outcomes for fracture treatment among elderly patients. The manuscript submitted does not contain information about medical device(s)/drug(s). No funds were received in support of this work. The authors have no conflicts of interest related to this work. General disclosures unrelated to the present work: Taylor E. Purvis: None. Rafael De la Garza Ramos: None. Eric W. Sankey: None. Isaac O. Karikari has a consulting relationship with NuVasive. C. Rory Goodwin has received grants from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, North Carolina Spine Society, and NIH/NINDS K12 NRCDP Physician Scientist Award. Daniel M. Sciubba has consulting relationships with DePuy Synthes, K2M, Medtronic, NuVasive, Stryker Spine. 