Although extensively studied, consensus on the kinetics or thermodynamics of iron oxide dissolution has not yet been achieved among scientists. The aim of this study was to investigate the applicability of twelve different kinetic models in describing the dissolution of hematite (α-Fe2O3). In this study, hematite was dissolved in 0.6mol/L oxalic acid at 50°C to obtain kinetic data for modeling. In addition to the kinetic data, thermodynamic data were collected at 35 and 50°C to discuss the dissolution mechanism. The Kabai equation and the first order rate law were found most suitable in describing the dissolution. The associated reaction rate constants were 2.0·10−5
                     s−1 for both models.The dissolution of iron,       The effect of temperature and acid concentration on the dissolution of magnetite has been investigated by The objective of this study was to investigate the suitability of different kinetic models, also those discussed earlier in this chapter, in describing the dissolution of hematite in oxalic acid. In addition, thermodynamic data was collected to discuss the mechanisms of dissolution. A solid synthetic hematite powder, provided by Sigma-Aldrich (Schnelldorf, Germany) in 97% purity, was initially characterized with laser diffraction (Beckmann Coulter LS 13320) to obtain a particle size distribution for the powder ( Solutions of 0.6 The dissolution experiments were conducted in a thermostated 1 The equilibrium data were collected in a similar way as the kinetic data but while initializing the experiments solids were added in excess to reach the equilibrium concentration, or solubility, without complete dissolution of the solids. Equilibrium data were collected at 35 and 50 The experimental error was estimated at roughly 2%. Quantifiable components included sampling and analysis errors. The models, summarized by  The physical background of the equations for dissolution, of which a summary is included here, has been extensively reviewed by Eq. Because the formation of an inhibiting product layer has been shown to be possible, the effect of the stirring rate was investigated. With insufficient mixing, the formation of a stagnant product layer is possible and can result in increased mass transfer resistance, possible precipitation of the reaction product, and subsequent inhibition of the dissolution. If sufficient mixing is induced the reaction product is effectively transferred into the bulk phase and does not inhibit the dissolution reaction. The effect of the stirrer speed was investigated by performing the dissolution under 400, 800, and 1000 Experiments done at 35 and 50 The pH of the system was in most cases below 1.00 which should eliminate the risk of formation of an inhibiting product layer, as the solid Fe oxalate has been shown not to be stable at such low pH. A constant decrease in pH was observed during the kinetic experiment until the system reached equilibrium where pH also reached a steady state. Observing a constantly decreasing pH in this study is contradictory to results of other authors ( In the thermodynamic experiments, a decrease in pH was observed in the early stages of the reaction, after which pH started to increase and reached a constant value at the end of the dissolution. The initial decrease was faster in 50 Complete dissolution was achieved in roughly 80 The suitability of 12 different kinetic models in describing the complete dissolution of hematite in 0.6 The research on the dissolution of hematite, and of other Fe oxides, has been extensive over the past decades. The aim of this study was to further investigate the dissolution of hematite with oxalic acid by conducting dissolution experiments in 0.6 With a fine solid powder, a stirring speed of 800 According to the experiments conducted here, increasing the temperature from 35 to 50 A decrease in pH was observed in the kinetic experiment. However, the behavior of the pH was not as straightforward when conducting thermodynamic experiments. A decrease was observed, similar to the kinetic experiment, but was followed by a steady increase of pH. The increase in pH could indicate the consumption of hydrogen ions in the dissolution process. The initial decrease of the pH lasted roughly 42 and 23 In comparing the kinetic models, the best fit was obtained with the Kabai equation. The suitability of the Kabai equation in describing the dissolution process and the identified sigmoidal behavior of the t–α curve further support the suggestion that the dissolution indeed proceeds through solid-state reduction of Fe(III), as both of these characteristics of dissolution can be related to autocatalytic reactions. In addition to the Kabai equation, good results were observed with the 1st order nucleation equation and the diffusion-controlled shrinking core model. Both the Kabai equation and the 1st order nucleation describe surface reactions and thus differ from the diffusion-controlled shrinking core model in their physical background. Based on this study, the reaction rate coefficient appears to be 2·10 Acknowledgments The