The particle size distribution (PSD) of impact crater ejecta is an important parameter that is useful for understanding the formation of natural craters, the distribution of space debris, the influence of impact events on climate and energy partitioning in impact events. 11 impact experiments into dry and water-saturated sandstone were performed and analyzed. The experiments span a range of impact velocities from 2.5 to 5.3kms−1 using projectile sizes from 2.5 to 12mm. Kinetic impact energies between 874 and 80,338J were achieved. Ejecta of these experiments was collected and the PSD was measured and quantified with power law fits. The resulting power law exponents lie between 2.54 and 2.74. Our results do not show an influence of impact energy or impact velocity on the PSD of impact ejecta. A significant increase in the PSD values was found from dry to water-saturated sandstone targets. We suggest that water saturation of the target has multiple effects on ejecta fragmentation. A comparison of our experimental data with data from the literature shows no correlation between the target material lithology and the ejecta PSD. Interestingly, literature data for disruption experiments revealed a strong influence imparted energy density on the D-values. PSD values were used to calculate the energy spent for target fragmentation and show that the fraction of impact energy used for comminution is in the lower single-digit percentage.The ejection of material during impacts is known as one of the fundamental processes of impact crater formation ( Furthermore we compared our results with the size distribution of asteroids ( By fragmentation of the target new fracture surfaces are developed. This process is endothermic due to the break-up of the chemical bonds during the creation of new fracture surfaces. Thus, the impact induced particle size distribution affects the amount of energy that is spent during fracture development and thus influences the energy partitioning during an impact. This energy is referred to as comminution energy. We used the particle size distribution as given in We used porous Seeberger Sandstein, Layer 3, from the Thuringian basin, Germany, as target material ( Projectile materials for the experiments were spheres ranging from 2.5 to 12 All experiments described here were conducted at the two-stage light-gas gun facilities ( In the water saturation parameter study (“A-series” exp. A5-5125, A11-5181, A12-5183, and A13-5182) 2.5 Ejecta catchers were installed in the target chamber to allow for an ejecta recovery as complete as possible ( One half of the frame was covered with degassed vaseline, 3–4 The other half of the frame was covered with panels of phenolic foam with a thickness 3.5 The ejecta catcher system was installed inside the target chamber parallel to the target surface at a distance of 28 Between 10% and 44% of the total ejecta was captured by the catcher system. The remaining material, particularly the large particle-size fraction including spall plates, was collected within the target chamber. This includes material that would not have been ejected from the crater in a vertical impact experiment. The analyzed material thus contains fragments that cannot be referred to as ejecta in sensu stricto. As this is only a small fraction of the analyzed material, we use the term ejecta for the total collected material. Evaluation of the experiments shows that the majority of particles was first ejected onto the ejecta catchers installed parallel to the target surface ( A part of the collected ejecta material was contaminated by projectile material, blast particles, and phenolic foam of the catcher. The projectile remnants were removed by magnetic separation (Frantz LB-1), and larger particles of phenolic foam were removed by hand. The removal of the finer phenolic foam particles (density of 1.1 The error for the mass of the different size bins is estimated at ±1–2%. The results give cumulative weight for grain sizes < Upon impact the kinetic energy of the projectile is transformed into (i) internal energy of projectile and (ii) the target, and residual kinetic energy of (iii) projectile and (iv) target. The relative proportions of these four components change rapidly during the contact and compression stage (see Fig. 5.5 in Integration of All results exhibit particle size distributions in excellent accordance with a power law distribution. The Impacts performed under the same conditions (A11-5181/A12-5183, E2-3383/E3-3384 and E1-3382/E4-3450) result in very similar particle size distributions. Their Four impact tests of the A-, D-, and E-series were conducted on dry Seeberger sandstone with similar impact velocities (4.6–5.1 The experiments of the D-serie were conducted to examine the effects of impact velocity. Therefore the impact velocity was increased from 2.5 to 3.5 and 4.6 The A-series experiments have been conducted to study the influence of pore space saturation on cratering mechanisms. For the effects of water saturation on crater growth see All fracture surface energies of the ejecta were calculated using the formula given as in The particle size distributions that were measured for all impact experiments are in excellent agreement with power law size distributions as given in Our experiments have shown that some of the experimental impact parameters seem to influence the Our analyses of impacts with very different impact energies have shown that no systematic change in Our impact velocity study showed that the impact velocity has a minor effect on ejecta PSD. The target saturation study has shown this parameter seems to increase the The first possibility to explain the higher A second possible explanation for the increase in The first aspect is a weakening of the clay minerals in the presence of water. This effect reduces the UCS of wet sandstone samples in axial compression tests compared to dry samples. A reduced strength of the clay minerals in turn would lead to higher stresses at the grain-to-grain contacts of the quartz grains. Water can thus facilitate the onset of fragmentation and may increase the The second aspect is that the presence of water might influence the fracture development on the micro to nanoscale. To investigate the effect of the target material on fragmentation we compared the A different pattern can be seen for targets that have undergone catastrophic disruption during impact. For the disruption experiments described in literature we see We suggest that the impact energy density imparted into the material is the reason for the fundamentally different The size distribution of asteroid families is believed to be controlled by the fragmentation history of their system (e.g. In good accordance with die size distribution of asteroid families are the size frequency distributions (SFD) of impact craters reported for planetary surfaces. The SFD of these craters is often characterized by a power law distribution, although this might be an oversimplification for craters over a large size range ( The fracture surface energies calculated for the ejecta of our impact experiments into sandstone are seemingly very sensitive to water saturation of the pore space. This might be connected to the higher A comparison of our results with other energy estimates for impact experiments yields conflicting results. To our knowledge the first attempt to determine energy partitioning in hypervelocity impact experiments was published by  The possibly largest impact experiment ever conducted was the Deep Impact mission impacting into the Comet 9P/Tempel 1 on July 4, 2005. Many ground based and in situ observations of this mission are presented in Science issue 310 (2005). The Comet Tempel 1 consists of a porous mixture of water- and CO A comparison of the energy partitioning with that of earthquake faulting as another high energy fragmentation process, shows, that for both processes the fragmentation energy seems to be in the lower single-digit percentage. To our knowledge the only study with fundamentally different results is by  Our results show that within in a range from 870 to 80,338 The impact velocity study has shown that there is a very small positive correlation between impact velocity and Increasing water saturation of the pore space has a positive effect on the Our calculated fracture surface energies are in good agreement with other impact experiments ( Our study indicates that only a fraction of a few percent or less of the kinetic impact energy is spent for comminution of the ejecta. We have planned to widen this investigation to the subsurface comminution in the future. The spectral study of ejecta from the Deep Space impact on Comet Tempel 1 by Comparison with literature data of earthquake energy partitioning showed that our results for comminution energy are in good agreement with most of these studies, suggesting that the energy dissipated in fracturing and grain comminution of impact and seismic events is comparable and in the order of 1–10% of the total energy. We want to thank Dr. Natasha Artemieva, and Dr. Erik Rybacki for their suggestions helping to improve this manuscript. We thank Tobias Hoerth and the technicians of the EMI for conducting the impact experiments, and the entire MEMIN team for their support. This project was funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Germany (