A first principle flotation model has been derived from the basic mechanisms involved in flotation. It consists of a set of analytical equations for various sub-processes such as bubble generation, bubble-particle collision, attachment, detachment, bubble coarsening, and froth phase recovery. A computer simulator based on the model can predict flotation from both hydrodynamic and surface chemistry parameters such as bubble size, particle size, energy dissipation rate, ζ-potentials, contact angles, etc. The model predictions are in good agreement with the flotation results obtained in both laboratory and pilot-scale tests. The model-based simulator can be used to design and diagnose flotation circuits. Typical input parameters include the size-by-class mineralogical composition of a feed, flotation cell characteristics, flow rates, and the types and dosages of reagents.Froth flotation is regarded the best available process for upgrading fine coal and mineral fines. Apart from a century of utilization in the minerals and coal industries, the technology is also used for bitumen extraction from oil sands, waste water treatment, and recycling. Flotation is a kinetic process involving 3-phases, The chemistry and hydrodynamic parameters may be linked to each other via the following relation ( In the present work, the flotation kinetics model derived for laminar flow conditions has been modified so that it can be used to predict flotation recoveries under turbulent flow conditions. The modification is based on the pioneering work of In principle, the bubble-particle interactions occurring in the pulp phase of a flotation cell should be considered a second-order process in that its rate should depend on the concentrations of both particles ( The probability of flotation ( In the present work, Substituting Eqs. From Eqs. In froth phase, liquid (water) drains, causing the lamella films between air bubbles to thin. When the film thickness ( The liquid drainage and drop-back mechanisms discussed above are also useful for removing the fine particles recovered to the froth phase due to hydraulic entrainment. In the present work, the froth phase recovery ( The first term represents the recovery due to bubble-particle attachment, while the second term represents the recovery due to entrainment ( Liquid drainage in froth phase is dominated by the drainage through Plateau borders (PBs), which is controlled by gravitational and capillary forces. One can readily derive a mathematical expression for bubble coarsening ( Using the geometrical relationship derived by In the present work, it is assumed that As is well known, bubbles coalescence when a lamella film thins to a critical rupture thickness ( Vrij developed the capillary wave model well before the role of hydrophobic force in foam films was recognized; therefore, the disjoining pressure term of Eq. Eqs. From the For a bank of In the present work, single-cell laboratory flotation tests have been conducted to verify the recoveries calculated using Eq. In addition, the model has been used to predict the size-by-class flotation rate constants ( The pulp zone of a flotation cell may be subdivided into two distinct energy dissipation zones, The bubble diameters ( The RMS velocity of the particles is calculated using the following relation ( For bubbles, the RMS velocity has been calculated using ( When a mineral particle collides with an air bubble in pulp phase, the TLF (or wetting film) formed between the two macroscopic surfaces thins initially due to the capillary pressure ( Disjoining pressure can be related to the changes in Gibbs free energy ( Integration of Eq.  The value of In the present work, the values of The probability of detachment may be calculated using the following relation ( Using the model equations presented in the foregoing section, a computer simulator has been developed based on the Microsoft Excel using Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) programming language. The Microsoft Excel was chosen as it is the most widely used spreadsheet software and gives much freedom and flexibility to the users unlike many other simulation platforms. Since the model equations have been derived from first principles (with the exception of modeling entrainment), the simulator has a predictive and diagnostic capabilities. The model parameters may be subdivided into surface chemistry and hydrodynamic parameters. The former includes contact angle (θ), Hamaker constants (A Closely controlled batch flotation tests were conducted on mono-size glass beads using a 1.2 For contact angle measurements, a clean and polished glass plate was conditioned in a collector solution for 2 In each flotation test, a known quantity (120     An important input parameter for the model predictions is the hydrophobic force constant (  The liberation data ( The data presented in The simulation results presented in One important parameter in flotation is the energy dissipation rate ( In order to demonstrate the importance of energy dissipation rate, two sets of simulations were conducted on rougher-scavenger-cleaner flotation circuits. In one circuit, all flotation cells are operated at The simulations were run on a copper ore from the Mount Lyell in Tasmania, from which chalcopyrite liberates in the 50–150 The simulation results are presented as recovery A flotation model has been developed to predict flotation from both surface chemistry and hydrodynamic parameters. The model predictions are close to the experimental results obtained in closely controlled laboratory flotation tests. It has been shown also that the model can predict flotation from the size-by-class mineral liberation data available for a flotation feed. Thus, the model may be used to design and diagnose flotation circuits on the basis of appropriate mineral liberation characteristics, operating parameters, and cell characteristics. The authors wish to express sincere appreciation to Prof. J.-P. Franzidis for making Dr. S. Welsby's Ph.D. thesis available for this work, Professors G. Jameson, D.W. Fuerstenau, and G.H. Luttrell for helpful discussions, and others who contributed. They also acknowledge the financial support from the