The influence of cold rolling to 50, 75 and 90% reduction on the age hardening behaviour of Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy has been investigated by hardness and tensile tests and optical as well as transmission electron microscopy. Hardness of Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy increased from 222Hv in solution treated condition to 416Hv with 90% cold work and peak aging. Cold deformation reduced the peak aging temperature from 450°C for the undeformed alloy to 400°C for cold deformed alloys. The yield strength (YS) and ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of the alloy with 90% cold work followed by peak aging at 400°C were found to be 1165 and 1248MPa, respectively. The microstructure of the deformed alloy exhibited elongated grains and deformation bands. The maximum strength on peak aging was obtained due to precipitation of ordered, metastable and coherent βl, Cu4Ti phase in addition to high dislocation density and deformation twins. Overageing of the alloy resulted in reduced hardness and strength due to the formation of incoherent and equilibrium β, Cu3Ti phase in the form of cellular structure. However, the morphology of the discontinuous precipitation was changed to globular shape with high deformation.The worldwide research acknowledged that binary Cu–Ti alloys could serve as a substitute for expensive and toxic Cu–Be–Co alloys. An extensive research was carried out by several researchers on the mechanisms of spinodal decomposition and precipitation strengthening in Cu–Ti alloys Our earlier studies Our recent studies on Cu–Ti alloys with 1 A Cu–Ti–Cr alloy was prepared with the aimed composition of 4 Flat tensile specimens were prepared as per the ASTM-E8M standards from the solution treated Thin slices were cut from the cold deformed and aged bulk samples using low speed ISOMET cutting machine and then mechanically polished to obtain 40–50  The effect of prior cold work on peak hardness of the ternary alloy before and after aging is shown in  The mechanical properties of cold deformed Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy peak aged at 400 The undeformed Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy has shown equiaxed fine grains in solution treated condition  Transmission electron microscopy studies were carried out on 50 and 90% deformed Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy to understand the structural changes during peak aging and overaging. A high density of deformation twins is revealed in BF and DF images of Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy ( Highly elongated grains with dislocation cells are revealed in the BF image of 90% deformed and peak aged Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy (400 The present investigation reveals that hardness of Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy is significantly improved by cold working in solution treated condition. The hardness was increased by about 40% when cold rolled to 90% reduction ( The presence of compositional modulations and β Hardness of Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy was improved by 87% reaching a maximum hardness of 416 The YS and UTS are increased significantly on peak aging the deformed alloy at 400 The precipitation hardening in addition to strain hardening plays main role in strengthening these deformed alloys. A coherent, ordered and metastable precipitate β The precipitation of fine coherent and metastable phase β Overaging of Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy is reflected in the decrease in hardness. Aging at 500 The deformed Cu–Ti–Cr alloy gets overaged with the formation of the incoherent and equilibrium precipitate of β Cu The conclusions drawn from the present investigation on age hardening behaviour of cold worked Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy are as follows: Substantial hardening occurred during aging of the deformed alloy at 400 The ductility decreased significantly in peak aged alloy due to prior cold work, reaching 2–3% elongation on 90% CW The aging got accelerated due to cold deformation and peak aging time decreased significantly to 1 At all the deformations, the predominant strengthening mechanism of age hardening is the precipitation of an ordered, metastable and coherent β The overaging in this alloy is associated with the formation of equilibrium phase of β, Cu The authors greatly acknowledge the Head, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, IT, BHU, Varanasi, for providing laboratory facilities. The authors are thankful to the Defence Research and Development Organization, New Delhi, for financial support. The authors thank Director, Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory Hyderabad for permission to publish this paper. One of the authors (R.M.) is thankful to Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad for granting leave under QIP.