This study investigated the links between variability in compost quality, the biochemical characteristics of their extracts (compost tea) and plant growth indicator through a series of experiments. Five different commercially produced composts were selected for quality evaluation. They were: (i) chicken manure-based thermophilic compost (ii) green waste thermophilic compost (iii) food waste vermicompost; (iv) chicken manure-based vermicompost (aged); and (v) chicken manure-based vermicompost (fresh). Compost teas were prepared from each compost using aerated extraction method with compost to water ratio of 1:10 (v:v), and were applied weekly for four weeks to pak choi (Brassica rapa cv Bonsai, Chinensis group) grown in a peat-perlite medium. The results demonstrated that compost quality generally impacted: (i) nutrient extraction efficiency (ii) microbial activity (iii) phytohormones and (iv) total nutrient content of the extracts. These differences in extract quality similarly impacted growth and mineral nutrient status of pak choi. Applications of compost tea increased growth and mineral nutrient content of pak choi. The responses were greater with aged chicken manure-based vermicompost tea, chicken manure-based thermophilic compost tea, and food waste vermicompost tea. The positive influence on plant growth was largely associated with mineral N and gibberellin (GA4) present in the teas. In vitro cultivation of pak choi with GA4 concentrations similar to those measured in the teas confirmed a direct positive effect of GA4 on growth. These findings suggest that either vermicompost or thermophilic compost can be used for the production of compost tea but the tea quality and its effect on plant may be predicted based on compost quality.Compost tea, a water-based extract, can be prepared using a wide range of composts. Characteristics influencing the biological, physical, and chemical properties of compost in turn impact the properties of the compost tea ( Research on the compost tea prepared from different sources of compost demonstrates the importance of feedstock. Differences in quality of vermicompost and thermophilic composts have been reported ( Compost maturity is another important characteristic contributing to compost tea quality. Mature composts generally release higher levels of soluble mineral nutrients and fewer phyto-toxic organic acids and heavy metals than immature materials ( Various experiments have indicated that applications of compost and vermicompost teas improve plant health, yield and nutritional quality ( The objectives of this study were (i) to evaluate the relationship between variability in compost quality and the quality of resultant extracts and (ii) to evaluate the relationships between biochemical properties of compost tea and growth of a model vegetable crop. Five different commercially produced composts that varied widely in feedstock and production methods were selected for quality evaluation. They were: (i) chicken manure-based thermophilic compost (ii) green waste thermophilic compost (iii) food waste vermicompost; (iv) aged chicken manure-based vermicompost (aged); and (v) chicken manure-based vermicompost (fresh). Briefly, chicken manure based thermophilic compost was prepared by composting layer manure and wood chips (approximately 5:1 by volume) for 6 months and cured for 3 months. Green waste thermophilic compost was prepared by composting landscape waste only. For food waste vermicompost, kitchen waste (green vegetables, egg shell, ground coffee, etc.) and cardboard (approximately 5:1 by volume) was composted with mixed culture of The pH and electrical conductivity (EC) of the composts were measured from a 1:1 (v:v) mixture of deionized water: compost, using a conductivity/pH meter (SB80PC, sympHony, VWR Scientific Products, MN). The volume of DI water used for making compost water solution for this measurement was determined by adjusting the moisture content of each compost. The pH and EC of the compost teas were measured using the same conductivity/pH Meter. Dissolved oxygen (DO) in compost tea was recorded at 21–22 Microbial activity of compost and compost tea was analyzed on 3 samples from each compost and compost tea. Tea samples were taken after 12 Microbial respiration rate in compost samples was measured with a portable soil respiration rate measuring system (LI-6400, LI-COR, Lincoln, NB, USA) fitted with a respiration chamber (6400-09, LI-COR, NB, USA). The respiration rate was expressed as μmol CO A number of phytohormones (e.g. abscisic acid (ABA) and ABA metabolites, cytokinins, auxins and gibberellins) in lyophilized compost tea samples were analyzed at the Plant Biotechnology Institute of the National Research Council of Canada (PBI-NRC Saskatoon, SK, Canada). Deuterated forms of the hormones that were used as internal standards were synthesized and prepared as described by Three greenhouse experiments were conducted between October 2009 and December 2010. Pak choi plants were grown in a peat-perlite medium fertilized with a chicken manure-based thermophilic compost to provide 150 Plants were harvested five weeks after emergence. Above ground fresh weight, dry weight, leaf area and height of each plant were measured. Total root length and root surface area of pak choi plants were calculated using WinRHIZO Pro V. 2003b system (Regent Instruments Inc., QC, Canada). The system consists of a scanner and WinRHIZO software. Root weights were taken when fresh and after oven drying at 70 Mineral nutrients in plant tissue were analyzed at the Agricultural Diagnostic Service Center, University of Hawaii at Manoa. Total C and N of dried tissue samples were analyzed by dry combustion as described earlier. Other nutrients in the tissue samples were measured after wet acid digestion using an inductively coupled plasma spectrophotometer (Jarrel-Ash Division/Fisher Scientific Co., Waltham, MA). Since GA Analysis of variance (ANOVA) of chemical and biological properties of compost and compost tea, plant growth parameters and mineral nutrients in plant tissue were performed using PROC GLM in SAS 9.1 statistical software. Means were separated using Tukey's HSD. Trend analysis via polynomial regression was conducted for the measured plant growth parameters between 0 and 3200 The type of compost had a significant effect ( Humic acid concentration was also significantly higher ( Food waste vermicompost had the highest levels of total N and NH Nutrient extraction efficiency, a measure of the percentage of nutrients in the source compost that is extracted in the compost tea was significantly affected by the type of compost ( Greater concentrations of NO Active microbial populations were significantly ( The active bacterial populations of compost teas were not affected by the type of compost used. Compost type did have a significant ( There was a significant ( The more active microbial population in vermicompost may be due to the intestinal contribution of earthworms. This result is supported further by greater dehydrogenase activity and microbial respiration in the vermicomposts. Significantly higher levels of dehydrogenase activity in vermicompost teas compared to thermophilic compost teas are attributed to greater active microbial populations in vermicomposts. Most of the phytohormones analyzed such as auxins, cytokinins and abscisic acid were not quantifiable or not detected in majority of the compost teas evaluated in this study. However, a small amount of abscisic acid and cytokinin-isopentenyladenosine (iPA) was detected in the extract of green waste thermophilic compost. Some of the gibberellins such as Gibberellin It has been established that several strains of Unlike many of the other phytohormones, microbial production of ABA has not been investigated extensively. However, Applications of compost tea significantly ( Applications of compost tea significantly ( Improved shoot and root growth and mineral nutrient content of pak choi with compost tea application in this study is consistent with previous studies ( Better growth observed on the plants treated with aged chicken manure-based vermicompost tea, chicken manure-based thermophilic compost tea and food waste vermicompost tea compared to the other teas could be explained by greater levels of mineral N present in these teas. Presence of GA The multiple regression analysis showed the effects of biochemical properties of compost tea on plant growth and tissue N. Above ground plant fresh and dry weights, leaf area, tissue N uptake, root dry weight, and total root length of pak choi were regressed on 5 major components of compost tea (active bacteria, active fungi, GA Mineral N had a greater effect (S Application of GA This study demonstrated that compost quality impacted: (i) nutrient extraction efficiency (ii) microbial activity (iii) phytohormones and (iv) total nutrient content of the extracts. These differences in extract quality in turn influenced growth and tissue mineral nutrient content of pak choi. The response was greater with aged chicken manure-based vermicompost tea, chicken manure-based thermophilic compost tea and food waste vermicompost tea. The positive influence on growth of pak choi was largely associated with mineral N and GA We would like to acknowledge Drs. Susan C. Miyasaka, Norman Arancon and Brent Sipes for internal review of the manuscript and Drs. Travis Idol and J.P. Bingham for granting us access to their laboratories. This research has been funded by