The electrochemistry behaviour of chalcopyrite electrodes was investigated by cyclic voltammetry. The results showed that the Cu–S intermediate species during electrochemical dissolution of chalcopyrite was mainly as Cu2S, CuxS (1<x<2) and CuS. The formation process of these species was analysed. It was shown that the oxidation of chalcopyrite can only produce CuS, but CuxS and Cu2S were mainly formed due to the reduction reaction of copper ion and sulphur. Furthermore, it was found that the addition of copper ion could greatly affect the formation of Cu–S intermediate species. Therefore, during bioleaching of chalcopyrite, the effect of different concentrations of copper ion on the bioleaching process was investigated. The results revealed that when the copper concentration was low, it was hard to form Cu–S species in the ore residue. However, as copper concentration increased, the formation of Cu–S intermediate species also increased and could be detected by X-ray diffraction.Chalcopyrite is the most important copper sulphide because it takes about 70% of copper resource in the world ( Bioleaching of chalcopyrite always involves the oxidation of elemental sulphur, iron and copper depending on the leaching parameters ( In the electrochemistry researches, cyclic voltammetry was often used to detect the intermediate species during dissolution of chalcopyrite ( Although the Cu–S intermediate species could be analysed successfully by cyclic voltammetry in this study, it was difficult to use normal XRD or EDX to detect these species during bioleaching process, which had two possible reasons: 1) the amounts of these species produced by bioleaching were small; 2) these species were very easy to be oxidised during bioleaching. However, in the electrochemistry experiment, The chalcopyrite used in the electrochemistry experiments was obtained from Yushui Copper Sulphide Mine in Meizhou, Guangdong, China. XRD analysis indicates that the ore sample contains about 98% chalcopyrite and 2% silicate. The chalcopyrite used in the bioleaching experiment was also obtained from Yushui Copper Sulphide Mine. This ore sample was a chalcopyrite concentrate, and the XRD analysis indicates that the sample mainly includes chalcopyrite (64%), pyrite (17%), galena (15%), and gangue (4%). This chalcopyrite concentrate had been used for culture moderate thermophiles for more than 2 The chalcopyrite electrodes were made by pure chalcopyrite. The pure chalcopyrite was cut with a work surface of approximately 0.2 For the electrochemistry experiment, a three-electrode system was used. The cell consisted of the chalcopyrite working electrode, a platinum counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The electrolyte used, modified 9 The mineral surface was characterised by SEM and EDX, which were performed on an FEI Quanta 400 field emission, environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) under high vacuum conditions. Secondary electron imaging was performed using beam energies of 15 Acid mine drainage (AMD) samples from several chalcopyrite mines in China were collected. The samples were mixed and then inoculated into the culture medium for enrichment of moderate thermophiles. This medium was modified 9 Bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate experiments was carried out in a 3 The reactor was placed in a thermostatic bath to keep the constant temperature at 48 The components of the mineral sample and ore residue were analysed by XRD. Copper and total iron concentrations in solution were determined by ICP-AES. Ferrous iron concentration in solution was assayed by titration with potassium dichromate. Ferric iron concentration is the concentration of total iron minus the concentration of ferrous irons. The redox potential (or Eh) was measured using a platinum electrode with an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Free cells in solution were observed and counted under an optical microscope. Cyclic voltammetry tests were performed to characterise the oxidation and reduction reactions during dissolution of chalcopyrite. However, Furthermore, At potential values more than 0.7 In the inverse scan, there was a series of reduction peaks which appeared especially from − When the potential value was lower than − While In the anodic scanning, peaks A1, A2 and A3 were reported not much during the dissolution of chalcopyrite, but always existed in the electrochemistry study of chalcocite and bornite ( While the reaction about peak A3 was relatively complicated, The difference of the electrochemical reactions associated to chalcopyrite dissolution process could be associated to the different oxidation states of copper (i.e. Cu The detailed oxidation process of chalcopyrite was not clear till now. But there were some reports recognised that the oxidation of chalcopyrite would remove iron and then became Cu  The potentiostatic experiment (0.45 The copper concentration in the electrolyte after the potentiostatic experiment performed for 60 It can be seen from It can be seen from It is reported that Cu In the experiment, in order to investigate the formation of intermediate species Cu When the addition of copper ion was 1 The results of electrochemistry experiment (  The ore residues after being bioleached for 10 As a result, it can be seen that during bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate the different concentrations of copper ion could affect the bioleaching process. When the copper concentration was relatively low, the reduction reaction in the bioleaching system was not obvious and Cu–S intermediate species were very difficult to be detected by XRD. However, when the copper concentration increased, the reduction reaction would be accelerated and the amount of reduction products increased. There were several intermediate species formed, but CuS and Cu However, in our previous studies and other author's reports, it was hard to detect Cu–S intermediate species in the ore residue by XRD during bioleaching of chalcopyrite. There were two possible reasons: 1) in the previous studies, the ore residue sample after bioleached was dried in the oven at 50–75 The analysis of the formation process of Cu–S intermediate species indicated that the oxidation of chalcopyrite can only produce CuS, but not Cu This work was supported by the