Treatment of complex distal humeral fractures in older patients with osteopenic bone remains a major surgical challenge. We report the results of 11 patients over 75 years of age who underwent semiconstrained sloppy-hinge total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) due to comminuted intraarticular fractures of the distal humerus. There were 9 women and 2 men with a mean age of 79.6 years. The mean duration of follow up was 2.8 years. According to AO classification, there were 8 type C3 and 3 type C2 fractures. The mean time from injury to operation was 4.3 days and the mean length of hospital stay was 9.8 days. The elbow flexion/extension and forearm pronation/supination arc of motion averaged 1070 and 1210 respectively. The mean Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) was 90 points, equivalent to excellent result. One patient sustained a periprosthetic humeral fracture and signs of non-progressive radiolucency were found in 8 out of the 11 elbows. Our search in the English and International literature revealed 9 other clinical studies describing the results of TEA in 167 patients with 168 distal humeral fractures. The mean age of patients varied from 69 to 84.6 years and the mean follow up from 17.8 months to 7 years. The mean MEPS among the studies was between 85 and 95 points. Wound infection was diagnosed in 9 cases (5.4%) but component removal and subsequent reimplantation was only applied in 3 elbows (1.8%). Partial ulnar nerve lesions were reported in 11 patients (6.5%) and reflex sympathetic dystrophy was developed in 5 patients (3%). In 3 elbows (1.8%) a periprosthetic fracture after a fall was recorded. Radiolucent lines between the cement mantle and bone interface were described in 24 cases (14.3%) but the majority of them (17 cases) were stable and asymptomatic. In conclusion, TEA constitutes a viable treatment option for the complex distal humeral fractures in elderly and medically compromised patients. Careful patient selection and regular follow up evaluation are mandatory for achieving an optimal result and eliminating the risks of mismanagement and early implant failure.Intraarticular fractures of the distal humerus in elderly pose a challenging therapeutic problem due to the varying degrees of bone comminution and articular cartilage fragmentation. Total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) has been proposed as an alternative and viable treatment modality aiming to overcome the previous difficulties. The technique promises immediate stability, early mobilisation, faster rehabilitation and better short-term functional result in older low-demand patients with osteopenia or osteoporosis. The primary goal of this retrospective study is to present the outcome of TEA in patients older than 75 years of age with acute distal humeral fractures. The secondary aim is to review the English and International literature and estimate the overall efficacy and safety of the described surgical technique.  The lesion was caused by a fall in 10 patients and a car accident in one patient. The mean time interval between injury and index procedure was 4.3 days (range 2–8 days) and the mean length of hospital stay was 9.8 days (range 5–15 days). All the patients were followed up for a mean of 2.8 years (range 1–5 years) (    On the other hand, Gustilo Type II or III open fractures  In all cases, general anaesthesia combined with interscalene or axillary blockade for postoperative pain management were applied. The patients were placed in lateral decubitus position and the whole limb was prepped in a sterile fashion. A posterior midline skin incision was followed by a Bryan–Morrey posteromedial approach.      Total elbow arthroplasty has become a well-established surgical technique for the treatment not only of the elbow rheumatoid and posttraumatic arthritis but also of the comminuted intraarticular fractures of the distal humerus in elderly patients with poor bone quality. Our search in the English and International literature revealed 8 other clinical studies describing the results of TEA in 167 patients with 168 distal humeral fractures From the total of 167 patients with TEA, there were 136 females (81%) and 31 males (19%). The mean age of the patients varied from 69 to 84.6 years of age and the average follow up from 17.8 months to 7 years. The mean MEPS among the studies ranged between 85 and 95 points, representing a good to excellent result. Likewise, flexion–extension and supination–pronation arcs indicated normal elbow behaviour while significant limitations in elbow motion or function were not observed. It seems that the linked character of elbow prosthesis does not necessarily indicate an extension loss or a block to achieving full elbow extension. However, an intraoperative-to-postoperative decrease in the range of motion should be anticipated according to Kaminemi and Morrey Two studies have compared so far the result of TEA and ORIF in patients over 65 year of age with distal humeral fracture. Frankle et al. Infection, ulnar nerve palsy, periprosthetic fracture and implant loosening constitute the main risks of the technique. Wound infection was reported in a total of 9 patients (5.4%). In all the reported cases the ulnar nerve was identified, protected and dissected distally and subcutaneous anterior transposition into a soft-tissue envelope was usually performed. Postoperative ulnar nerve lesions including neurapraxia, dysaesthesia or numbness along the distribution of the nerve were identified in 11 patients (6.5%). In the current study, one elbow was revised due to periprosthetic humeral fracture and substantial implant loosening. A long humeral prosthesis bypassing the fracture site and structural allografts for further enhancement of overall stability were used. Apart from Kaminemi and Morrey On the other hand, radiololucent lines around the humeral or ulnar components were not uncommon. According to the published data, 24 patients (14.3%) had radiographic signs of loosening in the follow up X-ray examination. Similarly with our study a cemented semiconstrained elbow prosthesis was implanted in all the previously published cases. This type of elbow arthroplasty has a “sloppy hinge” with a polyethylene bushing to provide stability to the ulnohumeral articulation. Besides, it allows several degrees of varus/valgus and internal/external rotation laxity. This motion is of major benefit as it decreases the transmission of stress to the bone–cement interface. The anterior extramedullary flange further resists the torsional and posterior stresses and the axis of rotation could be accurately replicated even if the condyles are severely damaged or fractured. Despite the linked nature of the implant model, reattachment of collateral ligaments seems to offer better soft tissue balance. Unlinked or fixed hinge elbow prostheses have not been used so far in fracture cases and subsequently they have not been compared with the semiconstrained elbow arthroplasty. Little et al. Elbow hemiarthroplasty has also been described as an alternative method for the treatment of distal humeral fractures in elderly. All the recently published clinical trials have clearly suggested that primary total elbow arthroplasty may be an effective treatment for the acute distal humeral fractures in elderly and medically compromised patients. However, permanent activity-related restrictions should be followed and regular follow up examination must be made for identifying early signs of loosening or implant failure. The technique should be followed in specific circumstances when stable and rigid fracture fixation is not feasible or articular cartilage damage is nonreconstructable. However, in no case shall replace the ORIF in the treatment of distal humeral fractures. The authors declare that they don’t have any financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work.