Solution percolation through packed ore beds provides essential substances for leaching reactions to occur and mobilizes reaction products through ore beds. Understanding key factors that control solution movement is the prerequisite to forecasting and optimizing the performance of a heap under leach. In this study, the responses of the solution flow behavior to four key design parameters were investigated using the HeapSim-2D model: irrigation rate, dripper spacing, heap height, and initial moisture content. The model was calibrated and validated against monitoring data provided by the Quebrada Blanca mine, a copper heap bioleaching operation located in northern Chile. The modelling results showed that solution breakthrough times were shorter at higher irrigation rates, larger dripper spacing, lower heap heights and higher initial moisture contents. However, higher irrigation rates and larger dripper spacing resulted in more uneven moisture distributions at steady state. After irrigation was terminated, the bulk of the mobile solution retained in the leach unit was drained out within two days. The modelling results can provide mine operations with information on how to control key parameters that determine the solution flow behavior for the optimization of heap leach design.Extraction of valuable metals via heap/dump leaching is a complex technology that involves various fundamental processes on different scales, such as fluid transport on the heap scale, microbial activities on the particle cluster scale, and chemical reactions on the mineral grain scale ( The understanding of the hydrodynamics in heap leaching is greatly assisted by the fundamental knowledge gained in the field of unsaturated soil mechanics, where it states that the flux of liquid phase through porous soil matrix is proportional to the hydraulic head gradient, with the proportionality being the unsaturated hydraulic conductivity ( In simulating the flow behavior inside a heap, heap porosity and permeability are usually assumed to be uniform ( This study aims at contributing to the understanding of key design parameters that determine the solution flow behavior in heap leaching by using the HeapSim-2D model. The key design parameters investigated were irrigation rate, dripper spacing, heap height, and initial moisture content (defined as moisture content as stacked). Heap leaching kinetics was reported to be proportional to the irrigation rate divided by heap height ( The HeapSim-2D model divides a heap leach pad into multiple identical 2D-axisymmetric cylindrical leach units, each with its own drip emitter ( Mine operations typically divide a large heap into several leach modules and initiate irrigation of the modules in a sequential manner within days or weeks. In other words, the whole leach pad consists of multiple leach modules, each with its own distinctive irrigation start time. The conceptual model provides the flexibility of simulating solution flow through individual leach module and integrating all leach modules that comprise the whole heap to derive solution flow of the whole heap. This flexibility is particularly important considering that the sequential irrigation could render different modules to leach for different periods of time, which has important implications for mine operations to accurately predict metal output. Mathematical equations are developed to describe the solution percolation through a leach unit, the smallest leaching component handled by the model. The leach unit is put in a cylindrical coordinate system with the drip emitter (also referred to as “dripper”) positioned at the origin. Any point in the coordinate system is denoted by ( The input parameters are divided into three categories ( Design parameters: These are user-defined operating parameters, which have clear physical meaning and can be directly manipulated by mine operations to achieve the desired outcome. Their values are typically varied in the sensitivity analysis that determines how different design parameters will impact the solution flow behavior within heaps. In this study, the values for the design parameters were provided by the Quebrada Blanca mine. Empirical parameters: Values of some empirical parameters can be obtained from the laboratory or on-site testing or estimated based on the operational experience. Others that do not possess clear physical meaning can be adjusted in the model calibration process that aims at fitting the simulated output with the site monitoring data. In this study, the value of Fundamental parameters: These are the parameters that represent the intrinsic properties of materials and processes and are not expected to change significantly from one operation to another, e.g., molecular mass. Values for these parameters are typically available in scientific literature. The HeapSim-2D model was calibrated and validated using the operational data from the Quebrada Blanca mine, a copper heap bioleaching operation located in northern Chile. The operation uses heap and dump leaching, solvent extraction (SX), and electrowinning (EW), to produce copper cathodes ( Heap G-14 consisted of 19 leach modules, the irrigation of which was initiated sequentially at an average irrigation rate of 9.4 Two types of monitoring data were available for the calibration, i.e., the average moisture content in G-14 at steady state and the solution breakthrough time. The former was used as the primary information for the calibration, which was calculated to be 0.16. The calculation was done as per the following procedure: (1) The flow rates of raffinate and PLS over the leach cycle were measured and provided by the operation as m The calibration was done with one leach unit. The calibration process involved firstly adjusting  In the model validation process, the calibrated model was applied to predict the PLS flow rates of the full-scale heaps: G-14 and H-9. The calibrated model was further applied to illustrate the evolution of the moisture content distribution within one leach unit after irrigation was initiated ( The key parameters that are considered to be controllable by operations are: irrigation rate, dripper spacing, heap height, and initial moisture content. One of other key parameters is the ore particle size (  Characterizing the moisture content distribution at steady state is essential for determining the distribution of lixiviants and therefore predicting metal recoveries. Ore that is not wetted by solution will not leach; and ore that does not receive timely and sufficient quantities of essential substances will leach poorly. The increase in the irrigation rate led to an uneven increase in the moisture content, with much higher moisture in the vicinity of the dripper and much lower moisture further away from the dripper ( In reference to  As shown in The HeapSim-2D model was applied to investigate the impact of four key design parameters on the solution flow behavior in the heap leaching process: irrigation rate, dripper spacing, heap height, and initial moisture content. The model was successfully calibrated and validated using the monitoring data from two full-scale heaps, G-14 and H-9, operated by the Quebrada Blanca mine. The validated model was then used for the sensitivity analysis that aimed at determining the impact of the four design parameters on the solution flow behavior. The modelling results showed that: (1) longer breakthrough times were expected when the following operating conditions were applied: lower irrigation rate, smaller dripper spacing, taller heaps, and lower initial moisture content, and vice versa; (2) higher irrigation rates and larger dripper spacing tended to trigger more pronounced unevenness in the moisture distribution. Heap height and initial moisture content did not seem to have significant impact on the distribution of the moisture content; (3) after irrigation was terminated, the bulk of the mobile moisture was drained out rapidly. The uncertainties in the heap leach modelling, as uncertainties intrinsic to any modelling attempt, must be noted. The uncertainties arise from the simplistic application or narrow appreciation of heap leaching as a technology and concomitant assumptions made. In other words, the model does not incorporate all parameters that could affect the flow behavior of leaching solutions. For example, there is no parameter reflecting the particle size distribution, and the accompanying assumption of the uniform porosity and permeability could be problematic. On the other hand, the attempt of incorporating a large number of parameters may also fail due to the difficulty or impracticality in estimating or measuring those parameters. Nonetheless, the modelling results are still considered to be useful for providing mine sites with the information on the key operating parameters that influence the solution flow behavior and the magnitude of their impacts. For practical applications, these results indicated that to achieve even moisture distribution, operations should apply dripper spacing as small as practically possible and irrigation rates as low as possible provided that sufficient lixiviants are supplied and that drippers are not plugged by too low irrigation rates. Data used for the model calibration and validation were provided by Teck Resources, Applied Research and Technology, Trail, BC, Canada.