Development of a flow sheet for the solvent extraction, separation and recovery of cadmium(II), cobalt(II) and nickel(II) from chloride leach liquors of spent Ni–Cd batteries by hydrometallurgical route was investigated. Cyanex 923 showed selective separation of cadmium(II) from nickel(II) and cobalt(II). Two-stage counter-current extraction at 1:1 phase ratio and three stages of stripping with distilled water at an aqueous to organic (A:O) phase ratio of 1.75:1 gave >99.9% Cd extraction and stripping efficiency. Studies on the separation of cobalt from nickel from the cadmium raffinate indicated Cyanex 272 as the best extractant with a separation factor > 4700. Cobalt(II) extraction efficiency of ∼ 99.9% was achieved with 0.03 M Cyanex 272 in three counter-current stages at an A:O ratio of 1.5:1. Complete stripping of metal from the loaded organic containing 0.33 g/L Co was carried out at pH 1.5 in 2 stages at an O:A ratio of 2:1. The enrichment of cobalt was about 4.7 times. More than 99% Ni recovery was achieved with 1 M TOPS 99 as the extractant from the cobalt raffinate. A complete flow sheet of the process for the separation and recovery of Cd(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) as chlorides was demonstrated.Nickel–cadmium batteries are used in many portable electronic devices, military and defense applications, but are classified as hazardous waste ( Several years ago attempts were made to replace Ni–Cd batteries with Ni-MH batteries because of toxic nature of cadmium. A review of the literature reveals that both pyrometallurgical/or hydrometallurgical operations have been tried to recover metal values from spent batteries. The pyrometallurgical method basically consists of selective volatilization of metals at elevated temperatures (∼ 900 °C) followed by condensation to recover cadmium with > 99% purity. But most valuable metals such as nickel and cobalt are not usually recovered ( In this paper we report studies to develop a complete hydrometallurgical process flow sheet for the separation and recovery of Cd(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) as metal chlorides from chloride leach liquors of spent nickel–cadmium batteries using commercial organo-phosphorus extractants, Cyanex 923, TOPS 99, PC 88A and Cyanex 272 diluted in kerosene. This is the first report on the application of Cyanex 923 for the selective Cd(II) separation from such solutions. The parameters studied to optimize extraction and separation conditions are: selection of extractant, effect of equilibrium pH, extractant concentration, phase ratios, extraction and stripping isotherms, counter-current extraction and stripping simulations. A Perkin Elmer Model A 300 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) and a digital Digisun pH meter (model DI 707) were used for the measurement of metal concentration and pH in the aqueous phase. The spent Ni–Cd batteries were prismatic shaped batteries supplied by HBL-NIFE Industries, Hyderabad, India. These are low rate cells with a capacity of 7 A and 1.2 V. The battery package was dismantled to remove the battery materials. Leaching of the dried material with dilute HCl under optimum conditions (HCl Cyanex 923, a mixture of four trialkyl-phosphine oxides (R Suitable volumes of aqueous (leach liquor) and organic phases were contacted for 5 min after initial experiments had showed that equilibrium was reached within 1 min. The phases were separated and the metal concentration in the aqueous phase (raffinate) was estimated directly by AAS. The loaded organic (LO) phases were stripped three times with 1 M HCl, and the combined strip solutions analysed for metal values by AAS. All the experiments were carried out at room temperature (30 Increasing Cyanex 923 concentration in the range 0.1–0.6 M increased the percentage extraction of Cd(II) from the leach liquor at pH 1.0 from 29 to 96.5%. Co-extraction of Ni(II) and Co(II) was nil. To determine the number of stages required at a chosen volume phase ratio, the extraction isotherm was obtained by contacting the leach liquor and 0.6 M Cyanex 923 at different A:O phase ratios from 1 to 8; and O:A phase ratios from 1 to 5. The McCabe–Thiele plot ( To confirm the extraction isotherm prediction data, a two-stage counter-current extraction simulation (CCES) test was carried out at the A:O phase ratio of 1:1. Aqueous (raffinate) and organic (LO) outlet streams were collected after the third cycle onwards and analysed for metal values. The raffinate contained 0.005 g/L Cd corresponding to 99.9% extraction efficiency. Co-extraction of nickel and cadmium was nil. Sufficient quantities of loaded organic phase and raffinate were generated for carrying out cadmium stripping studies. Under optimum conditions; i.e. using a feed leach liquor at pH 1.0 and 0.6 M Cyanex 923 in kerosene, a CCES test was carried out in two stages at A: O phase ratio of 1:1. The generated LO contained 6.27 g/L Cd. Cadmium raffinate was used to optimize conditions for the separation of cobalt and nickel. As the transfer of cadmium from leach liquor to the organic phase containing Cyanex 923 follows a solvation mechanism with the association of chloride ions ( A three-stage CCSS was carried out at A:O 1:1.75 to generate a representative strip solution (SS) and spent organic (SO). The combined strip solution and spent organic were collected. The SO phase was found to contain 0.005 g/L Cd corresponding to a stripping efficiency of 99.9%. The strip solution contained 3.58 g/L Cd at pH 1.9. The raffinate from the cadmium extraction circuit, containing Ni It is well documented in the literature that the separation factor, From the cadmium raffinate, extraction was carried out at 1:1 phase ratio in the equilibrium pH range 1.57 to 6.03 using 0.03 M Cyanex 272. The results showed that at pH 5.7, separation of cobalt could be achieved ( To optimize the conditions with respect to the phase ratio and number of counter-current stages required for the quantitative extraction of cobalt, extraction of metal was obtained at different A:O phase ratios from 1:1 to 2:1 ( Initial tests carried out on the scrubbing of co-extracted nickel from LO with distilled water at 1:1 phase ratio at different initial pH from 2.05 to 5.05 (corresponding to an equilibrium pH in the range 4.60 to 5.68), gave a scrubbing efficiency of 27–35% Ni and co-scrubbing of 61–74% Co, respectively. As a result, nickel scrubbing from LO was carried out with 0.12 g/L cobalt chloride solution in the initial pH range from 3.0 to 4.25 ( The cobalt from the LO was stripped with dilute HCl in the pH range 1 to 2 at O:A ratios of 1:1 and 2:1 ( The raffinate from the cobalt extraction circuit, containing 21.48 g/L Ni at pH 5.7, was used in optimizing conditions for nickel recovery using TOPS 99 as the extractant. Extraction of nickel from cobalt raffinate was carried out at 1:1 phase ratio in the equilibrium pH range from 1.91 to 6.27 using 1 M TOPS 99. As expected, the percentage extraction of metal increases with the rise in equilibrium pH of the aqueous phase and reaches a maximum 97.7% around pH 6.1 and remains constant thereafter. To determine the number of stages required at a chosen volume phase ratio, the extraction isotherm was obtained by contacting cobalt raffinate and 1 M TOPS 99 at different A:O phase ratios from 1:1 to 5:1 and O:A from 1:1 to 5:1 at an equilibrium pH 6.0. The McCabe–Thiele plot ( Nickel stripping from LO containing 17.2 g/L Ni was carried out at 1:1 phase ratio with varying acid concentrations from 0.6 to 2.0 M and O:A phase ratios from 1:1 to 2.5:1 ( A complete hydrometallurgical process for the separation and recovery of cadmium(II), cobalt(II) and nickel(II) from chloride leach liquors of spent batteries was developed on laboratory scale by solvent extraction route using the commercial phosphorus based extractants. Cyanex 923 was selective for cadmium(II) separation. Selectivity studies for cobalt–nickel separation indicated Cyanex 272 as the best extractant. The generated chloride salts of cadmium, cobalt and nickel are in pure form with a recovery efficiency > 99.95%. The enrichment of cobalt and nickel during extraction and stripping stages was about 4.7 and 1.6 times, respectively. Finally, the present approach demonstrates a process which could solve the environmental related issues and at the same time recover valuable metals as chlorides. Loaded organic Aqueous Organic Counter current Counter current extraction simulation Counter current stripping simulation Strip solution Spent organic Separation factor The authors express sincere thanks to the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF), New Delhi, India for financial support under project No. 19-125/99-RE. Thanks are also due to Dr. J.S. Yadav, Director and Dr. B.M. Choudary, Head, Inorganic and Physical Chemistry Division, IICT, Hyderabad, for their constant encouragement and permission to publish this work. Thanks are also to Cytec Canada for Cyanex 923 free sample.