Investigating how ore mineralogy and texture affect the recovery from the processing plant is important for any mining operation. The results will assist in production planning and optimising the utilisation of a deposit. Easily available validated tests are desirable and useful.
                  The Storforshei iron formation (IF) consists of several iron oxide deposits with mineralogical and textural differences. Although the Fe grades of the ores are similar, mineralogical and textural characteristics of the deposits affect the individual recoveries from the magnetic separation. For this paper three of the ore deposits were sampled, and important mineralogical and textural properties were investigated and tested. The investigations included geological mapping and optical microscopy, and the test work involved surface hardness measurements by Schmidt hammer and Equotip, and autogenous milling tests (i.e., grindability). The aim of the study was to investigate whether ore mineralogy and textures can be correlated to surface hardness measurements, and whether these three parameters can be used to evaluate grindability. The ores were classified into six ore types based on mineralogy and textures. The results show that the ore mineralogy and texture influence the surface hardness. Fine-grained ore types with irregular-to-no visible grain boundaries have higher surface hardness than coarser-grained ore types with straight grain boundaries. Furthermore, surface hardness measurements and grindability evaluations (using throughput (kg/h) and specific energy consumption (kWh/tonne)) of samples from three of the iron oxide deposits indicate that grindability decreases with increasing surface hardness. The relationship found between the parameters ore mineralogy, texture, surface hardness, and grindability suggests that geological mapping and surface hardness measurements can be used to evaluate grindability, and thus assess ore processing performance.Rana Gruber AS (RG AS) currently mines iron ore from underground and open pit operations in the Dunderlandsdalen valley, about 30 km north east of Mo i Rana, Nordland County, Norway. Four million tonnes of iron ore are mined from the Kvannevann deposit annually, and the main products are hematite and magnetite concentrates. There are 13 ore deposits in the Storforshei IF, with varying mineralogical and textural properties leading to variable recovery. The mineral processing at RG AS includes autogenous (AG) milling, wet low-intensity magnetic separation (LIMS) followed by wet high-intensity magnetic separation (WHIMS). The AG mills are in closed circuit, with 800 µm screens. The The Kvannevann- and Stortjønna iron ores have a total Fe content of 34 wt% ( The aim of the research presented in this paper was to investigate the effect of ore mineralogy, texture, and surface hardness on the ore grindability and on the particle size distribution of the mill circuit products. The throughput (kg/h) and specific energy consumption (kWh/tonne) in the AG mill were used to determine grindability. The classification of ore types is based on mineralogical and textural characteristics of the iron ores. Contrary to previous work (e.g., The main objective of the present study was to provide increased predictability in the processing of highly metamorphosed iron ores. If surface hardness can be used to evaluate grindability, the iron ores can be tested by easy, fast and non-destructive methods prior to mineral processing. The main research questions were: Is it possible to correlate ore mineralogy and texture with surface hardness? How is grindability affected by ore mineralogy and textures? Can surface hardness be used to evaluate grindability? The Storforshei IF is a metasedimentary iron formation and part of the Dunderland formation, located in the Uppermost Allochthon in the Norwegian Caledonides (  The Schmidt hammer method is widely used in concrete and rock characterisation (e.g., Ores are additive if the grindability of an ore blend is the same as the weighted average grindability of the ore types in the blend (e.g., Understanding the effect of mineralogy, geochemistry, lithology, and alteration on the comminution processes are valuable for processing any ore. The Kvannevann-, Stortjønna-, and Stensundtjern iron ore deposits found in the Storforshei IF were sampled for pilot scale testing. One truck-load (40 tonnes) from blasts in the geographical centre ( A Nikon Eclipse E600 petrographic light microscope with Diagnostic Instruments Inc. Spot IN320 colour digital camera was used to document and identify mineralogy and textures. A Hitachi SU-6600 low vacuum field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) with two Bruker XFlash 5010 energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detectors, was used for collecting x-ray analyses of minerals, with a 30 s counting time per point. The SEM was run at 20 kV and 0.49 nA beam current. A The Schmidt hammer measurements were conducted on non-weathered surfaces of roughly 0.5 m The selection of drill cores for Equotip measurement was based on the drill core logs and their locations in the iron formation. Based on procedures defined by Lopera (2014) and local lithological variations, measurements were taken every 3 cm along the core. All measurements under 100 HLD were discarded (only 5 out of 5689 measurements). The low HLD values are assumed to be incorrect measurements because of temporarily inaccuracies in the execution of the measuring procedures. A total of 5689 points on drill cores were measured using the Equotip, while 34 boulders were measured using the Schmidt hammer. All ore types were measured by the Equotip, while all but the ore types Hematite-Magnetite and Magnetite-Ore ( Wet closed-circuit pilot-scale milling of the Kvannevann, Stensundtjern, and Stortjønna samples were performed using an AG mill (inner dimensions: Ø 0.69 m × L 0.80 m) and a 0.760 mm Sweco screen. The initial charge settings for the mill circuit were derived from previous lab work conducted on the Storforshei iron ores ( The Granular-Hematite ore type demonstrates a sugar-grained hematite texture, supported by more competent mm-sized quartz layers (  The Hematite-Magnetite ore type is dominated by hematite and shows magnetite content typically in the range of 1–2% in Kvannevann and 9–10% in specimens from Stensundtjern. The texture of the hematite in hand specimens varies between sugar-grained and flaky. It can also be banded, with quartz and/or calcite layers in-between hematite/magnetite layers ( The Magnetite-Ore type is coarse-grained (average grain size 0.5 cm) ( Mylonitic-Hematite is, in hand specimen, characterised by a distinct red colour ( The Massive-Hematite ore type is a fine-grained hematite ore, with massive hematite and irregularly folded layers or veins of fine-grained gangue ( The lithologies defining the Storforshei IF iron ores were previously established during drill core logging by RG AS. For the present study, the lithologies were re-defined to comprise the six ore types defined in this paper and hence, improve the link between ore lithology and grindability. However, by using the original lithology descriptions, some correlations can be made (  The most frequent ore type in Kvannevann is the Hematite ore, followed by the group “Other”. Additionally, Kvannevann contains significant amounts of magnetite ore with minor magnetite-hematite ore. Stortjønna also contains magnetite ore. The hematite mylonite is found in minor content in Stortjønna, however, based on recent field observations it also occurs in the Ørtfjellet area. Stensundtjern contains hematite ore, but is dominated by magnetite-hematite ore and has substantial amounts of magnetite ore. The main host rocks are calcareous mica schist, mica schist, and marbles. Mylonite is predominantly found in Stortjønna but occur in all three deposits. Mylonite is used as a collective term for very fine-grained rocks that are found in veins at the ore-host rock contact. They are dominated by garnet, with varying contents of quartz, manganocalcite, and epidote. Minitab®17 ( Summary statistics from the Schmidt hammer measurements by Schmidt hammer of samples from Kvannevann, Stensundtjern, and Stortjønna are listed in The differences in surface hardness values by Schmidt hammer are illustrated with cumulative distribution plots (  In Summary statistics for Equotip measurements according to ore type and deposit are reported in  The surface hardness values by Equotip for the ore types and their cumulative distribution are shown in The surface hardness measurements of the ore types in the three deposits using the Equotip are compared in To obtain a stable circuit, the solid feed rate had to be adjusted for each deposit sample. The final steady-state solid feed rates, the resulting mill torque, and mill power are summarised in Samples collected from both the mill feed and the mill circuit product were sieved on a rot-tap sieve shaker using the W.S. Tyler sieves series.  The defined ore types show significant differences in ore mineralogy and textures. The most pronounced characteristics can be summarised as:     Quantified by the Equotip, the Granular-Hematite in Kvannevann exhibits lower surface hardness values than Granular-Hematite in Stensundtjern and Stortjønna ( The Hematite-Magnetite and Magnetite-Ore have higher surface hardness values by Equotip than Granular-Hematite and Specular-Hematite, although all four have approximately the same hematite grain sizes. Possible explanations for high values are irregular grain boundaries of the equant-irregular magnetite grains, or the higher contents of magnetite in the Hematite-Magnetite and the Magnetite-Ore. The high surface hardness by Equotip in Mylonitic-Hematite and Massive-Hematite can be explained by the fine-grained texture, and irregular to no visible grain boundaries. Based on the ore mineralogy, textures, and surface hardness values presented in the results, the ore types can be divided into three groups ( The surface hardness measurements by Schmidt hammer confirm the same trend as the surface hardness values by Equotip, with the lowest surface hardness values obtained for Specular-Hematite and Granular-Hematite whereas Mylonitic-Hematite and Massive-Hematite have the highest surface hardness ( Unlike The Stortjønna mill feed was coarser than the Kvannevann- and Stensundtjern mill feeds, while the mill circuit product was finer-grained compared to the corresponding samples from Kvannevann and Stensundtjern. A coarse feed also suggests a lower grindability in Stortjønna, with a longer residence time in the mill, creating a fine-grained mill circuit product. Stensundtjern has an intermediate feed size but produces the coarsest mill circuit product. The mill tests compared to mineralogical and textural characteristics indicate that grain size and shape, combined with the structure of grain boundaries, influence grindability. These results confirm the work by The weighted average surface hardness by Equotip was calculated from the distribution of lithologies in the deposits ( Kvannevann has the lowest surface hardness values, high throughput, and relatively low specific energy consumption, indicating high grindability. Stortjønna has the highest surface hardness, low throughput, and substantially higher specific energy consumption, indicating low grindability. Stensundtjern has intermediate surface hardness, a lower throughput, and slightly higher specific energy consumption than Kvannevann, hence, intermediate grindability. This suggests that it should be possible to use simple surface hardness measurements to evaluate grindability. The available sample material will determine whether Equotip or Schmidt hammer is the best surface hardness method in a mining operation. Equotip cannot be used on irregular surfaces and hence, is best suited for use on drill cores. The Schmidt hammer, on the other hand, is better suited for large-sized boulders. For statistical and efficiency reasons the Equotip is the preferred method, and drill cores are often readily available at most mine sites. The presented research shows that the grindability of the different ores is affected by ore mineralogy and texture in addition to Fe grade. This corresponds well with on-site experiences. The six ore types defined can be placed into three groups based on their surface hardness values ( The main textural characteristics influencing surface hardness are grain size and grain boundaries, as fine-grained ore types with irregular-to-no visible grain boundaries show the highest surface hardness. Whether ore mineralogy (magnetite content) influences surface hardness is difficult to determine and needs further investigation. Ore types with coarse-grained iron oxides and straight grain boundaries have higher throughput and lower specific energy consumption, thus a higher grindability, than fine-grained ore types with irregular-to-no visible grain boundaries. The results of this research show how surface hardness measurements combined with characterisation of ore mineralogy and textures can be used to evaluate grindability. To further investigate the relationship between ore mineralogy and texture, and grindability, automated mineralogy should be performed on the mill circuit products. Results from such analyses may also be used to predict the material’s performance in the magnetic separation, which is the next step in the processing of this iron ore, and ultimately the recovery of iron. Identifying key ore characteristics, and knowledge of how they affect mineral processing can lead to better production control and utilisation of ore bodies. The choice of surface hardness measurement method strongly depends on the available sample material. In general surface hardness measurements on drill cores using the Equotip is more efficient and provides more results in a shorter time, than the measurements using Schmidt hammer on larger specimens. The disadvantage with the Equotip is that a flat sample surface is required. However, as most mine sites have available drill cores from drill campaigns, drill core availability is rarely an issue. This research is funded by the