Chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) is the most economically important and most refractory copper mineral when treated in conventional sulphate media leaching systems. In this study, the effect of solution redox potential on leaching of a pure and a pyritic chalcopyrite concentrate was investigated using concentrates with fresh and aged surfaces. In experiments using concentrates with fresh surfaces, the response to redox potential depended on the presence of pyrite: fresh pyritic concentrate leached more effectively at low redox potential (in agreement with reductive leaching mechanisms), while the leaching efficiencies from fresh pure concentrate were similar at high and low redox potentials. The data suggested that the reductive leaching mechanism does not necessarily result in higher and faster recoveries in the absence of the galvanic interaction induced by the presence of pyrite. It was also found that exposure of chalcopyrite to atmospheric oxidation prior to leaching (ageing) had an effect on leaching behaviour in response to redox potential: copper recoveries in leaching of aged concentrates were higher at high redox potentials. This behaviour was attributed to the presence of iron–oxyhydroxides on the surface of aged concentrates. Based on the data from this investigation and previous surface studies, it is proposed that iron–oxyhydroxides play an important role in triggering the hindered dissolution of chalcopyrite.As the most abundant copper mineral, chalcopyrite (CuFeS The slow dissolution of chalcopyrite is termed ‘passivation’ or ‘hindered dissolution’ and is believed to be due to formation of compounds on the mineral surface during leaching. The most frequently suggested candidates to form the passivating layers are metal-deficient phases, elemental sulphur and jarosite ( The effect of impurities on the dissolution of chalcopyrite is a relatively old observation ( Being electrochemical in nature, this reaction can be expressed as an anodic half-cell reaction (Eq. The limiting step is reported to be the reduction of ferric iron which is slow on the surface of chalcopyrite due to presence of hindering layers ( Reductive leaching of chalcopyrite generally refers to dissolution of chalcopyrite at low redox potential. The redox potential of a system containing ferric and ferrous ions is mainly determined by the ratio of free ferric to ferrous ions, according to the Nernst equation (Eq. This model suggests that the redox potential has to be low enough for reduction of chalcopyrite in the first step and high enough for oxidation of chalcocite in the second. Consequently, there is a window of oxidation potential in which the chalcopyrite dissolution rate is optimal. This range is reported to be around 600–680 The reductive leaching mechanism has also been described by another model based on evolution of surface layers measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) ( In the present investigation, results from leaching of a pure concentrate as well as a pyritic concentrate performed under strictly controlled redox potential conditions are presented and the interaction of galvanic dissolution with reductive leaching mechanism is discussed. A high purity chalcopyrite concentrate from the Boliden Mineral AB owned Aitik mine in Sweden was used. The concentrate was washed with ethanol and water, dried by acetone rinsing at room temperature, divided into 15 The regular chalcopyrite concentrate from Kristineberg mine, Boliden Mineral AB contained higher amount of pyrite compared to the Aitik concentrate ( The pyrite concentrate originating from the Aitik mine was obtained from tailings of a chalcopyrite flotation at the Boliden plant and acid washed for removal of the acid soluble gangues. The amount of pyrite in the concentrate calculated based on the chemical analyses after the acid washing stage was around 74% ( Batch leaching experiments were performed in 2 Initial activation energies at low (420 Rates from the initial stage of leaching experiments (recoveries below 10%) at different temperatures were extracted from the leaching data by fitting a straight line to at least four data points, resulting in R Dissolved iron and copper in the solution samples were analysed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS; Perkin Elmer, Analyst 100). A CILAS 1064 Liquid apparatus and a Micromeritics Flowsorb II 2300 were employed for particle size distributions and surface area measurements, respectively. The phases and the minerals present in the concentrate and residues were examined by a PANalytical Empyrean X-ray powder diffractometer. Patterns were collected between 2θ angles of 5–90° at Cu Kα radiation of 45 In agreement with the common understanding of the chalcopyrite reductive leaching mechanism ( These results generally indicated that in absence of pyrite the reductive leaching mechanism at low redox potentials would not improve the leaching efficiencies, compared to high redox potential experiments. A review of the most cited research articles suggesting higher chalcopyrite dissolution rates within a low redox potential window with long leaching experiments performed in ferric/ferrous sulphate media revealed that most studies actually used a pyritic concentrate (sometimes by addition of extra pyrite) with a pyrite:chalcopyrite weight ratio of ⩾0.15 ( It is difficult to explain the effect of pyrite in accelerating the reductive leaching of chalcopyrite using the model proposed by The effect of redox potential on leaching behaviour completely changed when the aged concentrates were used. The copper recoveries from the aged Aitik concentrate (38–53 Atmospheric oxidation of chalcopyrite (ageing) produces compounds such as iron–oxyhydroxides and basic iron–sulphates on the chalcopyrite surface ( Ageing would not be a concern in industrial scale tank leaching/bioleaching as the ore is treated in successive stages of grinding, flotation and leaching ( Two experiments were performed in the absence and presence of 1.5 In another series of experiments with 38–53 The formation of iron–oxyhydroxides on chalcopyrite surfaces as a result of atmospheric oxidation is a well–known phenomenon ( If this is the case, then it seems that hindered dissolution cannot be avoided in conventional sulphate leaching systems, especially in bioleaching systems at high redox potentials and extended leaching durations where iron–oxyhydroxides would have enough time to form and become consolidated on the surface. One possible solution would be to leach under suitable conditions such that chalcopyrite dissolution reaches an acceptable level before its surface is extensively covered. Suitable conditions are fresh surfaces, temperature >80 Controlled redox potential leaching experiments showed that the reductive leaching mechanism would be beneficial in the presence of an active galvanic interaction. Experiments using a pyritic concentrate resulted in higher recoveries at low redox potential while the recoveries were similar at low and high redox potentials using a relatively pure concentrate in absence of pyrite. This behaviour was shown to be in better agreement with the alternative reductive leaching model that suggests chalcopyrite surfaces undergo a first step of partial oxidation before the reduction reactions occur. This model accounts for the effect of pyrite in the reductive leaching mechanism. It was also shown that the reductive leaching was not valid at all for aged concentrates. Aged concentrates (pyritic and pure) gave steadily increasing recoveries with increased redox potential. The air oxidation products, mainly iron-oxyhydroxide, on the surfaces of the minerals were found to cause such behaviour. Chalcopyrite ageing can have drastic effects in heap leaching processes where the ore is exposed for extended periods of time. The wide and inconsistent chalcopyrite leaching results reported in the literature could also be partly due to using of aged samples. The effect of initial copper concentration had no influential effect in the leaching rates for possible industrial processes. It was also proposed that iron–oxyhydroxides are the precursor of hindered dissolution in sulphate media where their formation entraps surface elemental sulphur and other surface species resulting to an inevitable formation of a consolidated phase on the surface. It was shown that when suitable conditions are met, high copper recoveries can be obtained before the surface is extensively hindered. The authors wish to express their gratitude for financial support from the