In the present work, a new 1,8-diaminonaphthalene-formaldehyde (1,8-DAN-F) polymer was synthesized by the reaction of 1,8-DAN with formaldehyde solution. The structure of 1,8-DAN-F polymer was characterized by elemental analysis, FT-IR spectroscopy and thermal analysis. In order to prepare a useful adsorbent, 1,8-DAN-F polymer was blended at the ratio of 25% with polyvinylchloride (PVC) using THF solvent. 1,8-DAN-F/PVC polymer blend was used in selective separation and recovery of Au(III) ions from Fe(III), Cu(II) and Ni(II) ions. The effects of pH and the initial concentration of Au(III) ions on the adsorption were examined by the batch technique. The optimum pH level was found to be 1 for the Au(III) adsorption. Furthermore, the adsorption data were applied to the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. It was found that the adsorption data fitted well to the Langmuir isotherm. The maximum Au(III) adsorption capacity (qmax) of the polymer blend was 119.0mg·g−1. The adsorption kinetics indicated that the Au(III) adsorption proceeds according to the pseudo-second-order model. Also, the separation of Au(III) ions from Fe(III), Cu(II) and Ni(II) ions was examined by the column technique. The column studies showed that Au(III) ions can be separated and concentrated from the base metal ions.Gold is one of the precious metals and it is used widely in various areas such as art, jewelry, electronic manufacturing, dentistry and currency. It is has a special economic interest compared with other metals. Therefore, the analysis, separation, enrichment or preconcentration of gold ions is important in recycling or prior to producing metallic gold ( Chelating resins or polymers with functional groups play a vital role in the adsorption of gold ions. Chelating polymers having N and S donor atoms are preferred in the adsorption of gold ions, because of the selectivity according to Hard–Soft Acid–Base (HSAB) principle introduced by In this study, the separation and concentration of Au(III) ions were examined using a new chelating polymer, 1,8-diaminonaphthalene-formaldehyde (poly(1,8-DAN-F)), which was synthesized from 1,8-diaminonaphthalene (1,8-DAN) and formaldehyde. In the synthesis of 1,8-DAN-F polymer, it was aimed that primary aromatic amine groups will remain open as a functional coordinating group to adsorb Au(III) ions. In the literature, poly(1,8-diaminonaphthalene) poly(1,8-DAN) has been synthesized by some researchers using chemical or electrochemical oxidation methods ( In the present work, 1-8,DAN-F polymer was synthesized and it was blended at the ratio of 25% (w/w) with PVC to provide a useful adsorbent. This prepared polymer blend has free primary and neighbor amine groups to absorb Au(III) ions and it was used in the adsorption, separation and preconcentration of Au(III) ions using the batch and column techniques. 1,8-Diaminonaphthalene (99.5%) and formaldehyde (37% aqueous solution, d Poly(aniline-formaldehyde) polymer is known well and it can be synthesized by the binding of methylene ( To obtain a useful adsorbent, 25% 1,8-DAN-F polymer and 75% PVC were blended by kneading together with THF solvent. This polyblend adsorbent (1,8-DAN-F/PVC) was dried again to evaporate THF solvent. The all adsorption studies were performed with 25% 1,8-DAN-F polymer in 75% PVC. The synthesized 1,8-DAN-F polymer was characterized by determining C, H and N elemental content using Truspec Model Leco Elemental analyzer (Leco Corp. Michigan, USA). It estimated the composition of the polymer content. The FTIR spectra of 1,8-DAN monomer and 1,8-DAN-F polymer were obtained with a resolution of 0.02 The adsorption studies of Au(III) ions on the 1,8-DAN-F blended in PVC were done using batch and column techniques. The effects of acidity, contact time and adsorption isotherms were examined by batch technique. In the column technique, the adsorption, elution, separation and preconcentration of Au(III) ions were studied. To determine the optimum acidity and contact time in the adsorption of Au(III) ions, the experimental studies were carried out at 1, 2 and 3 In this equation, The Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were used to examine the adsorption behaviors of Au(III) ions on the polymeric adsorbent. The linearized forms of The Langmuir (Eq. The experiments for the adsorption isotherms were performed by placing 0.3 The adsorption kinetics was examined using the obtained adsorption data. Pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order equations were used in the kinetic calculations. The pseudo-first-order equation (Lagergren's equation) describes adsorption in solid–liquid systems based on the sorption capacity. A simple kinetic analysis of adsorption is the pseudo-first-order equation in the form ( In addition, a pseudo-second-order equation may be tested on the experimental data. The kinetic rate equation is Eq. The values of The separation and concentration of Au(III) ions from Cu(II), Fe(III) and Ni(II) base metal ions were studied by column technique. The column system mainly consists of a peristaltic pump and a glass column which has the length of 15 In order to obtain a high preconcentration factor, Au(III) ions in the large sample volume have been quantitatively adsorbed and then desorbed by using small stripping volumes. The effect of sample volume on Au(III) sorption was studied by passing the solutions containing 4 The analyses of Au(III), Cu(II), Fe(III) and Ni(II) ions before or after the adsorption were performed using a Shimadzu AA-6701 model flame atomic absorption spectrophotometer (FAAS) (Japan). The measurements of Au(III), Cu(II), Fe(III) and Ni(II) ions were carried out with a hallow cathode lamp (Koto, Japan) at wavelengths of 244.8, 324.8, 248.3 and 232.0 Elemental analysis of the synthesized 1,8-DAN-F polymer was performed by CHN analyzer. The obtained results are given in The FITR spectra of 1,8-DAN monomer and 1,8-DAN-F polymer were recorded and they are given in Au(III) adsorption studies were performed by batch and column techniques. In the batch technique, the effect of acidity, adsorption isotherms, and adsorption capacity were examined. Then separation, recovery and preconcentration of Au(III) ions were studied by column technique. The effect of acidity of initial solution on the adsorption of Au(III) was examined at the pH In addition, pH change during Au(III) adsorption was examined and the results were given in To investigate the adsorption behaviors, the Au(III) solutions at various initial concentrations between 50 and 300 To understand the adsorption behaviors better, the Langmuir (Eq. To evaluate the kinetics of Au(III) adsorption process, the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models were tested using the experimental adsorption data. The pseudo-first-order equation (Lagergren's equation) describes adsorption in solid–liquid systems based on the sorption capacity of solids. The pseudo-second-order rate expression shows chemisorption kinetics from liquid solutions. The kinetic parameters in both the pseudo-first-order and the pseudo-second-order rate expressions were calculated from Au(III) adsorption data and the results are given in A comparison of 1,8-DAN-F blended polymeric adsorbent with the some adsorbents studied by different researchers is given in The adsorption and separation of Au(III) ions from Cu(II), Fe(III) and Ni(II) base metal ions were also examined by column technique. The obtained breakthrough curves for the metal ions are given in Au(III) ions may be found along with Cu(II), Fe(III) and Ni (II) base metal ions in a waste, recycling or leaching solution. Therefore, Cu(II), Fe(III) and Ni(II) ions are important for a competitive adsorption with Au(III). According to the competitive adsorption/elution results of Au(III) ions together with base metal ions, the column studies showed that Au(III) ions could be concentrated from 150 In order to determine the maximum applicable sample volume and maximum reachable enrichment factor, the effect of sample volume on the recovery of Au(III) was studied. For this purpose, 50, 100, 200, 400, 600 and 1000 A new polymer form of 1,8-DAN with formaldehyde was synthesized and blended with PVC. This blended chelating polymer was used in the adsorption, separation and preconcentration of Au(III) ions from Cu(II), Fe(III) and Ni(II) base metal ions. The maximum adsorption for Au(III) ions was obtained at pH