Mine managers find it challenging to predict changes in the level of acceptance of their mining projects due to changes in associated social, environmental and technological factors. To address this challenge, this study presents a: (i) framework for modeling the effect of information diffusion on community acceptance of mining using agent-based modeling (ABM); and (ii) case study to illustrate the framework. The model, built in Matlab, defines individuals in the community as independent agents that interact with other agents for information. The agents' utility function is derived from discrete choice models. Drawing on data from the literature, a case study was used to illustrate the framework. The results indicate that changes in agents' perception of air pollution have a significant effect on acceptance of mining while demographic factors do not. The proposed framework could be applied in other sectors besides mining and provides stakeholders a tool to integrate sustainability into design and management choices.Cost Age Housing and rental prices Gender Water restrictions Annual income Buffer for mine impacts Education Population in work camps Job opportunities Gender Income increase Number of children Increase in housing costs Age Labor shortage for other business Length of residence Noise pollution Enjoy living in Moranbah Water pollution and shortage Spending in Moranbah Air pollution Improved Services will reduce travel Land pollution and subsidence Population increase Infrastructure Improvement Traffic increase Crime increase Permit approval decision making mechanism Availability of information Mine buffer Mine life Mining provides raw materials, which are important to all services and infrastructure used by society ( Mineral developers need to gain and maintain a SLO to avoid potentially costly political and social unrest and consequent exposure to business risk ( Previous work to understand community acceptance of mining projects have generally been qualitative ( Changes in the community's perception of mine characteristics and impacts, which affect SLO, can be described as diffusion of information (perceptions) over a social network. This is particularly true if the changes in perceptions (or opinions) are mainly due to interactions with others. In such situations, new perceptions or opinions can diffuse over a network of people in the mining communities. Eventually, these new perceptions can lead to changing acceptance levels of the mining project. Continual surveying and engagement can help monitor such changes. However, such practices are expensive and time-consuming. Hence, mine managers need tools (including computational models) to predict such changes without (or in addition to) repeated surveys. Such tools do not currently exist and researchers have not given the problem the needed attention. This work is intended to fill this gap by proposing a framework for understanding how levels of community acceptance change over time given changes in social and environmental attributes of a mine. The specific objectives of this work are to: (i) propose a framework for modeling the effect of information diffusion on community acceptance Modeling the effect of information diffusion on community acceptance of mining requires a complex adaptive system framework such as agent-based modeling (ABM) ( Other researchers have used ABM to describe the effect of information diffusion and innovation on adoption of several green technology products ( This work contributes to improving mining sustainability practice and research and can inform broader discussions about the interactions between large engineering and manufacturing projects and their host communities. It will help facilitate better inclusion of community views in evaluating design alternatives during project design and planning ( This paper is structured as follows: The major determinants of the level of community acceptance of a mining project can be classified into characteristics and impacts of the mine, and demographic factors ( To model the level of community acceptance of mining, the model has to account for these determinants. ABM is the most appropriate approach because of its ability to account for agent heterogeneity and social structure. Thus, it allows the modeler to explicitly model the social interactions between individuals of differing characteristics and to take into account the structure of social network ( This framework ( The algorithm initializes agents at the beginning of each iteration. In this step, agents are created with various attributes depending on the input. The important state variables for this framework are the “decision” and “preference” variables. The decision variable is used to describe whether the agent is participating in the decision (above 18 The three major aspects of this framework are the approach to modeling agents, topology, and changing perceptions. These are discussed in detail in the following sub-sections with a discussion of minor miscellaneous constructs. An agent is a discrete, autonomous entity with its own goals and behaviors, which it can adapt and modify ( The modeling framework is based on utility functions derived from discrete choice theory ( At each time step, the odds ratio is estimated for all agents participating in the decision. The odds ratio is then used to determine the agents' state, with respect to whether they prefer the simulated mining project over the status quo or not. The model then collates that to estimate the level of community acceptance at that time step. The user needs to provide the model with the desired distributions of the various agent attributes. During the agent initialization step, the agents are assigned initial values of the demographic attributes based on Monte Carlo sampling. (The reader should note that, although the model is capable of incorporating correlation in the Monte Carlo sampling, the case study in this work does not consider potentially correlated properties since correlation coefficients are not available in Que's work). The demographic attributes of each agent are assigned by randomly sampling from the given distributions to mimic the actual distributions of the attributes. On the contrary, the non-demographic attribute values are assigned to the agents in a deterministic approach based on the particular simulated scenario. This approach assumes that at time zero, all agents perceive the status quo and the option to be evaluated to the same extent. This assumption is a limitation that is imposed by the survey (discrete choice experiment) used to capture individual preferences. Since all participants in the surveys were given same descriptions of the alternatives and instructions, the discrete choice modeling assumes that any differences in choices are due to individual preferences (which are assumed to be explained by demographics and project attributes) and not differences in the way the participants perceive the alternatives. Hence, when using the discrete choice model as a utility function, it is inconsistent to assume that the agents have differing perceptions of the alternatives. Nonetheless, the authors still believe the benefits of using a utility function based on actual data on individual preferences outweigh this limitation. At each time step, dynamic agent attributes (those that change with time) are updated. There are three types of these dynamic attributes: attributes that are a direct function of time (e.g. age); attributes that are function of events that happen over time (e.g. number of children); and those attributes that change from interaction with other agents (e.g. an agent's number of “active friends” In this work, the agents have 20 (4 demographic and 16 non-demographic) attributes that are used to estimate the utility function as per Topology describes agents' relationships and interactions with each other. The two main concerns of modeling agent interactions are identifying who is, or could be, interacting and the mechanism of the interaction ( For this framework, the ABM model uses a static network in which connections are defined at the beginning of the simulation and do not change ( The algorithm that generates the network in the framework is based on a random graph algorithm. The algorithm is modified, however, to account for homophily (i.e. a higher likelihood that individuals will be connected to other individuals who are similar to them). We accounted for homophily in this work because homophily, which is the property of social networks that leads to the observation that individuals tend to be similar to their friends, is one of the most basic properties of social networks ( Agents' zip code is assigned using Monte Carlo sampling from the zip code distribution over a given total population. Agents are considered “similar” if the difference between their zip codes is equal to or less than a “proximity” value defined by the user. As with random networks, we started with a goal of a binomial degree distribution (that is, the distribution of number of neighbors/friends is binomial) with probability of a connection, We specified the “proximity” value as zero in the case study in this work. This implies that agents are similar if they have the same zip code. We defined the probability Changing perceptions are modeled as a diffusion process over a social network (e.g. word of mouth information transfer) in this framework. The most common diffusion models, in the literature, are the Bass, SIR (“Susceptible, infected, removed”) and SIS (“Susceptible, infected, susceptible”) models ( Similarly, we assume that the probability of a person adopting the new perception of the mine's sustainability depends on the number of friends that person has and a stochastic process that is a function of the proportion of friends who have adopted the new view. We assume that agent innovation or spontaneous adoption is negligible (i.e. diffusion is primarily by word of mouth) because “word of mouth” is seen to be the predominant mode of diffusion in many cases and has major influences on individuals' behavior (  The statuses of an agent's friends are determined to ascertain whether they are active or not. If some of an agent's active friends have adopted the new perception, then it is necessary to determine the agent's likelihood of adopting the new perception based on strength of influence from his friends (  Agents' death is simulated using the death rate distribution over the age of the agents in this model. Monte Carlo sampling is used to determine whether an agent is dead or not at each time step. Dead agents are removed from the pool of decision makers by assigning “0” to their decision state variable. Conversely, those agents who are living (i.e. decision makers) have their decision variable set to “1”. During the step to initialize agents, the ages of the agents are simulated using Monte Carlo sampling, based on the age distribution provided by the user. To introduce new agents into the decision pool, all agents that have attained 18 ABM validation presents practical and scientific challenges for researchers. As noted by The demographic attributes used in this model are gender, age, level of education and annual income. In the validation experiment, the proportion of male and female agents was equal. For all non-demographic attributes, Using these inputs, we conducted an experiment with 20,000 agents and 20 iterations to predict the level of acceptance for the base case option (no dynamic changes were evaluated in this experiment). This was based on computational cost and a reasonable coefficient of variation (1.6% for the validation experiment) after 20 iterations. The validation results ( We recognize that further work needs to be done to obtain empirical data to fully validate the model. Also, one could easily argue that the validation in this work simply verifies that the utility function, which is derived from Que's discrete choice model, has been properly incorporated into the model. The authors believe this is not the case, since the stochastic aspects of the agent-based model do not necessarily rely on any input from Que's work. Regardless, however, we believe further work is necessary to comprehensively validate the modeling framework. The motivation for these experiments was to illustrate how to use the proposed framework to analyze how, in a given mining community, interactions between people, in the presence of changing perceptions of mine impacts, can influence acceptance of the mining project. We run simulations to evaluate how an improvement in residents' perception of the air pollution situation (this is a highly visible impact in Salt Lake City as the particulate emissions are visible in the community) can influence their acceptance of the mining project. The air pollution situation is simulated to have improved by 1 on the scale used by We used the same discrete choice model and input data in In addition, the model requires the time step per interaction as an input. The time step in this context, is the time it takes for meaningful interaction between the agents on an issue probable. We set time step per interaction to 0.1 The initial experiment only simulates the changing level of acceptance due to diffusion of the new perception over the social network over a four year period. We assume that this period is short enough to ensure the discrete choice model is still valid. This is a limitation of this work that needs to be explored with future work (i.e. how long is a discrete choice model valid for?). Two additional experiments were carried out to demonstrate how the model responds to changes in average degree (average number of friends) and the time between meaningful interactions (time step). In the time step experiments, we run different simulations with the time step taking values of 0.1, 0.2, 0.25 and 0.5  The results, as shown in The rapid adoption shown in these results may not always be observed in such situations. The results of these simulation experiments are, in part, because we simulated scenarios where adoption is through imitation resulting from unidirectional (i.e. the model only allows interaction where the early adopters of the new perceptions convince agents who have not yet adopted to change their perception) word of mouth ( In this work, the initial slow build up is the result of the fact that very few agents have adopted the new perception of air pollution at this stage of the simulation. Consequently, most of the potential adopters of this new perception have no neighbor who has the new perception and zero chance of changing their own perception (  It is also important to note that the different replications differ the most during the “rapid adoption” phase of the simulation ( The results from the time step experiments are shown in  Nevertheless, the takeoff point still occurs at the approximately same time regardless of average number of friends. This shows that the time to takeoff is independent of the connectedness of the network (average degree). As explained earlier, prior to takeoff the adoption process is primarily driven by the small probabilities that exist just because an agent has at least one friend who has adopted the new perception. Rapid adoption begins when most agents have at least one friend who has adopted and the increased adoption rate is the result of higher and higher probabilities of adoption as the ratio of an agent's friends who have adopted increases. Hence, it is not surprising that the time to takeoff is not affected by the average number of friends. As noted earlier, this work attempts to provide a framework for mine managers and other stakeholders to anticipate changes that can occur in community acceptance over time due to changes in perceptions. These changing perceptions occur due to engineering design choices, changing community demographics, and environmental performance of the mine. This new method provides a tool to assess design alternatives and various scenarios to understand the associated risks and sustainability outcomes. Although the current model (and case study) has limitations, it illustrates a pathway for using ABM to assess potential effects of specific changes in perception on social license to operate. Specifically, this work shows that using an agent-based model like the one presented in this work with agent utility function derived from valid discrete choice models can be used to explore the interactions between information diffusion and community acceptance. The model has some limitations that require future work including the fact that the: (1) social network used in this work is only assumed to be representative of the mining community and has not been observed in the community; (2) model does not account for different roles (e.g. active or passive, resistant or receptive, and innovators or followers) for individuals during information diffusion; and (3) model has not been fully validated with empirical data from a mining community or communities. Also, the model assumes that the analyst can isolate the “local community.” The system is thus bounded to a particular community and assumes no significant interaction between individuals in the community under study and in other communities that can impact perceptions. Notwithstanding, we believe the general framework presents a novel contribution that allows these limitations to be addressed in future work. Readers should note that the case study results are, at best, applicable to the particular instance. The results do not represent, as far as we know, a general trend. In fact, the whole point of this framework is to help stakeholders explore different scenarios to understand potential outcomes of changes in perception due to engineering design choices, changing community demographics, and the environmental performance of the mine so as to incorporate those possible outcomes into design, policy or government decisions. By incorporating appropriate utility function, social network model and other input parameters for a particular situation, an analyst is likely to generate results that differ from what is presented in this case study. However, those results will provide insights that are useful for decision-making in that context. Additionally, the model and framework presented here can be applied beyond mining in such applications as oil and gas projects and other large scale engineering projects such as construction of fossil fuel power plants and hydro-electric power stations. The framework is applicable in situations where the project has a relatively long duration (e.g. more than five years), significant environmental and socio-economic impacts, and distinct phases (e.g. construction, operation and decommissioning) with different impacts. This study successfully developed a framework for modeling the effect of information diffusion on dynamic community acceptance of mining using agent-based modeling (ABM). The model evaluates information diffusion due to word-of-mouth social contagion. A case study of mining activity in Salt Lake City, Utah, USA is used to illustrate the framework. The case study relies on discrete choice modeling by This work presents a framework that can be used to understand the effect of information diffusion and social interactions on community acceptance. The framework can be applied to other resource extraction projects and to large engineering projects in general. Although, the case study uses a utility function that includes 20 demographic and non-demographic factors, the list of factors will necessarily be facts and circumstances determination. Besides the utility function, however, there are other aspects relevant to understanding the changes in community acceptance over time that are not accounted for in the current work. Those aspects include the role of the agents in the diffusion process (active or passive, resistant or receptive, and innovators or followers) and diversity of social networks, including those with hierarchies. These aspects can be incorporated into the model as part of future work. Finally, future work should attempt to validate the diffusion process and its effect on preferences for mining projects. The authors thank Dr. Kyle Bahr for reviewing the first draft of this work.