A novel composite adsorbent, phenol@MIL-101(Cr), was prepared using MIL-101(Cr) functionalized with different amount of phenol via an impregnation technique. These new composite adsorbents were characterized by X-ray diffraction, thermogravimetric analysis, scanning electron microscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and N2 adsorption and the results showed that the phenol was immobilized in the MIL-101(Cr) structure. The adsorption performance of the composite for rubidium ions from aqueous solutions was evaluated by batch tests and using a fixed-bed breakthrough column at room temperature (25 °C). The phenol@MIL-101(Cr) exhibited high Rb+ uptake capacities, which are superior to all those previously reported in the literature. This excellent capacity is attributed to the exchange of acidic protons between the phenol groups and the rubidium ions. The saturated adsorbents were easily regenerated by washing with an ammonium nitrate solution. After regeneration, more than 90% of the rubidium ion capacity was maintained. Based on these results, MIL-101(Cr) modified by phenol should be a promising adsorbent for the separation and purification of rubidium ions from salt lakes.Rubidium (Rb), a metallic element with active chemical properties, has the second lowest ionization potential of the non-radioactive alkali metals This has led to the development of new methods for the separation and purification of Rb from resources such as salt lakes. Potential methods of solvent extraction is an economical, efficient, and environmentally friendly method for the separation and purification of dilute metal ion solutions Nowadays, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) have been widely studied as promising adsorbents, due to the combination of their particular features, such as high surface area, tunable pore size, and hydrothermal stability On the other hand, although there are some literatures to study the Rb adsorption performance by some diverse inorganic adsorbents Hence, in order to efficiently improve the uptake capacity and selectivity of the rubidium from water solution, we report the preparation of phenol@MIL-101(Cr) composite material through impregnation technique for the first time. Moreover, phenol@MIL-101(Cr) composite material was applied in adsorptive rubidium ions from aqueous liquid. The equilibrium and kinetics parameters are studied to describe the rate and mechanism of adsorption to determine the factor controlling the rate of adsorption and to find out the possibility of using this MOFs composite material as an effective adsorbent for rubidium capture. Chromium(III) nitrate nonahydrate (99%), terephthalic acid (≥99%), 2-naphthol (99%), benzaldehyde (purified by redistillation, ≥99.5%), β-caryophyllene (≥98.5%, sum of enantiomers, GC), and acetamide (≥99.0%) were all obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. and were used as received. All other chemicals and solvents used were obtained from commercial sources and were of the highest purity available. Inorganic reagents, RbCl (Jinhua Southeast Chemical Reagent Tech Co., purity>99.5%) and organic reagents, phenol (Beijing Realkan Seprtech Co., purity>95%) and cyclo hexane (Beijing Modern Eastern Fine Chemical Co., purity N 99%), were used in the present work. MIL-101(Cr) were synthesized from chromium chloride hexahydrate (CrCl X-ray diffraction (XRD) data was recorded from a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray Diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( In the Rb Fixed-bed adsorption studies were conducted to evaluate the column performance for Rb ion adsorption on as-prepared MOFs. The experiments were conducted with a vertical down-flow Perspex column of 0.5 cm inner diameter and 10 cm bed height (Z) packed with 2 g MOFs. A feed flow rate ( The total adsorbed ion quantity ( The total percentage of the Rb ions removed by the column, that is, the column performance, can be calculated from Equation Rb elution was achieved with 5 mol/L NH Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms for PH@MIL-101(Cr) and the blank MIL-101(Cr) are shown in The SEM images showed that MIL-101(Cr) samples before and after loading with PH had a similar appearance, i.e. a porous and the overall octahedral shape ( The TGA analyses of both PH@MIL-101(Cr) and blank MIL-101(Cr) samples were carried out in the temperature range from 25 up to 800 °C, under N The synthesized materials are analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) to verify its identity, and the XRD patterns of MIL-101(Cr) and PH doped MIL-101(Cr) samples were presented in FT-IR is a strong analytical tool to confirm the existence of functional groups. The FT-IR spectra of the MIL-101(Cr) and PH@MIL-101(Cr) samples are shown in The solution pH is one of the key factors which may influence Rb Preliminary investigations on the adsorption isotherms and adsorption rates of rubidium ions in aqueous chloride solutions by MIL-101(Cr) and PH@MIL-101(Cr) samples were conducted through batch test studies. As shown in The calculated constants according to the three kinetic equations and the Batch experimental data are often difficult to apply directly to fixed-bed sorption columns because the isotherms are unable to give accurate data for scale-up as the flow in the column is not at equilibrium. Fixed-bed column operation allows more efficient utilization of the adsorption capacity than the batch process. Adsorption tests on PH15@MIL-101(Cr) with different concentrations of Rb In this paper, partial doping of the MIL-101(Cr) with phenol been successfully carried out using an impregnation technique. Characterization of this composite material was confirmed by XRD, TGA, SEM, and N This research was supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at