Objectives
                  Outstanding mechanical properties, resistance to scratching and high biocompatibility make zirconia/alumina ceramics interesting for dental applications. To solve the problem of the well-known low temperature degradation and to provide stable mechanical properties a novel zirconia alloy ((Y,Nb)-TZP/alumina) was developed. The aim of this study was to investigate the initial bone cell response to this new zirconia/alumina composite ceramic.
               
                  Methods
                  HOS cells were cultured on zirconia/alumina composite (Zc) and pure titanium (Ti) discs. Surface topography was examined by atomic force microscopy (AFM), cell morphology by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Cell proliferation (MTS) and alkaline phosphatase activity was measured at 1, 4 and 8 days. The mRNA expression of Cycline D1, the cell cycle regulating gene, integrin β 1, osteonectin (ON) and β-actin were evaluated by RT-PCR analysis after 12, 24 and 48h.
               
                  Results
                  Both substrates showed a very smooth character with R
                     a-values in the range of 0.002–0.113μm supporting a continuous cellular growth. After 8 days, cell proliferation on Zc was higher than on Ti. The mRNA expression of cyclin D1 showed similar activity after 48h on both surfaces, ALP activity was higher on Zc after 8 days. ON expression however showed no difference between the two groups.
               
                  Significance
                  Our data demonstrate that this new zirconia composite ceramic showed at least equivalent or slightly better biological response of osteoblast-like HOS cells than pure titanium during a short-time cell culture period.Several biomaterials and surface modification methods have been introduced to improve osseointegration rate and reduce healing time for implant therapy. Titanium has been used for several decades and proved its safety and efficacy as an implant material Despite of exceptionally high mechanical properties, drawbacks of Y-TZP for dental applications are the low temperature degradation (LTD) and extraordinary white color Commercially pure titanium (cp Ti) bars were machined into discs (diameter 19 HOS (human osteosarcoma) cells were provided from the Korean Cell Line Bank. The cells were maintained as subconfluent monolayers in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 The cells were cultured for 6, 24, 48 and 96 The cell viability was evaluated by measuring mitochondrial dehydrogenase activity with the MTS assay (Cell Titer 96™AQ Nonradioactive Cell Proliferation Assay, Promega, USA) after 1, 4 and 8 days in culture. The assay measures the conversion of methyl tetrazol sulfate (MTS) into an aqueous soluble formazan product. Before incubation with MTS reagent each sample was rinsed 3 times with PBS. Forty microliter of the reaction solution (100 For the determination of the catalytic activity of alkaline phosphatase, the osteoblasts were washed with PBS and lysed in 1.5 The osteoblastic differentiation of HOS cells was evaluated by RT-PCR examination of integrin β1, osteonectin, cyclin D1 and β-actin. The cells were plated at a density of 5 Data were expressed as mean value (MV) When the discs ( The general shape and growth pattern of the HOS cells were observed using scanning electron microscopy. Both substrates supported continuous cellular growth from 6 to 96 MTS assay involves a conversion of tetrazolium salt in MTS agent into a soluble formazan product when incubated with viable cells. Thus, the absorbance of formazan reflected the level of the cell metabolism. The mRNA expression of cyclin D1, one of the growth promoting genes of cells showed greater activity on Zc than on the control and the Ti group until 24 In ALP assay, control % of OD of cells was increased according to the culture time on both Zc and Ti specimens. The ALP activity of the HOS cells on Zc was lower than that on Ti after 4 days; however, it was higher than on Ti after 8 days ( The mRNA expression of integrin β1 of HOS cells on the Zc discs ( The brittleness of ceramics is the main disadvantage that prevents its application for restoring load bearing areas in the medical and dental field. Zirconia is a biocompatible material and has the highest mechanical properties among oxide ceramics; however, it experiences the low temperature degradation. In the last two decades, the application of zirconia ceramics was mainly limited to hip joint replacement in orthopedics. Reports on clinical failures of ceramic hip joints clearly showed the accelerated aging of some zirconia products Therefore, the long-term mechanical stability of zirconia ceramics is the pre-requisite for its application for load bearing purposes. The new developed (Y,Nb)-TZP/alumina composite material was proved to be free of low temperature degradation phenomenon and has good biocompatibility with soft tissue Biomaterials for implantation in bone should have favorable cellular response in terms of cell attachment, adhesion, proliferation and differentiation. Surface characteristics like topography, chemistry or surface energy, play an important role in osteoblast adhesion on biomaterials Among them, osteonectin, integrin β1 and β-actin were evaluated and SEM was used to observe the morphology of cells attached on the biomaterial. The proliferation of mammalian cells is strictly regulated by extracellular signals, which exert their effects on cells primarily during the G1 phase of the cell cycle and regulate progression to the S-phase. D-type cyclins are some of the major mediators of the G1–S-phase progression, serving as targets of growth factors that integrate extracellular signals into the core cell-cycle regulators Cell adhesion to extracellular matrix ligands is primarily mediated by integrins, a widely expressed family of transmembrane adhesion receptors Integrin β1 is known as the major integrin sub-unit involved in osteoblast adhesion on biomaterials SEM observations showed that the osteoblast-like cells were well spread and attached onto both surfaces. In MTS assay showed that cell proliferation increased up to 4 days on the titanium specimens however, it decreased after 8 days. Cell proliferation on zirconia increased continuously up to 8 days. At 4 days, cell proliferation was almost identical between Ti and Zc specimens. At 8 days, cells on Zc showed more active proliferation compared to Ti. Another indicator of cell proliferation, cyclin D activity, was constant on Zc whereas Ti showed increased activity up to 8 days continuously. The results are somewhat contradictory to assay, it may be due to the other growing factors influencing cell proliferation. Osteoblast differentiation generally implies ALP activity and specific proteins like osteocalcin, osteopontin, type I collagen and in vitro mineralization capacity. In our experiment the ALP activity increased according to the culture time. At 4-day culture, the cells on the Ti specimens showed higher activity than on the Zc specimens. However, at 8-day culture, Zc showed a higher level of ALP activity. In general, the cells cultured on the Zc discs showed higher initial adhesion properties and a better proliferation and differentiation. The proliferation capacity of cells on the Ti specimens was highest after 4 days then it dropped. The ALP activity increased continuously up to 8 days. The cells on Ti proliferated until 4 days and then started to differentiate. On Zc the cells proliferated longer and more actively differentiated than those on Ti. In bone, the extracellular matrix (ECM) is largely composed of ECM proteins, such as collagen, osteonectin and other glycoproteins. Osteonectin, a secreted phosphorylated glycoprotein is an integral component of the noncollagenous matrix of bone. It is involved in binding Ca Our results show that the overall cell response to pure titanium and zirconia/alumina composite materials was comparable. It seems that the future stands on the combination of alumina and zirconia to obtain advanced composites but the aging properties of these materials should be examined in detail (Y,Nb)-TZP/alumina composite ceramic showed at least equivalent to or slightly better biological response of osteoblast-like cells than pure titanium during the short-term cell culture period. Therefore, the new zirconia/alumina composite can be a good candidate for load bearing implant materials. This study was supported by the grant of Ministry of Science & Technology (Regenomics, M10528010004-06N2801-00410).