To reduce environmental pollution and waste of biomass from Ginkgo biloba leaf residues (GBLRs), we developed a cost-effective enzyme system to hydrolyze GBLRs into available reducing sugars (RS). Biomass characteristics of GBLRs were investigated, which indicated that the acid hydrolyzed fraction was 49.43% of the dry weight of GBLRs. The fraction could be effectively converted into RS by an enzyme cocktail with high polygalacturonase activity without traditionally intricate pretreatment. The strain A32 isolated from the ancient ginkgo soil was used for the production of the enzyme cocktail, and a response surface methodology was used to optimize the enzymatic production. The enzyme cocktail released 87.2% of RS from GBLRs at 35 ℃ for 72 h with 1% (m/v) of loading, and the RS concentration arrived 8.95 ± 0.39 mg/ml with 9% of GBLRs loading. The cost-effective system of self-prepared enzyme cocktail is promising for facilitating GBLRs' bio-based industry. Lignocelluloses, including cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, and lignin naturally construct a complexly heterogeneous matrix in the plant cell wall, which forms the biomass recalcitrance to enzymatic hydrolysis of the cell wall ( In present work, we aim to develop an effective saccharification system for enzymatic hydrolysis of GBLRs into the valuably fermentable sugar by a self-prepared enzyme cocktail replacing costly commercial enzymes. The biomass character and enzymatic hydrolysis property of GBLRs will be studied. Then fungi will be selected for optimal production of enzyme cocktail from the ancient ginkgo soil based on our previous work, and the optimal condition of enzymatic hydrolysis will be determined yet. Finally, a cost-effective saccharification system for hydrolysis of GBLRs will be established that will be beneficial to facilitate the utility of GBLRs or other agro-industrial residues. Ginkgo leaves were harvested on Oct. in 2018, and its industrial residues were friendly supported by the Zhijian Pharmaceutical technology co. Ltd. in Shaanxi province, China. In the lab, the raw materials were further dried in an electric blast oven at 50 ℃ for 48 h. The cooled leaves were then broken through 2 mm sieve pore, and the powders were sealed in polythene bags and stored under 4 ℃ until analysis. Further shatter will be based on the experiment requirement. The composition of GBLs and GBLRs was analyzed to refer to the NREL method ( X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected by using PANalytical X’pert Pro diffractometer (PANalytical, Holland), which was equipped with a conventional X-ray tube (CuKα 40 kV, 20 mA, line focus) in transmission mode. XRD patterns of GBLs and GBLRs were recorded at a step size of 0.0263° and 165 s/step in the range of 6–40° (2θ). The Crystallinity index (CrI) was concluded refering to Four commercial enzymes were used for the hydrolysis of GBLRs, including E1 Cellulase from Soil samples from 0 to 25 cm soil horizon was a mix, which was collected from the soil under the ancient ginkgo trees (local in Taixing city, Jiangsu province China). Fresh soil samples 1.0 g were suspended in 100 ml of sterile tap water with stirring at 200 rpm for 15 min. Then suspension for 15 min, the supernatant liquid was serially diluted from 10 In fermentation trials, three-loop spores of the strain A32 with diameter 0.5 cm of the agar plate were inoculated into 100 ml of a liquid medium with different biomass. Fermentation was carried out in the incubator at 30 ℃ with a rotate speed of 150 rpm for 9 days or 5 days based on the aim of the experiment. One milliliter of each sample was taken for enzymatic activity analysis every 24 h. The optimal operation was designed base on the above single factor experiments, which was detailed in the following section. Enzymatic activities of xylanase, Polygalacturonase (PG), CMCase and filter paper activity (FPA) were assayed refering to the previous method ( The production of PG was optimized by a response surface methodology (RSM), as described by Seven times extraction were conducted to GBLs and GBLRs using water, absolute ethanol, and acetone. As shown in Cellulose crystal is highly resistant against enzymatic hydrolysis of lignocellulose due to encumber in the accessibility of the enzyme ( Complex structural and chemical mechanisms in plant biomass have evolved for resisting assault from the microbial and animal kingdoms, and various biomass is of different chemical components and matrix structure ( Sixty-five filamentous fungi isolates were obtained from the soil under the ancient ginkgo tree. For the investigation of the fungal ability of decomposing GBLs, each isolate was inoculated to ginkgo leaf media without other additives, and then lignocellulosic enzymes were analyzed. Five isolates producing high activity of enzyme were selected for further fermentation tests. As shown in The strain A32 grew well from 26 ℃ to 38 ℃, and the higher temperature was with faster growth and forming conidia. Black conidia were formed about 72 h at 30 ℃ in the potato agar plates. However, excessive temperature over 35 ℃ restrained the fungal growth with thick and strong hypha replaced by thin and weak hypha. Based on the results, the suitable culture temperature range for the black Response surface methodology (RSM) is essentially a set of mathematical and statistical methods for designing experiments, building models, finding the best set of factor levels to achieve the best value for the desired response, which has shown promising results in industrial research ( The 2-D contour plots in For proper use of the enzyme cocktail, characteristics of the lignocellulolytic enzyme produced by Pretreatment processed by mechanical comminution is a prerequisite step for further chemical or biochemical processing of lignocellulosic biomass before hydrolyzed using lignocellulosic enzymes ( GBLRs biomass is a widely available bio-refinery feedstock in China. In present work, we have developed a cost-effective enzyme cocktail system for enzymatic hydrolysis of GBLRs’ lignocellulose to the available RS. The enzyme cocktail preparation was produced via fermenting GBLs by the fungi strain A 32 which was isolated from the soil under the ancient ginkgo tree especially. The suitable condition for effectively enzymatic hydrolysis is pH 4.0, with a temperature from 35 ℃ to 40 ℃. Under this condition, the released fraction of RS is 87.2% of the total RS from the extractives and the acid hydrolysis, and the RS concentration arrived at 8.95 ± 0.39 mg/ml, with 9% of GBLRs loadings after 72 h of enzymatic saccharification. The cost-efficientive system of enzyme cocktail is promising for facilitating GBLRs bio-based industry, which also provides a value protocol for the use of some kinds of industrial plant waste.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank Zhijian Pharmaceutical Technology Co. Ltd for friendly supporting GBLs and GBLRs materials. This work obtained support from the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: