Every year, chemical engineers from Australia, New Zealand and, increasingly, beyond, come together at the Annual Australasian Chemical Engineering Conference, which has long been known as Chemeca. In the 40th of these gatherings, around 550 delegates from academia, government and industry gathered in Adelaide, Australia. The contributions spanned chemical engineering as broadly defined in the 21st Century. Drawing on the referees’ assessments of the conference paper – each was subject to double refereeing – 23 contributors were invited post-conference to submit a fuller manuscript to A major focus of Chemeca 2010 was energy, which is the subject of the first three papers of this special issue. In the first of these, Professor Müller-Steinhagen, who delivered the Rolf Prince Plenary Lecture, describes the work being undertaken by the Institute of Technical Thermodynamics of the German Aerospace Centre (DLR) on replacing traditional engine generators and auxiliary power units in civil aircraft with more efficient hydrogen-powered fuel cell systems whose by-products – water and oxygen-depleted air – are also used. The second and third contributions to this issue – one from a team of the Institut für Mikrotechnik in Germany and a second from Newcastle University in Australia – describe their respective work concerned with developing viable micro-reactor technologies for steam-reforming of hydrocarbons, the most common method today for producing hydrogen. The hope is these reactors will at some stage in the not too distant future provide the basis for scalable production of hydrogen for mobile transport and similar smaller-scale distributed applications. Australia is one of the few developed countries that managed to avoid recession during the Global Financial Crisis. This has to a large extent been due to the exploitation of its vast mineral reserves. It is fitting, therefore, that the fourth and fifth contributions to this special issue are related to minerals processing. In the first of these, a team from the Ian Wark Institute at the University of South Australia, present work that contributes to better understanding of why it is so difficult to recover fine dispersed mineral particles using flotation technology. The second contribution, which comes from Anh Nguyen and co-workers at University of Queensland, reports on how salt type and concentration affect bubble coalescence, a subject of direct relevance to flotation-based recovery of minerals. These papers demonstrate that there is still much to be done in minerals processing as industry seeks to exploit new and previously challenging deposits. The next three contributions to this special issue are broadly focused on fluid flow. The first of these sees a multi-institutional team come together to demonstrate how CFD may be used to model bubbly flows, which are of relevance across the process industry. In the seventh contribution, a group from the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) of Australia reports on a novel method for the study of packed bed-based liquid aerosol capture, and improved understanding and design correlations obtained using this method. The eighth contribution to this special issue outlines a new method for determining the pore size distribution of typical cores taken from oil reservoirs – understanding of these distributions are essential to improving flow in reservoirs and, hence, recovery of oil. The next set of four contributions to the special issue are concerned with another major theme of the conference – sustainable process engineering. The first of these, which comes from a team lead by one of the more than 20 keynote speakers at Chemeca 2010, Prof. Paul Lant, is concerned with identifying economically viable ways of recovering phosphorous – one of the most important chemical elements on Earth due to its importance in fertilizers – from domestic wastewater. In the tenth contribution to this special issue, a second keynote speaker – Prof. Yadav of the Institute of Chemical Technology in Mumbai, India – outlines his work focused on optimising the oxidation of 1-octanol to 1-octanal, a compound used extensively in the fragrance and food industries. In the third of the four contributions focused on sustainable processing, the authors outline a new approach termed SUSOP The next two papers of this special issue are concerned with control of processes, a topic not un-related to the last of the previous group of contributions. The first of these two papers, which comes from another of the keynote speakers (Brent Young), is concerned with better understanding the effect of so-called sample jitter – irregular data sampling – on the control of processes. This problem is of particular interest when, for example, wireless technology is used to transmit data to the controller, and for micro-processes such as those outlined at the start of this special issue. The second of these two contributions is concerned with further developing the work of Bao and co-workers at the University of New South Wales in determining the dynamic behaviour of real processes at the design stage so as to reduce the risk of costly retrofits or rebuilds at a later stage due to poor controllability. The next set of papers is concerned with developing the use of spray drying technologies to make high-value added products. In the first of these contributions, Prof. Xiao Dong Chen of Monash University, another of the keynote speakers of Chemeca 2010, focuses on identifying the optimal conditions for the production of crystalline lactose, an important step in improving the shelf-life of lactose, a product widely used in the food and other industries. The second paper of this group, this time from a team lead by Dr. Selomulya also of Monash, outlines the use of a novel microfluidic spray drying technology to produce more uniformly sized (in this case magnetic) particles, a challenge for traditional spray drying technologies. The penultimate paper of this special issue is concerned with understanding the crystallisation of ibuprofen – a widely used anti-inflammatory drug – in ethanol, with a view to developing improved methods for its purification. The final paper here, which is a contribution from Dr. Wilson of Chemical Engineering at Cambridge, outlines a novel technology for the high-throughput characterisation of soft-solid films on surfaces – fluid dynamic gauging or FDG – so as to it can be used to consider multiple points on a surface or different surfaces, and demonstrated its application to enzyme-based cleaning of protein soils. In conclusion, we commend this special issue as examples of the excellent work that is typically presented at the Annual Australasian Chemical Engineering Conference, or Chemeca.