An integrated hydrometallurgical process for the production of zinc and lead concentrates from lean oxidized zinc ores by alkaline leaching, followed by two-step sulfide precipitation of lead and zinc sulfides, is developed. The lean zinc oxidized ore was firstly ground to a size below 0.2mm, followed by alkaline leaching at 90°C for 120min in NaOH solution, in which both zinc and lead are effectively extracted. Lead concentrates were then highly selectively and quantitatively produced from the leach solution by adding sodium sulfide as precipitant. Zinc concentrates were obtained in the same way from the Pb-free solution. Optimum conditions of lead precipitation were found to be 1.8 Na2S·9H2O/Pb weight ratio, 90°C, 60min and those for zinc precipitation were 2.4 Na2S·9H2O/Zn weight ratio, 90°C, 180min. Finally, a scale-up experiment was carried out and found that the lead and zinc total extraction both reached above 80% calculated from the ores and the quality of lead and zinc concentrates can meet industrial requirements for roasting processes. Meanwhile, it was found that the loss of NaOH is negligible and the main consumption of chemicals was that of sodium sulfide.As the primary source of zinc, natural sulfide ores are steadily getting depleted, and for future demand there is an obvious recognition that the recovery of zinc from oxide ores is an alternative. Oxidized ores are the main source of zinc after sulfides and are generally found in silicate or carbonate forms in different parts of the world. In the past years, many processes have been tested for treating the oxide ore, such as flotation, gravity separation combined with flotation, hydrometallurgy and pyrometallurgy etc. It is generally known that oxidized minerals of zinc, lead and copper are more difficult to float than their sulfide counterparts. This fact is due to the higher solubility of oxide minerals as well as the extensive hydration of oxide surfaces ( Leaching of zinc oxide ores in various solution media was studied and the best leaching results were obtained with alkaline media ( Zinc and lead usually occur together in a variety of mineral zinc ores and their corresponding lead ores. Therefore, the selective and quantitative separation of lead from zinc is an important step in the effective use of these metal sources. The separation of lead from zinc in alkaline leaching solution by sodium sulfide precipitation had been studied ( The objective of this study is to explore an integrated hydrometallurgical process for the production of zinc and lead concentrates from lean oxidized zinc ores by alkaline leaching, followed by two-step sulfide precipitation of lead and zinc sulfides. The effects of experimental parameters, such as additive amount of sodium sulfide, reaction temperature, time of reaction, and NaOH concentration, on the precipitation of lead and zinc sulfide concentrates were investigated. The investigation was carried out on a lean oxidized zinc ore sample from Mengzi City in China. The ore sample was dried and ground to a particle size below 0.2 The sodium sulfide used was Na Leaching experiments of oxide ore were carried out in a flask placed on a heated magnetic stirrer-unit under the following conditions: L:S ratios (v/w), 5:1; NaOH concentration, 240 To 200 The concentrations of NaOH and zinc in the solution were determined by the method of combining EDTA complexometric and acid base titration ( The precipitation efficiencies of lead and zinc were calculated according to the following equation: Where C The leaching test results are shown in The effects of Na Obviously, over 99.90% of lead in the leaching solution can be precipitated by sodium sulfide at the optimum conditions, and the solid precipitated phase that contains a mixture of lead sulfide, and much less sodium–lead disulfide, forms the lead concentrates. The zinc can be precipitated from the lead-depleted filtrate using sodium sulfides, and the NaOH solution free from Zn and Pb can be recycled to the next leaching process of the ores. However, the zinc leaching rate will be seriously affected if the circulating solution contains sulfide ions. The concentration of zinc should be held above 4 The reaction time has no effect on the zinc precipitation, yet longer times are benefit to regenerate the alkaline in the liquid of zinc precipitated ( The integrated process based on the above results is shown in When 1200 The quality of the lead and zinc concentrates obtained in the scale-up experiments are shown in The leaching residue was washed with 5% NaOH solution and then with water. The results of the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) are lower than hazardous constituent limits of The solubility constants of ZnS and PbS are 2 Sulfide in aqueous solution may be present as S Chemical reactions taking place in the sulfide precipitation processes are proposed. The forms of lead and zinc in strongly alkaline NaOH solution are Na When the sodium–lead hydroxide sulfide and its zinc analogues are hydrolyzed in water after having been heated for hours, the species are transformed into PbS or ZnS and hydroxyl ions are released. The loss of NaOH in the whole process is low. The initial concentration of NaOH in the leaching was 240 Considering that the NaOH solution is constantly recycled in the system and the chemical composition of the raw ore is very complex, impurity ions such as As, Al, Cu, Fe will be accumulated in the recycled solution. These impurities will affect the quality of zinc and lead concentrates. Fe Pb and Zn in zinc–lead oxidized ore can be leached and transferred into NaOH solution effectively. The lead concentrates were obtained from lead precipitation with sodium sulfide in leach solution. The zinc concentrates were produced in the same way from the Pb-free solution, and the Zn-depleted solution can be recycled to the next leaching step. The lead and zinc total extractions can reach above 80% and the quality of lead and zinc concentrates meet the Industry Standard. The alkaline leaching-sulfide precipitation process developed in this work may therefore be of industrial interest.