Background
                  Reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) in complex shoulder fractures is ever more frequently. This study compares clinical and radiologic results of patients with comminuted proximal humeral fractures (PHFs) treated with RSA, with and without tuberosities grafting.
               
                  Methods
                  Between January 2009 and June 2014, 55 patients aged ≥65 years with 3- and 4-part PHFs were treated surgically. Patients’ files and the hospital’s digital database were reviewed retrospectively with at least 5-year of follow up. We constituted three groups according to the tuberosity consolidation: patients in whom the tuberosities showed anatomic consolidation (Group I) and patients either with secondary displacement of the tuberosities (Group II) or without tuberosity repair (Group III).
               
                  Results
                  The 74% of the repaired tuberosities consolidated in anatomic position. Among range of motion (ROM), we reported that forward elevation, abduction and external rotation were significantly better in Group I than those in Group II-III. Furthermore, quick Dash score and Constant score showed more satisfied results in Group I. Regarding complications, not infection or instability were found in group I. On the other hand, in group II, we reported one patient with deep infection, leading to two steps surgery. In group III, we recorded two patients with instability required implant revision and one with deep infection treated by revision.
               
                  Conclusion
                  RSA showed satisfied results even at 5 year follow up. Preservation of the tuberosities in anatomic position improves active forward elevation and external rotation as well as patient satisfaction with less complications.Proximal humerus fractures (PHFs) are the third most commonly encountered fracture in elderly [ Between January 2009 and June 2014, 55 patients aged ≥65 years underwent RSA for 3- and 4-part PHFs in Clinical Orthopaedics, Ancona and Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Civitanova Marche Hospital. The mean age of the patients at the time of trauma was 77 years (range, 65–85 years). All patients have been operated within the first 10 days of the initial trauma. Over the follow-up period, 8 patients died, 3 were lost to follow-up, and the general health status of 2 did not allow radiologic/clinical examination. The dominant side was affected in 74% of patients. The mechanism of fracture was a simple fall in all patients. At January 2019, patients’ files and the hospital’s digital database were reviewed retrospectively. In total, 42 patients (37 women and 5 men) observed for at least five years after the surgery, were included in the study. According to Neer’s system, PHFs in 12 patients were classified as type 3 and those in 30 patients were classified as type 4. We excluded patients with neurological disorders, rheumatic diseases, previous shoulder surgeries, bifocal or neoplastic pathological fractures. After a careful collection of patient’s past medical history and preoperative assessment by the use of plain radiographs and computed tomography scans with 3-D reconstruction, reverse shoulder arthroplasty was indicated based on: type of fractures, bone stock quality, rotator cuff tear arthropathy, glenohumeral osteoarthritis and function of deltoid. An upper-limb specialist operated all patients. All patients underwent surgery on a standard operative table in the beach chair position under sedation and peripheral nerve blocks anesthesia. Each fracture was approached through a deltopectoral incision, and the humeral head was resected between the tuberosities. The glenoid and humerus were reamed and prepared for implant fixation (Lima Corporate, San Benedetto Del Friuli, Italy) using appropriate surgical instruments. The glenoid component with 10° of inferior tilt was fixed to the scapula with two screws as recommend by Gutierrez et al [ After the RSA surgery, each patient required a sling immobilization in abduction of 15-30° for 2 weeks, passive ROM of the shoulder and pendulum exercises with active elbow movements were allowed from the first day after surgery. After 2 weeks, progression to active assisted shoulder movements were initiated avoiding internal and external rotation until 40 days after surgery. Patients were clinically and radiographically evaluated postoperatively at 3, 6, 12, and 24 months and then yearly. All patients included in the study underwent clinical examination and radiological exams by our unit after about 5 year from the surgery. The mean follow-up was 65 months (range 60–68 months). It has been evaluated joint active range of motion in anterior elevation, abduction, elbow- to-body external rotation, hand-in-back internal rotation ( Data were collected and organized using Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). Categorical variabilities were expressed in numbers and percentages. Continuous variabilities were expressed by averages and standard deviation (DS). Data from three groups were compared using Mann-Whitney test, Patient demographics and clinical results are reviewed in Complex proximal humeral fractures in elderly are characterized by several challenges in view of poor bone quality, tuberosity comminution, technical failure and difficult postoperative care. In aging patient, the main goal of the treatment of PHFs with RSA, is to obtain a functional joint range of motion necessary to comfortably and effectively perform activities of daily living (ADL) (i.e. toileting activities). Namdari et al. demonstrated that shoulder requires approximately 120° of forward elevation, and 130° of abduction to complete a series of exercises comparable of ADL. At the same time, the same authors stated that subjects require a minimum of 57% and a maximum of 76% of full shoulder motion to be retained satisfied [ RSA is being increasingly used for complex, displaced fractures of the proximal humerus in older patients. It showed satisfied results even at 5 year follow up. Preservation of the tuberosities in anatomic position improves all sectors of motion as well as patient satisfaction with less complications. Techniques to improve tuberosity osteosynthesis should be warranted in order to get healing tuberosities even in the most challenging cases. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. None.