Diffusion and convection are the main modes of mass transport that occur during copper electrorefining. Diffusion determines the rate of copper transfer across the diffusion layer, which in turn, affects the dissolution of the anode and deposition on the cathode. The diffusion coefficient of cupric ion (DCu(II)) is a typical property that can be defined from the limiting current density (j
                     lim) values. In this work, the limiting current densities were measured for 24 different synthetic copper electrolytes over a temperature range of 50–70 °C using a rotating disc electrode (RDE). From this data, a model for j
                     lim and the corresponding models for DCu(II) were constructed using Levich (Model L), Koutecký-Levich (Model K) and mixed-control Newman equations (Model M). The models for j
                     lim and DCu(II) were designed, refined and analyzed using the modeling and design tool MODDE, with the temperature, copper, nickel, arsenic and sulfuric acid concentrations as variables. Results from this research show for the first time that an increase in arsenic concentration has a reciprocal effect on the DCu(II) under copper electrorefining conditions. Furthermore, the models were validated with 11 industrial electrorefining electrolytes with known compositions. Model L (DCu(II) based on Levich equation) was shown to provide the highest correlation with the industrial solutions when compared to the other models (Model K and M) considered and previously published diffusion coefficient models. Overall, this work provides an explanation for the previously observed data variances in the literature, investigates for the first time the combined effect of parameters on DCu(II) value in industrial copper electrolysis and clarifies the effect of arsenic on the DCu(II) of copper electrorefining electrolytes.area of the working electrode disc bulk concentration diffusion coefficient Faraday’s constant activation-limited current diffusion-limited current limiting current activation-limited current density diffusion-limited current density limiting current density exchange current density revolutions per minute hydrodynamic boundary layer diffusion boundary layer kinematic viscosity angular velocity The effects of the impurities on industrial copper electrorefining electrolytes have become increasingly important due to the use of increasingly impure ores ( In industrial copper electrorefining, the mass transport of copper ions is the limiting factor of the process ( The diffusion coefficient of cupric ion (D Under electrorefining conditions an increase in temperature results in a parallel increase in D Various methods can be used in order to define D In this work, the main diffusible ion in the test electrolytes is Cu(II) based on the standard electrode potentials and potential ranges used in the analysis. Since the standard reduction potential of Ni(II) is 587 mV lower than that of Cu(II), Ni is not reduced and thus does not diffuse to the surface under the investigated conditions ( The diffusion coefficient of cupric ion (D The objectives of this work were to define the D The synthetic copper electrolytes used in this work contained varying amounts of copper, nickel, arsenic and sulfuric acid ( Multivariate data analysis, design of experiments (DOE) and sensitivity analysis of the models were carried out using the modeling and design tool MODDE 8 (MKS Data Analytics Solutions AB). For the data analysis and design of experiments the experimental defining factors, responses and levels of the factors outlined in The limiting current density was measured using cathodic linear sweep voltammetry with a rotating disc electrode (RDE) apparatus (Model 616, Princeton Applied Research), jacketed three-electrode cell (0.2 dm Koutecký-Levich plots were also used to evaluate the activation-limited current ( The platinum RDE working electrode tip (diameter 4 mm) was polished prior to each experiment using silicon carbide paper (P1200 grit, Struers). After the polishing step was complete, the Pt surface was electrodeposited with copper and the uniformity of the surface was visually controlled. Electrolytes were heated to the desired temperature (50–70 °C) and deaerated by sparging with nitrogen gas for at least 15 min to minimize the dissolved oxygen content. The same deaeration procedure was used by Scan rate in RDE measurements was 0.01 V/s, with a potential step 4.88 mV and rotation rates of 30, 50, 100 rpm and in 6 cases additional measurements also performed at 70 rpm. The lower limit of the rotation rates was chosen according to Eq. The models obtained from this work were utilized to calculate the limiting current density values of the industrial solutions with Eq. The results present the The D  The D The effects of the factors investigated can be seen from the equations constructed ( The sensitivity analysis shown in Activation-limited current ( The effects of As and Ni on D The D The Limiting current densities under the conditions used for the industrial samples were calculated using Eq. The results detailed here outline for the first time the effect of arsenic on the D Combined effects of parameters composition and temperature on D Evaluation of the Overall, it can be concluded that in order to enhance industrial Cu electrorefining deposition rates it is important to maximize both This research was performed within the