Anaerobic up-flow fixed bed reactor and annular photocatalytic reactor were used to study the efficiency of integrated anaerobic digestion (AD) and ultraviolet (UV) photodegradation of real distillery effluent and raw molasses wastewater (MWW). It was found that UV photodegradation as a stand-alone technique achieved colour removal of 54% and 69% for the distillery and MWW, respectively, with a COD reduction of <20% and a negligible BOD reduction. On the other hand, AD as a single treatment technique was found to be effective in COD and BOD reduction with efficiencies of above 75% and 85%, respectively, for both wastewater samples. However, the AD achieved low colour removal efficiency, with an increase in colour intensity of 13% recorded when treating MWW while a colour removal of 51% was achieved for the distillery effluent. The application of UV photodegradation as a pre-treatment method to the AD process reduced the COD removal and biogas production efficiency. However, an integration in which UV photodegradation was employed as a post-treatment to the AD process achieved high COD removal of above 85% for both wastewater samples, and colour removal of 88% for the distillery effluent. Thus, photodegradation can be employed as a post-treatment technique to an AD system treating distillery effluent for complete removal of the biorecalcitrant and colour imparting compounds.Molasses-based distilleries are among the most polluting industries that generate large volumes of high strength wastewater. The effluent is characterized by extremely high chemical oxygen demand (COD) (80,000–100,000 To improve the efficiency of the AD process, coupling it with other treatment techniques has been proposed. These techniques can be applied simultaneously alongside AD or as either pre-treatment or post treatment methods to the AD process to achieve total colour and COD removal. Among these techniques, it has been established that an integrated AD-aerobic process does not result in any significant colour removal To this end, there is still a need to address the limitations in the existing distillery wastewater treatment methods and to develop an integrated treatment process that can provide a solution to the problems caused by such wastewater streams. Photodegradation, which is an advanced oxidation process (AOP) that is based on photogeneration of highly oxidative hydroxyl radicals, has been reported to have a good performance in melanoidin degradation for colour removal Distillery effluent was obtained from Talbot & Talbot (Pty), Pieterm Aritzburg, South Africa. Raw molasses was purchased from a local commercial outlet at Vanderbjilpark, South Africa and was diluted to make synthetic molasses wastewater. The South African natural zeolite was purchased from Pratley mining company in South Africa and crushed to particle size of 2 Inoculum used was obtained from a digester treating distillery effluent and a secondary digester of municipal wastewater treatment plant (Sebukeng water plant, South Africa). The distillery wastewater and synthetic molasses wastewater (MWW) were diluted as appropriate, mixed with inoculum in the ratio of 7:3, this was the best ratio obtained from batch preliminary studies. The mixture was then supplemented with various nutrients: KHPO Laboratory scale anaerobic up flow fixed bed reactor and annular photoreactor ( The photocatalytic reactor was packed with the TiO Photodegradation and biodegradation experiments were carried out separately in the respective reactors; this was then followed by an integration of the two processes. The experiments were carried out in batch. In the integrated system, the two processes were arranged in series such that, in the first case, the photodegradation process was followed by the AD process while in the second case the AD process was followed by the photodegradation process. Photodegradation was carried out at pH 4 since this was the optimum pH condition for the photodegradation as was observed in preliminary experiments conducted in 100 To evaluate the performance of the system, various performance indicators were analyzed. The COD and BOD were analyzed in accordance with the standard laboratory procedure To compare the performances of AD and integrated AOP–AD or AD–AOP system, The EDX analysis of the South African clinoptilolite (natural zeolite) showed the following elemental composition: O (57.41%), Na (1.52%), Mg (0.63%), Al (6.5%), Si (30.63%), K (1.99%), Ca (0.73%) and Fe (0.57%). The SEM analysis for the TZ catalyst is shown in Results for photodegradation of the distillery effluent and MWW at their natural pH (4) are shown in The low COD removal observed during photodegradation of MWW and distillery wastewater has also been observed in previous studies The effect of the UV pre-treatment on the anaerobic digestion of the wastewater samples was studied whereby the effluent from the photoreactor was fed into the bioreactor unit. In Contribution of adsorption to the contaminant removal or concentrating the pollutants on the TZ composite catalyst surface in the photoreactor was studied. In this study, the wastewater stream was circulated in the reactor without irradiating with the UV light. Also, contaminants removal by adsorption on the zeolite surface in the bioreactor was studied (no inoculum was added) and results are presented in It is important to note that the adsorption on zeolite coated with TiO Daily biogas production during the anaerobic degradation of non-UV pretreated and UV pretreated wastewater samples were recorded and the cumulative amounts are shown in It is reported that accumulation of VFAs in the digester may lead to process failure as this results in low pH in the digester which inhibits microbial growth. For digestion to proceed optimally, the concentration of the VFAs in the digester should be less than 250 Also, UV pretreated wastewater had lower VFAs concentration compared to the non-pretreated wastewater. This may be due to the fact that the UV pretreatment led to degradation of the VFAs in these wastewater samples. This may also be evidenced by the reduction in COD during UV pretreatment observed in In The pH of the various wastewater samples was monitored during the entire digestion period and results presented in A reduction in nitrates concentration during the anaerobic digestion process was observed in all wastewater samples treated under various conditions as shown in The general reduction in nitrates concentration during the anaerobic digestion is due to denitrification process in the anaerobic conditions. Pozo and Diez The AD and photodegradation processes were integrated in two ways; in the first case, AD was performed before photodegradation (AOP) while in the second case the AOP was conducted before AD. In In The AD process was then followed by the AOP process. In this case it was observed that the photodegradation step further removed 37% of the original colour for the distillery wastewater while for MWW, 46% colour was further removed. It, therefore, follows that the integrated process in which AD treatment was followed by AOP achieved an overall colour removal of 33% and 88% for MWW and distillery wastewater, respectively, as shown in It can further be seen ( The The observed colour reductions in  The A study on the application of an integrated UV photocatalysis and anaerobic degradation (AD) in the treatment of raw molasses and real distillery effluent was carried out. UV photocatalysis was found to be efficient in colour removal but inefficient in BOD and COD removal. On the other hand, AD process was found to have good performance in BOD and colour removal, but performed poorly in colour removal. It was found that the integrated system has a better performance than the two processes applied separately. In the integrated system, the application of the UV photocatalysis as a post treatment technique to the AD process was found to be more effective than when it was applied as a pre-treatment technique. The authors wish to acknowledge