The anaerobic stabilisation process depends—among other things—on the bioavailability of organic carbon. Through pre-treatment of the sludge, which leads to the destruction of microorganisms and to the liberation of cell contents (disintegration), the carbon can be microbially converted better and faster. Moreover, effects on digestion can be expected. Laboratory-scale digestion tests with thermally, enzymatically or mechanically pre-treated surplus sludge were carried out to analyse the influence of disintegration on anaerobic degradation, sludge water reload, foaming in digesters and sanitisation. The results were different, depending on the disintegration procedure used. Whereas disintegration by a high-pressure homogeniser and by enzymes only achieved low reduction of the foam phase, thermal pre-treatment at 121 °C resulted in effective suppression of foaming. All methods, except for enzymatic treatment, resulted in cutting up of filaments, but only heating effected a reduction in exo-cellular polymers. The improvement in gas production of thermal (121 °C) and mechanically pre-treated sludge was approximately 20%.Cell destruction is a possible method to optimise the anaerobic stabilisation of sewage sludge. At several locations in Germany, tests with mechanical, thermal and other cell disintegration methods ( Foam is generally defined as a dispersion of gas in a liquid, with the volatile ratio being predominant. In activation tanks and digesters, the gas bubbles are stabilised by a sludge layer, so that a foam layer is formed which is very hard to destroy. Even if the reasons for the emergence of foam and floating sludge have not yet been completely explained, it is agreed that the following factors play a role in the production of foam: Hydrophobic wastewater, (sludge) components or cell structures; Filiform micro-organisms, such as Finely distributed gas bubbles, in particular in reactors mixed with gas; and Surface active substances, such as detergents or fatty acids. This also includes the accumulation of organic acids through overcharging of the digesters or caused by unstable digestion processes. Stable and strongly viscous foams in the digesters can lead to operational problems. The usable digester volume is reduced, so that digestion periods are shortened. This in turn decreases the degradation rate of organic matter and the production of digestion gas, which prevents extensive degradation of the organic substances contained in the sludge. There are various measures available to suppress foaming. Some are mentioned here, even though their success rates are different ( Increasing of the sludge load; Removal of the floating sludge fraction from the sludge circulation; Separate stabilisation of the surplus sludge; Use of de-foaming agents; Mechanical mixers for foam destruction; Thermal pre-treatment of the surplus sludge; and Mechanical pre-treatment of the surplus sludge. Using pre-treatment methods, the cell walls of the microorganisms are destroyed through the input of energy, so that substances contained in the cells are set free. This disintegration can be used in different ways at the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP): Improvement of the anaerobic degradation performance of the surplus sludge; Hydrogen donor for denitrification; Improvement of the settling performance of bulking and floating sludge; and Reduction of foam production. For several years, the University of Rostock has been carrying out laboratory-scale continuous digestion tests at the WWTP at Rostock. The objectives of these tests are, among others: Reduction of foaming; Improvement of the anaerobic degradation performance; Improvement of the degree of degradation; Increase in the bio-gas yield; Sanitisation of the sludge; Estimation of the reload; and Indexing of the dewatering behaviour. The laboratory-scale plant contains four double-walled 10-l digestion tanks, which are kept at a temperature of 36 °C. The hydraulic contact time was 20 days. The material used for the continuous application (3-h feeding bouts) was a raw sludge mixture consisting of 60% surplus sludge and 40% primary sludge from the wastewater treatment plant at Rostock. The reference reactor was fed with untreated sludge. Both thickened sludges have concentrations of approximately 40–50 g solid matter (SM)/l. The following methods of treatment of sewage sludge were tested in different series. The energy necessary for the destruction of cell membranes is supplied in the form of pressure, translation or rotation energy. The cells are broken up, so that the substances contained within are set free without any chemical changes or denaturing. For our tests, a high-pressure homogeniser (HPH) was used. The sludge is pressed against a special valve using a high-pressure pump (up to 600 bar), which strongly changes the direction of the current flow through the homogeniser slit. The width of the slit and the pressure can be varied. Decomposition takes place by cavitation and destruction mechanisms. Heat supply or withdrawal effects a change in the sludge structure. Through destruction of the cell membranes of the microorganisms, the water-soluble cell contents are set free; chemical and physical reactions then lead to a change in the substances liberated to a gel-like structure. In the tests, thermal destruction of the sludge was carried out at 80, 90 and 121 °C for 60 min in an autoclave. Enzymes catalyse the degradation of organic substances as a function of the substrate. The effect of enzymes on long-chain proteins, carbohydrates or lipids improves the degradation of biological slimes and gels and the delivery capacity of water ( The micrographs show very clearly the effect of disintegration on the sludge composition. For the determination of filamentous bacteria, crystal violet sheath stain was used according to In order to determine the quality of the exo-polymer substances (EPS), reverse staining with Indian ink ( With the enzymatic pre-treatment, no changes could be observed in micrographs compared to the reference, as the enzymes only reach full effect after a longer period. Hydrophobicity was measured following the BATH test (bacterial adhesion to hydrocarbons) by Rosenberg, modified by Knoop in 1997. With this test, the hydrophobic portion of the sludge, which is a possible cause of foaming, can be determined. In the tests, no correlation between hydrophobicity and foaming was observed. The results showed a wide variation. For instance, the amount of hydrophobic cells in the non-pre-treated sludge ranged from 0 to 55%, but changes in foaming or in the micrographs could not be found. The test requires much effort and is not suitable for further investigations for predicting the foaming of sludge. Changes in the sludge composition had different impacts on foam development. After a test period of 20 days, a slight decrease in foam was observed for the sludge treated at 90 °C and the mechanically treated ones. In contrast, in the reactor with sludge treated at 121 °C, the foam cover completely disappeared ( Thus, foam production seems to be caused, not by the filament structure of the sludge, but rather by the ratio of exo-polymer substances. At high temperature, the EPS are probably disintegrated to a high degree. Results for the anaerobic degradation of the sludge are promising, so that thermal disintegration can also be economically viable. The gas yield of the reference reactor was approximately 350 l/kg VSS (volatile suspended solids) and the average degradation rate of the organic substances amounted to 45%. Except for the enzyme methods, the increase in the gas yield varied between 15 and 22%. Through increased degradation, there is a higher reload of sludge-water, in particular with nitrogen compounds. The highest reloading was achieved by the mechanical treatment methods ( The capillary suction time, which is a measure of the delivery capacity of water, improved, particularly with the enzymes ( Regarding germ determination, the following statements can be made. The content of The results of the experiments showed that, in the case of the sewage treatment plant at Rostock, foam in the digester can be effectively stopped by thermal (121 °C) pre-treatment of the surplus sludge. The enzymatic and mechanical disintegration methods were not sufficiently efficient for foam suppression. Against the background of the positive influence of the enzymatic pre-treatment on the anaerobic degradation and the simple handling of the enzymes, these investigations will be continued. For evaluation and improvement of the results, the following studies are suggested: Efficiency of enzymatic treatment of primary and surplus sludge for the improvement of anaerobic degradation; Investigations into the efficiency of thermal treatment of primary and surplus sludge for sanitisation; Testing of thermal pre-treatment with sludge from other sewage treatment plants, particularly with different types of foam; and Further biological experiments to determine the exact reasons for the generation of foam in connection with the appearance of