Based on a class of industrial processes, a new distributed fault diagnosis approach and a collaborative operational fault tolerant control law are proposed for an irreversible interconnected stochastic distribution control (SDC) system with boundary conditions. This control method is different from the existing collaborative fault tolerant controllers which enable the output probability density function (PDF) to track a desired PDF as close as possible. When fault occurs, a setpoint redesigned fault tolerant approach is adopted to accommodate the fault instead of reconstructing the controller. An augmented PID nominal controller and a setpoint compensation item with linear structure are used to obtain a collaborative operational fault tolerant controller via solution of linear matrix inequalities (LMIs). Simulations are included to show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms where encouraging results have been obtained.During the last decades there has been considerable interest in the development of modeling and control for interconnected systems Compared with the conventional control methods Different from the prior fault tolerant controller, the impacts induced by the fault occurring in any of the subsystem or the communication channel are not only for the subsystem itself but also for the other subsystems due to the system coupling. Therefore, a collaborative fault tolerant control scheme needs to be developed in order to compensate the effects of fault on the local subsystems. The existing results of fault tolerant control for interconnected systems are mainly based on the generalized models which are not suitable for some industrial processes, such as food particles processing procedure, molecular weight distribution control process and mineral froth flotation process. These systems contain Many stochastic control methods always assume that systems and variables subject to Gaussian distribution. In fact, many practical industrial processes do not meet this assumption. Motivated by this problem, Hong Wang proposed a novel approach for SDC systems which could directly control the shape of output PDF, i.e. the output SDC systems The conventional FTC for SDC systems focus on designing fault tolerant controllers after fault occurs so that the closed loop system is stable and the controlled output PDFs follow the designed PDFs as close as possible, under the assumption that the designed PDF is given. However, it is difficult to give an appropriate PDF to be tracked which can not only guarantee the stability of the whole system but also keep the system operating at optimal conditions. The research on such FTC is still limited to a single control process, without considering the effect of the operational layer on the feedback control layer in case of failure. Moreover, the dynamics of fault operating conditions are different for industrial processes. It is difficult to use the existing methods for the diagnosis of fault caused by inappropriate setpoint and the self-recovery control in operational control for SDC systems. Inspired by Chai The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The problem description is given in Section  Consider a directed graph The edges in the form of Consider the dynamic collaborative stochastic distribution system which consists of In the future, Based on the well-known B-spline neural networks, the following square-root B-spline model has been used to approximate the output PDFs Different from the previous result for the square root B-spline models Since the actual probability density function is dynamically related to the system input, after the construction of output PDFs by B-spline approximation in Eq.  The parametrical matrices can be obtained either by physical modeling or by scaling estimation technique     In this section a new fault estimation method is given based on the observer. There are many excellent results for fault diagnosing which can mainly divided into two groups: one is for individual system  The residual error above is different from the centralized architecture in previous work In order to obtain the observer gain and the fault diagnosis parameters by LMI techniques, time-varying matrices Denote In order to consider the fault estimation problem from the overall perspective, the global error dynamics for the whole collaborative SDC system are defined as  The general Kronecker product    The proof of The existing collaborative fault tolerant controllers designed for interconnected systems are usually given by Since the output of the whole system is the output of the  When fault occurs,    Define the following Lyapunov function Denote   In the output SDC systems, the output PDF The time-delay is chosen as For the interconnected systems considered above, we can get the sum of Laplace matrix In order to validate the proposed fault tolerant method, two types of fault, i.e. constant fault and time-varying fault, are considered in the following simulation. The constant faults are defined as The fault diagnosis parameters in  On the other hand, the collaborative fault tolerant control result is shown in   In this paper, a new type of fault diagnosis and collaborative operational fault tolerant control algorithms are investigated for the irreversible interconnected stochastic distribution control system with time-delay, which is connected in series by Consider the following Lyapunov function Using