Background
                  Renal damage is more frequent with new-generation lithotripters. However, animal studies suggest that voltage ramping minimizes the risk of complications following extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (SWL). In the clinical setting, the optimal voltage strategy remains unclear.
               
                  Objective
                  To evaluate whether stepwise voltage ramping can protect the kidney from damage during SWL.
               
                  Design, setting, and participants
                  A total of 418 patients with solitary or multiple unilateral kidney stones were randomized to receive SWL using a Modulith SLX-F2 lithotripter with either stepwise voltage ramping (n
                     =213) or a fixed maximal voltage (n
                     =205).
               
                  Intervention
                  SWL.
               
                  Outcomes measurements and statistical analysis
                  The primary outcome was sonographic evidence of renal hematomas. Secondary outcomes included levels of urinary markers of renal damage, stone disintegration, stone-free rate, and rates of secondary interventions within 3 mo of SWL. Descriptive statistics were used to compare clinical outcomes between the two groups. A logistic regression model was generated to assess predictors of hematomas.
               
                  Results and limitations
                  Significantly fewer hematomas occurred in the ramping group(12/213, 5.6%) than in the fixed group (27/205, 13%; p
                     =0.008). There was some evidence that the fixed group had higher urinary β2-microglobulin levels after SWL compared to the ramping group (p
                     =0.06). Urinary microalbumin levels, stone disintegration, stone-free rate, and rates of secondary interventions did not significantly differ between the groups. The logistic regression model showed a significantly higher risk of renal hematomas in older patients (odds ratio [OR] 1.03, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.00–1.05; p
                     =0.04). Stepwise voltage ramping was associated with a lower risk of hematomas (OR 0.39, 95% CI 0.19–0.80; p
                     =0.01). The study was limited by the use of ultrasound to detect hematomas.
               
                  Conclusions
                  In this prospective randomized study, stepwise voltage ramping during SWL was associated with a lower risk of renal damage compared to a fixed maximal voltage without compromising treatment effectiveness.
               
                  Patient summary
                  Lithotripsy is a noninvasive technique for urinary stone disintegration using ultrasonic energy. In this study, two voltage strategies are compared. The results show that a progressive increase in voltage during lithotripsy decreases the risk of renal hematomas while maintaining excellent outcomes.
               
                  Trial registration
                  ISRCTN95762080Introduction of the Dornier HM-3 lithotripter in the early 1980s for extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) revolutionized the treatment of urolithiasis Against this background, current research is dedicated to improving SWL treatment strategies to minimize the risk of hematomas while maintaining or improving clinical effectiveness. Porcine models have shown that stepwise voltage ramping can significantly reduce the extent of renal parenchymal hemorrhagic lesions To redress the deficiencies of previous studies, we conducted a well-powered, single-blinded, prospective randomized trial to evaluate the effect of stepwise voltage ramping on renal damage during SWL of kidney stones. From July 2010 to March 2013, 418 patients (296 males and 122 females) ≥16 yr of age requiring elective or emergency SWL were randomized without stratification by a software program to treatment using the Modulith SLX-F2 lithotripter (Storz Medical AG, Trägerwilen, Switzerland) with either stepwise voltage ramping or a fixed maximal voltage ( All patients received SWL treatment under regional or general anesthesia to eliminate pain as a limiting factor and to keep respiratory movements regular, a common practice at our department. The Modulith SLX-F2 is a third-generation electromagnetic lithotripter that uses both inline fluoroscopy and ultrasound to locate the stone. The standard focal size (6 Patients were followed up 1 d and 3 mo after SWL using ultrasound to evaluate the presence of subcapsular or perirenal hematoma, and by kidney, ureter, and bladder (KUB) x-ray to categorize the degree of stone disintegration: stone-free, fragments <2 The primary outcome was evidence of renal hematomas on routine sonography 24 SAS 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) was used for statistical analyses. On the assumption that the incidence of renal hematomas is 5% Patient and stone characteristics are listed in At 24 The logistic regression model showed a higher risk of renal hematoma in older patients (OR 1.03, 95% CI 1.00–1.05; Stone analysis was available for 114/213 (54%) patients in the ramping group and 110/205 (54%) patients in the fixed group. There was no significant difference in stone composition between the groups ( Since the advent of new-generation lithotripters, the increase in the frequency of renal hematomas associated with their use, most likely because of smaller focal zones and higher peak pressures, has raised concerns among the urologic community Lambert et al The kinetic energy of SWs cause stone fragmentation mainly via tear and shear forces and cavitation, but SWs also affect the surrounding renal parenchyma We found that age constitutes a risk factor for renal hematoma, in agreement with data reported by Dhar et al In terms of clinical effectiveness, stepwise voltage ramping performed as well as a fixed maximal voltage. However, it should be kept in mind that the upper bound of the 95% CI for the difference in stone-free rates (10%) did not exclude a clinically relevant difference in favor of the fixed group. In vitro and in vivo studies have suggested that a progressive increase in voltage during SWL produces greater stone comminution, mainly by maintaining favorable stress-wave and cavitation bubble dynamics that leads to constant fragmentation rates Our prospective randomized trial is not without limitations. Renal hematomas were systemically diagnosed by ultrasonography, which may have lower sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of renal hematomas than magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT), according to which the incidence of renal hematomas after SWL is 15–24% Another limitation of our study is that the number of total SWs administered at maximal energy (18 Stepwise voltage ramping had a beneficial effect on renal damage compared to a fixed maximal voltage. Furthermore, there were no significant differences in treatment effectiveness between the two SWL strategies.              Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 