The structure of periodontal tissues is still far less understood than their clinical relevance would demand. Here the periodontal ligament and radicular cementum in healthy human teeth were studied by light microscopy, transmission and scanning electron microscopy. These observations showed that the extracellular matrix of periodontal ligament is composed of a loose plexus of wavy collagen fibrils immersed in a highly hydrated interfibrillar matrix. Only close to their cemental insertion do these fibrils gather in thick, parallel fascicles (Sharpey’s fibres). As these cross the mineralization front, they become infiltrated by the mineral phase and continue directly with the cementum matrix. Sharpey’s fibres, “extrinsic” and “intrinsic” fibres all appear to be the same fibres, which bend and branch repeatedly during their course within the thickness of the cementum. Because of its physical continuity with the cementum, a limited portion of the periodontal ligament approximately corresponding to the length of Sharpey’s fibres remains unaffected by enzymatic digestion of the interfibrillar matrix while the rest of the ligament is completely dissolved. The findings here indicate that the periodontal ligament and dental cementum join by a continuity rather than a contiguity of structures; that the collagen–mineral relation in cementum has distinctive features in comparison to other hard tissues; that extrinsic and intrinsic fibres of cementum and the adjoining portion of periodontal ligament form a structural, mechanical and metabolic unit distinct from the central, more metabolically active portion of the periodontal ligament.The clinical relevance of parodontal tissues clearly exceeds the current knowledge of their ultrastructure. Regenerative and reparative processes of root cementum and connective-tissue attachment on hard tissues generate greater interest than the ultrastructure and structural biology of these tissues, and many recent studies have focused on cementogenesis ( Although some ultrastructural and analytical research has been done on periodontal tissues, the published findings vary widely. Most recent studies converge on animal models ( Despite discrepancies among different studies and different species, consistent variations along the periodontal ligament have been recently indicated by immunohistochemical ( Here, an ultrastructural investigation was carried out on the periodontal ligament and the acellular cementum of healthy human teeth extracted for orthodontic reasons. These tissues and their interrelation were examined by polarized light microscopy, transmission and scanning electron microscopy. Permanent first premolars and third molars, extracted for orthodontic reasons from young individuals of either sex, were decoronated and the roots divided into small fragments; the apical regions and the furcations, which usually contain cellular cementum with a different composition, were discarded. Specimens were then treated as follows. Five specimens were fixed overnight in 2.5% glutaraldehyde plus 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer at 4°C, dehydrated in ethanol and infiltrated with Technovit 9100 (Heraeus-Kulzer GmbH). Three axial sections were sawn from each block with an abrasive disc under continuous water cooling, and ground to a thickness not exceeding 50 μm. Unstained sections were then observed in polarized light under a Leitz Orthoplan photomicroscope. One section per block was carbon-coated in a Balzers SCD 004 sputter-coater fitted with a CEA-035 carbon thread evaporation accessory and observed in backscatter electron-detection mode under a Philips SEM-515 scanning electron microscope operated at 25 kV. Twenty specimens for transmission electron microscopy were cut to approx. 1×1×2 mm, fixed as above, stained with 0.1% alcian blue in 0.05 M MgCl Five specimens for scanning electron microscopy were fixed as above, incubated at room temperature in 2 M NaOH (changed daily) for 5 days, washed overnight in distilled water, treated with 1% tannic acid and with 1% osmium tetroxide for 1 h each, and dehydrated in graded ethanol and hexamethyldisilazane. Two other specimens were incubated in hyaluronidase in 0.05 M sodium acetate buffer, pH 5.0, for 72 h at 37°C (3000 U/ml), then the periodontal ligament was gently scraped away and the specimens were processed as above. Several fragments of each batch were then mounted on appropriate stubs with conductive bi-adhesive tape, and either (a) coated with 15–20 nm of gold–palladium in a Balzers SCD-004 sputter-coater fitted with a BU-007-162-T planetary stage and observed in a Philips SEM-515 scanning electron microscope operated at 10 kV, or (b) coated with 2 nm of platinum–carbon evaporated in a Balzers BAF-301 freeze-etching apparatus fitted with two EK-552 electron-beam guns and a QSG 201-D quartz crystal thickness monitor, and observed on a JEOL JSM-890 “in lens” FEG-SEM operated at 7 kV. Sawn and ground sections from resin-embedded, undemineralized specimens allowed us to observe simultaneously all the hard and soft tissues of the periodontium without the artefacts usually associated with demineralization. On light-microscopic examination ( Greater detail afforded by back-scattered electron imaging ( By scanning electron microscopy the periodontal ligament again appeared to be made of thin, uniform collagen fibrils arranged in an apparently isotropic network. Only near their cemental insertion did the fibrils gather in thick bundles and then in well-defined Sharpey’s fibres ( Even when mineralized, Sharpey’s fibres were easily followed across the cementum and, in some cases, down to the cementodentinal junction. Most fibres entered the cementum orthogonally but shortly afterwards branched or bent into a different orientation ( Transmission electron microscopy is less suited to the analysis of three-dimensional architectures because of its strictly two-dimensional representation, but its inherently higher resolution allowed individual collagen fibrils to be easily followed across all periodontal tissues. This technique made it absolutely clear that the same fibrils cross the mineralization front and continue in the cementum proper, rather than just impinging upon it ( The process of lateral fusion of collagen fibrils caused by their mineralization was easily followed in tangential sections ( Several peculiarities give the cemental insertion of the periodontal ligament a distinctive, unique structure. While most skeletal ligaments and tendons have a similar bony insertion, marked by the appearance of proteoglycan-rich, specialized tissues (fibrocartilages) and a deep indentation of mineralized and unmineralized tissues, the periodontal ligament simply enters the radicular cementum ( Mineralized fibres then arch, branch and interweave within the cementum matrix, the same fibrils running in different directions. Considering that (1) cementum fibrils are continuous with periodontal ligament fibrils; (2) the portion of periodontal ligament closest to the cementum is unaffected by hyaluronidase digestion; (3) the same portion is reported to have distinctive differences in its collagen and glycoconjugates content with respect to the rest of the ligament ( From a structural standpoint, some experimental studies (