Purpose
                  To assess plain radiographic morphology of arcuate fractures in order to identify patterns and help shape treatment algorithm for proximal fibula fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  A search of radiographic reports at a level 1 trauma center from 2014 to 2016 using MONTAGE search software for the phrases “arcuate fracture”, “fibular head avulsion”, or “fibular head fracture” was conducted. Descriptive measurements were obtained including dimensions of the fragment, the displacement of the fragment from its anatomic position, and the orientation of the primary fracture line relative to the axis of the fibular diaphysis in both the sagittal and coronal plane. After review of the measurements and radiographs, fracture patterns were assessed based off previous knowledge previous knowledge of posterior lateral corner (PLC) anatomy.
               
                  Results
                  Radiographic reports of 48 knees (48 patients) met inclusion criteria. The distance of fractures from the proximal aspect of the fibula averaged 9.25 ± 5.53 mm on AP radiographs, and 9.42 ± 4.89 mm on lateral radiographs. The medial-to-lateral width of the proximal fragment averaged 20.09 ± 7.94 mm on AP radiographs, while the anterior-to-posterior width measured on lateral radiographs averaged 17.53 ± 8.48 mm. Orientation of the primary fracture line was calculated at an average of 23.04 ± 14.95° from the perpendicular on the AP view, and 21.55 ± 17.44° from the perpendicular on the lateral. Maximal displacement at the primary fracture line on the AP view was 4.95 ± 8.49 mm). Maximal displacement on the lateral measured 3.98 ± 7.01 mm. Recurring fracture patterns were identified and described. Assessment revealed 11 (22.9%) pattern 1 fractures, six (12.5%) pattern 2 fractures, 31 (64.58%) pattern 3 fractures, possibly correlating with anatomical features and fracture mechanism.
               
                  Conclusions
                  These measurements and recurring patterns in our study shows the heterogeneity of the size and displacement of these fracture fragments and demonstrates the need for further studies in order to create an anatomic descriptive classification for arcuate fractures, which could be used for clinically for treatment.Proximal fibula avulsion fractures can occur during isolated knee injuries or as a component of complex knee trauma and multiligament injuries. Plain radiograph evaluation may demonstrate a fleck of bone superiorly displaced from the fibula, the so called “arcuate sign” [ Historically PLC injuries have been frequently overlooked, however it is now recognized that these injuries comprise up to 16% of all ligamentous knee injuries [ Clinically, avulsions of the proximal fibula can be highly variable, and the literature is inconsistent when using the term “arcuate sign”. In general, the term is often applied broadly to include small fractures of the fibular head signifying any injury to the structures of the PLC of the knee. Huang et al performed a radiographic study evaluating patients with traumatic knee injuries, identifying arcuate injuries in only 13 patients according to strict definitions. According to the authors, the fracture fragment typically involved the styloid process of the fibular head, and was described as horizontal in orientation, ranging from 8 to 10 mm in length and 2 to 5 mm in width [ The primary goal of this study is to accurately define radiographically fractures of the proximal fibula with regard to size, position, and displacement. Additionally, we hypothesize that there may be recurring identifiable fracture patterns correlating to anatomical features which may used to guide further research and surgical decision-making. Appropriate institutional review board approval for a retrospective chart review was obtained., and a search for patients with proximal fibula fractures presenting to a level 1 urban tertiary care hospital from January 2014 to December 2016 was conducted. Inclusion criteria were defined as patients greater than 16 years of age with radiographs of the knee joint. A search of radiographic reports using MONTAGE search software (Nuance, Burlington, MA) including the phrases “arcuate fracture”, “fibular head avulsion”, or “fibular head fracture” was conducted. Exclusion criteria included isolated fractures of the fibular neck; evidence of prior surgical intervention to the knee, tibia, fibula, or femur; evidence of chronic injury; and severely comminuted fractures of the fibular head without apparent avulsion or proximal migration of the cephalad fragments. A minimum of two authors reviewed radiographs of the initial patient population to apply exclusion criteria and to identify reoccurring patterns in which there were no disagreements. Review of the radiographs for measurements was performed by a single radiologist reviewer for consistency in the measurements. Plain radiographs of the knee in the anterior-posterior (AP) and the lateral view were evaluated using Centricity PACS 4.0 (GE Healthcare, Barrington, IL). Descriptive measurements were taken including the AP length of the fragment, the medial-lateral width of the fragment, the maximal displacement of the fragment from its anatomic position on AP and lateral radiograph, and the orientation of the primary fracture line relative to a line perpendicular to the axis of the fibular diaphysis in both the sagittal and coronal plane Initial inclusion criteria yielded 53 proximal fibula fractures in 52 patients, with one incidence of bilateral injury. Of these 53 injuries, 5 knees were excluded (1 periprosthetic fracture, 1 chronic injury, 3 comminuted fractures of fibular head without avulsion or proximal migration) leaving 48 fractures in 48 patients. Included patients were 24 males and 24 females. The average age was 42.94. Twenty-three knees were right, and 25 left. Twenty-one of 48 had isolated proximal fibula fractures on plain radiograph. Associated injuries were found in 27 of 48 patients, and included one vertical sheer pelvis fracture, three femur fractures, fourteen tibial plateau fractures, two tibial shaft fractures, and seven Segond fracture-avulsions The proximal-to-distal height of the proximal fibula averaged 9.25 ± 5.53 mm on AP radiographs, and 9.42 ± 4.89 mm on lateral radiographs. The medial-to-lateral width of the proximal fragment averaged 20.09 ± 7.94 mm on AP radiographs, while the anterior-to-posterior width measured on lateral radiographs averaged 17.53 ± 8.48 mm. Orientation of the primary fracture line was calculated at an average of 23.04 ± 14.95° from the perpendicular on the AP view, and 21.55 ± 17.44° from the perpendicular on the lateral. Maximal displacement at the primary fracture line on the AP view was 4.95 ± 8.49 mm. Maximal displacement on the lateral measured 3.98 ± 7.01 mm After review of the imaging three reoccurring patterns were identified, correlating with previous anatomical descriptions of the PLC. These patterns included: pattern 1: small avulsions of the fibular styloid pattern 2: avulsion of a cortical rim of the fibular head superiorly which involves the arcuate complex (classic “arcuate fracture”) pattern 3: fractures through or involving the metaphyseal bone of the fibular head An assessment of distribution of fracture patterns identified 11 (22.9%) pattern 1 fracture. Six fractures (12.5%) were pattern 2, with 1 (2.08%) demonstrating no comminution and 5 (10.42%) demonstrating comminution. Thirty-one (64.58%) were pattern 3 Proximal fibula fractures, both isolated and as part of multi-system injuries, are uncommon injuries and radiographic descriptions are lacking in the literature. We looked to review radiographs and assess the morphology of arcuate fractures in order to inform surgeon decision making and better understand the anatomy of proximal fibula fractures. We identified 48 such patients. Our study is one of the larger radiographic collections of arcuate fractures to date. We identified 3 fracture patterns, which could have different implications with regards to the anatomic structures involved. This information may affect treatment considerations for repair. Lee et al in a combined imaging, cadaveric, patient and injury pattern study assessed the two anatomic bony locations of structures of the PLC [ Juhng et al. similarly evaluated the arcuate sign on MR imaging and found in all 18 cases the bone fragment was attached to FCL, BFT, or the conjoined tendon [ Given the heterogeneity of our measurements and previous anatomical studies mentioned we may have found reoccurring fracture patterns that are anatomically based which may further guide treatment considerations. Given prior research and the fracture patterns identified in this study the involvement of associated tendons and ligaments can be assumed in each of the fracture patterns. Pattern 1 injury describes avulsions of the fibular styloid. This cohort represented 23% of our study population. Pattern 2 injuries, avulsions of a cortical rim of the fibular head superiorly, represent an injury to the arcuate complex which may include other components of the PLC leading to instability. It is important to note that MRI missed disruption of the arcuate complex in a study by Huang et al in 6 of 10 patients who underwent operative management of this injury [ This study has several limitations. First, the study is limited by retrospective nature, and only includes patients’ records where the original radiographic report included the search phrases. Therefore, any missed injuries or alternatively described proximal fibular avulsions were omitted. Second, the study includes both isolated proximal fibular avulsions and those associated with other fractures about the knee, which may represent varying mechanisms and energy of injury. Further, MRI findings and operative findings were not correlated to the radiographic findings. Not all patients with these fracture patterns had MRI for correlation of ligamentous injury. However, we do recommend that all these patients undergo an MRI to assess which PLC ligament may be involved and to detect associated ligament damage to the ACL and PCL. Despite these limitations, this study is one of the largest reports of avulsion fractures of the proximal fibula to be reported. This study demonstrates that proximal fibular avulsion injuries are heterogeneous in size but may have recurring patterns with bony and soft tissues components. The three injury patterns identified appear reproducible, and may be useful for selection of surgical treatments. While fractures of the proximal fibula or “arcuate fractures” are uncommon they are associated with damage to the components of the PLC of the knee. They represent a previously under-reported heterogeneous group of fractures with reoccurring patterns that may correlate with anatomical structures of the PLC and Our study hopes to stimulate research in an under represented area and possibly help with surgical decision making pending further studies. To the best of our knowledge, no conflict of interest, financial or other exists, related to this work for all authors. No funding was received for this work.