In this study, the recovery of barite particles was investigated by using oil agglomeration. For this purpose, effects of operating parameters were investigated and also, zeta potential measurements and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrophotometer (FTIR) analyses have been carried out.
                  In the experiments, effects of operating parameters such as; pH, stirring speed, amount of Na-Oleate as a collector, and kerosene as a bridging liquid, solid concentration, suspension conditioning time, collector stirring time and agglomeration time were investigated to obtain optimum conditions. Zeta potential measurements were carried out depending on pH values and amount of Na-Oleate. FTIR analyses were investigated to determine the adsorption type of Na-Oleate on the barite surface.
                  By the evaluation of the experimental results, optimum oil agglomeration conditions of barite were determined as follows; pH: 10, stirring speed: 1500 rpm, amount of kerosene: 80 l/t, amount of Na-Oleate: 3 kg/t, solid concentration: 5 wt.%, suspension conditioning time: 2 min, collector stirring time: 1 min and agglomeration time: 2 min.
                  In the optimum conditions, barite was concentrated with recovery of 98.07 wt.%.In mineral processing, fine and ultra fine particles are inevitable because of mechanized mining methods, comminution process and greater size reduction need to liberate the minerals From these methods, oil agglomeration having advantages due to the simplicity of the process and mineral beneficiation with high recovery, gains importance gradually In the physico-chemical point of view, the oil agglomeration is a kind of aggregation The principles of the application conditions of oil agglomeration have been investigated by various studies. Most of the oil agglomeration studies have been performed with naturally hydrophobic particles such as coal In this study, agglomeration behavior of barite has been investigated by using classic flotation reagent (Na-Oleate) and optimum agglomeration conditions were determined. In this study, the barite sample taken from Barit Maden Türk in Sivas, Turkey was used. The sample was ground and sieved to −212 μm for oil agglomeration tests. The particle size distribution and the chemical analysis result of the ground sample are given in Na-Oleate (C The experiments were performed in a 400-ml beaker having four baffles at the border to create turbulence by using IKA-WERK RW 20-type mechanical stirrer. The agitation was provided by a centrally located flat blade turbine impeller (consisting of four blades) at a fixed distance from the bottom of the vessel. The experimental setup is shown schematically in Agglomeration recovery was calculated from In the experiments, amounts of bridging liquid, and collector were determined from The zeta potential values of the barite samples were measured depending on the pH value in the presence and absence of Na-Oleate, and the amount of Na-Oleate using Rank Brothers Electrophoresis Apparatus MKII. The zeta potential measurements were carried out at constant ionic strength of the mineral slurries (10 The FTIR spectra of the barite samples were obtained in the absence and presence of collector from SHIMADZU 8300 Model Infrared Spectrophotometer. All spectra were recorded between 4000 and 400 cm As it is known, the extent of agglomeration or the agglomeration recovery depends on surface properties of particles and the nature of the agglomerant. The surface properties of the particles are controlled by the pH value of aqueous medium. Therefore, the control of the pH value of aqueous medium has primary importance. The effect of pH value on the oil agglomeration recovery of barite is given in As seen in As seen in  It has been stated in the previous studies that oleic acid and their soaps are in ionized forms as R Under the light of the previous findings, the decreasing of the agglomeration recovery at highly alkaline pH values (pH 11 and above) may be based on both oleate anions which are not adsorbed because of hydroxyl ions adsorption on the mineral surface and the high electrostatic repulsive forces between kerosene droplets and mineral particles. In acid medium (pH 4 and below), the decrease in agglomeration recovery is a result of insufficient hydrophobization of barite particles due to low ionization of Na-Oleate. The effect of stirring speed on the agglomeration recovery of barite is shown in As shown in There is also, another factor to consider and that is presence or lack thereof of microscopic gas bubbles which participate in the agglomeration mechanism. The decreasing recovery at low stirring speeds can be based on less gas entrained and the production of fewer microbubbles which results in less particle agglomeration in a given agglomeration time In the higher stirring speed (1900 rpm), undersize amount (−500 μm) increased and the agglomeration recovery decreased because of the partial comminution of the agglomerates caused by the collisions of the agglomerates with cell walls and with each other. The effect of amount of kerosene on barite agglomeration is shown in As it is shown in The statements mentioned above are in good agreement with the results given in literature The effect of amount of Na-Oleate on agglomeration recovery and zeta potential of barite are given in It can be shown in The decrease in the recovery at lower amount of Na-Oleate was based on insufficient hydrophobization of mineral surfaces. At higher amount of Na-Oleate, the recovery oscillated, and it could be based on the multilayer oleate formation on the barite surface. In this case, the recovery would tend to oscillate depending on which end of the molecule was projecting away from the surface. In addition, the graph of zeta potential change vs. the amount of Na-Oleate amount is given in The results of FTIR spectra of barite are given in The IR bands at 650.0, 991.3 and 1093.6 cm From these results, it can be concluded that oleate anions are chemisorbed on the barite surface. The obtained results are in a good agreement with the results of The effects of solid concentration on the agglomeration recovery of barite is given in  The decreasing of recovery at higher solid concentration can also be based on the high apparent viscosity of the suspension which may cushion the impact of particle collision, and it may also interfere with the agglomeration mechanism which involves forming oil coated bubbles that then break away to form agglomerates Therefore, the optimum solid concentration was determined as 5 wt.%. The effect of suspension conditioning time on agglomeration recovery of barite is given in As shown in The effect of collector stirring time is shown in  The effect of agglomeration time on the agglomeration recovery is shown in As it can be seen in The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows. It was stated that naturally hydrophilic barite can be agglomerated with Na-Oleate as an anionic type collector and kerosene as a bridging liquid. It was found that pH and amount of Na-Oleate are the most important parameters. The oleate adsorption on barite surface increased the negative zeta potential value. The reaction between oleate anions and barite is a chemisorption. The optimum oil agglomeration conditions are as follows; pH: 10; stirring speed: 1500 rpm, kerosene: 80 l/t; Na-Oleate: 3 kg/t; solid concentration: 5 wt.%; suspension conditioning time: 2 min; collector stirring time: 1 min; agglomeration time: 2 min. Barite was agglomerated with the recovery of 98.07 wt.% at the optimum conditions. The authors acknowledge the financial support of this study provided by Cumhuriyet University Research Find Unit.