Zr73.5Nb9Cu7Ni1Al9.5 (numbers indicate at.%) nanostructure-dendrite composites were fabricated using three different casting techniques: suction casting, centrifugal casting and arc-melting. The microstructure of the suction casting sample consists of micrometer-scale dendrites in a nanostructured matrix. However, some areas in the matrix contain nano-scale crystals together with an amorphous phase revealing an inhomogeneity of the specimen. On the contrary, the microstructures of the centrifugally-cast and the arc-melted samples are overall homogeneous, consisting of micrometer-scale dendrites that are homogeneously distributed in a nanostructured matrix. The dendrites correspond to a body centered cubic (bcc) β-Zr phase, whereas the nanostructured matrix consists of body centered tetragonal (bct) Zr2Cu-type and hexagonal close-packed (hcp) MgZn2-type phases. The comparison of the microstructures of these two alloys reveals that the formation of nano-scale twins and a disordered ω-phase in the β-Zr dendrites only happens in the centrifugally-cast sample. The differences in the phases and the microstructures between the differently prepared samples significantly influence the corresponding mechanical properties of the specimens.A new class of nanostructure-dendrite composites with a significant improvement of the room temperature ductility of up to ∼30% strain without loosing the strength of 1.2–2 On the other hand, previous studies on Zr-based nanostructure-dendrite composites that were produced by different casting techniques have suggested that the length scale of the microstructure of such composites, that is closely linked with the applied cooling rate during solidification The multicomponent Zr     The present investigation reveals that the microstructure of the Zr Previous investigations allowed to estimate the cooling rate as derived from an analysis of the secondary dendritic arm spacing for the different casting techniques Microstructural investigations of arc-melted, centrifugally-cast and suction-cast Zr The authors thank F. Baier, M. Calin, G. He, W. Löser, G. Miehe, R. Theissmann, N. Radtke, P. Yu and W. Xu for technical assistance and stimulating discussions. Funding by the EU within the framework of the Research Training Network on ductile bulk metallic glass composites (MRTN-CT-2003-504692) is gratefully acknowledged.