Analytical hydropyrolysis performed under high hydrogen gas pressure (>10 MPa) has been demonstrated to possess the unique ability to release high yields of biomarker hydrocarbons covalently bound within the non-hydrocarbon macromolecular fraction of crude oils and source rocks. This study describes the development of the experimental procedure for trapping the product oils (hydropyrolysates) on silica to facilitate more convenient recovery than conventional collection and to allow analysis by thermal desorption-GC–MS without any prior work-up. Conventionally, the trap has consisted of a stainless steel coil, cooled with dry ice from which the products are recovered in organic solvents. Replacing this with a system in which the hydropyrolysates are adsorbed on a small mass of silica greatly reduces the turn-around time between tests, and aids the recovery and separation of the products. This method has been developed using an oil shale and an oil asphaltene fraction, with the silica trap producing very similar biomarker profiles to that from the conventional trap. The quantitative recovery of hydrocarbons from a light crude oil desorbed from silica under hydropyrolysis conditions demonstrates no significant loss of the high molecular weight n-alkanes (>n-C10) for both trapping methods. The use of liquid nitrogen as the trap coolant results in significantly improved recovery of the lower molecular mass constituents. The silica trapping method allows for the hydropyrolysates to be characterised by thermal desorption-GC–MS, which has been investigated both on- and off-line. The oils undergo relatively little cracking during desorption, with similar n-alkane and biomarker profiles being obtained as with normal work-up and GC–MS analysis. Thus, in terms of fingerprinting geomacromolecules, “hypy-thermal desorption-GC–MS” appears to have the potential to be developed as an attractive alternative to traditional py-GC–MS.Fixed-bed hydropyrolysis of coals and oil shales at high hydrogen pressures (>10 Mpa), together with the use of a dispersed sulfided molybdenum catalyst has been demonstrated to give rise to high yields (>65 wt.%) of dichloromethane (DCM) soluble products, with overall conversions greater than 85 wt.% of the total organic matter ( Hydropyrolysis has also been demonstrated to allow a greater precision in the determination of thermal maturity of source rocks and heavy oil fractions than is possible with traditional, free biomarker procedures ( Although generally more rapid than the closed system pyrolysis methods which have been utilised for generating bound biomarker profiles from geomacromolecules in correlation studies ( In addition to accelerating the recovery of the product, the silica trapping procedure also allows for the hydropyrolysates to be thermally desorbed from the silica for direct analysis by GC–MS, negating the need for solvent extraction or fractionation of the products. Although analytical pyrolysis methods for the structural characterisation of kerogens and asphaltenes, with the pyrolyser coupled directly to a gas chromatograph (py-GC) (e.g. The samples used to assess the silica trapping procedure for recovering hydropyrolysates were the Göynük oil shale (GOS) and the asphaltene fraction isolated from a biodegraded crude oil (Soldado Field, Trinidad—marine carbonate source). The thermal desorption experiments have been performed on the hydropyrolysate of the GOS. This lacustrine oil shale of Tertiary age has been classified as a type I kerogen ( Fixed bed hydropyrolysis of the samples was conducted using the apparatus and procedure described in detail elsewhere ( In order to quantitatively assess the recovery of hydrocarbons by hydropyrolysis, aliquots (∼50 mg) of a light crude oil were adsorbed to a small amount of silica and pyrolysed. The desorbed oils were recovered from each of the two designs of trap and cooled by both dry ice and liquid nitrogen. The temperature within the silica trap was measured by inserting a thermocouple into the trap at the base of the silica column during a blank run with each of the two coolants. Quantification of the recovered hydrocarbons (DCM soluble fraction) was achieved by the addition of squalane, with analysis by gas chromatography–flame ionisation detection (GC–FID), performed on a Chromopack CP9001 instrument, with separation achieved on a fused silica capillary column (25 m×0.22 mm i.d.) coated with BPX5 phase (0.25 μm thickness). Helium was employed as the carrier gas, with a temperature programme of 50 °C (2 min) to 300 °C (14 min) at 5 °C min The aliphatic, aromatic and polar (NSO) fractions of the oil shale and asphaltene hydropyrolysates were separated by silica gel adsorption chromatography with successive elutions of GC–MS analyses of the fractionated samples (1 μl in DCM) were performed on a Fisons Instruments 8000 gas chromatograph interfaced to a MD 800 mass spectrometer (ionising energy 70 eV, source temperature 280 °C). Separation was performed on a column similar to that used for the GC analyses, with helium as the carrier gas and an oven programme of 50 °C (2 min) to 300 °C (28 min) at 5 °C min The off-line thermal desorption of the silica-trapped hydropyrolysates of GOS were performed in the hydropyrolysis reactor under an atmospheric pressure of hydrogen with a sweep gas flow of 100 cm The on-line thermal desorption-GC–MS of the silica-trapped hydropyrolysates was performed using a CDS 1000 pyroprobe, platinum heated filament, pyrolyser (Chemical Data System, Oxford, USA) directly connected to a Varian 3400 gas chromatograph coupled to a Varian Saturn II ion trap mass spectrometer. The py/GC interface and the split/splitless Varian 1077 injector (at split ratio 30:1) were kept at 280 °C. Separation was performed on a Supelco MDN-5S capillary column (30 m×0.25 mm i.d., 0.25 μm film thickness) with a temperature programme from 50 °C (2 min) to 310 °C (16 min) at 5 °C/min, using helium as carrier gas. Mass spectra were recorded in the electron ionisation mode (70 eV) at 1 scan/sec, mass range 45–550 The recovery of the light crude oil by desorption in the hydropyrolysis rig is illustrated in The use of liquid nitrogen as the coolant in place of dry ice resulted in a significantly enhanced recovery of low MM compounds such as The efficiency of trapping the desorbed hydrocarbons will be largely dependent on the temperature within the trap during the course of the 40-min hydropyrolysis run. This will be controlled by the extent to which hydrogen cools as it is swept out of the reactor, the volume of gas passing through the trap and the efficiency of the coolant. The temperature and volume of the sweep gas have been optimised in previous studies to maximise the yield of biomarkers whilst minimising structural alteration ( These results demonstrate the relatively high efficiency of both designs of trap for the recovery of hydrocarbons desorbed by hydropyrolysis. The silica trap method, with important advantages of decreased experimental turn-around time, and reduced sample handling, produced data comparable to those from the coiled steel trap. Of the two coolant methods, dry ice is the more convenient to use and so, unless the target compounds of an experiment are relatively volatile, there is no significant advantage in using liquid nitrogen. Information on the efficiency of the different designs of trap in recovering the hydropyrolysate generated from the GOS is presented in The distribution of the GOS hydropyrolysate throughout the trapping silica column is presented in In addition to the total yield of hydropyrolysate recovered, it is also important that the silica-filled trap produces biomarker hydrocarbon profiles similar to those obtained from the coiled steel trap. A number of maturity dependent biomarker ratios based on the abundance of individual isomers are listed in The recovery and product composition obtained from hydropyrolysis of the asphaltene fraction isolated from Soldado crude oil are presented in The aliphatic hydrocarbon biomarker ratios presented in The yields recovered from the off-line thermal desorption pyrolysis of the silica-trapped hydropyrolysates are presented in Analysis of the desorption residues indicate that a significant proportion of the carbon in the hydropyrolysate from oil shale was not desorbed from the trapping silica (131 mg/g initial shale TOC at 300 °C; 33 mg/g initial shale TOC at 500 °C), although when this is added to the yield of desorbed DCM soluble products, there is clearly an overall loss of ca. 50% of the starting carbon at 500 °C. As noted for the reduced yield of asphaltenes during hydropyrolysis, interactions between the silica sorbant and polar functional groups in the sample may result in the reduced desorption of this fraction relative to the non-polar aliphatics and aromatics. However, the low recovery could be a result of the polar material condensing in the non-heated zone of the reactor; this is being further investigated. The distribution of aliphatic hydrocarbons in the hydropyrolysate from the GOS ( Changes in these profiles with increasing desorption temperature can be assessed by measuring the ratio in abundance between a long-chain alkane e.g.  In addition to high recoveries, it is important that these biomarker compounds do not undergo any structural rearrangement during desorption. Higher MM extended (C Further refinement of the heating programme in terms of both rate and the final temperature reached in the off-line desorption system is necessary to maximise the yield of aromatic and polar material. Such refinements could be accomplished by the on-line thermal desorption of silica-trapped hydropyrolysates with a simple programmed temperature vaporiser (PVT) injector, with a capacity for gram quantity samples and cryogenic focussing, such as that described by van The on-line thermal desorption of the silica-trapped GOS hydropyrolysate (  The trapping of hydropyrolysates on silica gives results comparable to those from the conventional method using a coiled steel trap, but with a significant time saving. Both techniques result in a recovery >80% for the majority of The authors thank the Natural Environment Research Council (Ocean Margins LINK grant Nos. NER/T/S/2000/01366 and 2001/01153) for financial support and Dr Cole Robison of ChevronTexaco for providing the sample of Soldado crude oil.