A novel system based on membrane contactor was applied for separation of iron ions during leaching of ilmenite ore in hydrochloric acid. Separation of iron would enhance leaching of ilmenite and leads to pure titanium products. The used membrane contactor cell consisted of two identical compartments separated by a porous flat sheet membrane. The ilmenite leachant was separated from the residue and placed in one compartment (marked as feed side) and an organic solution containing a selective iron extractant was placed in the other compartment (marked as receive side). Among the several tested organic extractants, trioctylamine (TOA) was found to be effective and selective for extraction of iron ions from solutions of a wide range of hydrochloric acid concentrations. TOA in kerosene and 10% 1-octanole was used as a receive phase in the membrane contactor cell. Two types of membrane materials were tested; polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and polypropylene (PP) with almost similar pore sizes of about 0.5μm. Multi separation stages by the membrane contactor were applied by replacing the receiving solution with a fresh one after 180min of separation time. High Fe removal efficiency of about 86% after 4 separation stages using 0.2μm PP membrane was obtained. The transport mechanism of iron was proposed mainly based on ionpair (R3NH+FeCl4
                     −) formation in the aqueous–membrane interface and its diffusion to the organic pulp through the membrane. The separation of the aqueous and organic solutions by a membrane in this contactor technique overcame the common drawbacks of the solvent extraction such as losses of the organic reagent, emulsion formation and delay of phase separation. In other procedures, the ilmenite slurry suspension was placed as it is in the feed side of the cell to test the possibility of the continuous separation of iron during leaching. The Fe removal efficiency was found to be very low (8% after 3h) due to fouling of the membrane. A brownish precipitate was observed on the feed side of the membrane and was growing by time leading to slowing down of the Fe transport rate. Thin Film XRD test of membrane fouling showed that Goethite α-FeO(OH), Feroxyhyte ō-FeO(OH) and iron oxy chloride (FeOCl) are the main constituents of the precipitate. In addition, SEM photomicrographs showed that the precipitated particles on the membrane surface are sphere in shape with size ranged from 1 to 2μm.Titanium dioxide (TiO The concept of using a membrane to bring two phases in contact to each other was practiced widely in diverse applications ( Industrial membrane contactors are typically hollow-fiber modules. These contactors have three major advantages and one potential disadvantage over conventional equipment ( Iron removal from acidic leach solutions is an important and necessary step in numerous hydrometallurgical process flow sheets for the production of pure solutions from primary or secondary materials ( In this paper, separation of iron ions from acidic chloride solutions containing dissolved iron and titanium was investigated utilizing different organic extractants. The suitable extractant was applied in a membrane contactor cell consisted of two compartments separated by a porous membrane. The ilmenite leachant containing mainly iron and titanium in hydrochloric acid was placed in one compartment (marked as feed side) and an organic solution containing the extractant in a diluent and a modifier was placed in the other compartment (marked as receive side). The transport efficiency of iron ions from the feed to the receive sides was estimated and parameters those affecting the transport process were evaluated. The purified solution with reduced iron content can be then recycled to the leaching slurry to enhance the process and produce purer titanium oxide. This separation system was also examined for separation of iron from ilmenite slurry during leaching. A representative sample of Abu Ghalaga ilmenite ore was provided by El-Nasr Mining Company, Egypt. The sample ranges in size from 1 Pure hydrochloric acid (35%) was supplied by El-Naser Chemical Company, Egypt and used as a leachant for ilmenite ore. The used solvent extraction reagents are Tributyl phosphate, TBP (Henkel), Trioctyl phosphine oxide, TOPO, (Fluka), Di-2-ethyhexyl phosphoric acid, D-2-EHPA (Luoyang Zhongda Chemical Co., Ltd.), Methyl isobutyl ketone, MIBK (Qingdao Lasheng Corporation Ltd.), Trioctylamine, TOA (Henkel), and Aliquat 336, Aliq (Aldrich). Basic information about these reagents are shown in Chemical analysis of titanium and iron in ilmenite ore, leachant and wash liquors was performed according to the standard methods using CECIL 7200 Double Beam UV Spectrophotometer and 3100 Perkin Elmer Atomic Absorption Spectrometer. Leaching process was carried out on multi stage bases. Leaching was carried out using a 500 Acid leaching of ilmenite ore consists of two main stages, namely digestion (leaching) and solid/liquid separation (filtration). In the digestion stage: acid leaching of ilmenite ore was carried out using a 500 In solvent extraction experiments, the 10% diluted extractant in kerosene was placed in a 250 Membrane separation tests were carried out using a membrane contactor cell (as schematically shown in The speciation diagram of iron (III) in acidic chloride solutions was constructed using It was important to define the form of Fe (III) ions that exist at conditions similar to those examined in this study. The speciation diagram of iron (III) in acidic chloride solutions was constructed using It is important to study the solvent extraction behaviour of iron ions to choose the suitable extractant and extraction conditions before the application in the membrane contactor system. Several organic reagents can extract iron ions from hydrochloric acid solutions where the extent of extraction depends mainly on the nature of the organic extractant, chloride ion and acid concentrations. Organic reagents belong to different chemical families; namely organophosphorus compounds, ketones and amines, were tested for extraction of iron ions from synthetic solutions containing 1000 The investigated reagents were neutral organophosphorus compounds: tributyl phosphate (TBP), and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), and an acidic organophosphorus compound: Di-2-ethyhexyl phosphoric acid (D-2-EHPA). TBP and TOPO are commercially available and used widely as industrial extractants, especially for reprocessing of nuclear fuels. The extraction of iron with TBP was low at HCl concentration beyond 10% and sharply increased with increasing acid concentration ( The extraction of iron by the nneutral organophosphorus reagents (such as TBP and TOPO) is known to follow the salvation mechanism where undissociated, electrically neutral molecules are formed and extracted to the organic phase. According to On the other hand, the extraction of iron ions by acidic organophosphorus compounds follows the cationic exchange mechanism where an ionpair is formed and extracted to the organic phase. The cationic exchange process involves the exchange of metal cations with the hydrogen ions of the reagent dissolved in the organic phase. Of the acidic organophosphorus compounds, D-2-EHPA is the most widely used extractant ( The investigated extractant is methyl isobutyl ketone, MIBK, which has wide applications in metals extraction through the solvation mechanism. As shown in The investigated amines were trioctylamine, TOA, (a tertiary amine) and \Aliquat 336, Aliq, (a quaternary ammonium salt). The extraction of iron(III) with TOA and Aliq was increasing with HCl concentration, reached about 97% at 10% HCl and remained at this high level at more concentrated HCl solutions, The two reagents, TBP and TOPO, can extract titanium ions together with iron ions from acidic conditions and then they are not considered as a selective extractants of iron. Trioctylamine is commercially available and was found to be a suitable extractant of iron (III) because it can extract anionic chloro species of iron ions selectively. Thus, TOA was used to test the selective transport of iron ions out of ilmenite leachant in a membrane contactor system. The solvent extraction of iron ions from ilmenite leach solution was found to encounter several difficulties such as phase separation, emulsion formation and solvent losses. When a porous membrane is placed between the aqueous and the organic solutions, the extraction of iron ions will be achieved without the above mentioned difficulties. This will be carried out in a membrane contactor cell using TOA in kerosene and 10% 1-octanol as shown in     The membrane type must be carefully chosen to retard the mass transfer as little as possible. Polypropylene (PP) membrane is a low cost, resistant under extreme pH conditions, hydrophobic and insoluble in most solvents. Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane is more costly, more hydrophobic, extremely inert and suitable for processing of aggressive streams ( The low removal efficiency of both membranes may be attributed to their large pore size. This may cause losses of the extracted iron in the aqueous feed side which in return decreases the value of the removal efficiency of iron. The slight lower transport behaviour of iron with the PTFE membrane may be attributed to the lower mass-transfer of iron ions due to the more hydrophobicity of this kind of membrane. The PP membrane was used in the following experiments since there is no big difference in iron transport between the two tested membranes. Two experiments were carried out using the ilmenite leachant in the feed side of the membrane contactor cell using PP membrane of 0.45 and 0.20 A series of experiments was carried out using multi membrane separation stages. The used membrane was PP with 0.2 The transport separation of iron ions was tested using two aqueous media in the feed side; the first is the clear aqueous phase after filtration of slurry of ilmenite leaching (ilmenite leachant) and the second is the leaching mixture with the accompanied suspended solids (ilmenite slurry). These experiments were performed to study the effect of the presence and absence of suspended solids on Fe removal efficiency. The used membrane was PP with 0.2 A brownish precipitated material was found in the feed side of the membrane surface after the transport experiment when the ilmenite slurry was used. Thus, the noticeable decrease in the removal efficiency of iron in the presence of the suspended solids may be explained based on the extensive fouling of the membrane surface. The fouling material clogged the pores of the membrane and prevented the contact between the aqueous and the organic phases which in turn adversely affected the transport of iron. This fouling precipitate was slight and yellowish in colour in the first 20 The precipitated material formed on the surface of membrane of the above experiment was separated and characterized using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and X-Ray Diffraction spectroscopy (XRD). The obtained results are given in After ilmenite leaching, the slurry was filtered and the filter cake was washed with 3% HCl. The iron and titanium contents were determined in the filtrate and in the wash liquor. The total contents of Ti and Fe in the filtrates were 230 and 4200  Trioctyl phosphine oxide (TOPO), trioctylamine (TOA) and Aliquat 336 (Aliq) gave high Fe Extraction efficiency with 10% HCl concentration (> Trioctylamine (TOA), and Aliquat 336 (Aliq) in kerosene gave almost quantitative Fe extraction in more concentrated HCl (16–18%). These extractants are more advantageous because they are selective for Fe anionic species out of other neutral and cationic ones present in solution. TOA in kerosene and 10% octanol was used as a suitable organic phase for continuous transport of iron from ilmenite leachant in the membrane contactor cell. The proposed transport mechanism includes amine protonation, diffusion of the protonated amine, ionpair formation, and diffusion of the formed ionpair. About 78% of iron could be transported through the membrane after 3 stages separation and this was increased to about 85% after the 4th separation stage. The used membrane was polypropylene (PP) with 0.2 Using ilmenite slurry in the feed side gave very low Fe removal efficiency (8.1%) due to fouling of membrane (coating with solid particles and preventing further separation). The slow diffusion of the extracted species may cause saturation in the layers close to the membrane sides followed by precipitation. Thin Film XRD of membrane precipitate showed that Goethite α-FeO(OH), Feroxyhyte ō-FeO(OH) and iron oxy chloride (FeOCl) are the main constituents. SEM photomicrographs of the precipitated solids on membrane surface showed that the precipitated particles are sphere in shape with size ranged from 1 to 2 EDX results of the precipitated particles indicated that Fe, Cl and O contents are 60.2%, 17.7% and 9.5%, respectively. Iron oxy chloride represents about 50% of the total precipitate. Ilmenite leaching was enhanced using the purified leachant after removal of about 85% of contained iron by the membrane contactor system.