In this paper, α-chloro-oleate acid (α-COA) and sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) were employed as collector and depressant in the flotation separation of magnesite from dolomite respectively. Properties of these two reagents were investigated through micro-flotation tests, zeta potential measurements, contact angle measurements and theoretical computation of adsorption energy based on conceptual density functional theory (DFT). Zeta potential measurements results revealed that SHMP was selectively adsorbed on the surface of dolomite, which leads to an exclusively depressing effect on dolomite. Results of contact angle measurements and theoretical computation indicated that α-COA had a stronger collecting ability to magnesite because of a stronger adsorption occurred on the surface of magnesite. In micro-flotation of artificially mixed minerals, separation of magnesite from dolomite with Gaudin's selectivity index up to 6.42 was succeeded using α-COA as collector and SHMP as depressant.Magnesium oxide is a vital material for manufacturing fire-resistant products widely used in metallurgy, ceramic and chemical industries [ Magnesite is often accompanied with dolomite, feldspar, and quartz [ In this study, the selective separation of magnesite from dolomite was achieved in the presence of α-COA as collector and SHMP as depressant. Zeta potential measurement, contact angle measurement and theoretical calculation of adsorption energy were used to study the selective adsorption between minerals and reagents. Mineral samples of magnesite and dolomite were acquired from Haicheng of Liaoning Provence, China. The samples were hand-picked, dry ground and sieved to −100 + 45 μm sized fraction, used for flotation tests and contact angle measurement. Samples further ground to −5 μm were used for X-ray diffraction analyses, Chemical analyses, and Zeta potential measurement. X-ray powder diffraction data ( In the micro-flotation tests, sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) were used as the pH regulators.α-COA and oleic acid (OA) were used as collectors. SHMP was used as depressant. All reagents were analytical-grade, except α-COA and OA, which were industrial pure and chemical pure respectively. Deionized water was used in preparation of solutions for all tests. All flotation tests were performed in a 40 mL mechanical flotation cell at a constant rate 1800 r/min, each single mineral flotation using 4 g of mineral samples in 30 mL of deionized water. Desired amount of pH regulators, collectors, depressant were added in sequence. After each reagent was added, the pulp was agitated for 3 min. Both the floated and unfloated products were collected, filtered, and weighed to calculate mineral recovery associated with chemical analyses of froth products and tailings. Gaudin's selectivity index (SI) was calculated by Eq. The zeta potential of magnesite and dolomite were measured with and without interacting with SHMP using a Malvern Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer. For these measurements, mineral suspensions containing 0.01% solids in a 1 × 10 The contact angle of material surface is an important index to evaluate the wettability of material surface. Advancing contact angle was observed to be the most reproducible contact angle, which was approximated to the ideal Young contact angle for the purpose of surface characterization [ In conceptual DFT, the chemical potential of mineral (μ Incorporating Eqs. The energy change after adsorption between mineral and reagents is: Thus adsorption energy ΔE can be calculated. Through Koopmans' theorem，chemical potential μ and absolute hardness η can be obtained by Eq. The E Effect of collector dosage on the floatability of magnesite and dolomite is shown in  Based on the single mineral flotation results, micro-flotation separation of artificially mixed minerals (3.0 g magnesite and 3.0 g dolomite) was conducted. The flotation results are shown in The zeta potential of magnesite and dolomite in the absence and presence of SHMP is shown Contact angles of magnesite and dolomite in the presence of α-COA and OA at different dosage were investigated. The measurement results are presented in The E Thus the energy change ΔE Because ΔE In this paper, flotation separation of magnesite from dolomite with Gaudin's selectivity index up to 6.42 was succeeded using α-COA as collector and SHMP as depressant. At optimal dosage of α-COA and SHMP, 89.72% of magnesite was recovered and 82.54% of dolomite was depressed. The results of single mineral flotation tests, Zeta potential measurements and contact angle measurements exhibited explicitly that adsorption behavior of flotation reagents on magnesite and dolomite was different. Zeta potential measurements results revealed that SHMP was selectively adsorbed on the surface of dolomite, which leading to an exclusively depressing effect on dolomite other than magnesite. Contact angle measurements results indicated that α-COA had a stronger collecting ability to magnesite because of a stronger adsorption occurred on the surface of magnesite. Through theoretical computation of adsorption energy based on conceptual DFT, the fact α-COA has a stronger reactivity with magnesite than dolomite was further confirmed. Results of Zeta potential measurements, contact angle measurements and theoretical computation were in agreement with the experimental results. Conceptualization & Methodology: Wenxing Zhong; Investigation & Data curation: Wenxing Zhong, Wanzhong Yin, Yulian Wang, Jin Yao; Writing - original draft: Wenxing Zhong; Writing - review & editing: Wenxing Zhong, Wanzhong Yin. The authors declare that there are no conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. The authors would like to thank for the support from the