 The current basis for commercial application of nuclear energy in the fission process. A neutron striking a heavy nucleus such as uranium-235 ( Disadvantages of the fission process for energy production relate to the particulate and electromagnetic radiations emitted at the time of fission and to the radioactivity (i.e., the property of emitting radiation with a characteristic time frame or Each fuel used for energy production is characterized by a fuel cycle. Typical cycles, such as with fossil fuels, include exploration mining or drilling to extract the resource processing or refining to remove impurities and otherwise prepare the fuel for use energy production waste disposal transportation among other steps The nuclear fuel cycle is more complex due to the following unique features associated with the fission energy source.  Uranium-235 ( Two other fissile materials, All fuel materials contain small to large amounts of radioactivity. A neutron chain reaction (criticality) could occur in fuel materials located outside of a reactor. The fission chain reaction used for commercial power generation has potential application to a nuclear explosive device. Each of these concerns influences one or more of the fuel-cycle steps. A schematic representation of a generic nuclear fuel cycle is shown in Major fuel-cycle features are described next, starting with those for the uranium fuel cycle employed by the current generation of popular pressurized-water reactors (PWRs) and boiling-water reactors (BWRs), known collectively as light-water reactors (LWR). Subsequent sections consider recycle of uranium and plutonium in LWRs, alternative uranium fuel cycles, plutonium and thorium fuel cycles, other fuel-cycle concepts, and support activities. The uranium fuel cycle (e.g., Each major step of the LWR fuel cycle is described below. Typical mass flows for an open LWR cycle are shown in Uranium exploration typically begins with geologic evaluation to identify formations similar to those known to contain the ore. Chemical and radiological testing confirm probable sites. Prospect sites are drilled for core samples, which are subjected to detailed evaluation through various nondestructive or destructive analyses. For areas selected for mining, core samples provide a basis for detailed mapping of the ore bodies. Assays of less than 0.25% U Uranium ore bodies tend to be “spotty” (i.e., thin and not too wide or long) and widely separated by low-grade ore or barren sands. Surface or open-pit mining techniques are employed for shallow deposits with relatively soft overburden. Underground methods are used for deeper deposits or those covered with very hard rock strata. Milling or refining operations are often conducted close to the mines to minimize the amount of transportation required for the bulky ore. The low assay of the uranium ore dictates against the use of standard metallurgical techniques in favor of complex chemical methods. One approach to separation of uranium from the ore consists of the following. Crushing and grinding the ore to desired size. Leaching in acid to dissolve the metallic constituents away from the sand-like residues that constitute the bulk of the ore. Ion-exchange or solvent-extraction operations to separate uranium from other metallic constituents. Production of ammonium diuranate (called yellowcake due to its color). Reactor applications require very-high-purity uranium, especially in terms of impurities with a large tendency to absorb, and thereby remove, neutrons needed to sustain the fission chain reaction. Initial purification of yellowcake is obtained by solvent extraction. Treatment of the concentrate with hydrofluoric acid and elemental fluorine produces UF The final product of this conversion step in the fuel cycle is highly pure UF Natural uranium, the mixture that exists in nature, is composed of 0.711 Several enrichment methods rely on the small difference in mass between UF Enrichment processes for any materials may be characterized by the amount of separation that occurs in a single unit or stage. A separation factor α may be defined as The gaseous diffusion enrichment method employs cylindrical barriers of precisely controlled porousity against which UF The enriched stream collects in the outer portion of the stage in Gaseous diffusion has produced most of the enriched uranium in the United States, France, and the Russia. It is the largest user of energy in the nuclear fuel cycle, at about 4% (e.g., if one reactor were dedicated to supplying enriched uranium, it and 24 others of the same size could be served). When UF Although the gas centrifuges operate with a higher separation factor of about α The several laser enrichment methods rely on exciting quantum energy levels in uranium atoms or molecules such that they may be readily separated. Since The atomic vapor laser isotope separation (AVLIS) method, shown conceptually in Another of these methods under development in Japan is molecular laser isotope separation (MLIS). The chemical reaction by isotope selective laser activation (CRISLA) process is being developed by a private U.S. firm. The gas nozzle (or “Becker nozzle,” after the German scientist credited with its development) is one of several aerodynamic separation processes. The UF Chemical exchange enrichment is based on the exchange reaction The uranium fuel is produced in final form for power production in the fabrication step. Fabrication of LWR fuel begins with converting the slightly enriched uranium from the enrichment process into uranium dioxide (UO Long stacks of pellets are loaded into stainless-steel or zirconium-alloy cladding tubes, which are welded shut to form individual leaktight fuel rods (which provide yet another barrier to fission product release). Clusters of fuel rods in square arrays of from 8 Fuel assemblies may be made from pins of a single fuel enrichment, pins of several average enrichments, and/or other components. For a reactor's initial loading, it is common to fabricate bundles of three or four average fuel enrichments. Later loadings may only require a single average bundle enrichment. Completed fuel assemblies in numbers from about 150 to 750, are loaded in a reactor vessel in a roughly cylindrical shape to form the reactor core. In this configuration with water added and the vessel sealed, the fission chain reaction can be initiated to produce heat (and ultimately electrical) energy. As fissions occur, the Current practice is to replace one-fourth to one-third of the core on a roughly annual basis. Careful fuel management shuffles existing and replacement fuel assemblies to optimize power production and energy extraction over the fuel lifetime of 3–4 years. The back end of the nuclear fuel cycle (see In supporting the fission chain reaction for several years, the fuel builds up a substantial inventory of radioactive fission products, which are a source of both radiation and heat. The fuel assemblies are stored in water basins and allowed to “cool” for a period of time, which may be a short as six months (or may be indefinite in the open fuel cycle where reprocessing and final waste disposal are not implemented). Water is an ideal storage medium, being clear for viewing purposes, a liquid for “crack-free” shielding, and able to remove reasonably large heat loads by natural convection. The open fuel cycle in the United States, with its prospect of exceeding initially built-in fuel-storage capacities, has prompted plans for high-density storage in existing facilities, construction of away-from-reactor storage pools, and various dry storage concepts. Other countries, even those such as France and the United Kingdom, which reprocess spent fuel, also have varying needs for wet or dry off-site storage facilities. Spent fuel discharged from a power reactor contains residual Spent fuel is stored on site in a pool similar to that used for interim storage at a reactor site. The fuel is then moved remotely into a disassembly area, where it is cut or chopped into short segments. The small fuel pieces are dissolved in strong acid, leaving the cladding hulls behind while placing the heavy metals and wastes into solution. The usual process for spent-fuel separation relies on solvent extraction of heavy metals from the radioactive waste products and then of the uranium and plutonium from each other. The liquid wasters are sotred in large double-walled steel tanks prior to solidification, which may occur at about five years after initial separation. The uranium and plutonium may be stored or recycled (as described separately in the next section). Each step in the nuclear fuel cycle, even including waste management, generates some radioactive wastes. The three principal waste handling methods have acquired the following nicknames: (1) delay and decay, (2) dilute and disperse, (3) concentrate and contain. The first two methods, often used together, rely on holding the waste until natural radioactive decay processes reduce its potential hazard to the point where it can be diluted and released “safely” (i.e., consistent with applicable laws or regulations) into the atmosphere or a body of water. Many of the liquid and gaseous wastes from reactors and fuel cycle plants can be treated in this manner. The third method immobilizes longer-lived wastes to reduce the risk of their accidental dispersal. Front-end fuel-cycle steps and reactor operation produce “low-level” wastes (LLW), which can be handled by near-surface burial in much the same manner as common societal wastes of other types. Reprocessing gives rise to “high-level wastes” (HLW), which are a combination of fission products and transuranic elements. These wastes may be solidified into a calcined or glasslike form and then placed in retrievable storage or disposed. High-level wastes [as well as intermediate-level wastes (ILW), which are essentially everything that is not LLW or HLW] may be stored retrievably in water basins, dry structures, and open mine tunnels. Disposal may be accomplished in a back-filled mined facility of salt, granite, basalt, volcanic tuff, or other geological formation. Another potential site would be an ocean-bed location selected for chemically inert sediments with exceptionally low current, resource content, and seismic activity. Spent fuel discharged from light-water reactors contains Uranium recycle would be complicated by the presence of the isotope Plutonium is recycled in light-water reactors in the form of mixed oxide, PuO Recycle core characteristics are of two basic types. In self-generated recycle, each reactor would use mixed oxide only in the amount it produces itself (e.g., as shown by France has a major program to use MOX fuel in a selected subset of its PWRs. Japanese plans to use MOX are uncertain in the aftermath of an accident at Tokaimura (see also Variations on the light-water reactor uranium fuel cycle are found for systems fueled with natural uranium or highly enriched uranium. Natural uranium, used to fuel Canadian deuterium–uranium (CANDU) pressurized heavy-water reactors (PHWRs) and a variety of early gas-cooled reactors, does not require enrichment. It would be reprocessed only for plutonium, since the residual uranium enrichment would likely be nearly that of depleted uranium. Typical mass flows for the CANDU fuel cycle without reprocessing are provided in More highly enriched uranium fuel is used at about 20 The HTGR uses a fuel concept that is very different from that considered to this point. It consists of a very small spherical kernal of uranium carbide (UC) surrounded by layers of graphite and silicon carbide, as shown by Reprocessing of HTGR fuel would be primarily for the uranium ( The liquid-metal fast breeder reactor (LMFBR) concept relies on plutonium fuel and The LMFBR fuel cycle uses small-diameter mixed-oxide (PuO The introduction of thorium into reactor fuel allows fissile Thorium fabrication may be into pellets and fuel pins or, in the case of the HTGR, microspheres. Reprocessing separates A large number of variations are possible for the nuclear fuel cycles described above. Major possibilities are to add plutonium, thorium, or both to the fuel for a specific reactor type. Symbiotic or cross-progeny fuel cycles interchange fuel materials among two or more reactor types. One possibility is exchange of LWR plutonium with that produced in an LMFBR: a procedure that, based on underlying theoretical considerations, turns out to be beneficial to the efficiency with which each system can support the fission chain reaction. In the aftermath of the “cold war,” two unique fuel-cycle options for former nuclear-weapons materials have evolved. High-enrichment uranium from Russia has been down-blended to low-enrichment uranium (e.g., for use in light-water or light-water graphite reactors) in the cascades of U.S. gaseous-diffusion enrichment plants. Then, plans have been developed to convert weapon-grade plutonium (nominally The nuclear fuel cycle steps shown by Each fuel cycle step has associated transportation activities. Shipping methods are determined by a combination of economic considerations and safety concerns from chemistry, radiation, and potential criticality. (The latter is considered separately in Uranium mines and mills are often located close to each other so that the ore may be carried between the two in open trucks. Yellowcake product is packaged into 55-gal drums, which are transported by truck. The high value of the product and related potential for damage in an accident are the key concerns for yellowcake and the other front-end products. Uranium hexafluoride is highly corrosive and is thus shipped in strong pressure-vessel containers. If UF Spent fuel and wastes are transported with significant attention to radiation and the related heat load. Spent fuel is moved from the reactor to the fuel pool under water. Shipping casks for spent-fuel assemblies (such as shown by Radiation safety, also referred to variously as radiological controls or health physics, deals with protection of operating personnel and the public from potential adverse effects of radiation. Radiation safety includes facility, equipment, and procedure development to minimize direct radiation exposures and skin contamination or inhalation of radioactive material. It is supported by routine radiation surveys, dose measurements, and audits. Extensive prejob planning is implemented to keep personnel radiation exposures Operations with toxic materials that emit little or no electromagnetic (gamma) radiation may be conducted in leak-tight glove boxes. Fabrication of plutonium pellets and fuel pins falls into this category. Materials that emit penetrating radiation may require shielding up to and including that requiring remote handling. Operations behind shielding may be viewed by television or through thick-leaded glass windows. Fabrication of Nuclear criticality safety deals with prevention of nuclear excursions (i.e., uncontrolled neutron chain reactions) in fuel materials outside of reactors. Since natural uranium is not subject to accidental criticality, enriched uranium is the first fuel-cycle product (e.g., from Criticality safety in general relies on some combination of limiting fuel quantities, using neutron-absorbing constituents, and applying geometrical arrangements that favor neutron leakage. The latter depends on use of geometrically favorable shapes (e.g., long, slender cylinders and thin slabs) augmented by limiting neutron-reflecting materials and by generous spacing of components. Examples of criticality safety applications include UF The reprocessing plant cell in A process criticality accident at Tokaimura, Japan, in September 1999 focused world attention on safety aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle. The accident occurred when enriched uranium solution was processed in a manner that bypassed both favorable geometry equipment and approved procedures, with a resulting uncontrolled fission chain reaction that produced high radiation levels that proved lethal to one worker, caused serious radiation illness to two other workers, and otherwise overexposed a number of others. Overall, process criticality accidents have been reported in the United States (7), United Kingdom (1), former Soviet Union/Russia (13), and, now, Japan (1). Nuclear material safeguards are those measures designed to deter, prevent, delay, detect, and report actions aimed at theft or sabotage of fuel or facilities. This is based on the potential use of fissile materials in nuclear explosives or for radiation threats. Physical security, material control, and accountancy systems are designed to counter the terrorist threat from a subnational group. International safeguards use multinational agreements and inventory verification to deter Measures should be commensurate with the perceived risks for given materials. The slightly enriched uranium of the LWR fuel cycle, for example, requires further enrichment for weapons use. The extreme complexity of the technology for uranium enrichment makes such clandestine operations unlikely. Spent fuel with its plutonium content that could be separated chemically is a somewhat more attractive target. However, the inherent radiation levels of the wastes and toxicity of the plutonium require sophisticated reprocessing operations. Highly enriched uranium (>20   Sustained reaction wherein neutrons cause fissions, which in turn produce more neutrons, which cause the next generation of fissions. Condition where a fission chain reaction is stable with production balancing losses at a nonzero neutron level. Process in which isotopes are separated by physical means; applies primarily to separating Material, not itself fissile, capable of being converted to fissile material following absorption of a neutron. Material capable of sustaining a fission chain reaction. Process in which a heavy nucleus splits into two or more large fragments and releases kinetic energy. Emission of particulate or electromagnetic radiation from an energetically unstable nucleus. Combination of fissile and other materials in a geometric arrangement designed to support a neutron chain reaction. Reuse of nuclear fuel material that has been separated from fuel previously used in a reactor. Process of separating nuclear fuel and waste constituents contained in spent reactor fuel.