We described a highly sensitive and selective strategy for sensing of human serum albumin (HSA) by constructing a reversible fluorescent “turn-off-on” sensor. Monodispersed cadmium telluride quantum dots (CdTe QDs) were synthesized by using a simple aqueous phase synthesis method, which exhibited strong green fluorescence. The CdTe QDs fluorescence was first quenched using resveratrol through dynamic quenching type, that is to say, excited states CdTe QDs collided with resveratrol. HSA can cooperate with resveratrol to dissociate CdTe QDs/resveratrol, leading to the recovered fluorescence of CdTe QDs. Therefore, a facile reversible fluorescent “turn-off-on” sensor can be developed for HSA detection. In a wide concentration range of HSA (0.0237–100 μg mL−1), the detection limit could reach 6.898 ng mL−1, which was much lower than previously reported values, indicating high sensitivity. Meanwhile, this strategy was successfully applied to the synthetic samples and demonstrated ideal selectivity. Moreover, the mechanisms of the interactions among QDs, resveratrol, and HSA were also investigated. The proposed strategy for HSA determination based on the constructed reversible fluorescent “turn-off-on” sensor suggests great promising in fluorescent sensing.Human serum albumin (HSA), as a high-abundance protein in human blood, is a researching hotspot currently in clinical medicine. It plays a crucial role in regulating physiological functions, such as transport of essential amino acids, steroid hormones, metal ions, maintaining normal blood osmotic pressure, et al. [ Quantum dots (QDs) are nanoscale small colloidal particles with superior optical and electronic properties over large particles [ Generally, the majority of the existing fluorescence determination sensors constructed by QDs depend on direct fluorescence quenching as the detection signal. However, due to the false-positive signal of environmental stimuli, the “on-off’’ model detects a narrow detection range as well as poor selectivity [ Herein, we reported a QDs-based sensor for HSA determination by using resveratrol as both the quencher to QDs and a receptor to HSA ( 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, ≥99.0%, Sigma-Aldrich), CdCl CdTe QDs were prepared based on previously reported methods [ 1.0 mL CdTe QDs, 1.0 mL PBS (pH = 7.4) and 1.0 mL resveratrol (800 μg mL The fluorescence spectra were carried out on a Hitachi F-4600 spectrofluorophotometer. The UV–vis spectra were obtained on a PerkinElmer Lambda 35 UV–vis spectrophotometer. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded using Rigaku D/MAX-RB ranging from 10° to 60°. The morphology and size of QDs were analyzed by Hitachi HT-7700 transmission electron microscope (TEM) and Olympus IX-81 fluorescence microscope. The pH was adjusted by a PHS-3C pH meter. The as-prepared CdTe QDs have an exclusively cubic phase (zinc blende structure, space group: F-43 m, JCPDS: 75-2086), as verified by the powder XRD pattern ( The fluorescence spectra of the QDs-resveratrol system are displayed in Generally, fluorescence quenching of phosphors can be induced by molecular rearrangements, photochemical reactions, and ground-state complex formation,  The absorption spectra of CdTe QDs, resveratrol, and QDs-resveratrol system were studied to further demonstrate the fluorescence quenching type (Fig. S3). Assume that the fluorescence quenching type of reaction system is static quenching, and then the progress is caused by the formation of QDs/resveratrol ground state complex. As known, the formed ground state complexes can induce changes in the absorption spectra of quenching agents or fluorescent substances [ In the case of resveratrol, proteins are preferred to bind with it due to the strong binding trend for amino acids and aromatic residues. With this in mind, the QDs-resveratrol system fluorescence is expected to efficiently recover Meanwhile, a contrast experiment was conducted to study the interaction between HSA and QDs ( Owing to the presence of tryptophan residues, HSA exhibits a maximum intrinsic emission at around 352 nm [ The fluorescence quenching effect of resveratrol on HSA was studied by the Stern-Volmer equation (Eq. As resveratrol is one of the fluorescent polyphenols, the effect of HSA on resveratrol fluorescence intensity was studied at 298 K ( Based on the Förster theory of energy transfer, three necessary factors of FRET are (1) high quantum yield ( The aforementioned results showed that resveratrol quenched CdTe QDs fluorescence by dynamic quenching. After adding HSA, resveratrol reacted with HSA to form resveratrol-HSA binding complexes through FRET, leading to the recovery of CdTe QDs fluorescence. The possible process can be illustrated in The effect of pH on the fluorescence intensity of the QDs-resveratrol-HSA system was studied in the range of pH 6.8-8.0. In our experiments, PBS was the optimal buffer solution for adjusting the pH value of the present system. Furthermore, the maximal enhanced fluorescence intensity of the QDs-resveratrol by HSA was obtained at pH 7.4, and the optimum content of PBS was 1.0 mL. Therefore, in order to obtain a lower detection limit of HSA, the pH value of the solution in the experiment was set at 7.4. The effects of different concentrations of QDs on fluorescence intensity of interaction among QDs, resveratrol, and HSA were studied. The experiment results suggested that the suitable dose of QDs in this system was 1.0 mL. The interaction of QDs with resveratrol and HSA was monitored at room temperature (∼25 °C). The experiment results showed that the interaction between QDs and resveratrol could complete within 10 min at room temperature (∼25 °C). After the addition of HSA, the interaction process reached equilibrium within the next 10 min and remained stable for more than 1.5 h. Therefore, it wasn't until 20 min later that the fluorescence spectra were recorded to guarantee that the reactions reached equilibrium. Under the optimum conditions, calibration curves for detection of HSA are obtained by the restored QDs fluorescence intensity ( In addition to the sensitivity requirements, high accuracy and selectivity are also essential, especially in the actual samples testing. To evaluate the selectivity and accuracy of HSA detection by using the present fluorescence method, the fluorescence intensity changes of the QDs-resveratrol-HSA system by adding a series of foreign substances were measured ( To explore the practical value of the developed HSA detection sensor, standard addition-recovery tests were carried out in the synthetic samples. Two synthetic samples were prepared by the addition of HSA, metal ions, amino acids, In this work, we provided a platform to investigate the interaction among QDs, resveratrol, and HSA. The QDs fluorescence was quenched significantly by resveratrol, and then the QDs fluorescence was gradually restored by the addition of HSA. On this point, a new reversible fluorescent “turn-off-on’’ sensor for the rapid and simple determination of HSA was developed. The present fluorescence “turn-off-on’’ sensor showed much higher sensitivity and selectivity than previously reported methods. Moreover, the mechanisms of the reaction were explored systematically. Fluorescence quenching of QDs by resveratrol was attributed to the collision between excited state CdTe QDs and resveratrol. When HSA was added to the above quenching system, the resveratrol-HSA binding complexes can be formed The authors declare no competing financial interest. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: