Squeezing characteristics of the ground in the Uluabat Tunnel, Turkey, are discussed and the analysis of TBM performance data around zones where the TBM jamming problems occurred is presented. Detailed analysis shows that a squeezing index of the ground can be defined which is related to the change in thrust force, time and length of tunnel where the increase of thrust starts and terminates with squeezing of TBM. This index is found to increase linearly with overburden and although the relationship is not strong, particularly with decreasing RMR values. It is also shown that the delays in tunnel excavation or TBM stoppages also play an important role in the squeezing of TBM shield. It was possible to mitigate the squeezing problem by means of bentonite injection through the shield. As a result, a methodology of predicting critical zones for shield blockage and problems caused by squeezing characteristics of difficult ground is discussed in detail.Squeezing behaviour of the ground may adversely affect the TBM performance even questioning the feasibility of a TBM excavation since even small convergences may cause jamming of the shield ( Literature survey on the subject with detailed theoretical and numerical investigations, as well as reference to practical experience, were carried out by The following basic works are of general character dealing with squeezing ground. According to the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM), squeezing is time dependent large deformation which occurs around the tunnel associated with creep caused by exceeding a limiting shear stress (    The study of the behaviour of TBM in squeezing ground is the main objective of this paper, and this topic is investigated in details in the following works.    Detailed and comprehensive works carried out by Ramoni and Anagnostou improved the understanding the affects of squeezing ground characteristics in mechanized tunnelling. Specific problems of mechanized tunnelling in squeezing ground, the problem of shield jamming and analysis of the effects of countermeasures were first investigated on the basis of the results of numerical computations ( The project area is situated on the southern part of Uluabat–Bursa (Apolyont) Lake, Turkey as shown in The geologic map of the area is given in A single-shielded Herrenknecht EPB-TBM was selected for the project with specifications summarized in An average daily advance rate of 8.6 During tunnel excavation, the TBM was stuck a total of 18 times at different tunnel locations, as shown in During tunnel excavation, The TBM became stacked in different places of the tunnel mainly in metadetritics rock formations due to the highly squeezing characteristics of the Karakaya formation. A general view of the squeezing ground around the TBM shield is shown in The overall performance of TBM in 18 critical squeezing zones is summarized in The gross advance rate is plotted against tunnel length in As shown in Data given in  The effect of TBM waiting time on the squeezing is illustrated in  The geology at various chainages presented squeezing or settlement, at extreme rates up to 60  The Uluabat Tunnel case study and the detailed TBM performance analysis presented in this paper clearly show how the squeezing characteristic of the ground can impact the progress rate of mechanized tunnelling. 18 rescue galleries were constructed to free the trapped shield of a 5.05 The authors are grateful to AK-Energy, the owner of the project and Tinsa, the contactor, E. Caner MSc student who helped analyzing the TBM data, B. Willis from IPC providing data for bentonite application in Uluabat Tunnel and Dr. G. Anagnostou, Dr. M. Ramoni and Dr. L. Ozdemir for their valuable comments and suggestions.