The use of high dosages of polysaccharide depressants in order to depress the undesired naturally floatable gangue (NFG) present in ores beneficiated from the Bushveld Complex, South Africa, results in a significant decrease in the stability of flotation froths. These unstable froths can result in restricted mass pull and decreased valuable mineral recovery. Previous work using a single polyglycol ether type frother, DOW 200, has shown that an increase in frother dosage could be used to overcome the destabilisation of the froth to a certain extent and improve valuable mineral recovery. This resulted in an increase in water recovery and dilution of the concentrate by entrained material. This work extends this study to examine the effect of using a stronger frother, DOW 250, on the recovery of sulphide minerals and floatable gangue from a Merensky ore at different dosages of guar gum and CMC, which are typically used as depressants in the processing of Merensky ore. Results indicate that an increase in the strength of the frother resulted in a more robust froth. Depressant type also had an influence on results obtained.The presence of naturally floating gangue (NFG) in ores mined from the Bushveld Complex, South Africa, can result in negative effects during the flotation process. The presence of NFG, which consists mainly of pyroxene associated with talcaceous minerals, results in the stabilisation of the froth and although present in small amounts (0.5–5% by mass in the ore) can cause these unwanted effects.That these minerals are naturally floatable is due to the presence of talc along pyroxene grain boundaries ( The use of high depressant dosages invariably results in a marked decrease in froth stability due to the depression of froth stabilising NFG (  For this work a Merensky ore containing a significant amount of NFG ( An ore from the southern section of the Merensky Reef in the Bushveld Igneous Complex, South Africa was prepared at UCT ( Batch flotation tests were conducted using a method developed at UCT ( The frothers, Dowfroth 200 (DOW 200) and Dowfroth 250 (DOW 250), supplied by Betachem were added at dosages of 40, 50 and 60 The general formula for DOW 200 is CH The air supply to the flotation cell was maintained at a flow rate of 7 In order to determine the effect of the presence/absence of NFG on the frothing behaviour upon increases in frother dosage, tests were conducted in the absence of depressant where NFG was present. All NFG was depressed at a depressant dosage of 500 Two phase batch flotation tests i.e. water and air only, were conducted using DOW 200 and DOW 250 at the same dosages as were used in the three phase tests (water, air and solids). The results of these tests are shown in Results for total mass and water recovered for the various conditions using DOW 200 and DOW 250 at increasing dosages in the presence of guar gum at dosages of 0, 250 and 500 Statistical analysis using t tests of the data presented in  The increase in dosage of DOW 200 was not sufficient to develop a robust froth whereas DOW 250 was strong enough to overcome the destabilising conditions created by the high dosage of CMC. The use of DOW 200 at a dosage of 60 Statistical analysis using t tests of the data presented in The amounts of total gangue recovered as a function of water recovered are compared in  The analysis of the response of the sulphide minerals to frother type and dosage in this study was determined by following the recovery of copper and nickel. Some of the nickel present in Merensky ore is associated with gangue minerals and total nickel recoveries obtained are lower than the sulphide nickel recoveries would be expected to be. In this work total nickel recoveries were sufficient to monitor pentlandite behaviour (  Upon observation of the figure it is evident that copper recoveries were at their maximum in the absence of a depressant with similar copper recoveries being obtained for both frothers under all conditions. Depressant addition resulted in a decrease in copper recovery probably due to the loss of partially liberated copper minerals. There was, however, little difference in the recovery of copper when guar gum dosage was increased from 250 to 500 Final copper recoveries and grades for all dosages of DOW 200 and DOW 250 in the presence of all dosages of CMC are presented in Final recoveries and grades obtained for nickel for both frothers at all dosages in the presence of guar gum at dosages of 0, 250 and 500 The results obtained for nickel recoveries and grades in the presence of CMC are presented in This testwork was carried out using an ore containing NFG in the form of partial talc rims along pyroxene grain boundaries. Further work should include the evaluation of an ore with different NFG mineralogy i.e. liberated talc to determine whether this results in differences in the mechanism of froth stabilisation. Increased frother dosage, from 40 to 60 The highly destabilised froths obtained using DOW 200 in the presence of high dosages of CMC depressant resulted in froth crowding with nickel competing with copper for adsorption. The increased strength of DOW 250 overcame this effect. Under destabilising conditions DOW 250 showed improved performance over that of DOW 200, but under conditions with maximum NFG presence there was little difference in their performance. An increase in frother dosage resulted in slightly improved copper recoveries, with a more marked improvement in the recovery of nickel, but at the expense of grade. Higher amounts of NFG were recovered from tests using DOW 200 than equivalent tests using DOW 250 in the absence of a depressant. This may be due to the adsorption of DOW 250 on NFG particles. It should be noted that an increase in frother dosage in a rougher circuit could affect downstream circuits. The members of the UCT Reagent Research Group are thanked for providing the financial support for this study.