In the railway sanding, the sand particles are firstly crushed into finer fragments in the inlet zone of wheel/rail contact. Therefore, two kinds of particles act in the sanding process: the initial sand with large sizes and the final fragments with micro sizes. To learn which kind of particles is more crucial for the sanding performances, standard sand particles (0.6–2.0 mm) and its micro fragments (0.1–30 μm) were used as two types of adhesion enhancers. The results indicated that the application of micro fragments had advantages on reducing the wear and surface damage, without losing adhesion enhancing capacities compared to the standard sand particles. However, the “fluid-driven” rolling contact fatigue (RCF) damage occurred when the micro fragments were used.In an open wheel/rail system, the low adhesion between wheel and rail is often encountered due to the presence of contaminants or third body layer on the surfaces. The most common contaminants leading to low adhesion problems are mainly water, oil, leaves, oxides, etc. [ Although the benefits on enhancing adhesion could be expected in the application of sand, the undesired negative effects caused by sanding should also be noted [ Different from the abrasion problems occurring in other industrial components, e.g., the bearings and gears, both the size and amount of sand particles applied into wheel/rail contact (0.6–2 mm and 0.3–1.0 L/min used in China [ To learn if the initial size of sand is crucial for the adhesion improvement, and to explore the contributions of the crushing process to wheel/rail wear and damage, comparative tests were conducted on a twin-disc wheel/rail test rig using two types of sand particles, i.e. the standard sand and its crushed fragments. The size of fragments ranges from 0.1 to 30 μm, thereby being able to pass through the contact interface without suffering a significant crushing process. In this case, the wheel/rail contact would be dominated by the abrasion of the micro fragments, which approaches to the final state after the standard sand having been crushed. All the tests in this study were conducted on an MJP rolling-sliding test machine. The schematic structure of the test machine is shown in In order to simulate the railway sanding under low adhesion conditions, contaminations and sand particles were fed into the wheel/rai interface simultaneously. The layout of inlets for feeding contaminations and sand particles was presented in In this study, the wheel/rail specimens were cut from the CL60 wheel tread and U71Mn rail head, respectively, and processed into discs with diameter of 55 mm. The sampling positions and sizes of the wheel/rail rollers are presented in A commercial silica sand used in China railway was chosen as the standard sand in this study, which had a size in the range of 0.6–2.0 mm. The micro fragments were obtained from comminution of the standard sand by a roller pulverizer, thus they have the same compositions and mineral properties with the standard sand. The morphologies of the standard sand and micro fragments are illustrated in  In the single-application tests, the flow rates of water and oil were 10 ml/min and 2 ml/min, respectively. In the case of leaf condition, the chopped fresh leaves (about 10 × 10 mm) were fed into wheel/rail contact manually around 10 pieces/min. The feeding of leaves was performed near the position of sand feed nozzle. When the discs ran steadily under the low adhesion conditions, a certain mass of solid particles, which were reserved in the sanding nozzle in advance, would be fed into the wheel/rail contact by a very short action of the compress air. The increased adhesion coefficient after application was regarded as the adhesion restoring ability of applied particles. This test strategy was used in other studies with the benefit of avoiding particle over-dosing problem on twin-disc setups [ In order to evaluate the wear and damage of wheel/rail material during applying particles, particles had to be applied continuously for a long duration to ensure discs be worn sufficiently. The standard sand in this part of experiments was applied continuously at a flow rate of 10 g/min under the wet condition. The simulation of wet condition was the same to the single-application test as mentioned above. Different from the standard sand, the micro fragments were difficult to be applied continuously due to the blocking of hose or nozzle by the micro particles. In this case, the fragments and water were pre-mixed into slurry at the concentrations of 0.5, 5, 25 and 50 wt% before application, as shown in The wheel/rail specimens were weighed using an electronic analytical balance (JA4103, China, accuracy: 0.0001 g) before and after testing, and the wear rates were evaluated using the wear losses divided by the running cycles. Longitudinal sections of the worn discs were cut, polished and etched to observe the deformation layer and RCF cracks on the subsurface. The surface and subsurface morphologies were inspected using optical microscopy (OM) (KEYENCE VHX-6000, Japan) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Phenom Pro-SE, Netherlands). The variation processes of adhesion coefficient when applying the standard sand and its fragments under three different low-adhesion conditions (wet, oil and leaf conditions) are presented in In the continuously steady tests, the water-particle slurry test method was adopted to further investigate the effect of particle content on the adhesion improvement. The slurry testing method was generally adopted in other abrasion studies with the benefits to create an assessable and controllable contact state in the test [ The film-thickness of water and oil in the contact could be evaluated through the elastohydrodynamic lubrication (EHL) numerical calculation. Based on a smooth line-contact isothermal EHL numerical model [  In addition, as interpreted by Lewis and Dwyer-Joyce et al. [ The SEM images of the wheel/rail worn surfaces are shown in Under the slurry conditions, as presented in The subsurface morphologies of the wheel and rail discs are illustrated in The slight plastic deformation under all the slurry conditions highlighted the less impact of abrasion of micro particles on subsurface material. In this case, the ratcheting effect of material diminished and there were almost no noteworthy cracks observed on the rail discs ( The assistance of fluid on developing RCF damage happened after the initiation of cracks. In the rolling contact, surface cracks would initiate when a certain level of the ratcheting damage was reached. The ratcheting damage level was related to the contact pressure, mechanical characteristics of material, friction force, and effective number of cycles [ When surface cracks had initiated during the test, the liquid lubricant in the contact area would penetrate into the cracks, then dramatically accelerate the development of cracks. The assistance of fluid on crack growth was generally associated with the following mechanisms: the pressurization of fluid inside the crack (Mode I); the hydraulic transmission of contact pressure into crack faces (Mode I), and lubricating the crack faces to accelerate the shear mode crack growth (Mode Ⅱ) [ In the application of standard sand, the coupling of high friction with the presence of fluid (either the water or a mixture of water and sand fragments) met most of the requirements for fluid-driven RCF development. There were also some sand fragments could be found in the cracks or inner materials after applying standard sand. However, owing to the high wear rates, the crack propagation was prevented by removing cracked layers from the surface ( From the comparison between the standard sand and micro sand fragments on the adhesion enhancement, it was confirmed that the micro particles were as effective as the standard sand when the particles were larger than the surface contamination layer. Although the final size of particles passing through the contact interface was not determined in the tests, the finding could still indicate that there was not necessarily a link between the initial size of sand and its adhesion enhancing performance. On the contrary, based on the high dependence of adhesion coefficient on the particle contents ( However, it should also be noted that there was a threshold of particle contents, above which the dependence of adhesion coefficient on the particle content would diminish or even be reversed [ Work carried out in this study demonstrated that the abrasion of sand fragments in contact seemed to be the main mechanism on improving degraded adhesion coefficient by sanding. Therefore, further investigations on wheel/rail sanding could focus on the final state of the particles after being crushed, not only on the initial particles. Without losing efficiency on improving adhesion, the application of micro sand fragments showed obvious advantages on reducing the wheel/rail wear and surface damage compared to normal sanding (i.e., applying standard sand). In case of applying standard sand, the coupling of significant particle crushing process with subsequent abrasion of fragments led to the severest wear and surface damage on the wheel/rail discs. On the contrary, in the application of micro fragments, the severe indentation damage was almost totally avoided, meanwhile, the abrasion damage was mild. Thus, the surface damage induced by applying micro fragments was not a big problem. In addition, it was noted that the wheel/rail materials suffered slight plastic deformation under slurry conditions. The significant ratcheting of wheel/rail materials in the presence of solid particles in contact was generally recognized to cause the high wear rates and surface delamination damage [ However, severe RCF damage was observed when the micro sand fragments were applied ( Laboratory tests were performed on a twin-disc setup to explore the adhesion performance, wear and damage of wheel/rail when standard sand and micro sand particles were used as adhesion enhancers. Compared to standard sand, the micro fragments were expected to avoid the significant particle crushing process during being applied. Through the comparison, the following conclusion can be drawn: The initial size of sand did not seem crucial for the adhesion improvement. The sand fragments showed the equivalent capabilities on improving adhesion coefficient as standard sand under wet, oil and leaf conditions. When tested in the slurry condition, the adhesion coefficient increased with increasing the content of micro fragments in slurry. The sand fragments induced much milder negative-effects on the wear, surface damage, and plastic deformation of wheel/rail materials than the standard sand. Most of the advantages of sand fragments could be due to the avoidance of a significant particle crushing process. Severe RCF damage occurred only under the fragment-water slurry conditions, which was resulted from the coupling of high friction to initiate surface cracks with the entrapment of fluid to drive crack propagation.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is supported by The work was also carried out under the project Furthermore, the authors also thank the support of Inter-Governmental S&T Cooperation Exchange program between China and Czech. The first author is sincerely grateful to financial sponsorship of Cultivation Program for the Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of