This article presents a strategy for the identification of optimal flotation circuits based on experimental data and the assumption that the flotation circuit structure are not very sensitive to stage recovery. The main objective is to find a set of optimal flotation circuit configurations, including the best metallurgical conditions for the process and cell design. The optimization process maximizes the Net Present Value (NPV). This methodology consists of two steps. The first step of the methodology entails obtaining data from the laboratory. Different metallurgical conditions are tested for different flotation stages. Each metallurgical condition is evaluated to determine its kinetics. The second step of the methodology is the optimization process. The optimization process achieves the best solution by optimizing cell design, flotation circuit structure and metallurgical conditions. The optimization process has three phases. The first phase assumes that every flotation stage has the same residence time and calculates feasible flotation circuits, metallurgical conditions and cell volumes. This process is performed for several residence times and, therefore, a set of feasible solutions is generated. The second phase takes the previous set of feasible solutions and calculates the residence time at each flotation stage. Then, for each phase two solution, the optimal flotation circuit, metallurgical conditions and cell design are calculated. The final product is a set of optimal solutions than can be considered for further study. The procedure is illustrated by the design of a zinc flotation plant, considering seven flotation stages and five species.Flotation circuit design determines the type, design, and interconnection of flotation units from an enormous number of alternatives given the design objectives. In general, several systematic methods can be used to evaluate and search among design alternatives. For example every alternative can be evaluated using sequential simulation and the one with the best evaluation is selected. This method demands large amounts of computation or human resources, unless the number of alternatives is considerably small. Another design alternative is to begin with a feasible base flotation circuit and make incremental improvements to part of the design in each iteration. The most significant drawback of this method is that it is unable to reach the globally optimal flotation circuit design. In superstructure optimization, a superstructure containing all the alternatives is proposed. Based on the superstructure a mathematical programming model is developed which offers an opportunity to simultaneously evaluate the performance of all alternatives and automatically generate the optimal flotation circuit. This method is limited by the complexity and quality of the mathematical formulation. However, in the early stage of flotation circuit design, superstructure optimization can be substantially useful to provide initial flotation circuit configuration from a number of promising alternatives. The optimization of flotation systems is usually a balance between recovery and concentrate grade. Many studies have focused on the physical and chemical aspects of pulp, particle size, and froth performance. These studies have led to improved designs and operating conditions. However, all of these improvements and studies have been conditioned by the circuit used, i.e., the number and type of stages and their interrelationship. Optimal flotation circuit design is a complex task because it is necessary to predict the recovery of each species in each stage, but the recovery of each stage depends on several variables, including the circuit structure and operational conditions. Most of the flotation models available are empirical ( There are several methodologies for flotation circuit design using superstructure and optimization methods. Examples of these procedures are the works of In addition, the feed grade and metal price have stochastic uncertainties, and the kinetic model has epistemic uncertainty (lack of knowledge of the correct value of the kinetic parameters). Thus, several studies have been developed to evaluate the effects of uncertainties in flotation process design ( The aim of this paper is to propose a strategy for the identification of a set of optimal flotation circuits based on the fact that few flotation circuit structures are optimal for a given problem and based on the knowledge of existing ones and experimental results. The method includes two steps: first, testing under different operating conditions, which are used to model recovery at each stage, and second, an optimization procedure that is used to obtain a set of optimal flotation circuit designs. This paper is divided into four parts; the first is the introduction. The second part describes the methodology used, which includes the experimental section and the optimization process. The third section reports a study case of the design of a zinc flotation circuit. Finally, the conclusions are given. The proposed strategy consists of two steps. The first entails obtaining data from laboratory experiments. The second step of the methodology uses the data from the laboratory to optimize the process. With these two steps, real data are included in flotation circuit design. The first step of the methodology requires experimental flotation tests. Different metallurgical conditions are tested, depending on the mineral of interest to be floated. For instance, different frothers, collectors or dispersants can be tested. It is important to consider the different types of flotation stages. For instance, in the rougher stage it will be more important to test the concentrations of the collector and frother. However, in the cleaner stage the pyrite depressant can be more important. Performing many tests will increase laboratory and computational costs; therefore, tests must be chosen carefully. Flotation tests are performed to consider recovery at different times. The objective is to obtain kinetic models based on the experimental data. For example, the experimental data for each laboratory condition can be adjusted using a fast-slow flotation model ( The second step concerns process design based on mathematical optimization using the kinetic models obtained in step one. A model is developed to calculate the optimal circuit configuration, operation conditions and cell design. This work uses a superstructure of stages that represent different flotation circuit configurations. The superstructure is based on the generic representation of a stage, which is used to represent all stages that are to be included in the design.  The mathematical model allows optimizing the flotation circuit, metallurgical conditions, cell volumes and residence times. The last two are considered elements of cell design. The metallurgical conditions are the conditions from the experimental kinetic test in step one. The optimization is very challenging because the model is a non-convex mixed-integer nonlinear programming problem (MINLP). Our experience is that the use of commercial software such as BARON does not converge to the optimal solution after several days for medium size problems (e.g., three species and four stages) using a PC with specifications such as i7 processor and 8 The first phase of the optimization considers that each flotation stages has the same residence time, which is a fixed value. Therefore, the recoveries at each stage are parameters that make the model a mixed-integer linear programing problem (MILP). By doing this, the cell volume becomes easier to calculate, as do the metallurgical conditions and flotation circuit structure. The outputs of this phase are the flotation circuit structure, metallurgical conditions and volumes for each flotation stage. The second phase of the optimization calculates the optimum residence time at each flotation stage using the flotation circuit structure, cell volumes and operational conditions calculated in the previous phase. This is a MINLP that is easy to solve because the structure is fixed and the operational conditions are known. The outputs of this phase are the optimum residence times at each flotation stage. The third phase of the optimization achieves an optimal flotation circuit based on the same principle as phase one. The input for this phase is the residence time at each flotation stage from phase two. The model is a MILP. The outputs are an optimum flotation circuit, metallurgical condition and cells volumes. This procedure is realized for several residence times, as shown in The model is designed to calculate the best structure and to select operational conditions and cell design. For this purpose, it is necessary to define sets, parameters and variables. The sets are as follows: II Based on the study by The estimation of the capital cost involves fixed capital ( The working capital is calculated similarly to the fixed capital, using the same fixed capital per stage Eq. The study case considers a plant that concentrates zinc. The flotation stages considered are the same stages currently utilized in the plant ( The methodology first requires testing different operational conditions according to the flotation stages. In these experiments, the sodium isopropyl xanthate and NaCN were prepared at 5%. The CuSO Regrinding was performed in a 20 In step two of the methodology, it is necessary to define the possible flotation circuit structures. The alternative structures that the circuit can have been described in Several parameters were used in the model for the case study, which are given in The experimental data were adjusted to the model of Eq. The procedure was realized using 46 initial residence times between 1.5 and 5.5 It can be argued that the five circuit alternatives can be identified based on experience. For example, all alternatives avoid the loop on S2 concentrate, while one alternative avoids the loop on CS2 concentrate. However, the alternatives identified also consider three options to send the concentrate from stage S1 (stages CS1, SC, and C) and two alternatives to send the tail from stage CS2. If only these alternatives are considered, and not all ones identified in  The optimal metallurgical conditions are given in   A strategy for the identification of a set of optimal flotation circuit was proposed based on laboratory tests and on the fact that there are few flotation circuit structures that are optimal for a given problem. The strategy uses two steps: first, kinetic models are developed for different operational conditions based on experimental tests. Then, an optimization procedure is utilized for the identification of circuit structure, operational conditions and cell design. The optimization procedure overcomes the difficulties of convergence that this type of problem presents. A case study allowed the identification of only five flotation circuit alternatives after running the optimization program 46 times using different initial cell residence times. The Net Present Value increased from 102,587 million dollars (the optimized current flotation circuit) to 106,777 million dollars for a 10-year project. The new design gives both better recovery and concentrate grade. Additionally, the operational cost is reduced. Financial support from This appendix shows plots of experimental values of recovery of Zn, Cu, Pb and Fe under different conditions. The data and plots are also available as Interactive Plot in the online version. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 