The physical mixtures of copper hydroxocarbonate with different amounts of powder aluminium were activated in a laboratory planetary ball mill. The elucidation of the chemical reactions occurring during grinding is presented. The formation of Cu–Al alloys beside Al2O3 can be possible after only a few minutes of mechanical treatment depending on the amount of Al0 in the system.The development of modern technology depends, to a considerable extent, on the possibility of production of special materials, i.e. substances with clearly controlled properties. It seems that mechanical activation could be used for this reason Mechanical activation can be carried out in special milling devices but, as literature data suggest, the planetary mill is most effective. Grinding in such a mill is defined as high-energy ball milling. Then, the simultaneous operation of stroke and friction on the milled material causes changes in the physical and chemical properties of the substances apart from the comminution. High-energy milling usually involves the accumulation of excess energy in solids. The local increase in temperature and pressure can be observed as well as the increase in defective structures of the substances undergoing mechanical activation. High defect density facilitates the increase in the kinetics of diffusion processes. These factors can intensify the course of chemical reactions between the components of the milled system. Consequently, reactions that normally require high temperatures can occur during mechanical activation without any externally applied heat Metallurgy is one of the fields of technology that mechanical activation in high-energy ball milling devices is using to obtain the alloys. There is a group of alloys called ODS superalloys mainly based on Al or Ni metals. They are characterised by high strength and hardness even at high temperatures and resistance to fatigue cracking higher than that of conventionally obtained ones Another promising idea of mechanical activation application is catalysis Furthermore, the milling products of copper hydroxocarbonate with aluminium, i.e. Cu–Al alloys beside Al The aim of this research is to explain the mechanism of metallic alloy formation besides other compounds during the mechanical activation of the Cu Copper hydroxocarbonate (malachite: 72.0% CuO, 19.1% H Three two-component systems of salt with metal, Cu A laboratory planetary mill with balls made of steel was used. Ball to powder weight ratio was of 14:1. The velocity of the ball was 3.20 m s Grinding was carried out in the range of 3–15 min in air at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. Thermogravimetric analyses of the samples were carried out on a Mettler thermobalance TG-50 in a Mettler TA-4000 System. Records were obtained with samples heated in air up to 950 °C at a rate of 24 °C min Differential thermal analysis was made in helium (under the same conditions as thermogravimetric measurements) using an Universal V2.5H TA Instrument. X-ray powder diffraction patterns were obtained with a Philips X′ Pert diffractometer using CuK The effects of both component proportions in the system and activation time were studied from three mixtures with different contents of aluminium treated by milling for 3–15 min. They were estimated by identification of the milling products. For this reason, the analytical procedure (thermal analysis and X-ray diffraction methods) tested previously As one can see in the XRD pattern of the Cu Moreover, as it is seen in The phenomenon of metallic alloy formation (Cu–Al) in the Cu An additional thermoanalytical experiment has been performed to simulate reaction (1) which could occur during milling of the Cu The mechanical impulse during the milling of the Cu Cu–Al alloys indicated by intermetallic phases (Cu The alloy synthesis depends on the amount of aluminium in the system; too low content of Al The strong exothermic of Al The authors wish to thank Prof. J.G. Shirokov at the Ivanowo State University of Chemistry and Technology, Russia, for valuable discussions and Dr. W. Balcerowiak at the Institute of Heavy Organic Synthesis in Kȩdzierzyn-Koźle, Poland, for his help in some thermoanalytical measurements. Partial support for this work was provided by the Polish Committee for Scientific Research (KBN), grant No. C-1/51/DS/01.