In order to alleviate the problems of fine coal handling and processing and to enhance the utilization of fines by utilities, US Department of Energy's (DOE's) Federal Energy Technology Center (FETC) developed and patented the GranuFlow Process. This paper summarizes recent test results of the GranuFlow Process with pilot-scale and plant-scale centrifuges in commercial plants. The main benefits of the GranuFlow Process are that it can potentially reduce the amount of waste coal that is stored in refuse impoundments, reduce the moisture content of the final clean coal product, improve handling by converting wet sticky fines to a granular, free-flowing material, prevent frozen coal problems in rail cars, and reduce the dustiness and fugitive dust losses during transportation and handling. Since Orimulsion is a low cost bitumen emulsion, this technology provides the coal industry with a cost-effective technology for fine coal processing.Coal preparation is used to upgrade as-mined coal before it is utilized by the end user, primarily electric utility power plants. It reduces the amount of noncombustible mineral impurities, acid rain precursor sulfur-bearing minerals and hazardous trace elements, and generally produces more uniform, higher energy content fuels. Most conventional and advanced coal cleaning processes, however, involve the use of water and dewatering ( In order to alleviate the problems of fine coal processing and enhance the utilization of fines by utilities, Federal Energy Technology Center (FETC) developed an innovative process, called the GranuFlow Process. The process requires the addition of a small amount of specially selected binding material, such as an aqueous emulsion of asphalt, bitumen, or heavy oil, and mixes it with the fine clean-coal slurry before dewatering. The binding material becomes incorporated into the product to form microagglomerates when the emulsion breaks with fine coal slurry. The clean-coal product is converted into randomly-sized, dustless fragments or granular particles after being discharged from the dewatering process. Such a product has only moderate compressive strength, but the great majority of the “dust” particles and moisture are sufficiently bound in the dewatered microagglomerates to mitigate the handling problems. Since the emulsion droplets bind selectively with the hydrophobic coal particles into granular products, the process also rejected ash forming material into centrifuge effluent water that provided further beneficiation effects. There were two patents obtained for this process. In the first patent ( The process was scaled up and tested in both a 15.2-cm bench-scale Bird screen–bowl centrifuge ( In searching for low cost binding agents to further improve the economic feasibility of the GranuFlow Process, the concept of using an emulsion as a flotation reagent was initiated for a second patent ( The main benefits of the GranuFlow Process are that it can potentially (1) reduce the amount of coal that is wasted to coal refuse impoundments, (2) reduce the moisture content of the final clean coal product, (3) improve handling by converting wet sticky fines to a granular, free-flowing material, (4) prevent frozen coal in rail cars, and (5) reduce the dustiness and fugitive dust losses during transportation and handling. Recently, FETC performed a series of pilot-scale centrifuge dewatering tests ( An Upper Mason seam coal was processed at the Mayflower Coal Preparation Plant. The column flotation slurry concentrate had about 15 wt.% solids and contained 6.5 wt.% ash. The particle size was 90% passing 150 mesh (106 μm) with mean size ( The coals being washed were a mixture of West Virginia No. 2 Gas Seam and Eagle Seam, Nicholas County, West Virginia. The centrifuge feed with particle size distribution of 28 mesh (600 μm)×0, at 9.6 wt.% ash was a combination of flotation concentrate and cyclone underflow at a ratio of approximately 1 to 3. Orimulsion is a low cost (US$40 per ton) and high-Btu bitumen-in-water emulsion from Venezuela. It is being used as a fuel for power generation. The emulsion contained about 70% Orinoco bitumen, 30% water, and a trace amount of surfactant. A typical Orinoco bitumen has a heat content of about 9280 kcal/kg (16,700 Btu/lb). Previous test results indicated that static mixers gave adequate mixing; however, when bypassing the static mixer, the in-situ pipe flow mixing also gave similar results when at least 4.6-m of feeding pipe was between the emulsion feeding location and centrifuge. Mixing could be a critical factor for dispersing the emulsion into the coal–water slurry. For the application of Orimulsion in a centrifuge dewatering system, the in-situ pipe flow mixing seems adequate, so the static mixer was not necessary. However, if the system is for vacuum filtration dewatering, high-shear mixing, as reported in previous work ( To evaluate the performance of the GranuFlow Process for dust control, FETC adopted a simple Ro-Tap dry screening process to experimentally measure the dust index ( A series of particle size distributions of the −150 mesh (106 μm) feed coal to the centrifuge at eight different Orimulsion concentrations ranging from 0 to 8 wt.% are shown in FETC performed a series of pilot-scale centrifuge dewatering tests at the Mayflower plant. The centrifuge dewatering test circuit at the Mayflower plant was set up outside the plant and included a 1900-l slurry feed tank, a 19-l Orimulsion holding container, a Viking gear pump, model SG-0525-M, a 46-cm Decanter screen–bowl centrifuge, and a product conveyer. The feed tank was set on a platform 9-m above ground. The centrifuge was set on the ground about 9-m away from the feed tank. The coal slurry was gravity-fed to the centrifuge via a 5.1-cm pipe connected from the tank to the centrifuge. A tube valve, located about 0.9-m from the centrifuge feed inlet, was used to control the feed rate. Orimulsion was pumped directly into the slurry feed line about 0.3-m away from the bottom of the feed tank providing about 8.5-m on-line mixing distance. The capacity of the centrifuge was around 1 to 2 t/h of coal, and the rotation speed was at 1000 rpm which provided a force field of 226 g. The screen opening was about 28 mesh (500 μm). The slurry feed rate to the centrifuge was kept constant at about 76 l/min which provided about 3/4 ton of coal per hour of operation. The dewatering tests started with samples without Orimulsion to obtain baseline data for the screen–bowl centrifuge dewatering. At the end of 30 min of baseline operation, the Orimulsion pump was turned on. Generally, samples of the slurry feed, dewatered product coal, and centrifuge effluent and screen effluents were collected at 10 and 20 min of operation for each test condition. Timed samples were usually taken after 20 min of operation for material balance determination. Samples were analyzed for product moisture, solids and ash contents, and product dust index. Two 91-cm Bird screen–bowl centrifuges were tested for the dewatering and reconstitution of fine clean-coal slurry at AMVEST Coal Terry Eagle Coal Preparation Plant in West Virginia. The plant capacity was about 425 t/h of run-of-mine coal. The centrifuges were dewatering −28 mesh (600 μm) fine clean-coal at a feed rate of about 40–50 t/h. This centrifuge feed consisted of −100 mesh (150 μm) froth flotation concentrate at about 12–15 t/h, and the 28 mesh (600 μm)×100 mesh (150 μm) classifying cyclone underflow at about 28–35 t/h. A continental progressing cavity pump, model 1CL4-CDF, was used to pump Orimulsion into the flotation concentrate for the plant-scale tests. The effective pumping range of this pump is 4–38 l/min. The preliminary laboratory test results ( A total of 3000 l of emulsion was available. Based on the flotation concentrate flow rate of an average of 13.5 t/h, a 2-h test was conducted for the Terry Eagle plant. For each condition, the test lasted approximately 15 min. All test results are summarized in The handleability of the centrifuge product was greatly improved with the addition of Orimulsion. Free-flowing granules, as opposed to wet lumpy material, were clearly observed at an Orimulsion addition of 3.2 wt.% and above. The improved handleability of the product was also indicated by the formation of product piles discharged from the conveyer. During the tests, two product coal piles were formed under the conveyer. The primary discharge pile was formed at the very end of the conveyer belt due to free-falling coal-granules. The second discharge pile was formed under a conveyer scraper which was located about 30-cm underneath the end of conveyer belt. The Orimulsion-treated primary discharge pile exhibited a much smaller angle of repose than the untreated primary discharge coal pile. The angle of repose is the angle between the horizontal and the slope of a heap of material dropped from some elevation. The smaller the angle of repose, the more flowable is the material. Also, most of the Orimulsion-treated coal ended in the primary discharge pile, while most of the untreated coal ended in the secondary discharged pile. All test results are summarized in The Orimulsion treatments dramatically reduced the solids content in both the screen effluent and centrifuge effluent. As a result, the dewatered coal recovery, as shown in With increasing emulsion dosages from 0 to 5.5 wt.% as shown in The dust index of the feed coal, The average dust indices of the Orimulsion treated dry products as also shown in The cost of Orimulsion at a sea port in the southeastern US would be around US$40 per ton. When using a bitumen dosage around 6 wt.% (which is equivalent to an Orimulsion dosage of 8.6 wt.% because of its water content), this would add US$3.44 to each ton of fine-coal product treated. Approximately half of the cost of Orimulsion can be credited as additional salable calorie at the price of coal (∼US$25 per ton). Thus, the true cost may be US$2 per ton of fine coal. If this treated fine coal is about 10–20 wt.% of the coal shipment sold to a utility, the actual added cost per ton of shipped coal is around US$0.2–0.4. This cost estimation does not include transportation costs of Orimulsion to the preparation plant, which could be significant, depending on location. The major cost savings from using Orimulsion could come from (1) higher recovery of fine coal product, (2) less wind loss during transportation, (3) longer life times for waste impoundments, (4) elimination of thermal drying, (5) less need for dust suppressants or freeze conditioning agents ( The GranuFlow Process has a variety of potential benefits, some of which may be more important than others depending on the particular application. Some commercial benefits are as follows: (1) increased amounts of fine coal can be added to utility plant feedstocks without creating handling problems; (2) the top size of coal fed to a preparation plant can be reduced to take advantage of increased liberation in order to improve the quality of the clean-coal product; (3) coal fines (valuable fuel) can be reclaimed from waste ponds with an attendant cleanup of waste sites, and (4) handleability during transportation can be improved by alleviating dust and freezing problems. The GranuFlow Process was successfully demonstrated in both pilot-plant-scale and plant-scale tests at the Mayflow and Terry Eagle plants. The process improved product handleability by converting wet sticky fines into granular, free-flowing materials with decreased moisture content, decreased dustiness, and increased solids recovery of the final product. This technology has been proven to be a viable process that can alleviate the coal producers' current practice of discarding coal fines, and can reclaim existing coal waste ponds. The authors wish to acknowledge Mr. William J. Peters of AMVEST and Mr. Reggie Roles of the Terry Eagle Coal Preparation Plant for providing test facilities, Mr. Robert Lowman, Mr. Robert Elstrodt and Mr. Adrian Woods of FETC for their technical contributions and efforts, Mr. Paul Dieter of Parsons Power, and Dr. B.K. Parekh, Dr. D.P. Tao, Mr. J. Wiseman of the Kentucky Center for Applied Energy Research, and Mr. Z. Zitron of CQ for their technical assistance.