This paper presents an analytical design method for the truss-bolt system in reinforcing underground fractured rock roofs in coal mines. The analytical design method is based on the mechanical analysis of the fractured rock roof with reinforcement by inclined roof bolts and a horizontal tie-rod. The mechanical analysis for the system includes a non-linear bending model for the laterally inclined roof bolts and three upper and lower bounds. The lateral resistance of the inclined roof bolts in a truss-bolt-supported roadway is examined using classical theory of a non-linear beam in bending. The paper analyses the arching action by lateral behavior of the inclined roof bolts in reinforcing the fractured roof. Based on mechanical models, the design formula concerning the lateral bolt forces, tensions in the tie-rod in the truss system, as well as the reinforcement behavior have been derived. In order to ensure that the roof truss-bolt system reinforces the coal roof effectively, a lower bound of pre-tightening forces must be applied on the tie-rod for stabilizing the fractured roof by arching action. The pre-tightening forces exerted via the tie-rod also cannot be greater than its upper bound, since the excessive tightening force will cause localized failure in the rock near the bolt tail at the abutment of the fractured roof beam. The analytical formulas for both lower and upper bounds for truss pre-tightening forces are put forward in this paper. Furthermore, the paper also presents analytical equations for designing the axial forces and dimensions for bolts in this kind of system. Parametric studies and optimization analysis are also carried out on the basis of the proposed approach. A flow chart and procedures are presented to show the analytical design method for this truss-bolt system. Case studies are presented to show how the method can be used in actual coal mining tunnels. The predicted results compare well with those measured in the actual case studies.the thickness of the plastic rock zone near inclined roof bolts (also the thickness of the rock arch in the plastic zone) the diameter of a roof bolt interval between two trusses (i.e., truss spacing) along the mining roadway cohesion of the rock in the fractured rock zone arm of the horizontal thrust ( flexural rigidity of a roof bolt height of side wall of a rectangle roadway skin cohesion between grouted materials and the surrounding rock in a drillhole factor of safety of anti-sliding at the abutment of crack arched roof beam tensile force of the tie-rod for determining the pre-tightening force in the tie-rod design the maximum design service loads of the tie-rod depth of an underground roadway force perpendicular to the inclined bolt axes and applied on a roof bolt tail and induced by the pre-tightening force along the tie-rod horizontal force of the bolt at the interface between the elastic and plastic rock zones and induced by coefficient of axial force in a roof bolt ( coefficient of rock resistant pressure in the elastic rock zone coefficient of area of the fractured roof ( design length of inclined bolts in truss accessional length for installation ( effective bond length between the steel bar and surrounding rock in a drillhole safety factor of effective bond length for inclined bolts (usually bending moment of a roof bolt in the elastic rock zone bending moment of a roof bolt in the plastic rock zone bending moment of a roof bolt at the interface between the elastic and plastic rock zones thrust provided by the resistant pressure of a roof bolt designing axial anchoring force of a roof bolt rock resistant pressure applied on a roof bolt in the elastic rock zone (i.e., resistant pressure in the plastic rock zone resistant pressure at the joint hinge position of the roof bolt and tie-rod (i.e., position resistant pressure at the interface between the elastic and plastic rock zones uniformly distributed pressure acting on the fissure beam ( shear force function of a roof bolt in the plastic rock zone distributed loading acted on a roof bolt by rock resistant pressure in the plastic rock zone uniformly distributed pressure applying on the rock arch by its immediate upper roof rock of 1–2 radius of the equivalent plastic zone circle above the equivalent circle tunnel bending moment function of a roof bolt in the plastic rock zone radius of the equivalent circle tunnel with respect to a rectangle roadway span of a rectangle roadway excavation shear force of a roof bolt in the elastic rock zone shear force of a roof bolt in the plastic rock zone horizontal thrust at the abutment of the fractured rock beam induced by rock gravity force maximum thickness of the plastic rock zone in roadway roof lateral displacement of a roof bolt at the tailing position lateral displacement of a roof bolt in the elastic rock zone lateral displacement of a roof bolt in the plastic rock zone lateral displacement of a roof bolt at the interface between elastic and plastic rock zones internal friction angle of the fractured roof rock setting angle of a roof bolt (the acute angle with respect to the horizontal direction characteristic, 1/ unit weight of the roof rock vertical primary rock stress component assumed convergence of the rock roof surface rotation angle of a roof bolt at the interface between elastic and plastic rock zones Rock bolts have been widely used for reinforcing tunnels in mining engineering  Studies on the use of truss-bolt systems in mining started in the later 1960s. Gambrell and Hagnes An examination of these studies has shown that there is a lack of a generally accepted design method for the use of the truss bolt to reinforce discontinuous or soft rocks in mining tunnels. In China, bolts with low anchorage forces (less than 100 In this paper, we will present a simple and yet integrated analytical design method. This analytical design approach is based on mechanical models representing the fractured rock roofs reinforced with the truss bolts and some associated analytical design equations. In particular, the bolt lateral resistance is examined using the theory of a beam in bending on both elastic and plastic rock confining conditions. In this model, the truss bolts are assumed to be effectively grouted over their bond lengths with the surrounding sound rocks. The analytical design equations are proposed for estimating upper and/or lower bounds of the pre-tightening force for the tie-rod and the axial anchorage forces of the inclined roof bolts. The analytical design method is summarized in a design flow chart and is further illustrated by parametric studies and actual case studies in coal mining projects. As shown in After the excavation of the roadway tunnel, the truss-bolt system is constructed to provide a pre-stressed reinforcement system to tie the fractured roof rock together and to hold it from deforming downward excessively. According to the design, two inclined bolts are installed in the roof rocks near the two roof side ends. They have to be fully bonded to sound rock for adequate anchorage above the plastic rock zone. The bolt length is pre-determined. A tie-rod is then connected with the two exposed ends of the two inclined bolts in the roadway via the brackets ( For a given roadway tunnel with adequate data on the in situ geological conditions, it is important to develop an effective and economical method to design an optimal truss-bolt system to reinforce the fractured rock roof. In order to optimize the reinforcement capacity, the truss-bolt design method has to follow the following three design principles: Minimum pre-tightening force principle. In order to make the truss-bolt system reinforce a fractured rock roof effectively, a minimum of the pre-tightening force must be determined and applied to the tie-rod. As a result, an arching action can be generated in the fractured roof rock to make the fractured rocks stable and tight. As shown in Maximum pre-tightening force principle. On the other hand, the pre-tightening force cannot be extremely large. As shown in Minimum anchorage force principle. It is evident that for the inclined bolts to be stably anchored in the elastic zone rock under any external loading, the larger their anchorage force capacities, the better the anchorage results. However, a larger anchorage force capacity needs a longer bolt length and/or a greater bolt diameter ( A number of mechanical models have been developed in this study to develop design equations and criteria according to the above discussion. Three of these are briefly discussed below. The inclined roof bolts usually have a high slenderness ratio and can be reasonably considered to deform as a flexible rod in the plastic and elastic rock zones. Their lateral deformation under the combined action of the surrounding rocks and the tightening force ( As discussed above and shown in A rectangle cross section of roadway is a typical tunnel shape for coal mining. However, it is not easy to identify the rock plastic zone shape and dimension for a rectangle roadway via a simple mechanical formulation. We try to find an equivalent rock plastic zone for the rectangle roadway using a simplified method. In this paper, as shown in In the development of the integrated design method, we have adopted the upper and lower bound approaches to take into account the three principles. In the ensuing, we will use the mechanical models to derive basic design equations to predict the following three bounds for a given tie-rod and inclined bolt scheme: (a) a lower bound for the pre-tightening force, (b) an upper bound for the pre-tightening force and (c) a lower bound for the axial anchorage force capacity. At the tail of an inclined bolt in a truss system (i.e., point A in We further assume that the rock pressure to resist the bolt lateral displacement in the rock elastic zone follows the Winkler assumption as follows: We will use the rock arch model shown in The eccentricity In Eq. Based on the work on rock stress estimation by Zhu and Zhen According to the equivalent rock plastic zone assumption for the rectangle cross section of roadway ( From Using Eqs. Eqs. In addition, if the thickness of the rock plastic zone near inclined roof bolts As discussed above, it is necessary to estimate the maximum value of the horizontal pre-tightening forces that can be applied to the truss-bolt system. It is difficult to estimate the actual maximum force for a truss-bolt system through simple analytical formulation. Therefore, the upper bound approach is adopted to estimate an adequate upper limit for the application of the pre-tightening forces. In this approach, we can assume that the rock weight of the plastic zone and the overburden pressure Similarly, a lower bound approach is adopted to address the minimum axial anchorage force principle. As illustrated in After formation of the roadway, the roof rock undergoes deformation. The rock roof downward deformation (or convergence) has to be considered in estimation of the height of the rock arch central surface from the roof surface. As shown in  Eq. Eqs.  Since the rock arch thickness In this section, Eqs.  In The lower and upper bound forces corresponding to the   Using Eq. Based on the above analysis, an analytical method has been developed for effectively designing the truss-bolt system associated with reinforcement of fractured rock roof in coal mining. The analytical design procedure is illustrated in At first, we need to determine the basic parameters including the roadway dimension, the rock strength values and the primary rock stresses according to roadway depth Next, we develop the lower and upper bounds for the pre-tightening force It is noted that the estimated values for the pre-tightening force ( The further design consideration for tie-rod and inclined bolts can be illustrated below. Eqs. Length of the inclined bolts can be determined as follows. The length should be greater than the thickness of the plastic rock zone near the inclined roof bolts and be anchored in the sound elastic rock zone. Resin-grouted rock bolts are mostly utilized in coal mining in China because high anchorage strength can be formed in the rock of very poor quality. We can express the design length ( Because the axial anchorage force ( Furthermore, the upper bound of the axial anchorage capacity ( Using Eqs. Finally, we can further examine the total bolt length using the empirical equation proposed by Lang and Bischoff The above analytical method has been applied to the design of a truss-bolt system for an actual roadway tunnel at a coal mine site in China. In situ testing was also carried out to monitor the performance of the truss-bolt system. In the ensuing, this actual application of the design method and the in situ measurements and results are discussed in detail.  The main coal stratum is 6.23 The argillaceous rock has a uniaxial compressive strength The service period of the roadway is anticipated to be 3 years. The roadway is formed by excavating within the main coal stratum and parallel to the rock strata. The road has a span of 3.40 Using the above given design parameter values and Eq. In order to verify the proposed design procedure, two truss-bolt design schemes were adopted for this experimental underground roadway project. Details of the two design schemes are given below. This design scheme was used for a 200 Next, the factor of safety for effective bond length for inclined bolts The tie-rods adopt 18 For the above truss-bolt design scheme, in situ testing was carried out. The measurement includes the tensile force in the tie-rods, the anchorage force in the inclined bolts, the displacement at the centers of the rock roof surface, as well as the inward convergence of the vertical sidewalls. The measurement was conducted at four truss-bolt sections. Some of the typical measurement results are shown in  The measured forces in For comparisons, this second design scheme was also carried out and implemented along a different section of the above roadway tunnel. This second scheme differs from the first scheme by using different values for the truss spacing Similarly, the resistant pressure in the rock plastic zone Results of the in situ measurements are shown in From Both the experimental design schemes were employed effectively to reinforce the underground roadway fractured roof. More than 1 year after the installation of the truss-bolt reinforcement schemes, the roadway tunnel was stable and safely accommodated the mining operations. Meanwhile, the entire truss-bolt system performed very well. No instabilities were observed in the roadway tunnel whose fractured rock roof was reinforced with the two truss bolt schemes. In the above, we have presented an analytical design method for the truss-bolt system to effectively and economically reinforce fractured rock roofs of roadway tunnels in coal mines. The analytical design method has been developed on the basis of the mechanical analysis of bolt and tie-rod lateral and axial behavior. Several mechanical models are used to derive analytical equations for estimating the key design parameters. These mechanical models are developed in accordance with the working experience of actual truss-bolt design in coal mines in China. Using the classic beam on Winkler foundation theory, analytical equations are presented for evaluating the lateral resistance of surrounding rocks to roof bolts. A plastic zone model is further presented to represent the fractured rock roof. In particular, a rock arch model is developed in the plastic zone to represent the clamping action of the two inclined bolts to the fractured rock roof. Analytical equations are developed to estimate the dimension of the plastic zone and the rock arch in the fractured rock roof. Three design principles are summarized for the truss-bolt system. A lower and upper bound approach is proposed to implement the three design principles in the analytical design method and procedures. Using the mechanical models, analytical equations are derived for the estimating of the lower and upper bounds of the pre-tightening force and the lower and upper bounds of the pullout force acting on the inclined bolt for pre-stressing the tie-rod and the two inclined bolts and for firm anchorage into sound rocks, respectively. Based on the coal mining experience in China, typical ranges of the design parameter values are summarized in the paper. These design parameters include the rock mechanics properties, the roadway dimensions, the in situ rock stress, the fracture zone sizes as well as the truss-bolt design schemes. Parametric studies are presented to illustrate the relations governing the main design parameters including the rock arch thickness, the plastic zone thickness, the three bound values with the basic ground conditions and roadway design schemes. The parametric studies have shown that the lower and upper bounds of the pre-tightening force vary between 5 and 125 Based on the mechanical models and analytical equation, a flow chart and procedures are presented for analytically designing truss-bolt system. The analytical design method is further illustrated with a case study. The case study adopted two design schemes for an actual coal mining tunnel in China. The tensile forces measured in the tie-rod and the inclined bolts of the two truss-bolt systems are well within the ranges of predicted values using the proposed analytical equations in this paper. The measured roof convergences are within the design expectations. These measured results have shown that the design is safe and reliable. It is expected that the proposed analytical design method can enable the practical designer to undertake effective and efficient design for use of the truss-bolt system in coal mining. The work described in this paper was supported by research grants from the Chinese National Natural Science Foundation (50304012) and the 973 Program (2002CB412701), the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China and the Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust. The authors thank Professors Xianwei LI and J.A. Hudson for their valuable suggestions. A bolt in the truss is flexible. The elastic theory of semi-infinite length beam can be employed in analyzing the lateral behavior of a bolt under the action of surrounding rock pressures. The rock elastic zone has its coordinate system A general solution of Eq. By taking the regularity boundary condition at point D into account, i.e., as The rock plastic zone has a coordinate system The four constants can be determined using the boundary conditions of a bolt at the plastic rock zone. As where The bolt displacement at the interface between the elastic and plastic zones is Because of the flexibility of rock bolts in a truss system, the host rock resistant pressure on bolt is mainly located near the roadway surface. It is reasonable to assume that the rock resistant pressure to bolt lateral deflection in the plastic zone is governed by the following equations: