Scraps of hardmetal tools and pieces of original size were contacted with aqueous solutions of acetic acid under simultaneous introduction of pure oxygen or air to dissolve selectively the cobalt binder and recover the tungsten carbide. The influences of nominal composition of the scrap on the necessary time for a complete removal of the binder, as well as temperature, concentration and pressure were evaluated. Increasing the pressure during leach operation, as well as the temperature and the oxygen potential in the solution, significantly improves the rates of dissolution. Increasing the concentration of acetic acid does not necessarily increase the rates, also a decrease can be observed mainly depending on the tungsten concentration in the binder. The time for a complete binder removal also strongly depends on the nominal composition, respectively the grain size providing a mean free path for the penetration of the solvent and the oxygen into the scrap pieces. Altogether it was shown that it is possible to work up hardmetal scraps without any preceding comminution by a very selectively removal of the binder within reasonable times by applying a simple and very effective process, as the rates of dissolution are surprisingly high. The proposed process uses ecologically friendly educts and gives high-quality tungsten carbide raw materials as well as cobalt acetate solutions from which the cobalt can be easily recovered.Scrap is accumulated during the complete hardmetal production loop. When the tools and components are scrapped, they are collected with a view to recover the tungsten and cobalt in light of the strategic importance of these metals ( Although cobalt metal can be dissolved in many acids, the challenge is to establish an industrial process that does not produce problematic emissions, where the scrap does not have to be crushed before leaching and the reagents can be recycled. Operations using sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid have negative environmental impacts and the low pH used results in a lack of selectivity and self-limitation due to formation of tungstic acid which is deposited in the pores of the leached zones ( It is therefore a challenge to establish an ecologically friendly method using hardmetal scrap of original size and shape. Acetic acid and especially aqueous solutions thereof can be a suitable way out. The nominal composition of the scraps used as stated by the producers are listed in Preliminary investigations were carried out in a 250 mL, thermostatted glass batch reactor. Oxygen or air was bubbled at 25 L/h through a bed of scrap pieces covered by acetic acid solution. Investigations concentrated on the influences of temperature, nominal composition of the scrap, concentration of the acetic acid and the oxygen partial pressure. A large, 4 L thermostatted (±1°C) pressure reaction vessel was used to investigate the effect of oxygen or air pressure. The gas and an acetic acid/acetate solution steam were continuously circulated through the bed of hardmetal scrap, the pressure was maintained by addition of gas as required. Small samples of the scrap were removed at various times, cut and characterized by the thickness of the leached layer by standard metallographic observations. This thickness represents an indicator for the removal of the cobalt binder. Cobalt concentration in solution and pH were measured as a function of time. Photometric analysis (HP8452A), AAS (PERKIN ELMER AAS 4100) and XRF (PHILIPS PW 2404) analysis were carried out for the estimation of the nominal composition of the solution after leach operation was finished. A JEOL 6400 with EDAX was used for the preparation of SEM images and analysis. The shrinking core model was applied to explain and model the leaching kinetics and mechanism of the Co extraction. If metal pieces of cobalt are contacted with deaerated acetic acid solution the initially colourless solution gets a light-coloured pink tone, which is no more intensified with increasing time. Acetic acid alone cannot dissolve cobalt, only the surface oxide layer. In order to corrode the metal further, oxidizing conditions have to prevail: Such oxidizing conditions and temperatures up to 80 °C result in surprisingly high dissolution rates and a rapid formation of magenta coloured concentrated solutions of Co–Acetate–Tetrahydrate ( The same principle can be applied in case of dissolving selectively the cobalt binder of hardmetal scrap. In order to evaluate the behaviour of different scraps under different conditions, the thickness of the leached layer was used as an indication of the extent of dissolution. It is clear from The layer thickness and cobalt concentration in solution are both approximately linear during the first third of the process. Further progress is expected since the surface area of Co will decrease with time; thus, the rate of increase in thickness will increase whilst the rate of dissolution decreases. The cobalt is dissolved as acetate and cobalt concentrations in excess of 90 g L The reaction rate for the selective removal of the cobalt binder from hardmetal scrap should be mainly influenced by the temperature of the solvent. However, the solubility of the necessary oxygen for the reaction of cobalt metal to Co  The influence of the concentration of the acetic acid on the rates of dissolution is given in  In addition to the temperature, the partial pressure of oxygen plays an important role. The higher the partial pressure, the higher the oxidation potential and therefore more cobalt should be oxidized per unit time. Scrap BB40, consisting of 3000 g of cylindrical hardmetal pieces of 8 mm diameter and a cobalt binder of 13% (WC grain size=9.5 μm), was pressure leached at 5 bar overall pressure, pure oxygen and 3380 ml of a 4.4 M acetic acid solution at 80 °C. The 4.4 M represent a stoichiometric excess of 1.08 of the necessary acetic acid for a complete removal of the cobalt binder.  Increasing the pressure far beyond 5 bars (and the temperature) does not necessarily result in higher dissolution rates, as at higher pressures also the tungsten carbide is oxidized. Using a high pressure autoclave at 200 °C and 25 bars (pure oxygen and 20% acetic acid) almost no cobalt is dissolved even after 48 h (the solution was only slightly pink). The formation of a blue powder on the surface of the scrap and in the solution was observed and identified by XRD as cobalt tungstate. Even if the pressure and the temperature are reduced to about 150 °C and about 15 bars, surface oxidation of WC occurs and cobalt tungstate is formed (  In the establishment of the SCM, the solid reactant is considered to be non-porous and is initially surrounded by a fluid film through which mass transfer occurs between the solid particle and the bulk of the fluid. As the reaction proceeds, an ash/inert layer forms around the unreacted core. Detailed derivation of the shrinking core model and additional information can be found in ( Clearly, the reaction kinetics are determined by a number of factors and attribution of a single model to a range of scrap with different carbide size and nominal composition is impossible. The cobalt acetate solution can be used for a further recovery of cobalt as fine metallic powders, which subsequently serve as raw material for new hardmetals processing. One of the most promising ways for further processing will be the pressure precipitation of nano-crystalline Co With the described process it was possible to selectively leach Co from hardmetal scrap pieces up to several cm in size within acceptable times using an environmentally friendly solution of acetic acid and oxygen. The advantage of the proposed process is that no comminution of the scrap is necessary. Any preceding step of crushing results irrevocably in unacceptable high contaminations with Fe arising from abrasion of the mill. It was shown that the selective removal of the cobalt binder is mainly determined by the nominal composition of the scrap, the temperature of the solution, the partial and overall pressure, as well as a favourable fill of the scrap in the vessel, creating a favourable flow of the solvent through the bed of scrap. The nominal composition has the main influence on the rates of dissolution, as the microstructure of the hardmetal is determined by the concentration of cobalt and the addition of grain growth inhibitors like Cr and V. Ultrafine hardmetals with a cobalt concentration of approx. 3.6% and Cr/V additions therefore represent the most unfavourable case for such proposed acetic acid leaching process. Nevertheless, they could be also treated in acceptable times, if the conditions are selected properly. Increasing the temperature from 40 to 80 °C results in a significant increase in dissolution rate, despite the solubility of the oxygen being drastically reduced. Also, increasing the partial pressure of the oxidizing agent by a change from air to pure oxygen is associated with an increase in the dissolution rates. A significant increase of the rate of dissolution can be obtained if the process is carried out at higher overall pressures. The cobalt binder in WC–(Ti,Ta,Nb)C–Co cutting inserts with 10% cobalt and a thickness of 3 mm can be completely removed within approximately 6 days if an overall pressure of 1 bar and a temperature of 80 °C is applied. Increasing the pressure to 5 bars reduces the necessary time for the complete binder removal significantly to about 2.6 days. Even scraps with an ultrafine microstructure can be completely leached within a reasonable period if the pressure is appropriately high (approx. 6.5 days at 5 bars, 80 °C, oxygen, scrap=3 mm diameter with Cr and V additions). Acetic acid and oxidizing conditions also dissolves tungsten, chromium, vanadium and iron which were present in the binder. This has to be considered for the further processing of such solutions, especially if the cobalt is to be recovered and re-used in the hardmetal production process. The residual WC pieces generally keep their original shape after leaching and can be easily crushed to fine powders for further hardmetal processing. The advantage is that the original composition of the carbides such as (W, Ti, Ta, Nb)C present in the scrap remains constant and need not be added again. The cobalt acetate solutions can be precipitated as very fine Co The leach operation was apparently diffusion controlled in case of scrap BB40 under an overall pressure of 5 bars. The cobalt leaching of scrap J under “pressureless” conditions was turned out to be more likely reaction controlled.