The role of sulfur species in the passivation of gold surface in cyanide and thiosulfate solutions was investigated using density functional theory (DFT). The interaction energy between various sulfur complexes as well as deposited sulfur allotropes with the gold surface were computed and the contribution of each specie to the formation of a passivated layer were compared. For this purpose, a new parameter was introduced to explain and understand the tendency of each sulfur complex to interact with the gold surface from a molecular point of view. It was observed that the ratio of the hydration to the binding energy (H/B) of each sulfur specie can be well correlated with the calculated interaction energy with the gold surface. This parameter could be effectively used to predict the interaction of each specie with a substance, only based on the structural characteristics of the specie. It has been also demonstrated that the theoretically calculated energies of interactions of sulfur complexes with the gold surface are well correlated with experimentally reported data. The results showed that S, S2−, polysulfides, tetrathionate, and sulfite species affect the gold leaching process directly through the passivation of the gold surface. Sulfate, dithionate, trithionate, and thiocyanate do not contribute to the passivation effect, although they indirectly affect the gold leaching process by consuming the oxygen and cyanide required to dissolve gold in the cyanidation process. The sulfur allotropes forming on the gold surface also passivate the gold surface and limit the access of the lixiviants required for the gold leaching process. The results could shed light on the mechanism of passivation of gold surface by sulfur species in gold leaching and this effect can be controlled by inhibiting the formation of main sulfur contributors in passivation process.It is well known that sulfide minerals slow down the rate of the gold cyanidation by forming either a protective layer or surface products, or a combination of both on the gold surface ( On the other hand, due to the environmental concerns regarding cyanide, thiosulfate has been introduced as the most promising alternative for the gold recovery ( Many studies have been conducted on the passivation effect and the role played by sulfur ions in the gold leaching solutions. It is generally accepted that the partial dissolution of sulfide minerals or the decomposition of sulfur-containing leaching agents (thiosulfate) hinder the gold leaching process by forming a passive layer ( Here, using an ab-initio quantum modeling method, the mechanism of the gold surface passivation by sulfur species was studied. For this purpose, the interactions of various sulfur ions and deposited allotropes with the gold surface were investigated. The results explain the existing challenges in the cyanide treatment of sulfide ores and the thiosulfate leaching of gold. The density functional Theory (DFT) based calculations were conducted using the Dmol The geometries were considered as the global minimum structures, where there were no negative frequencies in the vibrational frequencies results. No pseudopotentials were used in this study and all the results are based on ‘‘all-electron relativistic” calculations. This method integrates all core electrons and their relativistic effects as well as valence electrons to provide the most accurate calculations. The calculations were accomplished in the continuum hydration model, COSMO (the conductor-like screening model). The dielectric constant of water (78.54) was used to describe the solutions in COSMO, assuming a very dilute medium with a negligible dielectric constant deviation from pure water. The multipolar expansion was used for the calculation of the hydration energy for all molecules. The interaction energies of the species were calculated based on the difference between the SCF energy of the combined complexes and individual molecules in Kcal mol A mono-atomic gold cluster was used instead of a gold slab to minimize the calculation cost. The stable forms of the sulfur complexes in an alkaline solution were obtained from thermodynamic data. Previous studies have shown that several sulfur complexes, including sulfide, sulfate, sulfite, thiosulfate, hydrosulfur, cyanatem and polythionates exist in alkaline sulfur- and cyanide-containing solutions ( To examine the gold passivation by the deposited sulfur, a range of ring allotropes were modeled and the energies of their interactions with the gold cluster were calculated. The models are limited to cyclo-octasulfur (cyclo-S8) as the most prevalent polymorph. ( To evaluate the passivation potential of different sulfur species, the interaction energies of the sulfur species with the mono-atomic gold cluster were calculated. The interaction energy was calculated as the energy difference between the interacted species and the individual clusters as: Interaction energy = Energy To compare the energies of the interactions of the species with gold, the interaction energy of CN The modeling results show that S The interaction energies of trithionate, thiocyanate, sulfate, and dithionate are the least, as compared to those of the other sulfur-containing complexes. This may explain the lower passivation effect in cyanide- and oxygen-enriched solutions where thiocyanate and higher oxidation products of sulfide dominate ( The optimized geometries of the interacted species clearly demonstrate the tendency of the gold cluster to orient with the sulfur atoms where possible. The chemistry of the strong gold-sulfur interaction has received much attention and many studies have been conducted using theoretical and experimental methods to reveal the true nature of the bonds between them ( Our results is correlated with the data reported by Senanayake on the complexing role of the species reported ( To explain and understand the tendency of each specie to interact with the gold surface from a molecular point of view, a new parameter is introduced. It has been observed that the ratio of the hydration to the binding energy (H/B) related to each species can be well correlated with the calculated energy of its interaction with the gold surface. This factor can be self-sufficiently calculated for each specie and effectively represent the interaction energy of that species. To calculate the interaction energy, one needs to calculate the SCF total energy of each species (individually and in the interaction), which involves computational time and cost. The substitution of the ratio of the hydration to the binding energy for each species, it is not required to model the interacted complex. As demonstrated in Sulfide-containing ions undergo the decomposition process and form the elemental sulfur on the gold surface ( To investigate the mechanism of the sulfur deposition on the gold surface, the optimized geometries and the energies of the interactions of the sulfur allotropes with the gold cluster were obtained, as presented in The results show that the monoatomic sulfur has the highest interaction tendency toward the gold surface. As the polymerization proceeds (S The energies of interactions of sulfur complexes and deposited allotropes with the gold surface were computed using DFT and used to define the role of each specie in the gold passivation effect. The interaction energies computed by the DFT method and the COSMO model using a monoatomic gold cluster show a satisfactory agreement with the trends reported for the different species. The interaction of the gold surface with sulfide ion, polysulfides, tetrathionate, and sulfite species are strong. These species contribute to the passivation film forming on the gold surface and thereby protect it from accessing to oxygen and lixiviant and thus impede the gold leaching process. While, the adsorption of oxy-sulfur (sulfate, dithionate, and trithionate) and thiocyanate species on the gold surface is much lower and thus these species indirectly hinder the gold leaching by consuming oxygen and cyanide required to dissolve the gold. It is reported that the ratio of the hydration to the binding energy (H/B) of each interacting complex can be well correlated with the calculated energy of its interaction with the gold surface. The H/B ratio can be effectively used to predict the energies of the interactions of different species with a substance where the main orienting atoms are similar in those different species. It has been demonstrated in this study the ability of the DFT method to compute the interactions of different complexes with other species of industrial importance. This allows us to explain and control the chemical processes that control the hydrometallurgical extraction process of gold and other species.