In this paper, we present a framework that can process a user query for retrieval of information from documents of different properties across multiple domains, with specific application to patent laws and regulations. The framework has three basic components. The first component is ontology mapping and generation. What happens is that the keywords entered by users are mapped into a subset of relevant keywords. This step is performed by looking up those words in an ontology database. The second component is the joint and cross search in various document domains; in our case, they are patents and scientific publications. The last component is to modify the search results by applying user feedback statistics. The results of feedback will be saved as metadata for future uses.
                  A case example is given to demonstrate how results from multiple domain searches can be combined using ontology and cross referencing. We use an example of well-known biotechnology patents on erythropoietin (EPO) and give detailed analysis on each document domain with this keyword. Relationships between each domain are demonstrated.
                  A user feedback mechanism is also discussed in this paper. The ability to take user feedback into the framework is important. There is no doubt that domain knowledge from expert or experienced users could be a very good compliment to the proposed system. Both direct and indirect user feedbacks are discussed.Huge amount of information is available online and keeps increasing. More and more knowledge database is available on the internet. The fast pace of technological innovation is contributing to major changes in governments, societies, and the world economy. We are facing a problem of not being able to easily identify related documents across different information domains. A framework that can enable users to query multiple databases together would be desirable. Let us consider a few examples. If a company wanted to study the market for acid reflux drugs, they may choose to go to the FDA website, they may look for court cases involving these drugs and they may also study some relevant technical publications. Similarly, a start-up company looking to work on therapeutics in the breast cancer space may choose to study patents in this field, whether some patents were litigated, and the applicable scientific and technological literature. In each situation, we have a common problem. There is relevant information that must be accessed from different information. In addition, even within one domain, the information may not be easily accessible and searchable. Broadly speaking, we have information on a particular topic in:     Related to government regulations, administrative agencies that deal with various science and technology issues include the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and the like. The agencies promulgate regulations that appear in the relevant chapters of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) and they interpret these regulations and the applicable United States Code. In addition, the courts (often federal courts) interpret the relevant U.S. statutes and federal regulations (CFR). Moreover, there is often a need to consult additional literature in the form of technical/scientific publications. In general, for a given situation, such as evaluating the market and patentability of a new drug or technology invention, relevant information of different properties must be accessed; in practice, most relevant information do exist, and often accessible online nowadays but is available in different information domains and different formats and the information is heavily siloed. In this paper, we are focusing on a particular area of searching biotechnology patents. We demonstrate that there are a lot of add-on values in finding out the hidden dependency and relationship of information in different domains and our framework is capable of figuring them out. This cannot be achieved through simply mining one single set of data. However, our research could be general enough to apply and adapt to other inter-agency information searches. We aim to build an information system for biotechnology patent management and related court litigations. In addition, our information system could then be accessed by administrative agencies, such as the USPTO, and the federal courts and also by the private sector whose activities may be implicated by a particular technology sector. We believe that through our framework, information could be better represented than using simple search engines and this could be further extended to more types of heterogonous information governments usually have. This paper discusses three basic components in our research and development efforts. The first is the creation of a document repository of core patents and publications using ontology. This repository includes a suite of concept hierarchies that enable users to browse documents according to the terms they contain. The second is an XML framework for representing documents features and associated metadata. The XML framework enables the augmentation of regulation text with tools and information that will help users understand and compare across prior published patents and publications. The third component is the creation of a feedback system with a user interface. This paper is organized as follows: With the advance of new biotechnology in the last decade, the number of biotech patent applications filed has soared. However, the tedious preparation of patent applications has become a burden for inventors and it has seriously undermined start-up and small business companies and inventors' efforts to protect their inventions. The majority of the work in preparing a patent application has been spent in research related work and prior art. During the application process, inventors and patent lawyers want to answer the following questions:     To obtain the answers to all these questions, experienced engineers, patent agents and patent lawyers need to spend a lot of time researching various patent databases, academic journals and court documents, and tremendous efforts are made to cross reference each single document and centralize them. Therefore, it is highly desirable for people to have one central place that they can obtain all sorts of documents in a well-classified form with good cross referencing notes. Although today's advanced information retrieval technique could lead to effective search for documents in a single domain, the capability to search multiple domains at the same time and centralize them in a well-sorted manner is still not achieved. Our ultimate goal is to create a system that could help a user to obtain related documents across multiple domains for a single search query. In this paper, we present some of our preliminary results on jointly searching USPTO patents and PUBMED scientific publications at the same time with good cross referencing capabilities for bio-tech search terms. People have studied techniques in retrieval of scientific publications and patent searches. They are generally established under the framework of using text mining techniques ( The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) website provides free access to electronic copies of all existing patents, together with all materials in patent publications. The USPTO web user interface offers both quick and highly customized search for users. Certain analysis tools are also available. One disadvantage for the USPTP website is that some of the documents are not in a searchable format. For instance, some documents exist in an image format (TIFF). Although third party vendors also exist to provide patent documents in other digital forms, as a first step, we focus on the USPTO website as most issue patents can be accessed in text format. This is also the major approach that inventors use to search the USPTO's patent database to see if a similar patent has already been filed or granted. Patents may be searched in the USPTO Patent Full-Text and Image Database (PatFT). The USPTO houses full text for patents issued from 1976 to the present and TIFF images for all patents from 1790 to the present. The Entrez Global Query Cross-Database Search System is a powerful search engine with a web user interface, through which users can search multiple databases hosted at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) website in health science. NCBI is part of the National Library of Medicine (NLM), itself a department of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) of the United States. Entrez global query system is a search and retrieval system which links to multiple databases. It can access all these databases at the same time with one user query. It also has a unified user interface. Besides scientific publications, it also contains related data like DNA sequences and structures. As there are several databases in Entrez, we pick Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online (MEDLINE), which can be accessed via PUBMED, as our gateway to Entrez. MEDLINE is a bibliographic database of life sciences and biomedical information. Not only can we find most bibliographic information for articles from areas like medicine, nursing, pharmacy, dentistry, veterinary medicine, and health care but we can also find much of the literature in general biology and biochemistry. Areas like molecular evolution are also included. In other words, this is a very complete database, in which we expect to find most of the scientific publications that people refer to in the biotechnology and biomedical areas. Facilitating patent litigation research is a very important motivation behind designing a good patent query system. The central problem in patent litigation is to relate issued patents and patent applications to legal documents like court cases and judicial opinions issued by judges. Profession legal database service providers like LexiNexis and WestLaw have long been engaged in this area and are providing information regarding IP litigations. However, users can only see the patents involved in the litigation but have no idea on related patents or “prior-art” patents. Therefore users of these systems may miss the overall picture of the case. Recently, it is reported that Google has also entered this area by making all USPTO products free online and it has also provided a separate advanced search feature to search all course cases in its Google Scholar product ( Well known legal data bases of court cases also exist, including PACER (Public Access to Court Electronic Records), which is one electronic system to access databases for U.S. Court cases ( Our joint search system has three basic components as shown in Ontology engineering studies the methods and methodologies to formalize representations of a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between them. The ontology processing component in our framework uses standard ontology engineering techniques to analyze technical terms in bio-tech fields and match them with the query. Therefore, the search engine would be more powerful in returning documents with related terms. We would present an example in the next section on how a technical term is represented in bio-tech ontology. The ability to take user feedback into the framework is important. There is no doubt that domain knowledge from expert or experienced users could be a very good compliment to the proposed system. User feedback could exist in two forms: indirect and direct. Direct forms are feedbacks that are immediately obtained at the user interface level. Users can enter feedbacks by clicking the buttons or entering the values via a user interface, either on a web page or an application. Indirect forms of feedback are those implicitly expressed by the users. Typical examples include the number of citations by other documents or the number of queries a system received. Google's page rank is a good example of indirect user feedback as web pages receive their feedbacks by the number of other pages that have links to them. In our case, we could use the number of citations a publication gets from a subset of related patents as its indirect user feedback. User feedback could also be modeled by different approaches depending on the interface we have. For instance, users can be asked to rate a publication that appear for his/her query in numerical form (scores from 1 to 5) or users can be asked to give binary (click “positive” if satisfied) feedbacks or tertiary ones (“positive”, “neutral”, “negative”). In this research, we will demonstrate the simple usage of binary feedbacks:   The first form of user feedback comes directly from the users. It is easier to obtain and more timely in reflecting users' opinions. The second form of user feedbacks has a longer response time but is more accurate. Therefore both metrics are complementary to each other and should be included. To compute the ratings or scores, we always include a publication if user feedback score is larger than a threshold ( Simply applying this formula could obviously be biased by those users who have the habit of leaving a feedback since not all users leave feedback. Some users are more active and some are not. To minimize the bias, the Thus a final feedback score ( The acceptance rule could be defined as: Erythropoietin is a glycoprotein hormone that controls erythropoiesis, or red blood cell production. It is a cytokine for erythrocyte (red blood cell) precursors in the bone marrow. EPO is also produced by the peritubular capillary endothelial cells in the kidney, and is the hormone that regulates red blood cell p reduction. In 1968, Goldwasser and Kung began work to purify human EPO, and managed to purify 10 Amgen later had patents based on innovations made by its scientist, Dr. Fu-Kuen Lin, related to a naturally occurring human hormone called erythropoietin, or EPO, that stimulates the production of oxygen-carrying red blood cells. When Swiss drug maker Roche sold its anemia drug Mircera in the United States to compete with Amgen's rival drug companies Aranesp and Epogen, Amgen filed a lawsuit. Roche's main counter argument is that Amgen's patents are not valid because the technology underlying production of the drugs was already in the public domain before Amgen filed for patent protection in 1984. In our research, we would use this case example to demonstrate how a joint search framework could lead us to patents and original academic publications. As bio-tech search terms are mostly strict scientific terms and may have a different meaning in different domains, we have to first establish a mapping across multiple domains to make sure we mean the same thing for each of them. Generally, this is achieved by establishing an ontology and we could generate a list of related terms from a single term. We obtain a list of related words by using the ontology founded in Bio Portal (  After the five core patents are identified, we manually extracted all publications cited by these patents to establish a database based on those publications. The 300 publications extracted are considered as the core publications. For illustration, a few selected examples of publications are enlisted in To determine if a scientific publication is important or relevant to a patent, we need to extract certain features and quantify them. In this work, we would use the word frequency of a particular key word in a scientific publication's abstract. Besides the key term frequency in the abstract, we have also included multiple other features that are useful. Examples include the key term's appearance in the title and the key terms' appearance in the full text of the article. In this paper, we focus on the key term frequency in the abstract. Applying this analysis to all the patents, we can obtain a XML file as shown in To summarize, First, we need to define the “relevance” of a publication for a search term. We use a simple metric RefScore to quantify each document's relevance to the search term. RefScore is defined as the number of times a publication is cited by the five core patents. In this case study, it has max value of 5 since there are five core patents. A scientific publication that has a RefScore of 5 is cited by all of our core patents so it is reasonable to consider it as one of the most relevant publication. Once we have established the relevance, we further analyze the statistic relationship between RefScore and key term frequency. In the graph shown in To further extend this analysis to all documents, we calculate the correlation coefficient of RefScore and key term frequency. The results are shown in However, we want to point out here that RefScore relies on the particular structure of patent domain as inventors are required to cite prior art in their application. This provides an easy way for us to establish dependency in multiple documents. We would imagine finding such structure would need domain specific knowledge and there is no universal available structures across domains. For example, in the domain of federal laws and regulations, we might need quite some legal expertise to find out hidden dependency structures. As direct interactive form user feedback is not easily obtained, we present an example of indirect user feedback. We use the number of times a publication is cited in a core patent as a “positive” vote and use the number of citations in PUBMED to measure the visits a publication could get. In this case, a user feedback score ( Furthermore, we can define the normalization factor or the average user feedback score ( Finally, we can define the final user feedback score ( Using the above seven publications as an example, the scores for all the seven publications are obtained as shown in We should also note that the user feedback is a dynamic process. With the passing of time, if publication 2813359 is cited by more PUBMED publications and becomes less cited in new patents, it will eventually be removed from the category of “positive feedback”. The power of the feedback largely replies on the scale of the interaction. In citation based user feedback processing, it is obvious that a large corpus of publications would provide better feedback in terms of quality and stableness. In direct interactive feedback, more user input would be more desirable. However, we also should pay attention to the time window that user feedback is allowed. Including outdated feedback is not a desirable behavior as it may reduce the weight of more up to date feedbacks. Possible solutions like exponential weighting of the feedback could be further used to resolve this issue. Similar to using citation in patents, the use of academic references is not without risk. One potential shortcoming is that we might miss the latest publications that are not referenced yet. To resolve this, each journal or conference could receive a weight based on the average score of all its publications within a previous time window and each of its current new publication would be bootstrapped with an initial weight of this value. In this subsection, we will demonstrate that court cases also have a positive relationship with patents. As an example, we used “erythropoietin” as the key word to search for Federal court cases on LexisNexis database. The search resulted in 30 relevant cases which serve as the basis in this study. All of those cases were downloaded manually as no batch-processing API was provided by LexisNexis. We then carefully parsed all the documents using our own script and structure them in XML files with fields like title, abstract, claims etc. Here, we give an illustration on how a parsed court case relates itself to a patent. In     To further illustrate how all the court cases are correlated with the patents document. We show the related patent numbers for court cases among the 30 candidates in Another interesting finding is that some patents, like 5441868 and 4377513, frequently appear in these cases. Although they are not in the core patents set, they should also be considered as important patents. This demonstrates a possible feedback mechanism we have from cross referencing patents and court cases. Once all 30 sample court cases and all patents are parsed, we actually have a better structure of all these documents. In addition to patent numbers, we are able to query patent assignee, patent inventors, U.S. classes of patents (type), case plaintiffs and case defendants as well. They could be combined together for easy and quick queries. First, as shown in In each case, we use different a query triplet that questions individuals along the three different properties: U.S. class, inventor and assignee. By removing the distinct query requirement, it is possible to get an estimate of which of these results are the most occurring. This can give a sense of the more important U.S. classes, or assignees and so on. In One of the powerful usages of cross referencing is to achieve easy backward citation. We extract the backward U.S. patent citations for each of the 17 patents. Many of these patents can have overlapping backward citations; however, the number of distinctive patents is around 40. If we also count for forward citations, we can generate a larger list of patents, some of which may be highly relevant. From the results obtained in Besides backward and forward citation generation, we can use the same technique to generate more cross-referencing by further repeatedly exploring the results we have obtained. For example, we can expand our search for more patents by a particular field like inventor, or specific classes/types. We could find out in court cases what other patents are assigned to an involved assignee in the litigation and obtain a new set of related patents. Here, we present an example of the user interface page in In this paper, we have presented a framework to jointly search patents and scientific documentations. However, our endeavor to achieve a universal integrated search system doesn't end here. Further extensions could be made to our system. Besides issued patents and scientific documents, there are many related document resources that are available. For instance, the USPTO office offers all patent application prosecution materials for all issued patents, commonly referred to as the File Wrapper. These documents provide more details on the searches and analysis conducted by the USPTO examiners and the patentees' responses for all patent applications and the relevant prior art. Another example is that all patent litigation cases could also be found online on the PACER website for all U.S. federal district and appellate courts. These court documents could also be interesting to the users who are examining a particular document or researching a particular technology product. Our method and framework presented in this paper could be easily extended to include more than two document domains. We could include more heterogeneous domain knowledge so that the search results could be more relevant and robust. It is more likely that if a document is cross-referenced in four domains, it is more important and relevant than a document that is cross-referenced in fewer domains. In a future study, we will focus on a more generic framework that could include more types of document databases. As we note that cross referencing between documents of different domains could be fed back to each other for several cycles, it could actually return a broader set of patents for the initial query. This feedback loop can only be done efficiently by an automated process and this requires us to centralize all relevant structured data into the ontology. The scenario presented in this paper is only a simple prototype and the detailed steps on forming an ontology using multiple domain documents are not discussed in this paper. Once the ontology is fully developed, it can be used not only for a patent query system but can integrate with more complicated applications like knowledge discovery as well. This research is partially supported by