Improved adjustable discretized population balance equations (PBEs) are proposed in this study. The authors extended an improved particle coagulation model previously developed to an adjustable geometric size interval (q), where q is a volume ratio of class k
                     
                     +
                     1 particle to class k particle (υ
                        k+1/υ
                        k
                     
                     =
                     q). This model was verified with the time derivative of the zero and first moments to show mass conservation and compared with previous analytical and numerical solutions. Also, the self-preserving distribution test was conducted by using size-independent and size-dependent kernels. After direct numerical simulations (DNS), the proposed model was found to have excellent agreement with the analytical and continuous numerical solutions. In addition, this proposed model was converted to a dimensionless form to enhance computational efficiency in order to be coupled with computational fluid dynamic solutions in the future. Furthermore, a parameter estimation scheme was created to computationally determine the two key parameters, the collision efficiency (α) and the break-up coefficient (K
                     B), from orthokinetic experimental data. To verify the estimation procedure the fractal aggregate orthokinetic experimental data of Li and Zhang (a primary d
                     o of 2.8μm in dia., D
                     f of 2.0, a fluid strain-rate of 15 (1/s)) was used [X. Li, J. Zhang, Numerical simulation and experimental verification of particle coagulation dynamics for a pulsed input, J. Coll. Interf. Sci. 262 (2003) 149–161]. Considering fractal aggregation and break-up, two major parameters were found to be collision efficiency α of 0.3938 and aggregate break-up coefficient K
                     B of 4.4105 using a parameter estimation scheme coupled with an improved discretized population balance equation. This parameter estimation scheme was able to compute the coefficients in the coagulation model rapidly, especially in particle systems having a fractal aggregate structure.Coagulation is the growth of small particles (i.e. droplets, bubbles, or solid particles) into larger aggregates by the collision-inducing mechanisms: orthokinetic, perikinetic, and differential sedimentation (buoyancy). For droplet or bubble coalescence, the agglomeration between particles of volume In this study, the authors extend an improved particle coagulation model The new model was verified with the time derivative of the zero and first moment methods and compared to previously obtained analytical and numerical solutions. Also, the self-preserving distribution test was conducted by using size-independent and size-dependent coagulation rate kernels. Furthermore, two key parameters in the new model, the collision efficiency ( Hill and Ng produced a discretized population balance equation based on probability density functions in each interval Comparing Eq. The time derivative of the zero moment, corresponding to the total number of particles, can be rewritten in the discrete form of Eq. The time derivative of the first moment, corresponding to total particle volume, can be rewritten in a discrete form of Eq. The improved adjustable discretized model having agglomeration and break-up kernels was converted to a dimensionless form to enhance computational efficiency. Fractal aggregate break-up mechanisms have also been incorporated in the agglomeration modeling phenomenon to predict phenomenon such as floc disintegration, droplet break-up, and the comminution of solid particles To solve the break-up model equation of Eq. Researchers have proposed particle fragmentation (break-up) models based on five basic categories: limiting strength, strain-rate or flow stress dependence, limiting size, reaction rate, and stochastic dependence Further, a general expression for the break-up kinetics can be described using a random break-up distribution function, Kramer and Clark rigorously analyzed the coalescencing particle collisions created by a laminar shear flow in orthokinetic coagulation Further, by defining a dimensionless time constant (Eq. Several ODE solvers can be used to solve Eq. Numerical accuracy of the improved population balance equations were verified using the solution results and analytical equations having constant (size-independent) and linear (size-dependent) agglomeration kernels (see To extend a conventional discretized population balance ( Also, deviations between each result and the analytical solution were compared using an Similar results were obtained using a size-dependent kernel (see Higher numerical accuracy could be obtained by a decreasing A self-preserving (or self-similar) distribution method As shown in Friedlander provides a numerical solution for a size-dependent agglomeration kernel associated with an aggregate fractal dimension, As seen in A parameter estimation scheme was created to computationally determine the two key coagulation constants, the collision efficiency ( The improved adjustable discretized model was converted to the dimensionless form of Eq. These results are shown in Li and Zhang compared their model simulation results to experimental data and did not achieve an accurate prediction for a fast coagulation study in terms of the time evolution of particle size distribution In this study, the authors extended their improved particle coagulation model having an agglomeration and break-up kernel to an adjustable geometric size interval (