Calcium availability for sugar maple stands at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest (New Hampshire, USA) was tested by experimental addition of CaCl2 and AlCl3. Additions of 10gCam−2 represented the estimated loss from the soil exchange complex during the last 30 years due to acidic deposition. Four years of data from 12 throughfall collection sites were used to evaluate the influence of foliar nutrient content, precipitation amount, dry deposition, precipitation acidity and precipitation solute concentrations on throughfall chemistry. Calcium additions increased Ca foliar contents significantly. Foliar contents indicated plant uptake of Cl. Leaching of Cl from the canopy increased with elevated Cl content of the green foliage. Leaching rates for Ca, Mg, and K were not significantly different between the treatments (surprisingly Ca leaching tended to decrease with increasing foliar Ca content). We suggest that Ca supply to Ca deficient sugar maple trees protected the foliage from increased leaching of Ca (and other elements) due to improved integrity of cell membrane and cell wall formation from Ca. Degradation of the structural material of the foliage (autumnal leaf senescence, damages by ice and hail storms) caused Ca throughfall fluxes in accordance to measured foliar Ca contents. Increasing acidity of precipitation caused increased leaching of Ca, Mg and K. About half of the cation leaching from these sugar maple canopies is attributable to a cation-exchange reaction driven almost entirely by H+ in precipitation.Calcium (Ca), the fifth most abundant element in trees, is an essential component for wood formation and the maintenance of cell walls (e.g. Because Ca is a macronutrient for higher plants, spatial and temporal variations in its supply are important to the growth and vigor within a forest ecosystem. Soil acidification and accompanying leaching of Ca from the soil exchange complex is a gradual natural process. However, during the past 6 decades, concentrations of root available Ca (exchangeable and acid-extractable forms) in forest-floor and soils have decreased markedly at some locations in the northeastern United States ( A reflection of the base cation status of forest ecosystems may be seen in the element fluxes in throughfall. They are measured readily, but it is difficult to separate throughfall into its contributions. Nutrients in throughfall may result from (a) incident precipitation, passing through the canopy; (b) material deposited as particles, gases, or cloud droplets prior to the precipitation event being washed off during the event, and (c) exchange processes within the canopy (including foliage, woody parts, epiphytes, and microorganisms). Hence, according to Quantitative separation of these mechanisms is essential for understanding pollutant effects on canopy processes, but it is notoriously difficult ( It is hypothesized that foliar nutrient contents will respond to soil treatments with calcium and that increased foliar element contents will increase leaching rates of the corresponding element, partly due to acidic deposition. Since several studies have shown that H Calcium was applied as calcium and aluminum chloride to northern hardwood forest plots, dominated by sugar maple, to vary Ca availability manifold (e.g. increased foliar Ca content due to addition of CaCl The study was done in an area 300–900 Within the study area 12 study sites (45 The total amount of 10 Leaf samples of overstory sugar maple trees (five trees per plot) were collected at the end of August 1996 and 1997 with a shotgun. Individual samples were analyzed for N (Kjedahl; auto-analyzer) and cations (plasma emission spectrometer) after digestion with H Throughfall was collected and analyzed at all sites during the growing season (1 June to 30 September) of 1995–1998. Samples were collected weekly and the funnels of the collectors were rinsed with deionized water. Cleaned (rinsed with deionized water) polyester plugs were used in the funnels to minimize particulate inputs and replaced each time of collection with plastic gloves. Six bulk samplers were placed within the inner 25 The volume of throughfall and precipitation was measured in the field with a graduate cylinder, and a sample was brought back to the laboratory for analysis. An aliquot was allowed to come to room temperature and pH was measured immediately after collection with a glass electrode. Another aliquot of the sample, for chemical analysis of major ions, was preserved with 100 Sulfate, Cl and NO Titrations were performed by hand with a burette while the sample was stirred (magnetic stirrer) and purged with N Foliar element contents are given in Although Mg was not added with the treatment, foliar Mg contents were significantly higher for the CaCl Since Ca and Al were added as chloride to minimize changes in soil pH, and to accelerate infiltration of Ca and Al into deeper soil horizons, the treatments had distinct effects on foliar Cl content ( Aluminum chloride treatments resulted in increased foliar Al contents of sugar maple in 1997, probably due to low soil pH, while foliar Al contents were not different between the control and CaCl Bulk precipitation and throughfall fluxes during the growing seasons of 1995–1998 are given in Throughfall fluxes of Ca, Cl and Al are shown for the years 1995–1998 from 1 June to 30 September (fully developed canopy) in Mean solute fluxes in NTF are given for the control sites in This study revealed interesting effects of CaCl Calcium additions increased foliar Ca contents significantly ( Although Mg was not added with the treatment, foliar Mg contents were significantly higher for the CaCl Foliar Cl contents reflected plant uptake ( Average precipitation amounts and bulk precipitation fluxes (1995–1998, A massive ice storm struck the study area in January 1998, reducing the average leaf area index (LAI) from approximately 6.5 to 4.7 and a severe hail storm on 24 August 1998 further reduced LAI by 1.0 to 1.4 units (Fahey, personal communication). Since the bulk samplers were not moved during the experimental period this research represents a case study for evaluating effects of LAI on solute NTF. In fact in 1998, reduced LAI affected NTF of most solutes significantly ( Regression analysis on the event-to-event variation in NTF is used in this study to resolve the dry deposition (DD) and canopy exchange (CE) components (see To be consistent with The regression results indicated that The antecedent period ( Regression analyses ( The precipitation amount term ( Hence, our stated hypothesis of increased Ca foliar leaching due to elevated Ca foliar contents must be rejected for the treatment period (1996–1997), there even seems to be an opposite trend. Because Ca is important for maintenance of cell walls ( Calcium throughfall fluxes from 1 to 15 October 1997 (leaf senescence and beginning of litter fall, no October data were available for 1996 and 1998) were higher for the CaCl Canopy exchange coefficients were positive (leaching) for Cl, indicating significant impacts of the Cl treatments on Cl foliar leaching rates ( As discussed above, we do not believe that the forest gained weak acidity via dry deposition, but we consider weak acidity an internal source. Dry deposition rates for weak acidity (coefficient for All base cations except Na showed significant positive coefficients for precipitation H Calcium, Mg and K showed significant efflux from the canopy with increasing ion concentration in (bulk) precipitation. While the relative contribution of the In all cases ( Increasing NTF for weak acidity with decreasing solute concentration in precipitation is contradictory to meachnisms of dry deposition (as falsely given by the model, see above) but supports the assumption that weak acidity in NTF represents an internal source. Regression analyses of NTF were useful for relative comparisons between the chemical manipulated study sites. However, canopy exchange rates of these calculations were not used for estimating total amounts of canopy exchange, since the selected single rain events for this technique did not properly represent the entire growing season. Hence, Na was used to calculate particulate interception deposition ( Charge balance consideration requires that the net exchange of ions between the canopy and impinging deposition be electrically balanced according to the following equation ( These estimates of cation exchange (both sides of The fate of H Despite the assumptions and limitations of these estimates it can be concluded from data in This research was supported by the Austrian Fonds zur Förderung der wissenschaftlichen Forschung (FWF) under project No. P12449-BIO (T.W.B.), the USDA Forest Service (C.E.) and the A.W. Mellon Foundation (G.E.L.). We thank Norbert Grissemann and Sigrid Netherer for working in the field during the summers of 1997–1998. Gary