A 1.2m diameter mill was used to develop a batch test procedure for measurement of the rate of abrasion and breakage of full-size rocks. Balls (75mm) were used to increase grinding rates and an axial jet of water was used to flush fines out of the mill, through 20mm peripheral ports. The rate of production of fines, per unit mass of rock in the mill, was used for modelling purposes. This was called the ‘specific rate’. The mass of individual rocks was measured before and after each test to determine the effect of rock size and to check the data obtained by water flushing. Previous test data from 0.6m and 1.8m diameter mills is also presented. It was found the specific rate remained relatively constant over a wide range of sizes, justifying the use of an average rate for the calculation of mill performance. It was concluded that the semi-batch test in a 1.2m diameter mill (or a 1.8m diameter mill) offered a realistic and convenient way of determining the specific rate of rocks under conditions approaching those of a full-scale mill.The design of semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) mills is normally based on tests in a pilot-plant, typically 1.8 An early indication of the viability of SAG milling is useful when evaluating a project and in some cases the samples obtained from drill cores may be all that is available. Semi-empirical small-scale tests have been developed to estimate SAG mill performance, including the McPherson dry, air swept SAG test in a 457 Batch tests in a mill can be performed on a relatively small number of rocks in the size range 50 Models of FAG or SAG are based on progressive wearing down of rocks to finer sizes. It should be noted that this definition is Population balance models for FAG and SAG mills were developed by As mass is proportional to the cube of the diameter, it follows from Eq. Hence, if Batch tests were performed on gold ore waste rock and a quartzite rock from a quarry in the Durban area. The data from these ores was very similar and can be regarded as typical of hard, quartzitic ores. Most of the experiments were performed at the University of QuaZulu Natal in a rubber-lined mill, with an inside diameter of 570 The mills were operated in semi-batch mode, by adding a jet of water through an axial hole, to provide a means of removing the fine material and monitoring its size distribution. A water flow of about 1.4 The above procedures facilitated investigations of mill operating parameters, including the interaction of mill speed and charge level. ‘Test rocks’ which were easy to identify by their colour, were monitored to reduce the labour involved. However, data from individual rocks tended to be scattered, probably due to occasional removal of larger pieces from the surface. A special test was conducted in a 1.8 Data published by The average specific rate of the rocks was determined by measuring the rate of discharge of ‘fines’ and computing the mass remaining in the mill. As expected, the average specific rate decreased during the test as a result of pebble rounding. A model containing two specific rate terms was regressed to the mass fraction remaining (Austin’s approach) and the following parameters were obtained: Mass fraction of fast breaking material ( In view of the relatively fast rate of initial rock attrition, it appears that this phenomenon should be built into all simulators. Rounded pebbles arriving from coarse size fractions are very different from fresh feed and circuit variations using recycle crushing or changes in feed sizing will change the average breakage rate parameters significantly. The composition of the charge has a major impact on the rate of attrition of rocks. Pilot-plant ( It is well known that the size distribution of the feed, the ball load and the ball size influence the capacity of a mill. The effect of a coarser feed is of particular interest, as the specific rate of all sizes is increased, including that of the coarser rocks. There is an increased probability of high-energy rock-on-rock impacts. Hence, batch tests can be designed to simulate the more energy intensive conditions in larger mills by using balls and The 1.2 The rate of discharge of fines provided an adequate measure of the average specific rate, but corrections were needed to compensate for start-up and the fines remaining in the mill. The discharge method provided a useful check on the average for the test and it was essential for tests on raw rock, in which the specific rate changed significantly as the rock became rounded. It should be noted that the average specific rate obtained under FAG conditions in the 1.2 The energy intensity in the 1.2 Batch tests on rounded rocks had been performed previously in 0.6 It was concluded from the above, that the average specific rate of raw rocks, (preferably in the size range of 100 The impact forces in large mills are significantly higher than the forces in a pilot-plant. For a given charge composition and mill speed, energy dissipation is proportional to A design study often starts by specifying mill diameter and the volume fractions of rocks, balls and pulp in the mill. Hence power may be estimated using published data and the mass of rock may be calculated. Hence the power intensity for the production mill may be calculated and data generated in a test mill, as indicated above, can be scaled up accordingly. The use of a single specific rate makes it possible to calculate the residence time for any rock size ( Given that It follows that the feed rate The above offers a simple method of estimating the capacity of a SAG mill. The summation term could involve a fast and a slow rate constant, as discussed above, to account for a typical proportion of fast-wearing edge material. The scaling up of the rate parameters is an important aspect, together with appropriate selection of the exit size of the rocks. Rocks pieces finer than about 20 Similar logic can be used to calculate the mass of material between selected screen sizes and hence the size distribution of the charge can be calculated. The latter provides supplementary information for determining the specific rate in the production mill (  The rate of production of fines, per unit mass of rock, does not change significantly over the size range 20 to 160 Injection of water and removal of pulp from a batch grinding test offers a reliable means of monitoring the average rate of abrasion/breakage of rocks. It also provides information on the size distribution of the fines. This method could also be used to monitor the rates in a 1.8 A mill 1.2 Batch tests in a 1.2