Spicules of calcareous sponges are elaborately shaped skeletal elements that nonetheless show characteristics of calcite single-crystals. Our atomic force microscopic and transmission electron microscopic investigation of the triradiate spicules of the sponge Pericharax heteroraphis reveals a nano-cluster structure with mostly well-aligned small crystal domains and pockets with accumulated domain misalignments. Combined high-resolution and energy-filtering transmission electron microscopy revealed carbon enrichments located in between crystal domain boundaries, which strongly suggests an intercalated network-like proteinaceous organic matrix. This matrix is proposed to be involved in the nano-clustered calcite precipitation via a transient phase that may enable a ‘brick-by-brick’ formation of composite and yet single-crystalline spicules with elaborate morphologies. This composite cluster structure reduces the brittleness of the material by dissipating strain energy and deflecting crack propagation from the calcite cleavage planes, but the lattice symmetry and anisotropic growth properties of calcite still play a major role in the morphogenesis of these unusual calcite single-crystals. Our structural, crystallographic, textural, and chemical analysis of sponge spicules corroborates the view that nano-clustered crystal growth, induced by organic matrices, is a basic characteristic of biomineralisation that enables the production of composite materials with elaborate morphologies.Sponges are the most primitive metazoans with merely a loose multi-cellular organisation that lacks real tissues and organs comparable to those of higher organised, triploblastic animals The spicules form in intercellular cavities lined by sclerocytes that control the calcite crystal nucleation and the fluid conditions for further CaCO However, it seems impossible for such elaborately tailored structures to grow by the same process considered as normal for non-biogenic calcite crystals, namely an advancement of monomolecular crystal steps over the rhombohedral Stimulated by the long-standing controversial discussion of the composite crystal structure of calcareous sponge spicules and so-called single-crystalline biominerals in general, we carried out a detailed structural and textural investigation of sponge spicules. An analysis of the crystal texture and the spatial distribution of incorporated organic material in relation to structural subunits of the mineral phase on a nanometre-scale allows conclusions on the biomineralization processes and the role of soluble proteinaceous organic matter therein. The investigation was carried out on triactine spicules of the calcareous sponge Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM): Examination of spicule surfaces and fracture patterns was performed with an FESEM (JSM 6300F, JEOL), equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) system for element analyses. Intact and fractured spicules were glued to a C-tab and sputtered with carbon before the investigation. Atomic force microscopy (AFM): Structural investigation of large triradiate sponge spicules was carried out with a Multimode scanning probe microscope and a Dimension 3000 scanning probe microscope, both with a Nanoscope IIIa controller (Digital Instruments). The naturally grown spicule surfaces were examined with an AFM-integrated optical microscope camera to locate smooth light-reflecting surface areas, where the external membraneous organic sheath had peeled off, probably during the removal of the spicules from the dried sponge body. This ensured that organic tissue-free pristine spicule surfaces were investigated with AFM. The internal structure of the spicule actines was investigated on fresh fracture surfaces. In dissolution experiments spicules have been immersed in a few droplets of demineralised water for 2 X-ray diffraction (XRD): For single-crystal X-ray examination a single triradiate spicule was mounted on a glass fibre. The investigation was performed with a precession camera (Huber) with a molybdenum anode using white X-ray radiation produced at 40 Optical microscopy: The optical investigation was performed with a Leica DMRX microscope, equipped with a CCD camera (Kappa CF 15/4). Large spicules were separated and examined in reflected and transmitted light. Bits of sponge tissue comprising the spicules were embedded in epoxy resin, sectioned and polished on one surface, then glued facedown to a glass slide with wax before polishing the sample to a thickness of 30 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM): From the thin section (see above) a sample of 3 Crystallographic setting: Calcite shows a trigonal structural symmetry, An arrangement of spicules as skeletal elements prevents the sponge body from collapsing ( In optical microscopy, focussed below the spicule surface, actines appeared finely segmented perpendicular to the respective actine long axis ( Despite the largely single-crystalline appearance of the spicules the calcitic material fractured with a conchoidal, glass-like pattern ( TEM investigation was performed to further characterise the texture of the spicule material. Corresponding to the results from XRD and optical microscopy the spicules behave predominantly as calcite single-crystals. On a larger scale, irregular structures were recognisable in TEM bright field images ( We assume that the pocket-like local accumulations of misalignments in the spicule crystals are pristine naturally grown features and not preparation artefacts, since similar features were observed in differently prepared samples, in crushed samples as well as in polished and ion beam-milled samples. Additionally, the fact that the pocket areas still show the undisturbed periodic diffraction pattern dominating over the misalignment pattern disagrees with the idea of artificial misalignment structures. However, we cannot exclude with certainty that crushing of the sample and the polishing procedure may produce similar defect patterns induced by mechanical stress. If the observed misalignments are in fact artefacts, then these can be assumed to be part of the typical fracture pattern of the sponge spicules. Ion beam-milling cannot be held responsible for producing the misalignments, since it has not been applied to all the investigated samples. Moreover, the ion irradiation is known to produce a surface amorphisation of completely different appearance. We can also exclude the TEM electron beam as the cause of the domain misalignments, since a long-term irradiation test yielded no noteworthy sample damage. Proteinaceous organic matter incorporated in the spicules can be clearly distinguished from the Mg-calcite by its much higher carbon content, estimated to 40 The exact crystallographic orientation of the symmetric However, a peculiar feature of the spicules is their glass-like, isotropic fracture pattern ( Our TEM investigation with selected area electron diffraction and dark field imaging confirmed a predominant crystal orientation of the entire spicule material ( It has already been assumed by other authors that organic macromolecules, e.g., proteins, become intercalated in between crystal domains of sponge spicules and other biominerals, where they might be involved in modifying the mechanical material properties The organic matter must have been present during the spicule formation, since it is incorporated in the spicule material. The nano-clustered granular growth structure, as seen on the natural spicule surfaces ( On basis of the presented results the actual growth pattern cannot finally be determined. However, a growth process via a precursor phase may be supported by the occurrence of ACC in very similar spicules of the sponge The accumulation of inorganic and organic materials for spicule growth is likely to occur in specific vesicles of the adjacent cells from which they are released to the growth sites of the spicules, as implied by Ledger and Jones This biomineralization process has been experimentally approached by polyaspartate-mediated calcite precipitation via organic–inorganic liquid or gelatinous precursor phases The examined sponge spicules, formed in a controlled manner by one of the simplest animals on Earth, are a demonstration model for basic biomineral construction principles and emphasise the key-role of soluble organic matrices in biomineralization.  amorphous calcium carbonate atomic force microscopy energy-dispersive X-ray analysis electron energy-loss spectrum energy-filtering transmission electron microscopy field-emission scanning electron microscopy fast Fourier transform high-resolution transmission electron microscopy transmission electron microscopy X-ray diffraction We would like to thank Jürgen Löns for support with XRD, Christine Putnis for FESEM imaging, and Lia Addadi (Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel) for comments that helped to improve this paper. This study was funded by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG), priority program SPP 1117, ‘Principles of Biomineralization’. R.H. thanks the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for research support. G.W. would like to thank the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park authority for permitting fieldwork (Permit Nos. G98/142, G98/022) as well as the Australian Biological Resources Study (ABRS) and AstraZeneca R&D Griffith University (Brisbane, Australia) for funding. This work is part of the doctoral thesis of I.S. at the Department of Geosciences of the Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster.