Among the models used for performance prediction of hard rock tunnel boring machines two stand out and are often used in the industry. They include the semi theoretical model by Colorado School of Mines and the empirical model by Norwegian University of Science and Technology in Trondheim (NTNU). While each have their strong points and area of applications, more accurate prediction has been sought by modifying one of the existing models or introduction of a new model. To achieve this, a database of actual machine performance from different hard rock TBM tunneling projects has been compiled and analyzed to develop a new TBM performance prediction model. To analyze the available data and offer new equations using statistical methods, relationships between different geological and TBM operational parameters were investigated. Results of analyzes show that there are strong relationships between geological parameters (like UCS, joint spacing and RQD) and TBM performance parameters specially Field Penetration Index (FPI). In this study, a boreability classification system and a new empirical chart, for preliminary estimation of rock mass boreability and TBM performance is suggested.Hard rock tunnel boring has become more or less the standard method of tunneling for tunnels of various sizes with lengths over 1.5–2 Currently, two models, including Colorado School of Mines or CSM (  In a more recent study by the authors ( The above models, of course, have their advantages and disadvantages because of their origin and background. Some of them like original CSM model don’t consider the main influencing parameters and some of them like NTNU model require special experiments originated from the drilling. These tests are not commonly available outside Norway. Also some of the models like In this study, compiled field data obtained from three main tunneling projects in Iran ( For developing a more accurate TBM performance prediction model that can be applied in different geological conditions, data from different projects with different rock mass conditions were collected and compiled in a database. As mentioned above, three long water conveyance tunnels recently constructed in different geological zones of Iran and Manapouri second tailrace tunnel were selected for this study. The main characteristics of these TBM tunneling projects are summarized in As can be seen in the In this study data on geological and ground conditions, TBM operational parameters and machine performance represented by rate of penetration were collected during pre-construction and construction phases. The data were arranged in a special database including 158 tunnel sections of four selected projects ( The second part of database or category of information included some geological parameters such as intact rock properties (Compressive and tensile strength, quartz content, porosity), discontinuity characteristics such as spacing, NTH class or fracture class developed in NTNU ( In Eq. It should be noted that, since most of the selected tunnels have been excavated by shielded machines and lined with precast segmental linings, there were many limitations for mapping of the geological features in total length of the tunnels. So, just tunnel sections where reliable geological data were available were selected for the database. In these selected tunnel sections geological data were obtained directly from tunnel rock face observations and measurements or by investigating drilled boreholes logs and core boxes and related laboratory tests on core samples. Graphs presented in As can be seen in the graphs, geological and performance parameters have wide ranges of variations. Actually, in the developed database some tunnel sections have been excavated in weak and very poor quality rock masses (UCS In this study, both single and multi-variable regression analyzes were used to investigate relationship between engineering rock properties and TBM performance parameters and finally to develop empirical equations. As indicated in previous publications ( As shown in As mentioned before, in this study, multi-variable regression analysis was also used to find an empirical equation to relate FPI as a function of machine performance parameters to geological parameters. For this purpose, four rock mass properties including UCS, joint spacing, RQD, and To evaluate accuracy of the model, the measured and calculated values of FPI are compared in To facilitate using of Eq. The proposed equation in this study (Eq. Boreability is the term commonly used to express the ease or difficulty of rock mass excavation by a tunnel boring machine. In tunneling projects, ground characteristics or boreability of the rock mass is an important parameter for selecting machine type and specifications. It is clear that proper evaluation of rock mass boreability can also play a major role in machine operation to achieve the best performance. In a given project, rock mass properties have direct influence on boring difficulty of ground and FPI values. Usually stronger and less fractured rock masses are more difficult for cutting by disk cutters and boring by TBM and require use of higher thrusts to achieve a certain level of penetration. Therefore higher values of FPI are usually recorded in strong and massive rock masses like massive intrusive sills, dikes, and thick quartzitic veins (typically higher than 70 Clearly, rock mass quality is different in these boreability classes. Range of UCS and RQD values in each class were evaluated by statistical analyzes on data in the available TBM field performance database and the results are presented in  To better illustrate the FPI range for each boreability class and facilitate application of the model in estimation of machine performance in the future, the chart presented in  Finally, by assuming an average utilization factor of 25%, advance rate or AR (m/day) of the machine in each class can be estimated. As can be seen in part A of Normally, achieving high values of advance rate in rock masses with classes B-IV and B-V is very rare and difficult due to ground stability issues and due to some limitations of machine and back-up system such as capacity of conveyor belt. In general, more competent and stronger rocks indicated in classes B-0 and B-I coincide with higher utilization rate due to minimal ground support requirement and related stoppages and downtime. On the opposite side of the scale, lower utilization rate is often experienced in unstable grounds typical of class B-IV and B-V which reduces the utilization rate drastically and causes higher downtime and delays. In addition, in softer grounds, operator reduces cutterhead thrust to prevent cutterhead jamming due to high torque, minimizing the chance of face collapse, and reducing the possibility of overloading of conveyor belt. This simply means that same levels of applied cutter load are not used in soft ground (as it applies to stronger rocks) and by default the use of lower applied load will ease off the extremely high rates of penetration. Therefore, in part B of However it is concluded that highest values of advance rate can be achieved in rock masses categorized as classes B-II and B-III. In such grounds, combined conditions of rock mass boreability and stability of the surrounding rock are in the optimum condition for excavating the tunnel by TBM. Rock mass boreability depends on a number of influencing parameters including intact rock/rock mass properties, machine specifications and operational parameters. In this paper a simple model is proposed to evaluate rock mass boreability and TBM performance range. In the developed model, machine performance has been related to two main rock properties (UCS and RQD) and two operational parameters (average cutterhead thrust and RPM). These Input parameters of the model are typical parameters usually are available even in the preliminary stages of the tunnel design and planning. So, proposed model can be applied as a useful tool for quick estimation of TBM performance in projects with different geological conditions and machine diameters. This paper also introduces a new boreability classification based on rock masses characteristics to allow for prediction of FPI values. Various ground conditions are categorized in six different classes from B-0 as tough boring ground to B-V as easy ground for boring. Combining stability conditions which controls machine utilization and boreability characteristics of different rock types and ground condition allows for development of a new concept for classification of TBM excavatability or “Relative difficulty of ground for TBM application”. As mentioned, required FPI for boring the rock mass, decreases from B-0 to B-V class. It means that from B-0 to B-V class, less cutterhead thrust is required to achieve a given rate of penetration. It is also concluded that rock masses with class B-II and B-III due to optimum conditions of stability and boreability are most favorite grounds for TBM application. The Developed empirical model is based on analyzing data obtained from four tunneling projects with total length of 55 Authors wish to thank SCE Company, especially our colleagues in the Tunneling Division for their help in the collection of required data.