Background
                  Diets rich in dietary fibre are associated with multiple health benefits, but there is often only a restricted understanding of the mechanisms underlying these associations. This limits the ability to select or design foods for specific nutritional purposes. Traditionally, the diverse physical and chemical forms of dietary fibre have only been categorised as either soluble or insoluble.
               
                  Scope and approach
                  In this review, the physicochemical properties that have been proposed to be responsible for the biological functionality of dietary fibres in the digestive tract are summarised and classified. The extent to which these properties follow naturally from categorisation into soluble vs insoluble forms are then assessed. Based on this analysis, a new approach to functional categorisation of dietary fibres is proposed.
               
                  Key findings and conclusions
                  The physicochemical properties of dietary fibre components that are relevant to digestive tract functionality can be classified under the headings of binding, structuring, and transport barriers. Major nutritional outcomes such as control of macronutrient digestion or the nature of residual digesta that are available for fermentation by the large intestinal microbiota depend on combinations of these physicochemical properties in ways which are not readily reflected by a soluble vs insoluble fibre definition. An alternative approach is proposed based on 2D mapping of dietary fibre materials as a function of molecule/particle size and local density. This effectively separates diverse fibre materials and can be linked semi-quantitatively with functionally-important properties.Results from a number of large prospective cohort studies have shown clear associations between dietary fibre intake and reduced risks of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and cancers of the digestive tract ( Hypotheses for the protective action of at least some fibres against diabetes, cardiovascular disease and colon cancer have been proposed ( Dietary fibre in foods ranges from intact plant tissue pieces to small oligosaccharide molecules. The boundaries of what is ‘in’ or ‘out’ of a definition of dietary fibre have been debated for decades, but a consensus is now forming around a definition adopted by CODEX in 2009. This definition is based on carbohydrate polymers that are not hydrolysed by the endogenous enzymes in the small intestine of humans and are either (i) naturally occurring in food, (ii) obtained from food raw materials by extraction, or (iii) synthetic carbohydrate polymers. The key difference between type (i) and types (ii) and (iii) are that the latter are qualified to only include those materials “which have been shown to have a physiological effect of benefit to health as demonstrated by generally accepted scientific evidence to competent authorities” ( Within each of the three broad classes of natural, extracted, and synthetic dietary fibres, there is great structural diversity at the chemical as well as the physical structure level. Categorisation of fibres in terms of chemical composition is often used. This has the benefit of the analytical methods being robust, accurate and repeatable, but has major drawbacks in that it does not usually include molecular size characterisation (so an oligosaccharide is treated as equivalent to a polysaccharide), and does not usually distinguish between isolated molecules and those which are part of a natural matrix, such as plant cell walls. The natural heterogeneity of intrinsic fibre in plant-based foods at the polymer, cell wall, and tissue level ( In addition to diversity at the structural level, there is apparent diversity in the mechanisms underlying nutritional functionality at all stages of digestive processing that make it challenging to relate food composition to potential health outcomes ( Apart from chemical structure, the other characteristic that has been traditionally used to describe dietary fibre types is solubility. Typically, fibre solubility is evaluated after a food or component has been digested under conditions related to those found in the gastrointestinal tract ( Various nutritional functionalities are traditionally ascribed to either ‘soluble’ or ‘insoluble’ fibre. Soluble fibre is often reported as increasing the ‘viscosity’ of digesta with consequent effects on reducing gastric emptying and slowing nutrient absorption. The digesta flow profile (rheology), however, depends on the applied stress, and can be shear thinning or exhibit a yield stress behaviour ( Further, digesta can demonstrate a significant degree of viscoelasticity ( The effect of comminution e.g. particle size reduction as a result of oral, gastric or intestinal processing, is related to the ability of particles to adhere to each other. These interactions are frequently driven by capillary forces, for example due to the presence of microscopic gas bubbles, as well as due to interaction and bridging adhesion between surface polymer layers of insoluble particles. The adhesive interaction promotes particle clustering resulting in the formation of a cohesive semi-solid. Insoluble fibre, such as cereal brans and seeds, which absorb water and form a polymer-rich interfacial layer can facilitate comminution, and are often described as having the ability to promote the softening of digesta and support regular bowel movements. By contrast, highly condensed or lignified tissues such as cereal hulls or leaf stalks would not be expected to absorb water and thus would display weak adhesive interactions that limits their ability to facilitate comminution. An over-simplification that is sometimes made is that soluble fibres are readily fermented by the resident microbiota but insoluble fibres are not. There are, however, many examples of insoluble fibres e.g. from fruit, vegetable or cereal sources that are readily fermented, and there are a few examples of soluble fibres whose chemistry is apparently so complex that microbial enzymes are unable to hydrolyse them significantly (e.g. psyllium and other mucilage gums). For the case of cereal flours and derived foods, it has recently been shown that there is very similar fermentation behaviour for soluble and insoluble fibre fractions with similar chemical compositions ( There is clearly a need for a more sophisticated way of categorising dietary fibres that is linked to their nutritional functionality, as neither chemical composition nor fibre solubility are sufficiently discriminatory. The main nutritional functionality of dietary fibres can be simplified to effects in the digestive tract on: nutrient digestion and uptake rates residence times and passage rates fermentation products and microbiota populations, bulk structuring molecular binding transport barriers Bulk structuring effects of a fibre relate to digesta rheology once interactions with other components are taken into account, and are expected to influence e.g. digesta passage rate, enzyme digestion rates, nutrient transport and fermentation kinetics. Molecular binding of fibres with enzymes ( Whilst structuring, binding and barrier properties provide a reasonably comprehensive framework for categorising the physicochemical properties important for nutritional functionality of dietary fibres, this does not lead directly to classification of the properties of individual types of fibre. For this, the characteristic structural features of fibres that contribute to structuring, binding and barrier properties need to be identified. Structuring (rheology) of dietary fibres in digesta can come from both soluble polymers and swollen particles with both molecule/particle size and concentration being key determinants. Binding phenomena will be expected to involve some specific chemical features. For example the negative charge of pectins serves to enhance binding with positively charged mucin ( We propose that a useful approach to categorising the physicochemical properties of diverse types of dietary fibre is to map them by their size and their local density under application conditions, typically fully hydrated. A size axis can cover both dissolved molecules (hydrodynamic size) and particles, with dimensions ranging from about 1 nm for a trisaccharide (the smallest molecule that can be classified as dietary fibre) up to the mm/cm scale for large pieces of cereal bran or fruit/vegetable pulp. Although bulk concentration could be used as another axis, it is argued above that local concentration or density is a more appropriate measure for determining both binding and transport properties. Of course, for dissolved molecules, concentration and local density are equivalent, it is only for particulate materials that the two measures diverge. The range of concentration or density can range from a practical lower level of about 0.1 g/100g up to highly condensed systems at close to 100g/100g. For both size and concentration/density, the wide range of possible values suggests that a logarithmic rather than a linear scale would be appropriate for each axis. Such a plot is shown in To test the utility of size/density plots ( Solubility is limited by the size of polymers/colloids that can dissolve. This is in the 100 nm–1 μm range for polysaccharides in water, above which entities would normally be expected to phase separate. As the conventional soluble fibre test is carried out under dilute conditions, the starting concentration would not be expected to influence the solubility markedly – hence the vertical boundary division ( Flow behaviour of fibre systems can arise from either polymers in solution or swollen particles in suspension, with lower viscosity values (free flowing systems) for either low molecular weight oligosaccharides in dilute solution or suspensions of relatively non-swollen particles that sediment ( The fermentation rate of fibre systems is an important parameter because the rate of fermentation is related to the site of fermentation within the large intestine, considering the passage rate. Fermentation is limited under conditions of low water activity as would be found for high concentrations of low molecular weight fibres, but these conditions are not experienced in vivo. Alternatively, fermentation can be slow because the fibre substrate is highly condensed, providing a barrier to efficient utilisation of carbohydrates inside particles of e.g. lignocellulosic brans. As this effect is related to specific surface area, larger particles of less local density should be expected to be fermented at similar rates as smaller particles with higher density. Hence the position of the proposed boundary line in Binding of diverse molecules (micronutrients, enzymes, bile salts, mucins etc) to dietary fibres can be driven by chemical specificity or surface interactions, so size and density are not expected to be the only factors contributing to the extent and/or strength of binding. Nevertheless, where chemical factors have been taken into account, it is expected that molecules/particles of greater local density will provide more efficient binding than less dense systems due to the larger surface energy of the former. Hence the broad directional arrow in Overall The proposed approach is a broad one, intending to capture all relevant types of dietary fibres. Thus it is necessarily imprecise quantitatively, as generalising behaviour across diverse biological sources and chemical structures would be expected to result in a range of secondary effects on top of those due to size and local density. More quantitative and detailed property maps for individual fibre types at different sizes and densities could in principle be constructed, to compare behaviours between different fibre types. However, the nutritional functionality and preventative health value of dietary fibre is also difficult to quantify precisely, so we expect the maps to be more useful in a semi-quantitative form to compare properties between chemically and biologically diverse dietary fibres. One challenge in populating the maps will be in quantifying the two coordinates of size and, particularly, local density for individual fibres. We note that the effective size of dissolved oligosaccharides and polysaccharides can be obtained directly from measurements of intrinsic viscosity or from size exclusion chromatography, both of which are related to the hydrodynamic volume. The size distribution of particulate material can in general be readily estimated by microscopy or fractional sieving. Local density is equivalent to concentration for dissolved fibres, but is less easy to determine for particulate fibres. An average density can be obtained from sedimentation volume (or hydration capacity) measurements as long as interstitial volumes are taken into account. The bigger challenge is where there is e.g. an intact cellular structure that has a relatively low average density but is bounded by a thin and dense cell wall which provides an effective barrier ( Once issues of quantification of individual fibre types have been addressed, it will be of interest to consider how best to describe the various regions within the size/density map as a way of communicating the diversity of dietary fibre functionality to consumers. There is a large cohort of consumers who are eager to understand more about why a diet based on plant-based foods, and therefore rich in dietary fibre, is the healthiest option. A potential use for the proposed maps is to identify whether specific regions of the size/density space are related to individual nutritional benefits of dietary fibre such as cholesterol management, glucose absorption, blood lipid management, fermentation throughout the large intestine, or whether these functionalities overlap in size/density coordinates. If such relationships between size/density co-ordinates and nutritional properties are suggested, then this can form the basis for clinical trials in which e.g. a single fibre source is used with designed differences in size and density. It is possible that a diversity of map locations for the range of positive nutritional functionalities ascribed to fibre will provide evidence for why a diversity of plant-based foods and therefore fibre types is associated with optimal health outcomes. One challenge that will need to be addressed is the extent to which individual variation in gastrointestinal physiology and microbiological fermentation over-rides the physical properties of fibres discussed here. A second challenge will be to obtain sufficient data on the physical state of fibres within the digestive tract in humans to understand the mechanisms underlying relationships between ingested fibre size/density and nutritional outcomes. A third challenge is how to simplify the concept for public health messaging, although this needs to be first justified on the basis of property/nutrition correlations and then clinical intervention trials. We thank many members of the