Although surgical repair is considered the standard treatment for intraarticular distal humeral fractures, most investigators have assessed its results using dual-plate fixation in 2 planes. The purpose of this study was to determine the functional outcome of open reduction and internal fixation of these complex fractures using Y-shaped reconstruction plates. We identified 17 patients who had operative treatment for Arbeitsgemeinschaft Für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) type 1, 3-C fractures using a Y-shaped Lambda plate (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN). Patients were recalled for follow-up that included recording of a complete history, physical examination, radiographic evaluation, and completion of a limb-specific questionnaire. The mean duration of follow-up was 37.3 months. The average loss of extension was 13°, and the average arc of flexion-extension was 112°. As determined by the Mayo Elbow Performance Index, 6 were graded excellent; 8, good; 3, fair; and none, poor. Surgical repair of intraarticular distal humeral fractures by open reduction and internal fixation with a Lambda plate is an effective procedure that allows for stable osteosynthesis without loss of reduction or fixation as a basis for good functional outcome.Olecranon refixation (2) Ulnar nerve transposition (12) Intraarticular fractures of the distal humerus account for approximately 1% of all fractures in adults. A review of the recent literature confirms that dual plate fixation in 2 planes (orthogonal plate fixation), according to AO principles, has become the most widely used treatment of intraarticular distal humeral fractures in adults. This study reviewed 17 consecutive patients (11 males, 6 females) with AO/ASIF type C fractures of the distal humerus who were treated in our department from July 1999 to June 2005 by open reduction and internal fixation with a Lambda plate and were available for follow-up. Their average age was 41.5 years (range, 13-75 years); 3 were aged older than 65 years. Follow-up evaluations usually took place at 3, 6, and 12 weeks postoperatively; later follow-up occurred at variable intervals. A comprehensive assessment of final outcome included a standard clinical examination evaluating pain, range of motion, joint stability, and functional outcome, as well as radiographic evaluation and completion of the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI), a limb-specific questionnaire. A further subjective assessment of patient satisfaction of the outcome after surgical fixation was graded as very satisfied, satisfied, acceptable, and unsatisfied. The 17 patients included in the study were monitored for an average of 37.3 months (range, 12-76 months). The mechanism of injury was sport in 7 (ski or snowboard, 3; bicycle, 3; inline skating, 1), a fall from a standing height in 6 or from an elevated height in 1, and traffic accidents in 3 (1 of which was classified as polytrauma). By the classification of Müller et al, For radiographic assessment, anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs were obtained postoperatively and at the final follow-up in all patients. Union was defined as the presence of bridging callus or the disappearance of the fracture line on 3 of 4 cortices seen on the AP and lateral radiographs. Intraarticular gap or step-off was measured directly on the radiographs. With the assumption of a normal 7° valgus angulation of the distal humeral joint surface, varus-valgus angulation was measured on the AP radiograph. Likewise, a physiologic 30° anterior angulation of the condyles relative to the long axis of the humerus was assumed for measurement of AP angulation on the lateral radiograph. Finally, posttraumatic arthritis was graded using the scale of Knirk and Jupiter, As a rule, surgery was performed on the day of admission, and 15 patients (88%) were operated on within 24 hours after injury. One patient with a closed fracture underwent surgery the next day, and 1 patient, a 48- year-old woman with a closed type C1 fracture who was transferred to the trauma center from abroad was operated on the third day after the accident. Patients were placed in a lateral decubitus position, with a padded arm holder under the arm or supine with the affected arm hanging in a vertical position over the table. The iliac crest was prepared in case a bone graft was required. All interventions were performed with a pneumatic tourniquet and bloodless field. Using a straight midline posterior approach, the ulnar nerve was isolated, sufficiently mobilized, and protected throughout the procedure in a systematic fashion and transposed anteriorly in the subcutaneous tissues in 2 patients. The articular surface was exposed by an extraarticular chevron-shaped osteotomy in 3 patients, and 12 had a transverse intraarticular olecranon osteotomy. Other approaches included a triceps-reflecting approach in patient 2 and aposterior triceps splitting approach in patient 8. After incision of the posterior elbow capsule, the olecranon fragment and the triceps were elevated from the posterior aspect of the humerus, and the exact fracture pattern was determined. Internal fixation was performed beginning with reduction and anatomic reconstruction of the trochlea and the articular surface. The major fragments were reduced and temporarily fixed with Kirschner wires, with particular attention being paid to exact restoration of the joint surface, at all times avoiding potential narrowing of the width of the trochlea. Definitive fixation was established by replacing the Kirschner wire with 1 or 2 transcondylar, 3.5-mm cortical lag screws. One particularly comminuted fracture required supplementation with an iliac crest cancellous autograft. The columns were reconstructed and stabilized with a Lambda plate. The Lambda plate is made of steel (316L). Its diaphyseal branch is 3.6 mm thick and is available in 5 different lengths; the 2.5-mm thick epiphyseal branches, diverging by 50°, can be cut and contoured during the operation to accommodate the variations in anatomy and fracture pattern. The type of Lambda plate used in 12 patients had 2 diaphyseal holes, and a plate with 4 diaphyseal holes was used in 5 patients. Anatomic reduction was controlled by visualization under fluoroscopy ( The extraarticular chevron-shaped olecranon osteotomy was fixed with a cancellous screw. The transverse osteotomy was fixed either with 2 parallel Kirschner wires and a figure-of-eight tension-band wire or a cancellous screw, depending on the surgeon's preference. The stability of the internal fixation was evaluated during surgery by placing the elbow through a complete range of motion and looking for motion between the fragments. Standard AP and lateral radiographs of the elbow were obtained postoperatively. Mobilization was typically initiated using a continuous passive motion machine on the morning after surgery. On average, active motion of the elbow was allowed on day 14, depending mostly on intraoperative and postoperative assessment of the security of fixation of the olecranon osteotomy. Between motion exercises, patients wore a removable splint or sling for rest but were encouraged to discontinue use of either by 7 to 14 days postoperatively. The mean duration of hospital stay was 8 days, with an average of 6 days (range, 4-10) for patients with isolated fractures of the humerus compared with 10 days (range, 6-14) for patients with trauma-associated injuries located elsewhere in the body. Hardware removal was proposed to all patients aged younger than 60 years. Performed approximately 18 months postoperatively, it was combined with débridement of the olecranon fossa for improvement of ulnohumeral motion. Nonunion of the lateral column was observed in 1 patient who had a type C3 fracture, necessitating refixation by use of an isolated screw and iliac crest bone graft after radiographic assessment of consolidation of the intraarticular portion of the fracture and the medial column. Two instances of loosening of the cancellous screw for olecranon osteotomy fixation were assessed during first follow-up and were replaced by Kirschner wires and figure-of-eight tension-band wire. Patient 13 underwent reoperation on the second postoperative day for replacement of 2 screws seemingly penetrating the anterior surface of the humerus and had excellent final result. There were no associated vascular lesions in this series, but we recorded 5 trauma-related nerve lesions. Four were posttraumatic palsies of the radial nerve, 3 of which gradually resolved by 3 months. The radial nerve palsy persisted in patient 2, despite a procedure for nerve grafting performed 4 months after the injury. The fifth documented trauma-related nerve lesion was manifested by hypesthesia of the fingertips, corresponding to the ulnar and median nerve distribution, and resolved. Postoperative ulnar nerve lesions were seen in 2 patients. A sensory deficit of the ulnar nerve persisted in patient 7 and was resistant to operative neurolysis and hardware removal performed 18 months postoperatively. The second patient (patient 3), a 75-year-old woman who presented with a delayed posttraumatic ulnar nerve compression syndrome, had anterior subcutaneous transposition of the nerve 6 months after initial surgery and has refractory dysesthesia. A reflex sympathetic dystrophy that was confirmed by bone scintillation scanning in 1 patient resolved only partially within 18 months. Although there were 4 open fractures in this series, the only postoperative infection occurred in patient 12, a homeless man with a closed type C1 fracture. He presented with a perforation of the skin due to a migrating Kirschner wire of the olecranon osteotomy fixation at his regular 3-week follow-up examination. The problem was resolved by removal of the infected Kirschner wire and antibiotics. Apart from systematic hardware removal in 8 patients, 7 reoperations were performed in the course of this series. They have been commented on in the preceding text and are summarized in At the last evaluation, the average range of ulnohumeral motion was 112° (range, 50°-130°). The average loss of extension was 13° (range, 0°-50°), and the average arc of flexion was 125° (range, 100°-135°). These figures include results obtained after arthrolysis or simple débridement of the olecranon fossa in 7 patients. The average pronation-supination arc was 159°. All but 3 patients had full forearm rotation ( At final follow-up examination, 6 patients were pain-free, 8 complained of mild occasional pain, 3 reported moderate pain, and none had severe or constant pain. All patients noted that pain was strictly related to exertion. The total MEPI averaged 83. An excellent grade on the MEPI was attained in 6 patients, 8 patients had a good result, 3 were graded fair, and none as poor. Eleven patients were able to return to their original occupation at the same level, with a median delay of 3 months (range, 1-8 months). Four were retired or unemployed before the accident but took up their habitual leisure activities. One patient, however, had not returned to his premorbid profession 1 year after the injury. All but 2 patients who practiced sports before the accident resumed their activities, with a median delay of 6 months. Anatomic reconstruction of the joint was accomplished in all cases when evaluated from standard postoperative radiographs. No patient had a loss of reduction or fixation. At the final follow-up, measurement of the anterior angulation on the lateral radiographs averaged 32°, and the medium valgus angulation measured on the AP radiographs was 5.5° ( There was 1 nonunion of the external column and 2 malunions of olecranon osteotomy, related to hardware failure (see Complications). According to the scale of Knirk and Jupiter Dual-plate fixation, applying a radial plate dorsally and an ulnar plate medially, has become the most widely used treatment of intraarticular distal humeral fractures. Few comparative biomechanical studies of different types of osteosynthesis for distal humeral fractures exist. As much as 50% of the intrinsic stability of the elbow is provided by the articulation between the trochlear notch of the olecranon and the trochlea. Other authors advocate the single or combined use of the one-third tubular plate, the AO reconstruction plate, the dynamic compression plate, or the precontoured Lecestre plate. Our results are consistent with those of other studies on open reduction and internal fixation of intraarticular distal humeral fractures ( For evaluation of functional outcome, we chose the Mayo Elbow Performance Index because it was determined in a comparative study of 5 different elbow-scoring systems (MEPI, Broberg and Morrey Functional Rating Index, Ewald Elbow Score, Hospital for Special Surgery score, and Pritchard scoring system) to be the most discriminating on validity testing. In our study, the type of fracture and accuracy of fracture fixation did not inevitably correlate with the outcome, but open fractures were prone to result in an unsatisfactory outcome. Because open reduction and internal fixation is proposed by several authors for the management of distal humeral fractures in elderly patients, All patients aged younger than 40 years had a good or excellent result, whereas only 1 of 3 elderly patients (75 years) with osteoporosis had a good result. This finding must be interpreted cautiously because of the small sample size and the potential for a limited capacity to cooperate with postoperative rehabilitation that could have an adverse effect on results. Morrey et al The posterior approach combined with an olecranon osteotomy provides adequate exposure of both columns and the greatest percentage of visible articular surface of the distal part of the humerus. Olecranon nonunion rates as great as 10% have been reported, however, regardless of the type of osteotomy and fixation technique used. Although trauma-associated vascular complications with this type of injury are reported in 5% to 10%, Postoperative ulnar neuropathy after operative treatment for intraarticular fractures of the distal end of the humerus, as seen in 2 of our patients, has been reported by several authors. Our retrospective study has several biases. A number of patients with worse outcomes may have been lost to follow-up. Moreover, the relatively low case number does not allow for statistical analysis. Finally, posttraumatic degenerative change in the elbow joint could increase with time, negatively affecting outcome. In conclusion, from our review of 17 patients with intraarticular distal humeral fractures repaired by open reduction and internal fixation with the use of a Lambda plate, supplemented with an additional transcondylar lag screw, we believe that this technically simple procedure allows for anatomic reduction, rigid internal fixation, and early mobilization without loss of reduction or fixation, favoring a satisfactory final outcome. We deem worth stressing that early surgical treatment should be aimed for whenever feasible, not only with respect to expected clinical outcome but also because anatomic reduction before swelling, retraction, and incipient fibrosis may be facilitated. All except 2 patients in this series were operated on within 24 hours.