Diasporic bauxite represents one of the major aluminum resources. The low alumina to silica mass ratio (<6) in most of the diasporic bauxites in China makes physical cleaning necessary to utilize this vast aluminum resource. Over the last three years significant progress has been made in developing a viable reverse flotation technology to upgrade the Chinese diasporic bauxite to an alumina to silica mass ratio greater than 10, so that they can be used as feed to the well-known Bayer process. This review article summarizes the progress in fundamental understanding and process development of the reverse flotation of Chinese diasporic ores. The review is organized by first presenting the crystal structures of the major components of the diasporic ores, followed by a discussion of effective collectors for clay gangue minerals and depressants for diaspore.Aluminum is the third most abundant element in the Earth's crust and one of the most commonly used metallic elements in civilization. Due to its high corrosion resistance and mechanical strength to mass ratio, aluminum alloys are used as a major structural material in aircraft, buildings, machinery parts, beverage cans and food wraps. Currently, bauxite is the major source for alumina/aluminum production. China has about 2300 million tonnes of known bauxite reserves, which ranks the fifth in the world ( It is known that high grade bauxite with an Al Due to its economic importance, the vast diasporic bauxite resource in China has been extensively studied with the objective of developing a flotation-Bayer process. As a surface wettability-based separation technology, flotation is known to be highly versatile and particularly suitable for fine particle separation. It has therefore been chosen as a potential physical upgrading method for the diasporic ores. Early research efforts have led to the development of new chelating collectors for the direct flotation of diaspore while rejecting the silicate minerals ( Considering the successful experience of reverse silicate flotation practiced in kaolinite purification ( All the major components including diaspore (Al When subjected to grinding, diaspore breaks along (0 Because of the distinct differences in surface broken bonds of diaspore from the aluminosilicate clay minerals, the ground mineral particles exhibit significantly different surface charge characteristics, which can be described by the corresponding isoelectric points (iep). For diaspore, a typical iep of 6.4 was obtained ( To improve the floatability of these clay minerals, efforts were focused on testing other cationic collectors. In a weak acidic medium (pH 4–4.8), For diasporic ores with kaolinite and illite as the major gangue minerals, it is desirable to search for a stronger collector than APDA. This motivated the synthesis of various novel polyamine collectors ( After finding a strong collector for the clay minerals, the second requirement for reverse flotation of diasporic ores is to search for a selective depressant for diaspore, which could also act as a dispersant. Dispersion is required as dispore has been shown, from theoretical analysis, to heterocoagulate with fine clay minerals ( Although the inorganic phosphates showed some degree of selectivity in depressing diaspore in the reverse flotation of diasporic ores, the floatability of koalinite was relatively low. Efforts were therefore also focused on polymeric organic depressants. Natural corn starch has been extensively studied as a sulphide and an oxide depressant, particularly in the reverse flotation of iron ores ( The activation of kaolinite flotation with the addition of HA-starch is a very interesting observation and worthy of further elaboration. Due to its mineralogical structure, kaolinite has two different cleavage basal planes. For the convenience of discussion, the cleaved tetrahedral silicates basal plane is referred to as (0 With the fundamental knowledge derived from the above studies, a reverse flotation separation test was performed using disporic ore samples from Henan province, China. The feed ore samples were analyzed and the chemical composition is given in It is fair to say that with the financial support from the National Key Fundamental Research and Development Program of China, the research group in Central South University of China, led by Professor Hu pioneered successfully the reverse flotation of diasporic ores. The separation performance reached the same level as with the direct flotation of diaspore using anionic collectors. In general, diaspore is much harder than aluminosilicate clay minerals. When comminuted together, the clay minerals experience a preferential breakage over the diaspore. As a result, the clay minerals become liberated after a relatively short period of grinding, favoring reverse flotation of these clay minerals from diaspore. The coarse size of diaspore in the unfloated stream facilitates filtration and reduces the moisture content of the filter cake. In addition, coarse grinding would minimize mechanical entrainment and slime coating inherent in fine grinding and therefore improve separation efficiency. In the reverse flotation, only minor clay gangue minerals making up less than 20% of total feed mass are floated, which requires lower dosages of collectors than the direct flotation process. In addition, frothers are not needed in the reverse flotation as the cationic collectors possess frothing power, which would simplify the process control. More importantly, the diaspore concentrate obtained from the reverse flotation does not contain organic collector and frother, thus eliminating possible undesired consequences of carry-over organics in the subsequent Bayer process. An additional advantage of the reverse flotation is the potential removal of Ti, Fe, Ca and Mg-containing impurities along with the clay minerals, reducing the formation of harmful Mg and Ti containing sludge in the Bayer process. A remaining challenge to the reverse flotation of diasporic ores is the enhancement of the floatability of illite. The recent advances in developing a reverse flotation technology of diasporic ores in China are summarized. The most notable progress is the improved understanding of clay mineralogy in the context of collector or depressant interactions with the clay minerals and diaspore. This fundamental understanding leads to the design of new clay collectors and selective depressants of diaspores. The reverse flotation technology incorporating an enhanced floatability by a modified flocculant while depressing diaspore was demonstrated to be as effective as direct diaspore flotation. The reverse flotation was able to upgrade the Chinese diasporic bauxite ores to an alumina to silica mass ratio of greater than 10 at an alumina recovery greater than 85%. It is hoped that this knowledge may lead to applications in other areas where gangue clay minerals are a problem such as potash, phosphate, iron ores and low rank coal. The authors would like to thank Professor Hu and his group for providing the original materials, in particular those in Chinese, without which this review would not have been possible.