The characterisation of interfacial layers is a rather complex problem. The available methods become more and more efficient and allow deeper insight into the interfacial structure and its impact on interfacial properties. However, single methods have often quite strong limitations so that an optimum combination of different techniques is the best way to get a complete insight into the interfacial behaviour. This issue of the journal is dedicated to examples of combined methods applied to interfacial systems with the aim of getting a maximum of information. Surface rheological properties, comprising dilational and shear visco-elasticities, are accessible via different methods, such as capillary wave damping, oscillating drops and bubbles, or flow channel and oscillating bi-conical disk rheometry [ The first paper, by Noskov and Bykov [ The situation for the shear rheology of interfacial layers is following this statement. In their contribution, Guzman et al. [ The paper by Jaensson and Vermant [ In recent literature, we see more publications on the characterisation of liquid interfacial layers by optical methods, for example the non-linear methods SFG [ The characterisation of the interfacial dynamics by correlation spectroscopies and microscopy techniques is the main target in [ In two contributions of this issue the characterisation of the interfaces involved in flotation processes are discussed: the solid/water and air/water interfaces [ The paper by Badruddoza et al. [ Although the processes of liquid drainage in foams and the electrokinetics of particles are well understood, their combination - i.e., electrokinetic phenomena in foams - is still at an immature state of comprehension. The contribution by Hussein Sheik et al. [ The final article in this COCIS issue is dedicated to measurements of the charge of liquid surfaces. The contributions emphasises that only a combination of experimental characterisation and molecular modelling allows a reliable description of the situation [ In summary, this collection of papers and the given examples demonstrate how the combination of complementary tools allow insights that are else either questionable or contradictory. The combined application of experimental and simulation methods gives even rise to new observation, otherwise not accessible. The authors declare no conflict of interest.