The potential of honeycomb briquette ash as a new source material for the manufacture of geopolymers was examined. The successful geopolymerization of honeycomb briquette ash was attained by means of NaOH treatment. The concentrations of the major and minor elements of honeycomb briquette ash are in the normal range of the chemical composition of fly ash and appropriate for the synthesis of geopolymers. Honeycomb briquette ash contains 9.88wt.% unburned carbon, however, all but 0.04% of the unburned carbon was removed in clean ash by means of a froth flotation process. The development of the compressive strength of the geopolymer bodies is affected by the unburned carbon content, the molar concentration of the NaOH solution, the curing temperature, and the curing time. With a few exceptions, a high compressive strength was achieved for the unburned carbon-free ash-based geopolymer bodies regardless of the curing temperature and the curing time. A geopolymer body was prepared by the dissolution of unburned carbon-free ash in 12M of NaOH solution and curing at 80°C for 7days. Under these conditions, the compressive strength of the geopolymer body increased to 65.63MPa. This value is almost double the highest value of a geopolymer body, prepared by the dissolution of as-received ash in 12M of NaOH solution and curing at 80°C for 28days. In conclusion, unburned carbon-free honeycomb briquette ash could be an alternative to Portland cement as a prospective cementitious material.The manufacture of Portland cement has an environmental impact at all stages of the production process. The most notorious impact is the release of CO The use of honeycomb briquette ash has received scant attention in the cement industry. Nonetheless, it should be examined as a potential raw material for the synthesis of geopolymers because, as with coal fly ash, it is a residue of coal combustion. Pulverized coal combustion occurs in power plants at a temperature range of 1300 In terms of the steady availability of the raw material, honeycomb briquettes are widely used in some Asian countries including Korea, China and Indonesia, for house heating or cooking. There has also been a sudden increase in demand recently. In 2008 more than 2.3 Mt of honeycomb briquettes was used in Korea for the purpose of heating greenhouses. At present, China is the world's largest consumer of honeycomb briquettes. The huge dependence of China on coal for energy and its soaring consumption suggest that briquette ash will also undergo an increase in demand. Unburned carbon in coal fly ash is undesirable for the application of geopolymers in the cement industry ( The purpose of this study is to examine the potential of honeycomb briquette ash in the manufacture of geopolymers. We assumed that the removal of carbon from ash would enhance the compressive strength of the geopolymer. The froth flotation was also expected to be an effective and thorough means of separating carbon because it is one of the world's main methods of cleaning coal. A pile of used anthracite honeycomb briquettes was collected from farms in a suburb of Daejeon in South Korea. The honeycomb briquette is cylindrical with a honeycomb pattern of 22 holes drilled into its top shown in Chemical analysis was conducted with an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (Model: MXF-2100, Shimadzu, Japan) after 3-days of drying at room temperature. The content of the unburned carbon was determined by means of a proximate analysis. The ash samples were crushed with a jaw crusher and a gyratory cone crusher and then ground with a single runner mill. Unburned carbon was removed from briquette ash by froth flotation because a high carbon content is presumed to hinder the geopolymerization, as is the case with fly ash. The froth flotation performance depends on the interactions among multiple factors, such as material properties, the particle size and density, and the surface chemistry modification ( We combined sodium hydroxide solutions at four different molarities (6, 8, 10 and 12 The phase identification of the cleaned ash and geopolymer samples was conducted with an X-ray diffractometer (Model: X-pert MPD Philips, Netherlands) and a TEM/EDS (JEM 2100F, Jeol Ltd., Japan). The ash aggregates were ground and mounted on a holey carbon film supported by a Cu grid for TEM observation.  The X-ray diffraction pattern in The honeycomb briquette ash contained 9.88% unburned carbon ( With some exceptions, the unburned carbon-free ash-based geopolymer bodies tended to yield higher levels of compressive strength, regardless of the curing temperature and the curing time ( As the curing times increased, so too did the compressive strength of the compression bodies of the briquette ash ( In spite of the geopolymerization, the ground compression bodies with the highest compressive strength produced X-ray diffraction patterns ( The source materials for geopolymer manufacturing should be rich in Si and Al. The concentrations of the major elements (Al, Si and Fe) and minor elements (Ca, Mg, K, etc.) in the honeycomb briquette ash ( Honeycomb briquettes have different combustion conditions than the combustion conditions of power plants, and this difference means that honeycomb briquette ash undergoes a different type of mineral phase transformation. The diffraction peaks of mullite crystals are weak ( Compressive strength is the most commonly used measure of success for geopolymerization ( We observed a decreasing trend in the compressive strength of the geopolymer bodies cured at higher temperatures and longer curing times ( The definition of a geopolymer is controversial ( The geopolymerization of honeycomb briquette ash is achieved by means of NaOH treatment. The use of honeycomb briquette ash has seldom attracted much attention in the cement industry, whereas fly ash has been the subject of considerable research and interest in the industry. Unburned carbon-free honeycomb briquette ash could be one of the prospective cementitious materials that could be an alternative to Portland cement. The honeycomb briquette form of the ash makes it easier to handle than fly ash; it is also less likely to become airborne. Over and above that, the honeycomb briquette ash contains less mullite crystals and more activated clays with the high SiO This research was supported by a grant from the