The problem of calculating the threshold sensitivity of an integrating photoreceiver (photocurrent integrator) is investigated. A noise model of a photointegrator is used to develop equivalent noise circuits and to calculate the RMS value of the voltage across the output of the photoreceiver. Among all the models of the real photointegrator it is conceivable that the approximation by an ideal photointegrator may be used. The threshold sensitivity of a photointegrator is defined as the power at the input of a photointegrator at which the root mean squared (RMS) voltage across its output is equal to the RMS voltage of total noise i.e. the signal-to-noise ratio is equal to one. A photomultiplier tube (PMT) can be used to increase the sensitivity. Formulas for calculating the sensitivity of a PMT-based photointegrator are given. The increase in sensitivity due to the use of PMT can be up to 18–30 times.
                  An experimental study of a photometer of a molecular condensation nuclei (MCN) detector that forms a base of highly sensitive MCN gas analyzers was conducted. The measured sensitivity differed from the calculated by 10%. However, at femtowatt power levels it is very difficult to get rid of parasitic optical signals that are responsible for a small decrease in sensitivity compared to the theoretical prediction. In many practical applications, for example, for the X-ray absorption method of mineral extraction using position-sensitive photodiode X- ray receivers, an approximation of a real photointegrator must be used.The photocurrent integrators are the basis of optical photometers that allows to accurately measure extremely small light intensities. Photocurrent integrators are used in scientific instruments to achieve high sensitivity of an optical measurement system in case of relatively slow physical processes. The photometers are applied to various fields of human activity: from medicine (for example, in systems for measuring optical densities of solutions and aerosols) to the mining and mineral processing technologies (x-ray scintillation detectors, etc.). The important problem in creating highly sensitive photometers is lowering the threshold optical power that can be registered by photoreceiving devices. The paper presents the results of developing a modern molecular condensation nuclei (MCN) detector. The goal of this study is to analyze the threshold sensitivity of the as-developed detector to optical signals and to enhance the device as much as possible. The photometer is one of the main parts of highly sensitive gas analyzers based on the MCN method. The molecular condensation nuclei method is based on the application of various physico-chemical processes to the flow of a gas containing impurities that need to be detected The mechanism of condensation of supersaturated vapor on MCNs is investigated in Refs. As mentioned above, the measurement of light scattering by the obtained aerosol is made by the nephelometric method. In this method the inner cavity of an aerosol photometer is illuminated through a hole by a lamp or laser and the scattered optical signal is measured at some angle to the incident light. The photocurrent of the photoreceiving device of an aerosol photometer is proportional to the countable particle concentration in the aerosol and, finally, to the concentration of the impurity molecules at the detector entrance. The design of the aerosol photometer for studying the light scattering in an MCN detector is shown in The photometer is of a The aerosol particles in the photometric volume have the radii of about 0.25 µm with minor variations in size around this value Scattering by air inside the photometer's chamber produces the parasitic background illumination that masks the light scattering by aerosol particles. Calculation of light scattering by air is based on the Rayleigh's theory A small size aerosol photometer and a microprocessor-based control, data acquisition and processing unit were developed To ensure high photocurrent sensitivity the photoreceiver uses a current integrator (Texas Instruments IVC102 chip) The input voltage of a photointegrator is given by For the case of a slow varying photocurrent this formula can be simplified to The ATMega88 chip-based controller produces control signals for the If the concentration of the detected substance ( The strongest possible photocurrent corresponds to the minimal measurement time of The As 10 The minimum measurable photocurrent corresponds to the increase in the output voltage equal to one quantization step of the ADC during 1 s and is If a 14-bit ADC is used, then If a 20-bit ADC is used then the minimum measurable photocurrent is The equivalent noise model of the photointegrator is shown in The parameters of the operational amplifier are: the time constant The equivalent noise current and noise voltage generators describe random processes with spectral noise densities The equivalent noise generators in the equivalent circuit can be considered noncorrelated and their power spectral density across the working frequency band is constant (white noise). The total power spectral density of noise current sources can be found by simple summation: After substituting the appropriate power spectral densities we get The mean squared noise current at the operational amplifier's input is To find the root mean squared value of the noise voltage created by the noise currents across the output of the photoreceiver it is necessary to find the dispersion of the random process at the output of a linear circuit assuming that starting at time where Three possible approximations are studied in noncorrelated noise generators (with white noise), which corresponds to the equivalent circuit shown in an approximation with approximations with The formulas for approximations (a) and (b) are rather bulky and can be found in The impulse response of the photointegrator's current sources can be found by applying the inverse Laplace transform to the frequency response giving The equivalent noise model of the photointegrator used in the calculation of the influence of the noise voltage on the root mean squared output noise voltage is shown in The frequency response of the integrator in operator form is The impulse response is found by applying the inverse Laplace transform to the frequency response Using the ideal photointegrator approximation results in a significant underestimation of the influence of the noise voltage source on the root mean squared output voltage. The threshold sensitivity of a photointegrator To get the equation The photointegrator's output signal for the input jump of the photocurrent Now let us determine the photointegrator's threshold current at which the root mean squared (RMS) voltage across its output is equal to the RMS voltage of total noise. The threshold current for short integration times is calculated in If the condition The relative influence of noise currents increases with the integration time. If the integration time is longer than Substitution of the spectral density of the noise current sources into (20) gives  Shot noise current 2 It is often convenient to use equivalent input spectral density of the noise current source  Sometimes a concept of the noise equivalent power (NEP) is introduced. NEP is defined as the power of the input signal at which the signal-to-noise ratio at the output is equal to one for the bandwidth of 1 Hz. NEP is equivalent to the spectral density of the noise current source at the amplifier's input (measured in A photointegrator using a precision low noise operational amplifier with field effect transistors (FET) at the input, an integrating capacitor and a low loss FET switch (all integrated in an IVC102 chip) and a silicon The threshold sensitivity of a photoreceiver with a silicon An analog-to-digital converter (ADC) must have more than 20 bit to cover this dynamic range completely. A PMT can be used as a photosensitive element to increase the sensitivity of a photointegrator. A PMT has a high coefficient of transformation of light power into an electric current In a PMT two sources of shot noise (shot noise of the signal current The spectral density of the shot noise of thermal emission cathode current The spectral density of the mean squared shot noise of the signal and dark anode currents of a PMT is given by The total mean squared noise voltage across the output of a PMT's photointegrator is given by Because of a PMT's high internal amplification the output voltage can be determined using the step response function of an ideal integrator The threshold sensitivity of a PMT-based photointegrator is calculated in Shot noise of a PMT must be taken into account if the integration time is less than several tenths of a second. The threshold sensitivity of a PMT-based photointegrator depends on the PMT's anode voltage. To calculate the threshold sensitivity for various PMT anode voltages the corresponding values of The measured threshold sensitivity was Equations for the calculation of the threshold sensitivity were significantly simplified because of the long integration time (about 1 s) and the use of a highly sensitive photomultiplier tube with a low noise preamplifier. However, in many practical situations where position-sensitive optical detectors are required and measurement time is only a fraction of a millisecond or less, photodiode-based photodetectors must be used. In this case approximations (a) and (b) must be used. An example of such a detector is a position-sensitive X-ray detector used in a sensor for the X-ray absorption method of mineral enrichment The threshold sensitivity of integrating photoreceivers (photointegrators) can be determined using their equivalent noise circuits and integrating the impulse response of a photodetector. A photocurrent integrator based on measuring the photocurrent increase with time followed by the averaging of the tangent of this increase can detect photocurrents induced by the aerosol scattered light power in the fA range. In an MCN detector such a low detected power allowed: to reach the sensitivity to the target substance that is lower than its dangerous concentrations; to calibrate the gas analyzer by measuring air scattering in the photometer's chamber; to reach the target substance detection level close to the level of spontaneous condensation and not limited by the sensitivity of the optical-electronic system of a sensor.