Cation/H+ exchanger transporters (CAXs) are crucial in Ca2+ homeostasis and in the generation of Ca2+ profiles involved in signalling processes. Given the crucial role of CAX1 in Ca2+ homeostasis, CAX1 modifications could have effects on plant metabolism. Three Brassica rapa mutants for CAX1 were obtained through TILLING. The aim of this work is to assess the effect of the different mutations and different Ca2+ doses on plant metabolism. For this, the mutants and the parental line were grown under low, control and high Ca2+ doses and parameters related to nitrogen (N) and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) metabolisms, and amino acid (AAs) and phytohormone profiles were measured. The results show that BraA.cax1a mutations affect metabolism especially under high Ca2+ dose. Thus, BraA.cax1a-7 inhibited some N metabolism enzymes and activated photorespiration activity. On the opposite side, BraA.cax1a-12 mutation provides a better tolerance to high Ca2+ dose. This tolerance could be provided by an improved N and TCA metabolisms enzymes, and a higher glutamate, malate, indole-3-acetic acid and abscisic acid concentrations. Therefore, BraA.cax1a-12 mutation could be used for B. rapa improving; the metabolomics changes observed in this mutant could be responsible for a better tolerance to high Ca2+.One of the main mechanisms that plants possess to regulate internal Ca Two very important pathways affected by Ca The primary assimilates of N are AAs such as glutamate (Glu), glutamine and aspartic acid (Asp). These and other AAs are efficiently catabolized by TCA cycle enzymes to produce energy for plant growth, especially in response to stress. Thus, N metabolism connects with respiration through TCA cycle ( Besides Ca Given the crucial role of Ca Three Treatments were started 30 days after germination and were kept for 21 days. Plants were grown with different Ca Plant leaves were washed with distilled water, dried on filter paper, and weighed for fresh weight (FW). Half of the leaves from each treatment were frozen at −30 °C for later biochemical assays and the other half of the plant material was lyophilized to measure the dry weight (DW) and the nutrients concentration. For the Ca NO Leaves were ground at 0 °C in 50 mM KH For glyoxylate oxidase (GO) determination, fresh leaf tissue was ground with PVPP and 1 ml of 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.8) with 0.01% Triton X-100 and 5 mM DTT. The homogenate was centrifuged at 30,000 For determination of glutamate-glyoxylate aminotransferase (GGAT) activity, leaves were ground with 100 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.3) containing 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100 and 10 mM DTT. The homogenate was centrifuged at 20,000 Glutamine synthetase (GS) was determined by an adaptation of the hydroxamate synthetase assay published by Aspartate aminotransferase (AAT) activity was assayed spectrophotometrically at 340 nm using the method published by ( The protein concentration of the extracts was determined according to the method of Soluble AAs were extracted following the method of Malic, citric and oxalic acids were analysed according to Extracts for measuring enzyme activities were obtained following the method of IAA, GAs (GA1, GA3 and GA4), CKs (tZ and iP), ethylene precursor 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) and ABA were analysed as in Data were subjected to a simple ANOVA at 95% confidence to evaluate the differences between treatments. A two-tailed ANOVA was applied to ascertain whether the Ca Principal components analysis (PCA) was utilized to identify general trends in the data and to analyse the relationship between parameters. The first principal component (PC1) separated the samples with respect Ca Several authors evidenced that modifications in CAX1 activity affect Ca  Concerning foliar Ca It is well known that a proper Ca Comparing between lines, According our results, PCA analysis related Ca PCA analysis also related NH Plants synthetize and accumulated OAs such as malate, citrate and oxalate to increase nutrient uptake under deficiency conditions or to improve homeostasis under toxicity conditions (Evangelou et al. 2007). In the present experiment, all lines showed higher OAs concentrations under low Ca Regarding TCA cycle, Ca CAX1 mutations could affect both concentration and responses of phytorhomones in plants because Ca According PCA analysis, IAA levels are related to foliar DW ( Regarding stress related hormones, such as ABA and ethylene, The results obtained in this work show that JMR and BB conceived and designed research. ENL conducted experiments. AA contributed new reagents and analytical tools. ENL and BB analyzed data. ENL wrote the manuscript. JMR and BB did a critical revision of the article. All authors read and approved the manuscript. None. This work was supported by the We thank Dr. Martin R. Broadley and Dr. Neil Graham from Nottingham University for providing us the seeds utilized in this experiment.