The discrete-module-beam-bending based hydroelasticity method proposed by Lu et al. (2016) deals with the hydroelastic response of a flexible structure by discretising it into several rigid submodules which are connected by Euler-Bernoulli beam elements. A stiffness matrix is determined in terms of the geometrical and physical properties of the flexible structure for each beam element and it has an analytical form for simple geometric features such as a rectangular cross section unchanged along the longitudinal direction. However, the analytical stiffness matrix may not exist for a flexible structure with complex geometric features. In the present study, with the aid of finite element method, the discrete-module-beam-bending-based hydroelasticity method proposed by Lu et al. (2016) is extended to be applicable for a flexible structure with complex geometric features.Hydroelasticity is concerned with the deformation of flexible structures responding to hydrodynamic excitations and simultaneously the modification of the excitations due to the structural deformation. Traditional three-dimensional hydroelasticity theory based on mode superposition approach has been widely adopted for the dynamic response of flexible structures in waves ( Unlike the traditional mode superposition approach, The flexible structures investigated in the above-mentioned researches have simple shapes with unchanged cross section in the longitudinal direction (a rectangular plate in The aim of the present study is to extend the discrete-module-beam-bending-based hydroelasticity method proposed by The discrete-module-beam-bending-based hydroelasticity method proposed by The total external force exerted on the center of all submodules is Subsequently, each submodule is simplified as a lumped mass at its center of gravity. And the adjacent lumped masses are connected by a beam element, the geometrical and physical properties of which are derived from the flexible structure. The force on lumped masses caused by structural deformation is Finally, the equations of motion of a flexible structure in waves are established in frequency domain by considering the equilibrium of forces for each lumped mass, By solving Eq. If the flexible structure has a simple shape, an analytical expression of the beam element stiffness matrix We consider a beam element with arbitrary shape of cross section and varied geometric features along the longitudinal direction shown in The finite element method (FEM) is applied to the beam element for calculation of the overall stiffness of the structure. Suppose that the beam element is discretised into a number of small elements with the number of nodes In Eq. From Eq. The second step is to represent the physical variables of nodes on two end cross sections by the ones at the center of each cross section of the beam element (center The problem now is to seek the relationship between the equivalent stiffness matrix As the forces on the nodes of two end cross sections and the relative coordinates of nodes to the centers of two cross sections are both known, it can be easy to transform the forces on the nodes Combining Eqs. Eq. First, we choose a cubic steel model, the physical properties and dimension of which are given in Next we consider a model adopted in the experiment conducted by The discrete-module-beam-bending-based hydroelasticity method proposed by The extension of the hydroelasticity method is validated by (Ⅰ) a small difference (within 5%) of the stiffness matrix for a cubic steel model calculated using the analytical formulation and the proposed approach and (Ⅱ) a good agreement between the experimentally measured vertical response of a VLFS and that calculated using the present method. The extension of the discrete-module-beam-bending based hydroelasticity method is a big step for its application in practical engineering problems. In the future work, relevant experiments will be carried out on the hydroelastic response of a flexible structure with complex geometric features in waves to further validate the present study. The first author would like to acknowledge the support of the IPRS, APA and Shell-UWA offshore engineering PhD research top-up scholarships. The stiffness matrix The size of the symmetric matrix is 12 × 12.