In-situ capturing of fluorine (F) with CaO in a fluidized bed reactor is proposed to accelerate the defluorination reaction and to improve the lithium extraction from lepidolite ore. Compared to the roasting process without addition of CaO, the Li extraction efficiency is improved by ca. 15 percentage points in the present of CaO during the roasting reaction. And more than 91% of the fluorides volatilized from the lepidolite are captured by CaO particles in the fluidized bed reactor and are converted to CaF2. The formation of CaF2 on the surface of CaO particle is attributed to the generated HF from the lepidolite particles. The in-situ capturing of HF by addition of CaO changes the thermodynamic equilibrium state that benefits the defluorination reaction. Therefore, the in-situ capturing of fluorine with CaO in fluidized bed reactor is a promising method for the de-fluorinate and for the lithium extraction for versatile applications.Known as the “metal of the future”, Lithium plays an important role in many industries, especially in high-tech applications [ Although brines have became the dominant raw materials for the lithium production because of the low production costs [ The core of lithium extraction process from lithium ores is convert the insoluble lithium minerals to water-soluble lithium salts, including beneficiation to produce a concentrate, followed by roasting at a high temperature, leaching of the products with acid or water for the lithium salts production [ The major physical chemical means including sedimentation using Ca-based alkali salts for fluoride removal from wastewater [ In this contribution, A lepidolite ore collected from Jiangxi Yichun mine, was used as the feed material. As most processes producing lithium from ores, beneficiation is used to upgrade the Li content, before subjecting it to roasting tests. The chemical composition of the lepidolite concentrate is shown in A conical fluidized bed reactor (CFB) with inner diameter (i.d.) of 20 mm was designed for the roasting reaction of lepidolite concentrate. The schematic diagram of the fluidized roasting apparatus is shown in After the roasting test, the roasted sample was digested with H The microstructure of the raw lepidolite and the as-roasted samples was observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM 7100F) operated at 10.0 kV equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector (INCA X-Max). X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF, PW4400/40; PANalytical, the Netherlands) analysis was used to determine the chemical composition of the lepidolite concentrate and the roasted products, while their structures were determined by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, X'Pert MPD Pro, Panalytical, Netherlands) with Cu Ka radiation (k = 1.5408 Å) at 40 kV and 40 mA. The Li content of the raw lepidolite and the leached residues after chemical digestion treatment were measured by using an Inductively Coupled Plasma spectrometer (ICP, OES 6300, Thermo Scientific, USA). The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) specific surface area of samples were determined by N The SEM image and its partial enlarged image of the raw lepidolite particles are shown in  In order to investigate the effect of CaO particles on defluorination efficiency and capturing efficiency, a sample of high purity of CaO particles was selected for the Prior to the roasting evaluation, the fluidization behaviors of the lepidolite with or without addition of CaO particles were investigated in the same fluidized bed reactor under standard conditions. The results are shown in After the roasting reaction at 830 °C for 60 min with addition of CaO particles (20 wt%) in the fluidized bed reactor with various stream partial pressure, the XRD peaks assigned to lepidolite were obviously reduced ( From During the roasting reaction, more than 91% of the fluorides transferred from the lepidolite particles were captured by the added CaO particles and were converted to CaF Exploration of the The EDS mapping of the roasted CaO particles was also characterized using a JSM-7001F (FESEM, JEOL, Japan) scanning electron microscope (SEM). The result is shown in There are three kinds of gaseous fluorides that might be generated during the roasting process: HF, SiF stream diffusion into the lepidolite particle; stream reaction with the LiF(s) to form HF; HF desorption and diffusion out of the lepidolite particle. Upon the above reaction steps, the step (2) is the rate-determine reaction step, because the H From  This work was supported by the