Here generalized Fourier’s and Fick’s laws are employed for heat and mass transfer in stagnation point flow of Powell–Eyring liquid. The flow is generated due to stretched cylinder. Consideration of non-Fourier double diffusion characterizes the features of thermal and concentration relaxation factors. Temperature-dependent conductivity of fluid is adopted. The set of partial differential equations governing the flow of Powell–Eyring liquid and heat and mass transfer through non-Fourier double diffusion concept is established. The applicable transformations yield the strong nonlinear ordinary differential system. Homotopy theory is utilized to acquire convergent solutions for nonlinear differential systems. Coefficient of skin friction is calculated and addressed for distinct embedded parameters. Our presented analysis shows that temperature and concentration are decaying for larger thermal and concentration relaxation times.The consideration of non-Newtonian liquids is especially significant in the fields of engineering and applied sciences. In order to explore the flow and heat transfer characteristics, several rheological relations have been suggested. Eyring–Powell Analysis of stretchable flows with heat transfer is a subject of great interest owing to its existence in distinct fields of industrial, metallurgical, engineering and manufacturing phenomena. The motivation behind the procedure of heat transport is to establish a metal more secure, stronger and grounded. Such procedure is also used to construct a metal softer and flexible. Few usages here comprise polymer extrusion, paper production, glass blowing, crystal growth, manufacturing artificial fibers, drawing plastic films, aerodynamic exclusion of plastic sheets, hardening and conserving of copper wires etc. In aforesaid procedures the distinct thermophysical objects, for illustration thermal conductivity is generally taken uniform. However realistically the thermal conductivity varies with temperature Fluid flow in the neighborhood of a stagnation point (orthogonal or oblique) is an area of great attention for several recent researchers. This attention is predominant because of its noticeable demands in engineering and industrial and processes. Such flow has important role in the flow of floor water as the numerous streamlines developing through them depict distinct flow regions. In this direction Hiemenz The aforestated attempts reveals that much consideration has been paid to heat conduction relation due to Fourier Existing information in this field certifies that much consideration has been devoted to the flows towards flat stretched surface. However very scarce is presented for the case of stretching cylinder. Analysis regarding flow and heat transport by stretchable cylinder has importance in extrusion processes Let us investigate the stagnation point flow of Powell–Eyring liquid over a horizontal stretchable cylinder. Fluid is taken incompressible. Two-dimensional flow is studied. The cylinder has linear velocity The energy and concentration equations Here Employing Here coefficient of skin friction ( From Here we used the homotopic technique The homotopic technique has incredible flexibility to select the auxiliary variables ℏ This portion is arranged to disclose the salient characteristics of curvature parameter ( Impact of  The performed analysis has the following worth-mentioning points: Larger ϵ yield higher temperature and related layer thickness. Temperature ( An enhancement in Impact of Skin friction increments for larger Temperature and concentration for non-Fourier’s and Fick’s situation are less when compared with Fourier’s situation.