Mineralized scaffolds, which are fabricated by electrodeposition, mimic the chemistry of natural bone and have attracted a great amount of attention due to their rapid and simple production. In this study, mineralized electrospun polylactic acid (PLLA) nanofibrous membranes containing different amounts of strontium (Sr) were fabricated by an electrodeposition method for potential use in bone regeneration applications. In vitro assays, including cell proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of rat bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) grown on these membranes and in vivo cranial bone defect repair assays, were carried out. It was found that mineral crystals could be uniformly deposited onto the electrospun nanofibrous membranes, while the morphologies of the formed crystals were affected by the amount of Sr. By analysis of the X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements, the formed crystalline phase was dramatically affected by the incorporation of Sr, which drove a conversion from the hydroxyapatite (HA) phase to the dicalcium phosphate dehydrate (DCPD) phase. The release of Sr2+ from the Sr/PLLA nanofibrous membranes was monitored over 20 d, and the release rates of Ca2+ and PO4
                     3− from the Sr-incorporated samples were higher compared with those of the mineralized sample without Sr. In vitro cell proliferation experiments demonstrated that mineralized Sr/PLLA nanofibrous membranes could facilitate BMSC proliferation. Furthermore, the mineralized Sr/PLLA nanofibrous membranes induced a higher degree of osteogenic differentiation in the BMSCs compared with those of pure PLLA and mineralized PLLA, as determined by the results of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, alizarin red (AR) and osteocalcin (OCN) staining and the expression of osteogenesis-related genes. More importantly, in vivo cranial defect experiments revealed that mineralized Sr/PLLA nanofibrous membranes promoted bone regeneration. These findings indicated that mineralized Sr/PLLA nanofibrous membranes are a promising material for bone tissue engineering.Bone defects caused by trauma, disease and congenital anomalies remain a serious fast-growing challenge in the medical field, not only for surgical advancement but also in the development of bone implants [ Human bone is constructed from mineralized collagen fibrils, which form the basic building blocks for the three-dimensional structure. The mineral component is mainly hydroxyapatite (HA), which comprises 65–70 wt. % of bone [ In addition to HA, Sr Furthermore, in the process of apatite formation, Sr Herein, we prepared mineralized PLLA nanofibrous membranes with different incorporated amounts of Sr by an electrochemical deposition method and attempted to evaluate their Poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA, 1.93 dL/g inherent viscosity) was purchased from Daigang Biomaterials Inc. (Jinan, China). Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris) and strontium nitrate (Sr(NO PLLA was first purified by dissolving in chloroform, recrystallizing in ethanol and then drying before further use. For electrospinning, PLLA was dissolved in a mixed solution of dichloromethane (DCM) and To fabricate the Sr-incorporated membranes, an electrolyte with Sr ions was first prepared. Briefly, equal volumes of 0.042 M Ca(NO Before mineralization, the PLLA nanofibrous membranes were treated with dilute ammonium hydroxide. Afterward, the materials were fixed onto the surface of a stainless steel electrode, which served as the working electrode (cathode). A platinum plate electrode served as the counter electrode (anode), and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was applied as the reference electrode. The parameters of the mineralization process were as follows: 3 V (deposition potential), 37 ℃ (deposition temperature) and 2 h (deposition time). After mineralization, all the samples were collected and dried before further use. According to the incorporation of different amounts of St, the as-prepared mineralized nanofibrous membranes were denoted as Mineralized PLLA, Mineralized 5Sr/PLLA, Mineralized 10Sr/PLLA and Mineralized 15Sr/PLLA. The morphologies of the mineralized nanofibrous membranes were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi, Japan). The minerals were observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Hitachi, Japan) at an operating voltage of 200 kV. Attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) was performed by a Nicolet-670 spectrometer (Thermo, USA) in the wavelength range of 500 to 4000 cm First, the Sr contents in the mineralized samples were measured using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Prodigy, Leeman, USA) by dissolving the mineralized nanofibrous membranes in aqua regia. The Sr contents relative to the mass of the mineralized samples were calculated to be 7.2, 18.2 and 26.3 μg/mg for Mineralized 5Sr/PLLA, Mineralized 10Sr/PLLA and Mineralized 15Sr/PLLA, respectively. To evaluate the release of ions, as-prepared composite nanofibrous membranes were immersed in a Tris-HCl solution (0.05 M, pH 7.4). Briefly, the dried samples were placed into a 50 mL plastic centrifuge tube containing 10 mL of the Tris-HCl solution and then shaken at a speed of 100 rpm at 37 °C in a shaking incubator (THZ-300C, Shanghai Yiheng Scientific Instruments, China). Then, 4 mL of the supernatant was extracted, and an equal volume of fresh Tris-HCl solution was added into the tubes at predetermined time points. Finally, an ICP-AES instrument (Leeman, USA) was used to determine the ion concentration of the collected solution, including Sr Before the BMSCs were seeded onto the surface of nanofibrous membranes in a 24-well plate at a density of 5 × 10 BMSCs were cultured on different samples and incubated with osteogenic medium. Calcium deposition (mineralization) was assessed by alizarin red staining. After culturing for 14 d, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at 37 ℃ prior to being stained with a 1% (w/v) alizarin red solution for 45 min. Then, the samples were washed with PBS to remove nonspecific staining and directly observed by optical microscopy. For the quantitative analysis, 10% acetic acid was added and neutralized with 10% ammonium hydroxide. Then, 100 μL of the supernatant was added to 96-well plates and measured at 405 nm with a plate reader. After culturing in osteogenic medium for 14 d, the cells were fixed with a 10% formalin solution for 20 min. Then, the samples were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 min and blocked with 10% normal goat serum for 30 min. Afterward, the cells were treated with osteocalcin monoclonal antibody (1:50 dilution, R&D, Minneapolis, MN) at 4 ℃ overnight and incubated with a secondary antibody (1:200 dilution, R&D, Minneapolis, MN). Finally, the nucleus was stained with DAPI and observed by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). The fluorescent intensity of the OCN in CLSM photos was determined by Image-Pro Plus (IPP) software from randomly selected regions of each sample. BMSCs were seeded onto the surface of nanofibrous membranes in a 24-well plate at a density of 5 × 10  At 8 weeks after surgery, the rats were sacrificed by air embolization. Then, the skulls were dissected and immediately fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. The morphologies of the reconstructed skulls were assessed by micro-CT (mCT-80, Scanco Medical, Brüttisellen, Switzerland) in high-resolution scanning mode (pixel matrix, 1024 × 1024; voxel size, 20 mm; slice thickness, 20 mm) to characterize the newly formed bone. After scanning, a 3D image of each sample was reconstructed using GEHC Micro-View software (GE Healthcare BioSciences, Chalfont-St. Giles, UK). The bone volume (BV), bone mineral density (BMD), bone surface (BS)/BV, trabecular number (Tb. N), trabecular thickness (Tb. Th) and trabecular separation (Tb. Sp) were also calculated with the software. After micro-CT analysis, the samples were divided into two groups. The first group was for hard tissue slices. The collected specimens were dehydrated in increasing concentrations of alcohol (70–100%) and embedded in polymethyl methacrylate until solidification. Coronal sections (approximately 100 mm in thickness) of the central area of each defect were cut and ground. The specimens were polished to a final thickness of approximately 20–30 mm. Fluorescent labeling of CA, AR and TE was observed under CLSM. The slices were then stained with van Gieson stain to identify new bone formation. The area of newly formed bone was quantified with Image-Pro Plus software as a percentage of the total bone defect area. The second group was for soft tissue slices. Hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) and Masson trichrome staining were used to assess the morphology and tissue integration after the samples had been decalcified. Briefly, the sections were deparaffinized with xylene and then rehydrated in a serial gradient of ethanol. After washing with PBS, the sections were incubated with a hematoxylin solution for 15 min to stain the cell nucleus. Then, the sections were differentiated by 1% hydrochloric alcohol and stained with an eosin solution for 3 min. For Masson trichrome staining, the deparaffinized sections were stained by Weigert iron hematoxylin staining for 5–10 min and Ponceau staining for 5–10 min. Afterward, the sections were treated with a phosphomolybdic acid solution for 5 min, followed by aniline blue counterstaining for 5 min and 1% acetic acid treatment for 1 min, and then dehydrated in graded ethanol and cleared in xylene. Finally, the slices were mounted for examination by light microscopy. All data are expressed as the mean ± SD. Statistical analysis was carried out using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a post hoc Tukey method to test all pairwise mean comparisons. The statistical significance for all tests was considered at SEM was used to study the morphologies of the mineralized PLLA nanofibrous membranes with or without Sr incorporation. As shown in In addition, mineral crystals for the different Sr contents were further observed by TEM. For the sample without Sr incorporation, the mineral crystals were clustered together, and the particles of the minerals were fusiform shaped (  To investigate the effects of different amounts of Sr on the mineral crystals, we obtained mineral crystals from the composite nanofibrous membranes by an ultrasonic method, and the mineral crystals were analyzed by XRD. As shown in  The proliferation and differentiation of BMSCs on the substrate material are two important steps for bone mineralization [ ALP, a membrane-bound enzyme, is an early marker in osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs and plays a key role in directing differentiation toward the osteoblastic lineage. Thus, ALP activity is an important indicator for osteogenic activity in bone tissue engineering [ The calcium nodules generated by BMSCs on the nanofibrous membranes were observed by alizarin red staining, and the amount of calcium deposition was quantitatively analyzed. As shown in OCN is a unique marker for late-stage osteogenic differentiation, which plays a key role in regulating bone formation and mineralization [ To further investigate the osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs induced by the mineralized PLLA nanofibrous membranes containing Sr, we examined the expression levels of ALP, Runx2, OCN and OPN by real-time PCR. As shown in The osteogenesis-inducing capabilities of mineralized Sr/PLLA nanofibrous membranes have not been investigated In this study, fluorescent labeling analysis was performed. Sequential fluorescent labeling of CA, AR and TE were conducted at 2, 4 and 6 weeks after surgery. In addition, new bone formation and mineralization were analyzed by different fluorescent markers, as indicated in a previous study [ Van Gieson, HE and Masson staining were analyzed at 8 weeks after surgery. The histological analysis further supported the results of the micro-CT analysis and sequential fluorescent labeling. Analysis of undecalcified specimens stained with Van Gieson picrofuchsin clearly showed that a substantially greater amount of newly formed bone was present in the mineralized 5/10/15 Sr/PLLA nanofibrous membrane groups than was present in the pure PLLA nanofibrous membrane group or the mineralized PLLA nanofibrous membrane group ( In this study, mineralized Sr/PLLA nanofibrous membranes with different amounts of Sr were successfully fabricated by an electrodeposition method. It was found that the incorporation of Sr could influence the morphology of the minerals. With increasing amounts of Sr, the mineral crystals changed from flower-like clusters to sheet-like structures and finally to spherical particles. The ion release curves showed that the addition of Sr accelerated the release of calcium and phosphate ions from the deposited minerals, thus facilitating the rapid dissolution of the minerals. Then, BMSCs were seeded onto mineralized nanofibrous membranes containing different amounts of Sr to study the effects of Sr on cell proliferation and osteogenic differentiation. There are no conflicts of interest to declare. This research was financially supported by the