The aim of this study is to evaluate the association between maximum tongue pressure, masticatory performance, and oral conditions in children aged 6–12 years. The decayed, missing, and filled teeth (DMFT) index of 70 Japanese school children (35 boys, 35 girls) was measured, as well as their height, body weight, maximum tongue pressure, and masticatory performance. Furthermore, their subjective masticatory ability was scored using a newly developed questionnaire related to the preference and hardness of 25 foodstuffs. To investigate masticatory performance, the total number and maximum projected area of chewed particles of jelly-based Kamuzokun were measured. The reliability of the questionnaire was assessed based on its internal consistency and on confirmatory factor analysis. Pearson's correlation analysis showed that maximum tongue pressure was significantly correlated with age, height, body weight, DMFT index, masticatory performance, and subjective masticatory ability score. Multiple regression analysis showed that maximum tongue pressure was associated with age, DMFT index, and the total number of chewed particles. The total number of chewed particles was the most important variable associated with maximum tongue pressure. The questionnaire exhibited good internal consistency, and satisfactory goodness-of-fit indices were obtained in the confirmatory factor analysis. These results suggest that tongue pressure is associated with healthy physical and mental development, as well as with masticatory performance and dental caries.Developmental disabilities in tongue function and tongue habits are of interest to many pediatric and orthodontic dentists as potential etiologic factors in malocclusion During the neonatal period, the tongue is located in the forward suckling position for nursing, and the swallowing pattern is infantile. Over a period of 12–18 months, proprioception causes postural and functional changes in the tongue, and a transitional period ensues. Between 2 and 4 years, functionally balanced mature swallowing prevails; however, the tongue thrust that is part of the infantile swallowing pattern may be found in children older than 4 years, and even sometimes in adolescent and adult patients It was recently reported that the prevalence of tongue thrusting is 4.9% in children aged 6–12 years For several decades oral myofunctional therapy has been used to treat and prevent poor oral habits In this work, we examined tongue pressure among children aged 6–12 years, as well as the relationships between tongue pressure and various factors, including anthropometric measurements, dental status, masticatory performance, and a measure of the subjective mastication ability (SMA) score using a self-administered questionnaire associated with the preference for hard foodstuffs. Furthermore, we verified the reliability of this newly developed questionnaire. The participants were 70 healthy school children (35 boys and 35 girls) aged 6–12 years ( Measurements of height and body weight were made in the consulting room of the hospital. Height was measured to an accuracy of ±0.1 cm using a portable digital stadiometer (AD-6531, A&D Co., Tokyo, Japan) with the head in the Frankfort plane, and body weight to within 0.1 kg Children with POW ≥ +20% were classified as overweight and those with POW ≤ −20% were classified as underweight. Children with POW between these cutoffs were classified as normal weight During the intraoral examination, the sum of decayed, missing, and filled teeth (DMFT) was calculated, using criteria recommended by the World Health Organization All measurements were duplicated, with intervals of >30 s for rest, and the mean values were used in the analysis. All examinations were carried out by the same highly trained examiner. Maximum tongue pressure was measured using a JMS tongue pressure manometer (JMS Co. Ltd, Hiroshima, Japan; Masticatory performance was evaluated by determining the individual's ability to comminute a jelly-based chewable material (Kamuzokun, Mamarisshimo Ltd, Tokyo, Japan; In line with the manufactures' instructions, after chewing the jelly-based samples for 60 s, the participants were instructed to stop chewing, expectorate the sample into a plastic filter, and rinse with water until all particles were removed from the mouth. The chewed particles were then washed with water and dried at room temperature on a paper filter (Super Absorption Paper, Mamarisshimo Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) for 10 min. The samples were positioned on white filter papers, and a digital camera (D750, Nikon Co, Tokyo, Japan) was used to photograph the samples from above under standard lighting. A plastic calibration ruler was used as an index of length ( SMA was scored using a modified version of the method used by Koshino et al. The denominator here is given by: To assess the validity and reliability of the questionnaire, factor analyses were performed. The Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) measure of sampling adequacy For the exploratory factor analysis, principal factor analysis with Varimax rotation was performed. Kaiser's criterion (i.e., eigenvalues >1.0) together with a visual examination of scree plots were used to determine the number of components to retain. Following exploratory factor analysis, confirmatory factor analysis was carried out to explore the valid factor structure. The goodness-of-fit index (GFI), adjusted GFI (AGFI), comparative fit index (CFI), and root-mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA) were used as indices of conformity. In general, with GFI, AGFI, and CFI values of ≥0.90 indicate good fits Furthermore, as an index of internal consistency of the questionnaire, Cronbach To assess time stability, the test–retest reliability of all participants was investigated, with an interval of 2 weeks. The results of the test–retest reliability were expressed in terms of the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) as follows: 0.700 ≤ ICC ≤ 0.899 corresponded to good, and 0.900 ≤ ICC ≤ 1.000 corresponded to excellent Data pertaining to height, body weight, DMFT index, maximum tongue pressure, and masticatory performance were analyzed for reliability. Systematic error was investigated using Bland–Altman analysis, and the random error was characterized based on the intrarater reliability quantified using the ICC. Data pertaining to the anthropometric measurements, DMFT index, maximum tongue pressure, masticatory performance, and SMA scores in each age group are presented in the form of mean ± standard deviation. Statistical comparisons between boys and girls were made using two-tailed The KMO measure was 0.879, and the result of Bartlett's test of sphericity was  The results of the confirmatory factor analysis show that the goodness-of-fit of the three-factor structure models was as follows: GFI = 0.920, AGFI = 0.904, CFI = 0.931, and RMSEA = 0.061. In the questionnaire, the three factors describing the 25 food items yielded a reliability coefficient (i.e., Cronbach The ICCs for height, body weight, DMFT index, maximum tongue pressure, total number of chewed particles, and maximum projected area of the particles were all ≥0.97. These data were not observed for the fixed bias and proportional bias results of the Bland–Altman analysis. In the anthropometry of children, the prevalence of overweight (i.e., POW ≥ +20%) was four (5.7%), with the remaining 66 (94.3%) children belonging to the normal weight group. For each age, statistically significant differences were not found in any parameters between the sexes (data not shown).   The total number of particles was strongly correlated with the maximum projected area of particles and the SMA score (  We used a tongue pressure measurement device, which is a simple chair-side method for children aged 6–12 years ( Multiple linear regression showed that maximum tongue pressure was associated with masticatory performance, age, and DMFT index among children aged 6–12 years. The total number of particles was the most important variable associated with maximum tongue pressure. The Kamuzokun chewable samples used to test masticatory performance were both hard and elastic in nature, which makes them suitable for investigating shearing and comminution ability. Recently, several types of test materials have been reported to characterize masticatory performance in adults, including a method using an automatic measuring device where the β-carotene concentration dissolved in an aqueous solution from the surface of the test substance The mean total number of particles and mean maximum projected area of the particles were not stable among children aged 6–11 years. Toro et al. With respect to maximum tongue pressure, multiple linear regression analysis showed that age was the most significant parameter. This suggests that the development of tongue function may be related not only to body weight but also total development. It has been reported that tongue pressure and masticatory performance are positively correlated (also using jelly-based test samples) The SMA score was significantly correlated with objective measurements of masticatory performance, although it was not directly associated with tongue pressure. It has been shown that an increase in tongue pressure is associated with hard foodstuffs being crushed by pressing the tip of the tongue against the anterior hard palate Therefore, how frequency and how easily individuals are able to chew hard foodstuffs may be indirectly attributed to strength of tongue pressure. The DMFT index was also directly correlated with maximum tongue pressure. Several studies have reported that a larger number of missing teeth are correlated with inferior masticatory performance in children Another aim of this study was to verify the reliability and validity of the questionnaire relating to the preference and hardness of 25 foods. Cronbach Exploratory factor analysis suggested that the three subjective measures of “dryness,” “springiness”, and “chewiness” were significant. Furthermore, confirmatory factor analysis suggested that these three factors exhibited satisfactory conformity. The 25 foodstuffs were classified into five grades depending on the difficulty of mastication, which allowed us to calculate SMA scores. The results of factor analysis showed that the 10 food items included in Grades II and V corresponded to foods in Factor 1, and that these foods had commonalities in that the moisture content was low and the mouthfeel was dry, although there were differences in hardness. An additional 10 food items were included in Grades I and III, which corresponded to the foods in Factor 2, and these foods had commonalities in terms of high glossiness and springiness, but were different in terms of brittleness. Foods belonging in Factors 1 and 2 (i.e., those exhibiting dryness and springiness) corresponded with the established classification of food textures reported by Yanagisawa et al. The reliability and the validity of the questionnaire were thus established. Furthermore, the SMA score was shown to be useful for characterizing masticatory function in children. In summary, we have demonstrated that an increase in masticatory performance, good dental status, physical health, and intellectual development are associated with tongue pressure in children. Furthermore, we believe that the frequency and ease of chewing hard foodstuffs can be (indirectly) attributed to tongue pressure. Furthermore, we have developed a measure of masticatory ability using a self-administered questionnaire regarding preferences for hard foodstuffs, and have demonstrated its reliability and validity. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid from the