Rupture of small blood vessels is a primary feature of the vascular injury associated with shock-wave lithotripsy (SWL) and cavitation has been implicated as a potential mechanism. To understand more precisely the underlying mechanical cause of the injury, the dynamics of SWL-induced bubble dynamics in constrained media were investigated. Silicone tubing and regenerated cellulose hollow fibers of various inner diameters (0.2 to 1.5 mm) were used to fabricate vessel phantoms, which were placed in a test chamber filled with castor oil so that cavitation outside the phantom could be suppressed. Degassed water seeded with 0.2% Albunex® contrast agent was circulated inside the vessel phantom, and intraluminal bubble dynamics during SWL were examined by high-speed shadowgraph imaging and passive cavitation detection via a 20-MHz focused transducer. It was observed that, in contrast to the typical large and prolonged expansion and violent inertial collapse of SWL-induced bubbles in a free field, the expansion of the bubbles inside the vessel phantom was significantly constrained, leading to asymmetric elongation of the bubbles along the vessel axis and, presumably, much weakened collapse. The severity of the constraint is vessel-size dependent, and increases dramatically when the inner diameter of the vessel becomes smaller than 300 μm. Conversely, the rapid, large intraluminal expansion of the bubbles causes a significant dilation of the vessel wall, leading to consistent rupture of the hollow fibers (i.d. = 200 μm) after less than 20 pulses of shock wave exposure in a XL-1 lithotripter. The rupture is dose-dependent, and varies with the spatial location of the vessel phantom in the lithotripter field. Further, when the large intraluminal bubble expansion was suppressed by inversion of the lithotripter pressure waveform, rupture of the hollow fiber could be avoided even after 100 shocks. Theoretical calculation of SWL-induced bubble dynamics in blood confirms that the propensity of vascular injury due to intraluminal bubble expansion increases with the tensile pressure of the lithotripter shock wave, and with the reduction of the inner diameter of the vessel. It is suggested that selective truncation of the tensile pressure of the shock wave may reduce tissue injury without compromising the fragmentation capability of the lithotripter pulse. (E-mail: pzhong@acpub.duke.edu)Although shock-wave lithotripsy (SWL) has been used routinely for the treatment of urolithiasis in the past two decades Two different mechanisms have been implicated for tissue injury in SWL: cavitation and shear stress. Evidence supporting a cavitation mechanism includes the spatial correlation between hyperechogenicity in B-scan ultrasound (US) imaging (scattered from SWL-induced bubbles and/or their remnants) and intrarenal hemorrhage The dynamics of LSW-induced cavitation in a free field are characterized by an initial large and prolonged expansion (a few hundred μs), followed by subsequent violent collapses of the bubbles To ascertain the mechanism of cavitation-induced vascular injury in SWL, it is imperative to understand the dynamics of bubble oscillation in vessels. This information is currently lacking, due to either insufficient temporal and spatial resolution of the B-scan US imaging that has been used to assess cavitation in tissue during SWL In this work, we first investigated LSW-induced bubble oscillation in silicone tubing and cellulose hollow fibers, which were used to mimic blood vessels of various sizes. These vessel phantoms were immersed in an optically and acoustically transparent chamber filled with castor oil, so that cavitation outside the phantom could be suppressed. Degassed water containing 0.2% Albunex® US contrast agent serving as cavitation nuclei was circulated inside the tube. With this arrangement, bubble dynamics inside the phantom could be visualized by high-speed imaging while the associated acoustic emission recorded by PCD technique. Using such an approach, a clear size-dependent constraining effect of the vessel phantom on SWL-induced intraluminal bubble expansion was observed, on the other hand. The intraluminal expansion of the bubbles, on the other hand, was found to cause significant dilation of the phantom wall, leading to consistent rupture of the hollow fibers (i.d. = 200 μm) after less than 20 pulses of shock-wave exposure. The rupture is dose-dependent, and varies with the spatial location of the vessel phantom in the lithotripter field. Furthermore, it was found that, when the large intraluminal bubble expansion was suppressed by inversion of the LSW, rupture of the hollow fiber could be avoided even after 100 shocks. All together, these results provide the first experimental evidence that supports the hypothesis that rapid, large intraluminal bubble expansion could cause rupture of small blood vessels in SWL, if appropriate cavitation nuclei exist in the blood. In the second part of this study, we evaluated the potential of vascular injury due to intraluminal bubble expansion and the size-dependency of the injury based on theoretical calculations of LSW-induced bubble dynamics in blood. The experiments in this study were carried out in a Dornier XL-1 experimental electrohydraulic shock-wave lithotripter, which employs a hemi-ellipsoidal reflector with semimajor axis a = 110.3 mm, semiminor axis b = 78 mm, and half-focal length c = 78 mm. At the beam focus (F2), the XL-1 generated LSW at 25 kV has a peak positive/negative pressure of 68/−17.6 MPa, with a −6-dB beam size of 22 × 5 mm, along and transverse to the lithotripter axis, respectively Silicone tubing of various i.d. (0.3, 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 mm, 62,999–850, −852, −858, and −860, VWR S/P, Atlanta, GA) and thin-walled, regenerated cellulose (RC) hollow fibers of 200-μm i.d. were used to construct vessel phantoms. The RC hollow fibers were taken from commercially available fiber bundles (132290, Spectrum, Gardena, CA) developed for dialysis and ultrafiltration. The silicone tubing and hollow fibers were cut into ∼70-mm long segments, and then embedded in straight connectors (E-31801–00, Cole-Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL) at both ends using fast curing epoxy. The free space between the connectors is about 34 mm, sufficiently wider than the beam diameter of the lithotripter field. In the experiment, each tubing or fiber assembly was connected to a circulation system driven by a peristaltic pump (Model 7619–50, Cole-Parmer) operating at its lowest speed, which yields a mean flow rate ranging from 4.0 to 241 mm/s inside the tube, depending on its size. To allow a clear observation of LSW-induced bubble dynamics inside the tube, degassed water (O Limited data are available on the mechanical properties of the silicone tubing and RC hollow fibers for a thorough comparison with blood vessels. Based on manufacturer-supplied information, the elastic modulus of the silicone tubing is 2 MPa, which is within the range of 0.5 ∼ 5.0 MPa reported for human arteries Several techniques (detailed in the following) were used to characterize the dynamics of LSW-induced bubble oscillation in the vessel phantoms. To provide a baseline comparison, similar measurements were also carried out in free field (test chamber filled with degassed water). Bubble dynamics in the free field were characterized by using a high-speed shadowgraph imaging system (low magnification) set up inside a modified XL-1 lithotripter tank To examine bubble dynamics in the vessel phantom, a high-magnification optical imaging system consisting of a reading telescope (450100, Spinder & Hoyer, Milford, MA) with an auxiliary close-up lens (449006, Spinder & Hoyer; working distance = 165 to 200 mm) was established. Both the low- and high-magnification imaging systems were mounted on an optical breadboard (30.5 × 45.7 × 1.9 cm) that can be slid horizontally, allowing an easy exchange between the two systems. Magnification of each optical system was calibrated by imaging a transparent scale (0.1-mm resolution) placed either in water or in castor oil at F2 inside the test chamber. Acoustic emission (AE) associated with LSW-induced bubble oscillation in the free field was detected using a PCD system with 1-MHz focused transducer (V392-SU, Panametrics, Waltham, MA) with a focal length F = 101.6 mm and a nominal element diameter D = 38 mm Previously, we have shown that exposure of the hollow fiber in the acoustic field of the XL-1 lithotripter leads to consistent rupture The general features of LSW-induced cavitation in a free field (test chamber filled with degassed water), as shown in In contrast to the typical large expansion of cavitation bubbles produced by a LSW, bubble expansion generated by an inverted LSW is much smaller Although, if unconstrained, a LSW-induced cavitation bubble has the potential to grow to a maximum diameter of ∼2 mm, the expansion of such a bubble in a constrained medium such as renal vasculature will be limited. Using EHL-generated single bubble and LSW-induced bubbles in a silicone tube, it has been shown that the constraining effect of the silicone tube (i.d. = 0.3 ∼ 3.5 mm) on bubble expansion increases as the tube size becomes smaller Both theoretical In contrast to the bubble oscillation in a free field, the collapse time of LSW-induced bubbles inside the hollow fiber was found to be greatly reduced (  Using the standard reflector, rupture of the hollow fibers placed at F2 was observed consistently within 20 shocks at various output voltage settings The rupture of the hollow fiber is dose-dependent To confirm the correlation between the rupture and dilation of the fiber wall, the initial ( If appropriate cavitation nuclei (initial radius In light of the current theoretical limitation, we attempt to search for features predicted by theoretical models of spherical bubble oscillation in a free field that may be useful in gauging qualitatively the potential of vascular injury due to intraluminal bubble expansion. This strategy is based on two important observations from the hollow fiber experiment (see To simulate the radial oscillation of a spherical bubble in blood (without tissue constraint) in a lithotripter field, the original Gilmore formation for bubble dynamics was used: The Gilmore model Unconstrained bubble dynamics in a lithotripter field is determined predominantly by the tensile pressure of the LSW Another interesting feature of the bubble dynamics can be observed from the trajectory of bubble wall velocity During expansion, the work done by the bubble against ambient pressure ( Tissue injuries in SWL are primarily vascular lesions, characterized by extensive damage of the endothelial cells and mechanical rupture of small blood vessels Under normal physiologic conditions, cavitation nuclei in blood are presumably scarce or small in size Current thinking on SWL-induced tissue injury postulates that the mechanical stresses produced by cavitation and/or shear stress cause rupture of small blood vessels that initiates extensive hemorrhage, cellular damage and inflammatory response, which eventually leads to fibrosis and loss of functional renal mass In summary, using vessel phantoms made of silicone tubing and RC hollow fibers, we have demonstrated a size-dependent vessel-constraining effect on LSW-induced bubble expansion. Conversely, the rapid, large expansion of intraluminal bubbles was found to cause substantial dilation of the vessel wall, leading to consistent rupture of the vessel after a low dose of shock-wave exposure. Finally, suppression of the large bubble expansion prevents vessel rupture, indicating potential remedy to minimize tissue injury in SWL. This work was supported in part by NIH grants RO1-DK52985, PO1-DK20543, and R21-CA83760. The authors also acknowledge the support of Dornier MedTech Inc. for providing the XL-1 experimental lithotripter.