A novel composite made of biocompatible synthetic polymer (Sulphonated Polysulphone, SPSPH) which may be easily fabricated in various shapes and synthetic hydroxyapatite (HAP) was prepared. The preparation was done by the spontaneous precipitation of HAP in aqueous suspensions of the polymer particles. The time the precipitation process was allowed to proceed was used to regulate the inorganic content of the composite. The preparation thus obtained, in addition to its effectiveness in inducing HAP formation, could be easily fabricated in various shapes, including films. The SPSPH-HAP composite films, surface area totaling ca. 30cm2 induced the exclusive formation of HAP with rates proportional to the solution supersaturation. No induction times preceded the formation of HAP. Kinetics analysis with respect to HAP yielded an apparent order of precipitation of 6.0±0.4, suggesting polynuclear growth with the formation of nuclei above nuclei. The surface energy calculated from the rates of crystal growth on the polymeric substrate gave for HAP the value of 185mJm−2 of order of magnitude typical for crystalline solids.Hard tissues of higher mammals including bone, dentin, and dental enamel are natural composites that contain hydroxyapatite (Ca An important issue in the development of mineral-polymer composites is to find the optimal ratio of mineral/polymer needed to achieve high rates of biomineralization. An additional feature which is necessary for a biomaterial is the possibility of fabrication into different shapes (pellet, film, fiber, etc) depending on the intended application. In the present work, we have synthesized and characterized a composite material, consisting of a biocompatible polymer (sulphonated polysulphone) and synthetic HAP. The properties of the polymer allow the fabrication of films. This feature is carried on in the composite material. Moreover, the choice of the particular polymer was done because polyethersulphones are reported to show fairly high adhesive strength with apatite, of the order of about 4 Sulphonated polysulphone (SPSPH) was prepared by using chlorosulfonic acid as sulphonation agent in dichloroethane solution following the procedure of Johnson et al. A quantity of the SPSPH polymer equal to 0.20000±0.00005 The addition was done over a time period of 2 Examination of the solid by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Phillips 1830/40) showed that the only crystalline phase formed was HAP. The weight of the prepared solid after drying was 0.22000±0.00005 All experiments were done at 37.0±0.1°C, in a thermostated double walled pyrex Upon introduction of the film into the supersaturated solutions, the crystallization process started without any appreciable induction period. The initiation of the precipitation process resulted in proton release which, in turn, triggered the addition of titrant solutions from two mechanically coupled burettes of a modified automatic titrator controlled by a personal computer so as to keep the solution supersaturation constant In the biomaterials research literature, simulated body fluid (SBF) is extensively used for the investigation of the calcification potential of various substrates One of the primary tasks of this investigation was the preparation of a potentially biocompatible material which may be fabricated as a film and which can induce the formation of HAP selectively in supersaturated solutions. This was done by achieving controlled precipitation of calculated amounts of HAP into the bulk of polysulphone polymer, which is a biocompatible material Morphological examination of the film by SEM, before ( The driving force for the formation of HAP from a supersaturated solution is the change in Gibbs free energy, Δ The formation of precursor calcium phosphate phases on the film was ruled out not only on the basis of the XRD analysis of the final solids obtained but also from the constancy of solution composition throughout the precipitation process, based on the fact that the titrants were prepared according to the stoichiometry of HAP, i.e. molar ratio Ca The rate of HAP formation on the film of the composite material tested was found to increase with supersaturation and the kinetics were interpreted according to the phenomenological The kinetics data were fitted to the model equation predicted by the polynuclear nuclei above nuclei model The experiments presented in this work have shown that it is possible to grow HAP on sulphonated polysulphone. Even though we did not proceed beyond an overgrowth of ca. 10% weight with respect to HAP, this may easily be obtained at longer residence times of the composite with the supersaturated solution, provided that the supersaturation is kept constant. It should be noted that the methodology we have applied simulates the mineralization process in biological fluids in which the driving force is kept constant, through the constancy of the fluid composition. In the present study, a composite biocompatible material, which induces the growth of HAP and may easily be shaped, was prepared and characterized. The new material was prepared by introducing controlled amounts of HAP into the mass of an inert (with respect to the induction of the growth of HAP), biocompatible and easily shaped polymer (sulphonated polysulphone). The incorporation of HAP was achieved by spontaneous precipitation of HAP at controlled conditions of pH and temperature. The capability of the prepared composite material on the one hand to take easily different shapes, especially the shape of film, on the other hand to induce the growth of HAP reaching thus the desired ratio mineral/polymer, renders this material the potential for use as implant for healing diseased or broken hard tissues. Analysis of the kinetics results showed that the growth of HAP on the film shaped composite material followed a polynuclear nuclei above nuclei crystal growth mechanism. The dependence of the rates of HAP formation on the film tested yielded a surface energy of the overgrowth of 185