The surface properties of slightly oxidized chalcocite, bornite, and chalcopyrite with sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS) treatment were investigated by solid analyses of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, solution analyses, and zeta potential measurements. NaHS is known as a flotation activator for copper-oxide minerals by sulfurizing their surfaces. This study focused on the surface properties before/after sulfurization by the NaHS at several NaHS dosages and alkaline pHs. Iron leaching and precipitates of copper–iron-sulfide minerals have also been investigated. The analysis results showed that NaHS sulfurized the oxidized copper species, CuO and CuSO4, to copper sulfide, but oxidized iron species, Fe2O3 and Fe(OH)3, were not sulfurized by NaHS. These oxidized iron species dissolved into solutions as complex ion, Fe(HS)2
                     0, then Fe(HS)2
                     0 was decomposed by dissolved oxygen and reprecipitated as Fe2O3. The results of chalcocite showed that Cu2S was generated on the surfaces with NaHS treatment at any pH. The bornite and chalcopyrite results indicated that Fe2O3 was produced on bornite surfaces with an increase in pH, whereas the chalcopyrite surfaces were covered as the pH decreased. A flotation test was conducted using a Chilean copper ore that contained chalcocite, bornite, and chalcopyrite, and the flotation recovery of each mineral was consistent with the surface sulfurization at several NaHS dosages and pHs.Copper-sulfide minerals, such as chalcocite (Cu  Sodium hydrosulfide, NaHS, is a flotation reagent for several copper minerals. For example, NaHS is used commonly in Cu–Mo flotation as a depressant for chalcopyrite ( We focused on NaHS activation for oxidized copper-sulfide minerals, such as chalcocite, bornite, and chalcopyrite, and investigated surface properties and interactions between copper-sulfide minerals and NaHS. To elucidate the activation mechanism of NaHS, oxidized and sulfurized precipitates on each mineral surface were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and zeta potential measurement at certain alkaline pH and NaHS concentrations using pure mineral samples. Leaching and precipitation between each mineral and solution was discussed by solution analysis, especially for iron and sulfide ions. We conducted flotation tests using a Chilean copper ore, which contained chalcocite, bornite, and chalcopyrite and linked the mineral surface property analysis with the flotation behaviors of each copper mineral. Mineral specimens of chalcocite (Flambeau Mine, America), bornite (Leonard Mine, America), and chalcopyrite (Kosaka Mine, Japan) were used. The samples were characterized by X-ray fluorescence (Supermini 200, Rigaku Co., Ltd.) (see The samples were ground using an agate mortar to less than 20 µm. To remove oxidized species from the surfaces, 2 g of the minerals were immersed in 20 mL of a 1 M HNO A Chilean copper ore sample that contained chalcocite, bornite, and chalcopyrite was used in the rougher flotation tests. The mineral composition of the samples that was analyzed using a Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA 650, FEI) is shown in The mineral surfaces after oxidation treatment were treated with NaHS to sulfurize the surfaces. Treatment solutions (100 mL pure water) were adjusted to pH 8, 9, or 10 using 1% NaOH. NaHS was added to the solutions to a concentration of 0 M, 1.0 × 10 Fresh, oxidized, and NaHS-treated samples were analyzed using an XPS apparatus (AXIS-ULTRA DLD, KRATOS) with a Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV) operated at 135 W and with a scanned area of 700 µm × 300 µm. The vacuum pressure in the analyzer chamber was 1.3 × 10 The pulps after NaHS treatment at desired concentrations were filtered at 1, 5, 20, and 60 min. The total iron ions in the filtrates were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; Optima 5300 DV, PerkinElmer Inc.) and the sulfide ions were analyzed by methylene blue absorptiometry. Zeta potential measurements were obtained at room temperature using a Zetasizer Nano-ZS90 (Malvern Panalytical Ltd.). The solutions that suspended the minerals after NaHS treatment at 5 min were sampled (1 mL) and placed in a cell before the zeta potentials were measured three times. Average values were used. A Denver-type flotation machine was used in the flotation tests. The sample after grinding by using the rod and ball mills had a 37% pulp concentration and was transferred into a 1-L flotation cell. The pulp was agitated by using an impeller at 900 rpm. The conditioning stage of the flotation tests was divided into three stages: pH adjustment, NaHS addition, and addition of flotation reagents. The pH was controlled using Ca(OH) The mineral surfaces were analyzed by XPS to elucidate products on the surfaces before/after NaHS treatment at pH 8, 9 and 10. The spectra of oxidized chalcocite surfaces in In After chalcopyrite oxidation as shown in After NaHS treatment of chalcocite at several pHs, the Cu 2p spectra showed that the peaks of oxidized copper species decreased and converted to the Cu The Cu 2p results of each mineral suggest that NaHS reacted with oxidized copper species and produced copper sulfides on the chalcocite surfaces according to ( The XPS analyses showed that a large amount of CuO and CuSO  Compared with the chalcocite results, the sulfide-ion concentrations of the bornite results were of higher concentrations at 120 µmol/L to 340 µmol/L during the early stage ( The sulfide-ion concentrations of chalcopyrite were highest for chalcocite and bornite, at 180 µmol/L to 550 µmol/L, respectively ( The sulfide-ion results show that the decreasing rate was highest in chalcocite, followed by bornite and chalcopyrite. The rate of sulfurizing reaction between sulfide ions and oxidized copper species should be rapid. However, the bornite and chalcopyrite surfaces were covered with Fe The difference in trend of total iron ions between bornite and chalcopyrite could result from the formation of complex ions between iron and HS   The chalcocite zeta potential remained almost constant at –10 to –20 mV with NaHS treatment regardless of pH and these values are similar to the Cu On the bornite surfaces with NaHS treatment, the zeta potential values became more negative compared with chalcocite. Although oxidized copper species sulfurization progressed according to the XPS and solution analyses, copper sulfides should be generated at an inner layer because of their higher generation rate than iron-oxide generation, and the presence of Fe As shown in Flotation tests were conducted using a Chilean copper ore sample that contained chalcocite, bornite, and chalcopyrite. Froth samples were analyzed by MLA to obtain mineral recoveries. As shown in  For chalcopyrite, NaHS addition did not change or decrease the flotation recovery at pH 8 and 9 but 50 g/t of NaHS addition increased the recovery at pH 10. These trends could be supported by the zeta potential measurements and solution analyses. As shown in the solution analyses, sulfurization of oxidized copper species was faster than iron-oxide formation, and excessive NaHS dosage resulted in increased iron dissolution into solution and reprecipitation as iron oxides on the surface. Therefore, for bornite and chalcopyrite, excessive NaHS dosage resulted in a decrease in recovery during flotation because of a greater iron-oxide precipitation on the surface. At a higher pH for bornite and at a lower pH for chalcopyrite, iron dissolution and reprecipitation of iron oxides by NaHS addition was likely, and NaHS addition in those pH ranges had little effect on an improvement in recovery. Thus, the effect of NaHS addition as a flotation activator differed for each copper mineral (chalcocite, bornite, and chalcopyrite), and these trends could be explained by surface precipitates, as observed by XPS, and indirectly from solution analysis and zeta potential measurement. The following condition can be applied to recover three copper minerals. The optimum pH of the flotation pulp was a lower pH (e.g., pH 8) and the best NaHS dosage was 100 g/t to recover chalcocite and bornite. An additional 50 g/t NaHS dosage and a higher pH (e.g., pH 10) should recover chalcopyrite best. The surface properties of copper-sulfide minerals such as chalcocite, bornite, and chalcopyrite that were reacted with NaHS were studied. With oxidation treatment, the chalcocite and bornite surfaces were covered with CuO and CuSO Flotation tests were performed to confirm the mechanisms of interaction between copper-sulfide minerals and NaHS. The chalcocite recoveries increased with an NaHS dosage of 100 g/t regardless of pH. The bornite and chalcopyrite results indicated that the bornite recoveries increased at pH 8, whereas the chalcopyrite recoveries increased at pH 10. The sulfurization of oxidized copper species by NaHS contributed to the chalcocite floatability because of Cu  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank Kathryn Sole, PhD, from Edanz Group (www.edanzediting.com/ac) for English editing a draft of this manuscript.