The chemistry, structure and morphology of the implant surface have a great influence on the integration of an implant material with bone tissue. In this work, we applied Combinatorial Matrix-Assisted Pulsed Laser Evaporation (C-MAPLE) to deposit gradient thin films with variable compositions of Sr-substituted hydroxyapatite (SrHA) and Zn-substituted β-tricalcium phosphate (ZnTCP) on Titanium substrates. Five samples with different SrHA/ZnTCP composition ratios were fabricated by a single step laser procedure. SrHA was synthesized in aqueous medium, whereas ZnTCP was obtained by reaction at high temperature. Both powders were separately suspended in deionized water, frozen at liquid nitrogen temperature and used as targets for C-MAPLE experiments, which proceed via simultaneous laser vaporization of two distinct material targets. X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analyses confirmed that the coatings contain the same crystalline phases as the as-prepared powder samples, with a homogeneous distribution of the two phosphates along deposited thin films. Human osteoclast precursor 2T-110 and human osteoblast-like cells MG63 were co-cultured on the coatings. The results indicate that osteoblast viability and production of osteocalcin were promoted by the presence of ZnTCP. On the other hand, SrHA inhibited osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast differentiation, as demonstrated by the observed increase of the osteoprotegerin/RANKL ratio and decrease of the number of TRAP-positive multinucleated cells when increasing SrHA amount in the coatings. The results indicate that the possibility to tailor the composition of the coatings provides materials able to modulate bone growth and bone resorption.Hydroxyapatite ( The next generation of implantable biomaterials should exhibit bioactive surfaces and interfaces able to modulate cellular behavior. The core concept in combinatorial materials science is based on the synthesis of compositional libraries of distinct compounds that preferably exert a synergistic influence in the composition-structure-properties relationship [ In this study, we applied C-MAPLE to deposit gradient thin films with variable composition of Sr-substituted HA (SrHA) and Zn-substituted β-TCP (ZnTCP) on Titanium substrates. The aim of the work is to investigate how the compositional intermixing of two calcium phosphates (which differ in several aspects, including structure, morphology and solubility, and contain two different bioactive foreign ions) can be utilized to modulate bone cells response. To this purpose, we applied a model of co-culture of osteoblast and osteoclast in order to reproduce the SrHA nanocrystals were synthesized in N β-TCP was prepared by reaction of CaCO Powder X-ray diffraction ( Calcium, strontium and zinc contents in the solid products were determined by means of an Agilent 4200 microwave plasma- atomic emission spectrometer (MP-AES). Powders were previously dissolved in 0.1 M HNO Morphological investigation of crystals was performed by transmission (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy ( For infrared absorption analysis in attenuated total reflection (ATR) mode, powders were analyzed using a Bruker ALPHA FT-IR spectrometer equipped with a diamond unit, to collect 64 scans in the range 4000–400 cm In C-MAPLE process, the beam of one laser was optically split into two beams, and then focused onto the surface of the targets, each one containing different frozen solutions [ The experimental protocol for combinatorial CaPs libraries synthesis was similar to those described in Refs [ The samples were labeled A, B, C, D and E, where the composition varies from 100% SrHA (A) to 100% ZnTCP (E). XRD measurements on the coatings were performed using a PANalytical X'Pert PRO powder diffractometer equipped with a fast X'Celerator detector. Ni-filtered CuKα radiation was used (λ = 0.154 nm, 40 mA, 40 kV). The 2θ range was investigated from 24 to 34° (2θ) with a step size of 0.067° and time/step of 3000 s. Morphological investigations of thin films were performed using a HITACHI S-2400 scanning electron microscope operating at 15 kV. The samples were sputter coated with gold before examination. Energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry ( For atomic force microscopy ( Films adherence to Ti substrate was measured by “pull-out” method. The investigation was carried out with a standardized DFD Instruments PAThandy adhesion tester AT101 (maximum force = 1 kN), equipped with stainless steel testing elements (dollies with a diameter of Φ = 2.8 mm) that were glued to films surface with a cyano-acrylate one-component epoxy adhesive, type E1100S. After gluing and cleaning, the samples were placed in a stabilized oven (Venticell) for thermal curing at 130 °C for 1 h. The detachment of the dollies was achieved by the gradual increase of the pull-out force by means of a hydraulic head until fracture occurred. The procedure was carried out according to ASTM D4541 and ISO 4624 standards. The tests were performed in triplicate. Cell experiments were carried out on coatings deposited on Ti substrates and sterilized by gamma-rays (Cobalt-60) at a dose of 25 kGy. Human osteoclast precursor 2T-110 ( Pre-osteoclasts were plated at a concentration of 3 × 10 OB were previously expanded in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin), β-glycerophosphate (10 Proliferation and viability of co-cultured OB and OC was separately evaluated on disassembled co-cultures, transferring samples with OB in empty wells, by At 7 days OB viability and morphology were observed by the Live/Dead® assay (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Samples were visualized using an inverted microscope equipped with an epifluorescence setup (Eclipse TiU, NIKON Europe BV, NITAL SpA, Milan, Italy): excitation/emission setting of 488/530 nm to detect green fluorescence (live cells) and 530/580 nm to detect red fluorescence (dead cells). For SEM investigation, osteoblasts grown on the materials were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, in phosphate buffer 0.01 M (pH 7.4) for 1 h, and then dehydrated in a graded ethanol series. After a passage in hexa-methyldisilazane, the samples were air-dried and sputter-coated with Pd. SEM investigation was carried out using a Hitachi S-2400 instrument operating at 15 kV. TRAP staining was performed, after 7 days of co-culture, to assess osteoclast morphology and differentiation starting form mononucleated cells, according to manufacturer's instructions (SIGMA, Buchs, Switzerland). The positive cells developed red colour of different intensity. Osteoclastogenesis was evaluated by counting the number of TRAP-positive multinucleated cells (three or more nuclei each cell), under the microscope by a semiautomatic software (NIS-Elements AR 4.30.01). Results are given as percentage of OC control culture considered as 100%. At the end of experimental time, after 7 days of culture, the supernatant was collected from all wells and centrifuged to remove particulates, if any. Aliquots of supernatant were dispensed in Eppendorf tubes for storage at –70 °C and assayed with the following immunoenzymatic kits: Alkaline Phosphatase ( Statistical evaluation of data was performed using the software package SPSS/PC The XRD pattern of the product of the synthesis of hydroxyapatite in the presence of strontium (SrHA) is characterized by a number of peaks which indicate the presence of hydroxyapatite as unique crystalline phase ( TEM images of SrHA show small needle- or plate-like crystals, with mean length appreciably shorter than those of HA ( The powder X-ray diffraction pattern of ZnTCP and β-TCP are reported in Typical X-ray diffraction patterns of the thin films deposited by C-MAPLE are given in SEM images ( In agreement with the different morphology of SrHA and ZnTCP thin films, the roughness parameters, Ra, Rq and Rt, evaluated by AFM analysis (Fig. S2) increase slightly on going from A to E. Average values measured for A were: Ra = 0.454 ± 0.058 μm, Rq = 0.583 ± 0.072 μm, Rt = 3.471 ± 0.127 μm, whereas the values of the other samples increased up to Ra = 0.669 ± 0.075 μm, Rq = 0.829 ± 0.095 μm, Rt = 4.861 ± 0.182 μm, measured for E. The adherence to substrate of the thin films was explored by pull-out investigation. In all cases, the adhesion values are between 16 to 18 MPa, i.e. superior to the threshold of 15 MPa requested by ISO13779-2:2008 standard for implantology coatings. MG63 and 2T110 were chosen to conduct the in vitro test as well-characterized cells, exhibiting the most important markers of differentiation and a standard behavior. Osteoblast and osteoclast viability and differentiation were measured after 1 week of co-culture of cells with SrHA and ZnTCP deposited in different relative amounts on Ti disks using combinatorial-MAPLE (from A to E samples), and CTR. Results of the present study demonstrated a trend related to the different compositions of the thin films for both OB and OC. In detail, OB grown on SrHA (A) samples showed viability similar to CTR. At variance, the increase of the presence of ZnTCP provoked a significant increase of the values of viability in comparison with both A and CTR (B,C: p < 0.05), which reached the highest levels in D and E (p < 0.05 versus CTR and p < 0.005 versus A) ( In agreement, osteoblasts on the surface of the coatings appear well attached and spread, and display a number of filopodia, as it can be appreciated in the SEM images reported in Cells viability of OC is showed in The evaluation of differentiated OC through the number of TRAP-positive multinucleated cells, demonstrated that OC number and differentiation decreased significantly on increasing the presence of SrHA in the thin films. Data were also statistically correlated (Pearson test 0.962, p < 0.005). Examples of TRAP staining performed at 7 days of co-culture are shown in Fig. S3. To assess if OB maintained or modified their activity on the different samples in comparison to CTR, two common markers of osteoblastic activity were chosen and evaluated after 7 days of co-culture: ALP and OSTC, respectively as early and late marker of OB differentiation. ALP activity of OB cultured on all samples was slightly higher than CTR, even if the values did not reach statistical significance ( OSTC values of all samples containing ZnTCP, both alone (E vs CTR, p < 0.005) and in combination with SrHA (B, C, D vs CTR, p < 0.05) were significantly higher when compared to CTR, which did not differ from A. Results in the present experimental conditions showed that both SrHA and ZnTCP did not alter ALP activity of OB, not affecting the early phases of OB differentiation. On the contrary, ZnTCP strongly improved the differentiated state of OB and the mineralization process, as indicated by the enhanced production of OSTC ( OB and OC cultured together influence each other and modulate the balance between bone deposition and bone resorption. In order to evaluate the effects of SrHA and ZnTCP and their combinations on the co-culture in relation to this aspect, OPG and RANKL were measured at the end of experimental time, as they and their ratio play a role in OC differentiation and activity. Results showed that SrHA stimulated OPG production, reaching statistical significance in B group (p < 0.05), and reducing RANKL in A, B and C with respect to CTR (p < 0.05) (Fig. S4). The OPG/RANKL ratio showed a highly significant difference between the samples with higher concentrations of SrHA (A, B, C) and both E and CTR ( It is known that Sr is effective in counteracting bone resorption and its local action when incorporated into HA has been already demonstrated by a number of in vitro and in vivo studies [ Chemical and morphological analyses of the samples after incubation in cell medium for 7 days (in the absence of cells) show that the thin films still completely cover the titanium substrates (Fig. S5). The morphology of the coatings surface appears modified when compared to the as-prepared samples, most likely due to a partial dissolution of the deposited phosphates. Furthermore, the presence of some round shaped aggregates could be ascribed to deposition from the biological medium. However, the results of EDS analysis indicate that the ionic composition is roughly maintained (Table S2). The results of the present study demonstrated that both SrHA and ZnTCP had effects on OB and OC co-culture. In particular, SrHA decreased OC number and the process of differentiation, as showed by WST1, TRAP and the pathway related to OPG/RANKL, in agreement with previous data [ Combinatorial-MAPLE technique has been successfully applied to deposit blended thin films with a gradient composition of Sr-substituted hydroxyapatite and Zn-substituted β-TCP on Titanium substrates. The response of osteoblast and osteoclast co-cultured on the coatings is modulated by the graded composition and varies with the relative content of SrHA and ZnTCP. In particular, the data indicate that the presence of SrHA inhibits osteoclast viability and differentiation, whereas ZnTCP displays a beneficial action on the mineralization process promoting osteoblast proliferation and osteocalcin production. The intermediate compositions, containing both SrHA and ZnTCP, couple the positive effects on osteoblast with the inhibitory action on osteoclast and provide materials with tailored capability, via laser processing parameters, in order to enhance and accelerate bone repair.  Combinatorial Matrix-Assisted Pulsed Laser Evaporation hydroxyapatite β-tricalcium phosphate Sr-substituted hydroxyapatite Zn-substituted β-tricalcium phosphate Calcium phosphates Atomic Force Microscopy Scanning electron microscopy X-ray diffraction Energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry Osteoblast Osteoclast Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium Tetrazolium salt Alkaline phosphatase Osteocalcin Osteoprotegerin Receptor Activator for Nuclear factor KB Ligand Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase Authors are grateful to  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at