Bacteria-containing water is being increasingly accessed by the minerals industry as an alternative water source to improve water efficiency. Water-borne bacteria have been shown to negatively affect the efficiency of froth flotation when using a representative system consisting of E. coli as the model bacterium and chalcopyrite as the model mineral. It is essential to understand the underlying mechanisms that could explain the observed effect, to provide guidance on the subsequent solutions to deal with it. This study conducted a systematic investigation into the mechanism by which bacteria affect flotation efficiency using fluorescence microscopy, bubble attachment time measurements, and froth phase characteristics. E. coli bacterial cells in solution were found to attach to chalcopyrite surfaces. In turn, the surface hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite particles decreased as the number of the attached bacterial cells increased. Reduction in surface hydrophobicity resulted in less mineral particles attaching to bubbles, leading to decreased froth stability, bubble coalescence rate and froth velocity. Slurry pH and Eh were also affected by the presence of the bacterial cells. These changes were correlated with reductions in flotation recoveries. These experimental results contribute to an understanding of how biotic water constituents impact the operation of flotation plants that choose to use alternative water sources, and provide knowledge towards possible solutions to the negative effect of water-borne bacteria.As water resources become scarcer, mine sites have been increasingly accessing bacteria-containing water for their operations. However, water-borne bacteria have been found to have a negative effect on flotation efficiency ( The process of particle-bubble capture in flotation can be described by three independent sub-processes: collision, attachment, and stability ( A number of studies have shown how abiotic water constituents affect the efficiency of the sub-processes by changing properties of particles, bubbles and aqueous solution. For example, electrolytes favor the formation of smaller stable bubbles due to the influence of the electrolytes on surface tension and gas solubility ( Compared to studies on abiotic water constituents, there is not much study on how biotic water constituents, specifically water-borne bacteria, affect the sub-processes in flotation ( A pure culture of High-purity chalcopyrite was purchased from GEOdiscoveries Company, Australia. The sample was crushed using a roll crusher and screened to collect 0.6–2.8 Microflotation was used to study the adsorption of the bacterial cells to chalcopyrite surfaces and the resulting modifications to surface hydrophobicity. Microflotation is a well-accepted means of studying mineral surface changes due to the simplicity of the system ( The change in particle surface hydrophobicity after bacterial attachment was quantified by measuring particle-bubble attachment time. The attachment time was measured using the Attachment Timer (University of Alberta, Canada). Chalcopyrite particles were conditioned with different concentrations of the bacterial cells and sodium ethyl xanthate collector. The treated particles were transferred to a rectangular optical glass cell to form a bed of mineral particles. The glass cell was then placed on the moving stage of the microscope of the Attachment Timer for measurement. A bubble of about 2 Changes in particle surface hydrophobicity were correlated with mineral recoveries from microflotation experiments. Microflotation experiments were conducted with a standard microflotation unit ( For each flotation test, 100 For each flotation test at a specific concentration of the bacterial cells, slurry pH and Eh were measured using a pH-Eh meter with a platinum tip ORP sensor (TPS 90 FLMV). These measurements were conducted before collecting each of the four concentrates.  It has been reported that bacterial cells adhere to solid surfaces through four stages ( The attachment of the bacterial cells can create surface modifications, particularly surface hydrophobicity ( Change in particle surface hydrophobicity due to bacterial attachment can be determined by measuring particle-bubble attachment time. The correlation between flotation recovery and the attachment time is shown in The surface hydrophobicity results demonstrate that the bacterial attachment resulted in a reduction in mineral surface hydrophobicity. This could compromise the efficiency of particle-bubble attachment, the second sub-process in flotation. Furthermore, these very same changes in particle surface hydrophobicity may also affect the formation of stable particle-bubble aggregates, the third sub-process in flotation. To understand it, experiments were carried out to quantify changes of the froth phase properties at varying bacterial concentrations. Changes in the appearance of the froth phase were observed visually in randomly selected froth images taken for the baseline test and at different bacterial concentrations, as shown in As can be observed from This lower concentration of less hydrophobic mineral particles in froth might compromise the efficiency of the sub-process of formation of stable particle-bubble aggregates by affecting froth stability, bubble coalescence and froth velocity (   The sub-process of formation of stable particle-bubble aggregates might also be affected by froth velocity changes that alter the residence time of particles in the froth ( Bacterial cells could also affect flotation efficiency by changing the pH and Eh of the pulp. Changes in pH and Eh can affect chalcopyrite surface oxidation and thus surface hydrophobicity (  Flotation efficiency depends on the efficiency of the three sub-processes involved: particle-bubble collision, particle-bubble attachment, and formation of particle-bubble aggregates. The experimental results show that the bacterial cells affected the efficiency of these sub-processes by affecting the properties of the particles, bubbles and aqueous solution. The very presence of bacteria in solution resulted in a cascade of effects that ultimately manifested themselves as decreased recovery of chalcopyrite and therefore reduced flotation efficiency. First, the presence of bacteria in the slurry resulted in their attachment to chalcopyrite surfaces. In turn, the attachment of the bacterial cells impacted the attachment of collector to the particles, leading to decreased mineral surface hydrophobicity. The more bacteria in solution, the more bacteria that attached to mineral surfaces, and the greater the reduction in mineral surface hydrophobicity. The reduction in surface hydrophobicity reduced the attachment of mineral particles to the bubbles. As a result, the bubbles were less loaded with particles upon entering the froth phase. The less-loading bubbles resulted in them not being able to coalesce into larger bubbles once in the froth phase. As a result, the froth was less stable and overflowed at a lower froth velocity. The lower stability combined with longer residence time allowed the froth to lose more particles back to the pulp phase. The consequences of these effects manifested themselves both in the froth characteristics as well as in the metallurgy. In essence, all of the phenomena described resulted in less chalcopyrite reporting to the overflowing froth. In metallurgical terms, all of these events ultimately manifested themselves as reduced recovery and poor flotation efficiency. This study succeeded in establishing the mechanisms by which the presence of the bacteria cells had a negative effect on flotation efficiency. It is noteworthy to mention that real flotation water on mine sites may have a variety of bacteria over a wide range of concentrations, which may alter the mechanisms. With the understanding of the underlying mechanisms, the development of solutions to these negative effects now becomes possible. For example, the results of the mechanism studies indicate that the most important reason for the negative effect was the reduction in particle surface hydrophobicity. Therefore, one efficient solution to deal with the effect might be to increase collector dosage or even develop a new reagent that competes effectively with bacteria to increase particle surface hydrophobicity. Furthermore, other solutions that consider the opportunities from the entire site water system might also exist. In certain situations, the negative bacterial effect could be used to the advantage of the flotation operation. For example, bacteria could be used to reduce the recovery of one mineral over that of another in situations where a selective flotation is required ( Funding for this study was provided by ARC-Linkage project (#LP0883872) “Impact of recycled and low quality process water on sustainable mineral beneficiation practices”, which is part of AMIRA project P260E. All flotation experiments were carried out in the lab at Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC).