The coupled development of compaction and strain localization may significantly impact the stress field, strain partitioning and fluid transport. To investigate the phenomenon of compaction localization, mechanical deformation and microstructural observations were conducted on the Darley Dale, Rothbach, Berea, Bentheim and Diemelstadt sandstones with porosities ranging from 13 to 24%. The constitutive behavior, failure mode, acoustic emission (AE) activity and spatial distribution of damage were investigated. While our observations reveal a broad spectrum of geometric complexity associated with failure modes, two end-members can be distinguished: shear bands at relatively high angles and arrays of discrete compaction bands subperpendicular to the maximum compression direction, respectively. A hybrid localization mode involving high-angle shear bands and diffuse compaction bands was observed in sandstones with intermediate porosities. The discrete compaction bands in our laboratory samples are qualitatively similar to localization structures observed in the field. Whereas the development of high-angle shear bands is characterized by the continuous accumulation of AE, discrete bands are associated with episodic surges in AE that are characterized by an overall strain hardening trend punctuated by episodic stress drops.Strain localization occurs on all scales, from small laboratory samples up to crustal fault zones. Since localized deformation can significantly influence the stress field, strain partitioning and fluid transport, it is important to have a fundamental understanding of the mechanics of strain localization in rock. Shear and extensile discontinuities in the forms of faults and joints have been investigated quite thoroughly in the field and laboratory. These phenomena are accompanied by dilatancy, and accordingly attention has focused on strain localization that occurs in a dilatant rock. In contrast the development of localized failure in a compactant rock has not been studied systematically until recently. Indeed there may be a misconception that a compactant rock does not fail in a localized mode. However, recent geologic ( Previous studies have focused on the mechanical behavior of porous sandstones in the two end-members of brittle faulting and cataclastic flow ( The spatial distribution of damage in both regimes was studied in detail at different stages of the deformation by While To address these questions, we investigated the mechanical behavior, localized failure mode and deformation microstructure of five sandstones with porosities ranging from 13 to 24%. The samples were deformed at stress states at the brittle–ductile transition, and we characterized quantitatively the evolution of porosity, AE activity, as well as microcrack density and its anisotropy in the failed samples. The mechanical and microstructural data are compared with field observations and theoretical predictions. Darley Dale, Rothbach, Berea, Bentheim and Diemelstadt sandstones (with nominal porosities of 13, 20, 21, 23 and 24%, respectively) are used in this study. The Darley Dale, Rothbach and Berea sandstones were from the same block studied by The samples were cored perpendicular to their sedimentary bedding and then ground to a cylindrical shape, with diameter of 18.4 mm and length of 38.1 mm. The Berea, Darley Dale, Diemelstadt and Rothbach sandstones samples were saturated with distilled water and deformed under fully drained conditions at a fixed pore pressure of 10 MPa. Adjustment of a pressure generator kept the pore pressure constant, and the pore volume change was recorded by monitoring the piston displacement of the pressure generator with a displacement transducer (DCDT). The porosity change was calculated from the ratio of the pore volume change to the initial bulk volume of the sample. For Bentheim sandstone, the nominally dry samples were dried in vacuum for a week at 80 °C. Longitudinal and transverse strains were measured by two electric resistance strain gauges ( The sandstone samples were deformed at a nominal axial strain rate of 1.3×10 Samples at different stages of deformation were unloaded and retrieved from the pressure vessel. The deformed samples were first impregnated with epoxy and then sawed along a plane parallel to the axial direction to prepare petrographic thin-sections. Using optical microscopy the damage states in the thin-sections were characterized. As described later some of the samples failed locally along diffuse bands, with intense damage at the center of a band that decreased laterally. To identify such a diffuse band it is necessary to resolve in fine detail the spatial distribution of crack density. For each of these samples an area of 16.3×35.4 mm We denote the linear intercept density (number of crack intersections per unit length) for the array oriented parallel to In this paper we will use the convention with the compressive stresses and compactive strains taken as positive. We will denote the maximum and minimum (compressive) principal stresses by We performed a series of experiments through the brittle–ductile transition. The conditions were chosen such that dilatancy was absent in all these experiments. To underscore the compactive failure behavior, we plot in Any deviation from the hydrostat would imply that the porosity change in a triaxial compression experiment depends on not only the effective mean stress, but also the deviatoric stresses. This in turn implies the onset of inelastic yield. In all the experiments shown in  The AE data in these experiments follow two common trends that have been reported in earlier studies ( However there is also an important attribute of the AE activity (not evident in the cumulative count presented in earlier studies), which we will highlight here by differentiating the cumulative count to obtain the AE rate. Two distinct types of activity can be identified on the basis of the AE rate.  In experiments on the Bentheim, Rothbach and Berea sandstones that showed episodic stress drops, each of the stress drops was associated with an appreciable surge in AE rate ( In samples that underwent compactive failure without any stress drops ( Preliminary experiments were also conducted to investigate the development of compaction localization in the Diemelstadt sandstone at effective pressures of 80 and 160 MPa. The mechanical data and AE activity are shown in The preliminary data of For each pressure condition a sample was deformed to beyond the onset of shear-enhanced compaction, and the microstructure in the deformed sample was then investigated. The maximum axial strain attained in each sample is compiled in Damage evolution is quantified by the spatial distribution of microcrack density. The development of an elongate, connected cluster of anomalous damage (manifested by high crack density) that extends over several grains is considered as a proxy for compaction localization. Since our observations have revealed a broad spectrum of geometric attributes associated with compaction localization, it is important to first define several terms adopted in later discussion.  A localized structure that is subperpendicular to the maximum principal stress A localized tabular structure of only a few (say ≤3) grains thick will be referred to as a ‘discrete band’. A structure with a thickness of many more grains will be referred to as a ‘diffuse band’. High-angle shear bands commonly develop as conjugate sets of diffuse bands. A compaction band may be discrete or diffuse. Discrete compaction bands commonly develop as a subparallel array, with the cumulative strain accommodated by the initiation of additional discrete bands. In contrast, a diffuse compaction band accommodates the cumulative strain by the lateral propagation of damage. Our microstructural observations have revealed a broad spectrum of geometric complexity associated with compaction localization, with two end-members represented by the Bentheim and Darley Dale sandstones. As one of the end-members the Bentheim sandstone is distinguished by three localization characteristics. First, compaction localization was observed over the widest range of pressure (90–395 MPa). Second, the stress–strain curve is punctuated by episodic stress drops, accompanied by Here we also present additional microstructure that illustrates the evolution of localization with strain. Although a discrete compaction band has an overall direction subperpendicular to Our preliminary study of Diemelstadt sandstone indicates that its localization mode is similar to that of Bentheim sandstone. The other end-member of compaction localization is represented by the Darley Dale sandstone with three distinct characteristics. First, localization was observed over the narrowest range of effective pressure (80–95 MPa). Second, the AE activity is of the In Berea sandstone, the localization behavior is a hybrid of these two end-members. The spatial distribution of damage in Berea sandstone at the brittle–ductile transition is summarized in A different localization mode was involved at higher effective pressures ( The AE activity is of the The hybrid localization behavior we observed in Berea sandstone is qualitatively similar to that in Rothbach sandstone. Preliminary microstructural observations on the latter have been presented by  In The brittle–ductile transition and localization modes in the Darley Dale sandstone represent one of the end members ( Bentheim sandstone represents the other end member. Compaction localization occurred over a very wide pressure range (90–395 MPa) and it involved a single mode, namely, the formation of discrete compaction bands in a subparallel array ( Intermediate between these two end members is the compaction localization behavior in Berea and Rothbach sandstones, which involved a hybrid of two failure modes. In the Berea sandstone high-angle shear bands were observed at an effective pressures of 50 and 75 MPa, and the failure mode switched to diffuse compaction bands at 150 and 200 MPa ( The end-member scenario documented here for the Darley Dale sandstone ( The mechanics of compaction localization can be analyzed as a bifurcation in the constitutive response of a porous medium. Critical conditions for the inception of localization and orientations of the compactive shear and compaction bands can be derived as functions of the constitutive parameters. The simplest approach is to adopt a constitutive relation whereby the yield envelope and inelastic volumetric change can be characterized by the pressure-sensitivity parameter While bifurcation analysis provides a very useful framework for understanding the mechanics of compaction localization, it has an intrinsic limitation that the analysis applies only to the onset of constitutive instability in an initially homogeneous material and does not provide any information on the subsequent propagation behavior or geometric attributes of the localization structures. In particular this continuum approach cannot explain why compaction bands may develop as discrete or diffuse structures. An explanation may lie in the microstructure. Discrete compaction bands have primarily been observed in highly porous materials with relatively homogeneous and regular pore structures. In cellular solids such as honeycombs (e.g. However, porosity may not be the only microstructural attribute that promotes the development of discrete compaction bands. In the Castlegate sandstone Our microstructural observations suggest that the compaction bands in Berea and Rothbach sandstones initiated as short discrete features that were arrested before propagating across the sample, and many such short discrete bands subsequently coalesced to develop a mosaic of diffuse bands. A conceptual model of how diffuse bands may develop from coalescence is illustrated in A deeper understanding of the micromechanics will help address some of these intriguing questions on compaction localization. It is useful in such an investigation to integrate AE and microstructural observations. We have demonstrated that categorization of AE activity into the The intensity of damage can be inferred from either the mechanical or stereological data. For the Bentheim sandstone the failed samples did not show appreciable barreling, with the implication that the porosity reduction was mainly due to axial shortening with negligible radial strains. Indeed if we plot the volumetric strain as a function of axial strain for samples deformed in the regime where compaction bands developed, they follow a linear trend with slope close to unity ( In the other sandstones we conducted stereological measurements to map out the damage intensity. While the damage maps provide details on the spatial distribution, for comparative purposes it is also useful to evaluate the average values. However, because damage was distributed in a very heterogeneous way in most of our samples averaging over the entire sample would not provide useful information on the localized damage. Therefore in Our measurements for samples deformed in the transitional regime are in overall agreement with previous data of Systematic studies in the rock mechanics laboratory have demonstrated that compaction localization is associated with stress states in the transitional regime from brittle faulting to cataclastic flow. The stress states are in the range typically encountered in sedimentary formations ( While a number of localized structures have been postulated to be subperpendicular to The field observations ( While this is a question that can only be addressed by more systematic investigations in the field, we have begun to identify the key microstructural attributes that are favorable for the development of compaction localization in the form of discrete bands, such as those in the Bentheim and Diemelstadt sandstones, as well as in cellular solids and ice. One should also keep in mind that even in laboratory-deformed sandstones, the complex mosaic of diffuse compaction bands could not be delineated without comprehensive and tedious measurements, especially in the highly deformed samples with diffuse bands covering a relatively large proportion of the sample. As discussed above, we had to conduct stereological measurements at relatively fine scale to map out the spatial heterogeneity of damage in the Berea and Rothbach sandstones. Similarly, the diffuse compaction bands in the Castlegate sandstone could not have been resolved by While the laboratory studies have provided a very useful analog for understanding the mechanics of compaction localization in the field, there are several apparent discrepancies. Grain crushing as a mechanism of pore collapse seems to be not as pronounced in the field examples as the discrete compaction bands in our Bentheim and Diemelstadt sandstone samples. In many instances the compaction bands in the field have propagated transverse to the bedding (K. Sternlof, personal communication, 2002), whereas the samples in this study were all cored perpendicular to bedding and therefore the compaction bands had all propagated parallel to the bedding. These outstanding questions should be addressed by a more systematic integration of mechanical data, structural observations and theoretical analyses in future studies. Most laboratory studies on initially intact samples show that compaction localization tends to initiate and cluster near either end of a sample, with the implication that the bands have possibly been triggered by the local stress heterogeneity due to the end-constraints. In geologic settings structural and stress heterogeneities are pervasive on all scales, and a deeper understanding of how they control the initiation of compaction localization necessitates studying the process under well-defined conditions of stress concentration. To address this question Integrating mechanical deformation, AE and microstructural observations, we have demonstrated that localized failure modes involving compaction bands and high-angle shear bands can develop in five sandstones with porosities ranging from 13 to 24% while they undergo shear-enhanced compaction. We also confirm that such phenomena of compaction localization are commonly associated with stress states in the transitional regime from brittle faulting to cataclastic flow. Our observations have documented a broad spectrum of geometric complexity associated with compaction localization, and we identify two end-members of localization mode: shear bands at relatively high angles and arrays of discrete compaction bands subperpendicular to the maximum compression direction, which have been observed in the most compact (Darley Dale) and porous (Bentheim and Diemelstadt) sandstones, respectively. In (Berea and Rothbach) sandstones with intermediate porosities we also observed a hybrid localization mode involving high-angle shear bands and diffuse compaction bands. The various localization modes are manifested by distinct AE signatures. Whereas the development of high-angle shear bands is characterized by the continuous accumulation of AE ( The discrete compaction bands in our sandstone samples are akin to those documented in cellular solids and metal foams with highly porous and relatively homogeneous structures. A similar localization mode has been observed in ice during the high-pressure I→II transformation that involves 21% volume reduction. In relation to tectonic deformation, arrays of discrete compaction bands with qualitatively similar features have also been documented in Navajo and Aztec sandstone formations. We thank Veronika Vajdova for her precious help in the laboratory, Michel Darot for helping to collect extra Bentheim sandstone, and Jérome Fortin for helping with the experiments on Diemelstadt sandstone. Kurt Sternlof and Dave Pollard have graciously shared with us their field observations. We thank Pierre Bésuelle, Joanne Fredrich, Yves Guéguen, Bezalel Haimson, Dave Holcomb, Steve Kirby, Bill Olsson and John Rudnicki for stimulating discussions regarding compaction localization. Patrick Baud was partially supported by Université Louis Pasteur. The research at Stony Brook was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grants EAR-0106580 (in collaboration with Kathleen Issen of Clarkson University) and INT-9815570 (in collaboration with Yves Guéguen of Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris).