Physical dispersion is one of the most important key parameters in compositional reservoir simulation. It is a phenomenon of mixing with mass transfer occurring when gradients in composition arise or exist. This process tends to homogenize the composition of the phases. When the dispersion term is included in the material balance equations, we obtain a full tensor structure. However, most of the reservoir simulators neglect such an important physical term. In this work, we investigate the governing partial differential equations for modeling miscible flooding by adding dispersion to the material balance equations. The equations are solved by the Element-based Finite-Volume method (EbFVM) in conjunction with unstructured meshes. Results of several compositional reservoir simulation case studies are presented to demonstrate the application of the method.Gas injection is one of the most important methods for enhanced oil recovery; but requires careful and prudent modeling in order to correctly predict field production ( Several authors highlighted the importance of appropriate modeling of physical dispersion (  In this study, we introduce a similar methodology as proposed by We implemented the EbFVM in conjunction with the physical dispersion in an in-house simulator called General purpose Adaptive Simulator (GPAS). The current implementation adds a new capability, by adding the dispersion term in the simulator, compared with the previous EbFVM implementations carried out in GPAS. GPAS was developed at the Center for Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering at The University of Texas at Austin for the simulation of enhanced recovery processes. GPAS is a fully implicit, multiphase/multi-component simulator, which can handle simulation of several enhanced oil recovery processes. This simulator is divided into two main modules: Framework and EOScomp. Framework is responsible for input/output and memory allocation, while EOScomp handles the computations for flash calculation and solution of non-linear equations arising from the discretization of the governing equations. Details for EOScomp and Framework modules can be found in The mathematical problem for compositional modeling is composed of For each component The second term inside the parenthesis in Eq. In Eqs. For the water phase, there is an additional material balance equation which is given by For each component there are There are also Finally, there is one volume constraint defined by In this work, the approximate equations are obtained by using the EbFVM. In the EbFVM, each element is divided into sub-elements. The conservation equations, Eqs. In order to evaluate the accumulation and the advective and dispersion terms of Eq. In the above equations Inserting Eqs. Eq. This section presents four simulation case studies for investigation of the dispersion tensor effect in conjunction with the EbFVM approach. The first case study refers to simulation of tracer injection into a one-dimensional isotropic and homogeneous reservoir saturated with water. The second case study refers to a two-dimensional simulation in a quarter-of-five spot of tracer injection in a homogeneous and isotropic saturated reservoir. The fluid and physical properties are presented in The third case study refers to solvent injection in a quarter-of-five spot, but now a heterogeneous reservoir has been considered and a 3D variation of fluid and rock properties has been taken into account. The last case study refers to simulation of solvent injection into an irregular reservoir. Except for the reservoir dimensions and the absolute permeabilities, we used the same properties shown in  The results in terms of normalized effluent tracer concentration obtained for Case 2 are shown in The results for Case 3, in terms of volumetric rates at standard conditions of oil and gas, obtained in conjunction with hexahedron element and Cartesian grid are shown in  Physical dispersion full tensor was implemented in an in-house compositional simulator in conjunction with an element-based finite volume approach using unstructured grids. The methodology was tested for four different case studies: two tracer injections (1D and 2D), and two case studies involving solvent injection. The results of 1D tracer injection were compared to the analytical solution and to the results of GPAS in conjunction with Cartesian meshes. The results suggest that the element-based approach reduces numerical dispersion, compared to the Cartesian meshes. The results of the second case study (2D tracer injection) are also demonstrated to be more accurate than the ones using Cartesian meshes. The two other applications were performed in a heterogeneous quarter-of-five-spot and in a reservoir with a complex geometry. The results demonstrate the flexibility of the method in representing complex reservoirs and difficult phase behavior and also its capacity to deal with heterogeneous media. In conclusion, the EbFVM approach was tested for several case studies involving physical dispersion. Based on the results, the approach presented advantages, compared to the traditional Cartesian meshes. This work was conducted with the support of the