In the present study the effect of adding sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) to sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) as a co-collector in the flotation of a platinum group mineral (PGM) ore was studied with a view to investigating whether there was any evidence of a synergistic beneficial effect resulting from the use of the mixture. Flotation tests were carried out using single collectors as well as various mixtures of the collectors at different but constant total molar concentrations. Size-by-size analyses of the concentrates were carried out in all cases. After deconvoluting the results of the different flotation tests there was no conclusive evidence of a synergistic effect when using mixtures. The DTP was shown to cause an increase in the recovery of fine particles (<25μm) and this is ascribed to its effect on the behaviour of the froth phase. It was concluded that the effect of the addition of the DTP was to stabilise the froth phase and that this was a parallel reaction and not a result of any synergistic interaction between the SIBX and DTP.When two or more collectors are mixed in the flotation process and the outcome is an increase in the recovery of the valuable mineral(s) greater than the proportional contribution of each collector, the collectors are said to be acting synergistically. It has also been suggested that the heterogeneity of sites of different energies on the surface of a particle will result in different interactions between strong and weak sites and strong and weakly adsorbing reagents and this would give rise to a synergistic effect resulting in an overall increase in hydrophobicity (e.g. With respect to dithiophosphates in particular, apart from the above reports, Another example of synergistic effects in flotation is the observation that mixtures of surfactants can cause a greater lowering of surface tension than that predicted for each component in the mixture due to a chemical interaction between the components in the mixture ( In summary, a careful examination of the results of many such investigations questions whether there was indeed a synergistic effect arising from mixing collectors or whether the co-collector played a parallel but advantageous role leading to the ultimate improved metallurgical performance. In the present study the effect of adding sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) to sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) as a co-collector in the flotation of a PGM ore was studied with a view to investigating whether there was any evidence of a synergistic beneficial effect resulting from the use of the mixture. The di-ethyl as opposed to the di-isobutyl dithiophosphate was used to ensure that no spurious side effects of frothing would confound the results. Flotation tests were carried out using single collectors as well as various mixtures of the collectors at different but constant total molar concentrations. The ore used in the present study was a typical sample of Platreef ore from the Eastern limb of the Bushveld Complex of South Africa containing PGMs and having low concentrations of base metal sulphides. The mineralogy of the ore is shown in The ore was prepared for flotation by milling to 85% passing 75 In order to determine the respective amounts of floatable and non-floatable gangue reporting to the concentrate by either true flotation or mechanical entrainment, a method previously described in which depressant is added in specified dosages was used (      It should be noted that the data shown in these figures represent the average of the assay of a blended aggregate of three concentrates obtained in the batch flotation tests all of which were compliant with the reproducibility criteria set for all such tests in terms of solids and water recovery and copper and nickel recovery. Firstly, two phase tests have shown that sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) on its own, in the absence of any solid phase, did not have any significant frothing properties. In three phase systems the recovery of solids and water when only frother was used was 72 Both pure reagents produced good and similar Cu recoveries which is not surprising given the fact that chalcopyrite is well known to be readily floatable at these flotation conditions. This was confirmed by the fact that even in the absence of any collector the copper recovery was 58%. In the case of Ni the recovery using DTP was much less than in the case of SIBX and the recovery in the absence of any collector was only 8% showing that pentlandite, or nickel locked in other mineral types present in this ore, was not readily naturally floatable. The recoveries in the case of SIBX are typical of what is commonly observed in the flotation of a bulk metal sulphide containing chalcopyrite and pentlandite (e.g. The question arises as to whether the use of mixtures of the reagents resulted in an effect which was different to what would have been expected if the individual reagents had merely acted in a parallel but individual manner. In other words whether or not there was a synergistic effect when the mixture was used. In order to investigate this, a careful analysis was undertaken of the various responses obtained for different mixtures of SIBX and DTP compared to pure SIBX and pure DTP. The responses studied were solids recovery, total gangue recovery, entrained gangue and water recovery. These results were shown in The results of plotting these responses against the relative concentrations of SIBX and DTP as shown in These results shown in The present investigation has studied the respective roles of sodium iso-butyl xanthate (SIBX) and sodium di-ethyldithiophosphate (DTP) in the flotation of PGM bearing ores from the Platreef deposit of the Bushveld complex in South Africa. In particular it has investigated the respective roles of the two collectors in this process. There is no evidence to support the proposition of a synergistic relationship between the two collectors. Rather it is proposed that each reagent plays a key but different and parallel role in the flotation process. It is clear that SIBX is a strong collector and that DTP is relatively weak in this regard. However the results indicate that DTP plays an important role in the recovery of fine particles and has an important effect on the behaviour of the froth phase and, in the present instance, this is associated with an increase in the recovery of PGEs, especially Pd. The authors wish to thank Anglo American Platinum for financial assistance.