The ideal method of fixation in proximal humeral fractures is not well established. Locked plating is a potential solution, but to date, there has been little support shown in the literature. We compared the biomechanical performance of a locked plate with that of an intramedullary humeral nail in a cadaveric model. Paired fresh-frozen cadaveric humeri (N = 5) were instrumented with either a locked plate or an intramedullary nail after creation of a 3-part osteotomy. Construct stiffness, cyclic loading behavior, and load to failure were evaluated. The locked plate was more stiff in valgus loading than the nail (P = .003). All other loading vectors showed no statistical differences in stiffness between the two constructs. The load to failure was 828 N for the plate and 901 N for the nail. The nail showed interfragmentary motion (degrees), or toggle, at zero load, whereas the plate did not. The locked plate, being stable at zero load, may prove useful in earlier pain-free rehabilitation of proximal humeral fractures.Debate over fixation methods for proximal humeral fractures is centered on the issue of obtaining stable fixation in soft bone while preserving the blood supply to the fracture fragments. Many devices have shown favorable results in the literature, including percutaneous pins, nails, blade plates, sutures, bone cement and substitute, and extramedullary plating. The new concept of locked plating has recently been introduced as a possible solution to proximal humeral fractures. The locked proximal humeral plate is composed of an array of locked screws that capture multiple fixation points in bone, as well as the plate itself. As a result, this plate does not require periosteal stripping to ensure frictional contact between the plate and bone. Stability is achieved not by compression at the interface between the plate and bone but rather by compression at the plate-screw interface. This design makes locked plating attractive in osteoporotic bone and comminution by obviating the need to rely on screw purchase for stability. In fact, the static preload developed in bone by a locked plate construct is on the order of a few newtons, as compared with several hundred newtons generated by a conventional plate. To evaluate the locked plate, we compared it with a well-established benchmark, the intramedullary nail. The biomechanical behavior of intramedullary fixation in the humerus has been characterized in the literature, Paired humeri from 5 fresh-frozen female cadavers aged over 65 years (mean, 82 years) were obtained, and radiographs were obtained to exclude any pre-existing bone pathology. The specimens of a pair were then randomized to be instrumented with an intramedullary nail (Polaris Nail; Accumed, Portland, OR) in one specimen and a locking proximal humeral plate (Synthes, Paoli, PA) in the other. The humeri were stripped of soft tissue, and a reproducible 3-part osteotomy was created with an oscillating saw in the proximal humerus. Cuts were made through the intertubercular groove and the surgical neck 1 cm distal to the articular surface. The humeral head, greater tuberosity, and humeral shaft were completely separated from each other. The distal part of the humerus was removed at 23 cm from the most superior portion of the head in order for the proximal part to fit our apparatus. If the specimen received an intramedullary nail, the entry portal was made approximately 1.5 cm posterior to the intertubercular groove, and the nail was placed in the standard fashion recommended by the manufacturer, including all 4 proximal 5.0-mm-diameter cancellous screws and the locking end cap. Two distal interlocking 3.5-mm-diameter cortical screws were placed ( If the specimen received a locked proximal humeral plate, the plate was placed in the fashion recommended by the manufacturer with the position 8 mm distal to the superior portion of the humeral articular surface as determined by a K-wire through the alignment jig. All 3.5-mm-diameter proximal locking screws were placed in the divergent mode, and two 3.5-mm-diameter locking screws were placed distally ( Once the specimens had been instrumented, they were allowed to thaw for 24 hours before biomechanical testing. Before testing, a custom-made jig was attached to fit onto the humeral head by means of 8 headless machine screws drilled into the articular surface. These screws were not removed until testing was completed. The humerus was then clamped in the upright position to a 2-axis biomechanical testing machine (MTS, Minneapolis, MN) ( By use of the previously mentioned instrumentation in the appropriate mode, we evaluated construct stiffness by obtaining load-deformation curves (see “Loading protocol” section) in varus, valgus, flexion, extension, internal rotation, and external rotation. In addition to this, we also applied a force vector (and obtained load-deformation curves) to simulate the force action of the rotator cuff. Each humeral specimen was secured in the biomechanical testing machine by use of a vice attached to the base of the machine. The load-deformation curves in the various modes were obtained with a load-controlled protocol at a rate of 10 N/s to a value of 80 N. To obtain varus, valgus, flexion, and extension, the load was applied 2.5 cm from the axis of the humeral shaft. For each direction, conditioning curves were first obtained to ensure repeatability, and then 3 load-deformation curves were obtained and averaged (they were usually identical) to give the stiffness of the construct in that specific mode. Testing of rotational stiffness was then performed in a similar manner in internal/external rotation about the center (as explained previously). A displacement control protocol was used to attain torque-angular displacement curves at a rate of 1°/s to 8° of total displacement. The slope of this curve is the rotational stiffness. Again, after conditioning, 3 measurements were taken in each direction and averaged (they were usually identical) to give the stiffness in internal rotation and external rotation. The major deforming force of a proximal humeral fracture occurs at the surgical neck and is a result of the rotator cuff. Poppen and Walker During initial testing (with the hardware applied), we observed a difference in the constructs with respect to the interfragmentary motion between the cut parts of the humerus. The nail had interfragmentary motion under very small loads, whereas the locked plate did not. The loading protocols described previously for obtaining the load-deformation curves were not able to reveal the extent of this interfragmentary motion, because they require a small amount of preloading to the specimen; this preloading takes up any slack or motion allowed between the fragments. Therefore, we characterized this interfragmentary motion in a different way. First, we used an angle-measuring method; an inclinometer was used to assess the maximum angular deviation of the proximal fragment in the coronal plane. The construct was freely advanced through an arc of motion, and angular readings were taken at the point at which resistance was first encountered or, in other words, after the slack had been taken up. This angle-measuring method was not applied to the locked late, because there was always immediate resistance to motion (ie, there was no slack to be taken up). Second, a bidirectional load-deformation curve was obtained in torsion (ie, internal and external rotation) to characterize the gross allowable interfragmentary motion of the constructs about the zero-load position. We termed this allowable motion (measured in degrees) between the fragments as toggle. The toggle may also be characterized in mechanical stiffness terms as zero stiffness, defined by zero slope on the load-deformation curve. This is observed around the equilibrium position of the load-deformation curve, before preload is applied. This toggle is illustrated clearly when the specimen is loaded bidirectionally from internal rotation through zero (or neutral) to external rotation (or vice versa) ( After biomechanical testing had been performed, the specimen was prepared for cyclic loading by use of a force vector to simulate the action of the rotator cuff. Cyclic loading was then applied for 16,000 cycles at 10 Hz at 500 N (amplitude ± 100 N). If the specimen was still intact after cyclic loading, another set of load-deformation curves, as described previously, was obtained by use of the same force vector applied 30° posteromedial to the anteroposterior plane. Finally, the construct was loaded to failure at a rate of 100 N/s, and the mode of failure was documented. Failure was defined as an acute decrease in load, indicating that the construct no longer had mechanical integrity. The direction of the applied force simulated the pull of the rotator cuff on the proximal humerus. The data on the nail and the plate were compared by use of paired The results are shown in Conclusions regarding cyclic loading were difficult to draw within pairs, because one member of each pair failed to exceed our cyclic loading protocol in all cases but one. Without regard to pairing, the nail specimens retained 71% of their initial stiffness after cyclic loading whereas the locked plate retained 81%. The mean load to failure of the nail was 901 N, and that of the locked plate was 828 N ( The mode of failure was also noted for each construct. In 5 of 5 cases, the nail failed consistently through the jig–humeral head interface, with minimal deformation occurring through the proximal cancellous screw holes. The locked plate failed through the osteotomy site in 2 cases and through a combination of the jig and osteotomy site in 3. In previous studies involving nails, the amount of interfragmentary motion through the fracture site after stabilization has not been characterized, because this motion would be taken up by the preload to obtain load-deformation curves. In other words, the slack in the system must be taken out to obtain a load-deformation curve with measurable slope. A difference in the amount of gross motion was observed during implantation of the devices; the nail always had gross motion, or toggle, whereas the plate never did. The mean toggle for the nail in the coronal plane was 2.65°. Rotationally, the toggle was found to be 3.66°. Again, this toggle is demonstrated graphically in In this study, the Synthes locked proximal humerus plate is shown to be more stiff in valgus loading than the Polaris intramedullary nail. No statistically significant difference was found in terms of resistance to cyclic loading and load to failure. The locked plate was found to be stable (no toggle), whereas the intramedullary nail was unstable (positive toggle). Finally, the mode of failure of the locked plate was catastrophic failure through the osteotomy site, whereas the nail did not fail catastrophically. A major limitation of this study was lack of sample size. The vagaries of postmortem collection only allowed us (after a long period of time) to obtain 5 suitable pairs of humeri. However, despite this limitation, there was a statistically significant difference in valgus loading stiffness as measured by load-deformation curve slope. This was significant when evaluated in a paired and unpaired manner. Although our study was underpowered in terms of showing a statistical significance in load to failure between the two constructs, it is useful to observe the magnitude of failure of both constructs. Previous authors have defined the maximum force about the shoulder to be between 0.5 and 0.9 times body weight. A cyclic loading protocol simulating physiologic loading at the proximal humerus was used to test the hypothesis that a locked plate system resists the loosening that may occur over time with conventional screws and, thus, resist failure of fixation. We did not see a difference between the locked plate and the intramedullary nail with regard to cyclic loading. There are many possible explanations for this observation. First, the behavior of these constructs under cyclic loading is not well known, and hence, the number of cycles needed to cause fatigue failure of the construct is not known. Thus, we could have underestimated the fatigue limit for these constructs. In addition, cadaveric material deteriorates quickly over time, and very large cycle repetitions at low loads are not feasible. For this reason, we chose high loads and a short cycle time. Another factor influencing cyclic loading pertains to the loading vector. We chose a physiologic vector to approximate the actual loading conditions in vivo. However, as our specimens were loaded unidirectionally, the bone-jig interface tended to deform plastically before failure of fixation occurred. This is an inherent problem in testing fixation in poor bone; the weakest link in the system seems always to be the bone-metal interface, making the testing jig articulation a source of failure. One difference that was clearly evident between the two methods of fixation was the amount of motion allowed at the fracture site. The AO characterizes this property as absolute or relative stability. Fixation methods that use one or the other form of fixation have implications clinically, because different methods of bone healing (endosteal vs callus formation) are encouraged depending on the amount of strain at the fracture site. Although, strictly speaking, both constructs studied use relative stability, it appears in our study that the locked plate approached rigid fixation. An explanation for this could be that the short side plate used in the proximal humerus resists bending moments more than long side plates used in other areas, such as the femur and tibia. In contrast, the nail, which had toggle, was not as stable to bending and rotational loads. This finding could have been caused by a diameter mismatch between the nail and the metaphysis of the humerus. Chen et al A clinical factor influenced by toggle, or interfragmentary motion, is pain felt by the patient postoperatively. Minimal motion at the fracture site may allow earlier pain-free rehabilitation, a factor that is paramount in periarticular fractures. The locked plate, to its advantage, showed no toggle. This difference between the nail and plate could be clinically important. However, our conclusions must be couched with the reservation that our sample size was small.