This study focuses on the following problem: by increasing the mechanical strength of concrete, we increase the environmental impact per cubic meter of concrete produced by increasing the cement content. We could, however, decrease the amount of concrete needed to build a given structural element. To know whether the improvement in concrete strength will produce a significant difference on the structure scale, this study evaluates the environmental consequences of using high performance concrete instead of ordinary concrete for a bridge. The Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) methodology, based on international standards of series ISO 14040, is used to compare these solutions. Uncertainties due to data collection are taken into account. The results show that choosing a high performance concrete for bridge construction is, on average, more environmentally friendly than the traditional concrete bridge construction.The building materials sector is the third-largest CO The principal objective of this study is to compare two classic bridges that cross a four-lane divided highway with a two-lane road. The first bridge was built using traditional concrete, and the second was built with high performance concrete. The traditional concrete bridge, located in France (Saône et Loire, 71), is composed of one deck with two 25 m-long spans for a total length of 51.53 m ( A transversal cross-section of the bridge ( The bridge constructed using high performance concrete was built during the BHP2000 project ( A transversal cross-section of the bridge ( The comparison of the two bridges might seem difficult because they do not have exactly the same dimensions. However, they are both classic bridges made to cross a four-lane divided highway with a two-lane road. The Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) method used to perform the environmental evaluation is a methodology for measuring the environmental load of processes and products during their life cycle, from cradle to grave. LCA has been used in the building sector since 1990 (  The second step of the LCA method consists of building the inventory data. This step includes gathering of the technical data related to the amount of materials used for construction, the energy used by machinery during the construction and maintenance phases and the transport distances. From an LCA point-of-view, these data are known as The production phase includes the quantity of materials used for the bridge, and the details are presented in The transport phase includes the distance travelled from the production site to the work site. For the concrete, the distances from the cement plant to the ready-mix plant are included in the concrete production phase, and the transport phase includes only the distance from the ready-mix plant to the work site. Similarly, the transport of equipment such as vehicle parapets or PVC tubing includes only transport from the regional storage facility to the work site. All previous transport distances are included in the production phase. The transport phase also includes transport of the workers and machinery to the work site. This process is not often followed in regular LCA, but in this study, it was included because the work site is often located far from any city for bridge construction and transport distances can be long. The foreground data from the construction phase have been collected for the work site of the traditional bridge ( The scenario for the maintenance phase has been calculated from the IQOA recommendations and an expert's advice on the machinery needed to perform the various inspections. This common maintenance scenario has already been used in a previous study on the traditional concrete bridge life cycle ( The energy consumption of the machinery used during demolition of the bridge at the end of its service life has also been considered. Additionally, transport of the materials to the landfill site has been included, assuming a distance to the landfill of 30 km and taking into account only the materials that are deposited in the landfill. Recycled materials have not been considered because they are included in the system that uses the recycled products. A distinction is made depending on the type of landfill that must be used; steel and concrete are considered to be inert materials, but bitumen must be deposited in a sanitary landfill. An environmental evaluation is always based on many hypotheses that are difficult to constrain fully. Uncertainties are present all along the process of environmental evaluation ( The second type of uncertainty lies in the value of the environmental impact of building materials. Typically, steel is produced by the electric or blast furnace method ( Two main methods for impact assessment are found in the literature: i) pressure-oriented methods such as CML ( In this study, the CML pressure-oriented method ( Environmental evaluation of the two solutions has been carried out. The first part of this section presents the environmental impact of the two solutions by taking into account the variability in the data, and the different phases of the life cycle for each solution. In the second part, the two solutions are compared assuming that they are two propositions for the same project. The environmental impacts of the different phases of each bridge solution are presented in Finally, the comparison between the two solutions shows similar trends, except that the material construction phase is much less important for the high-performance bridge. The other phases are similar either because exactly the same work is considered (maintenance phase) or because the additional work caused by the precast solution is negligible (construction phase) or finally, because even if differences exist, these differences are in phases that are not very sensitive (transport and end-of-life phases).  For abiotic depletion, steel and concrete have a similar impact. For acidification, eutrophication, global warming and ozone layer depletion, concrete dominates and, for ecotoxicity-related indicators, steel is predominant. Within concrete structures, the concrete used for the deck clearly dominates the impact for the regular bridge. This impact is significantly reduced for the high performance bridge. For the steel, the reinforcement steel is mainly important compared to the cables used for prestressed elements. This impact is slightly reduced for the high-performance bridge. The impact of the construction phase is mainly due to the energy used by the machinery and equipment on the work site ( The construction phase has been considered to be the same for both solutions, except for the use of a mobile crane to put the precast concrete in place. From The maintenance phase has been assumed to be the same for both solutions. Additionally, the maintenance scenario considered does not include changes in the structure of the bridge. This lack of integration can be justified because the bridge is designed to stand without requiring major changes during its service life. The asphalt sealing, the pavement and some concrete on the curb of the road, however, must be changed. In the scenario that has been studied, the impact of the maintenance phase accounts for nearly 40% of all impacts in the life cycle. The details are shown in The aim of this LCA study is to evaluate which of the two studied solutions has the lowest environmental impact while still performing the same function. The objective is then to determine which of the two bridge designs has the lower environmental impact. In this study, we have dealt with uncertainties in the data due to possible variations in the distances between plants and the work site and energy efficiency of the machines that were used as well as uncertainties in the environmental database from one site to another. However, if the objective is to choose a design for one bridge construction project that creates a lesser environmental load, the distances of the industrial plants will be the same for both solutions. The same is true for the machinery energy consumption, which depends on the type of equipment used. Similarly, even if the true impact of material production is not known, we can assume that the same type of material will be used for both construction solutions. Therefore, the variables are independent from each other, but the values will be the same for both solutions. In a statistical analysis, the evaluation must be performed using Monte Carlo analysis (because all variables are independent) in a simulation that considers both solutions (because if a value for a variable is affected for one construction solution, it will be the same for the other). The Monte Carlo analysis is then performed on the difference between the two solutions (traditional bridge minus high performance bridge).  The construction scenario has been built on the effective construction of one regular bridge. The same scenario is applied to the HPC bridge with the addition of a mobile crane for placing precast concrete elements. This situation actually represents an overestimation because the construction period will be shorter due to the use of precast concrete, which saves time for framework-building. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether the differences are significant, and the difference has been shown to be approximately 15%; thus taking this savings into account would increase the difference. The maintenance scenario is based on expert advice that could be further refined. However, it is clear that the hypotheses used represent the upper maintenance scenario ( In this study, two bridge solutions have been compared. Each solution has approximately 20% dispersion for most impact categories, and the mean impact difference between both solutions is often close to 20% ( In this study, the use of high performance concrete has been shown to allow a 20% reduction in the global warming impact of the life cycle of the bridge ( Therefore, from the global perspective of CO Uncertainties in the environmental evaluation are not negligible and account for ±20% of the environmental impact for most impact categories. However, the present study shows that that choosing a high-performance bridge construction solution to cross a four-lane divided highway with a two-lane road is always more environmentally friendly than a traditional concrete bridge solution, regardless of the observed environmental impact and the geographic context. Uncertainties in the maintenance phase for structures that last a very long time, like bridges, are a major problem for accurate evaluation of the environmental impact of the construction. This study shows that comparison of the two solutions using Monte Carlo analysis is particularly useful in overcoming this problem and performing a robust LCA for civil engineering studies in general. Finally, the present study shows that the use of high performance concrete allows for a 50% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions for production of the building materials used in the bridge. Promoting the use of high performance concrete for bridges is therefore a very efficient effort towards the goal of sustainable construction and management of infrastructures. The authors acknowledge an anonymous reviewer for constructive comments and a very detailed rewording in the text.