A new alternative to copper production from a chalcopyrite–enargite concentrate by sulfidation (heating of the concentrate with elemental sulfur) followed by pressure leaching of the sulfidized material has been studied.
                  The sulfidation of the mixed concentrate with elemental sulfur in the range of 350–400°C produced a rapid mineralogical transformation of chalcopyrite into covellite (CuS) and pyrite (FeS2) phases without transforming the enargite. In the pressure leaching of the sulfidized chalcopyrite–enargite concentrate, the variable that influenced most was the temperature in the range of 125–180°C, while the partial pressure of oxygen affected little the copper dissolution rate in the range of 507–1520kPa. The rate of dissolution of copper from the enargite in the mixed sulfidized concentrate was shown to be faster than the rate of dissolution of copper from pure enargite concentrate, 90% and 10% in 30min, respectively, due to a galvanic couple with the pyrite or the indirect leaching by ferric ions. The shrinking core model with chemical reaction control was used to determine the activation energy for the dissolution of arsenic from the mixed chalcopyrite enargite sulfidized concentrate. The determined value was 71kJ/mol.Presently, the smelting/converting technology is used to produce most of the copper from sulfide concentrates that contain chalcopyrite as the main copper sulfide and sulfides of deleterious minor elements such as arsenic, antimony, and bismuth. In Chilean copper concentrates, the majority of arsenic is present in the form of enargite (Cu Leaching of copper concentrates is a practicable alternative to treat chalcopyrite concentrates minimizing atmospheric pollution, especially when enargite is an important accompanying impurity. However, direct leaching of chalcopyrite ores or concentrates presents yet operational problems related to the slow dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite in most leaching systems at low temperature and ambient pressure ( In order to accelerate the dissolution of chalcopyrite, various leaching methods have been proposed from laboratory studies. Among those, an attractive alternative to resolve the problem of slow dissolution is the sulfidation/leaching process wherein the sulfidation stage, the chalcopyrite is transformed into covellite and pyrite by reacting with sulfur at temperatures under 400 Reaction Recently, According to these authors, at temperatures below 120 On the other hand, there is no published information about the behavior of enargite under sulfidation conditions. However, recently Thus, the objective of the present investigation was to study an environmentally friendly route to treat chalcopyrite concentrates that contain large amounts of enargite to extract the copper not only from the chalcopyrite but also from enargite. Accordingly, considering the above discussion, the sulfidation of the concentrates and pressure leaching at medium temperature was the method used to dissolve the total copper and arsenic content from the chalcopyrite–enargite concentrate. For the present study, the copper–arsenic concentrate used was prepared by mixing a chalcopyrite concentrate and enargite concentrate. The chalcopyrite concentrate was obtained from Andina Mine (CODELCO, Chile) which was a flotation concentrate. This material was classified by sieving into narrow size fractions, and it was characterized by chemical and mineralogical analysis. On the other hand, the enargite concentrate used in this work was prepared from large pieces of natural enargite crystals from El Indio Mine (Barrick Corporation, Chile). This enargite concentrate was also classified by sieving into narrow size fractions for subsequent chemical analysis. The size fraction of 75/53 A final chalcopyrite–enargite concentrate was prepared by mixing both chalcopyrite and enargite concentrates in the ratio of 2/1 to yield a material with overall copper content of 33.3% and arsenic content of 6.7%. This mixed concentrate was used in all the experimental work, starting with sulfidation followed by leaching of the sulfidized material. The mixed concentrate was sulfidized according to the methodology described elsewhere ( Since enargite did not experience any physical or chemical change during the sulfidation process, the sulfidation conversion of the sample was calculated considering the weight gain due to the transformation of chalcopyrite in the sample according to the stoichiometry of reaction Batch leaching experiments were conducted in a 1.5 The main variables studied in leaching were agitation speed, acid concentration, temperature, and partial pressure of oxygen. The copper dissolution was determined with respect to the total concentration of copper contained in the sulfidized mixed concentrate. Since, the copper was present as CuS and Cu The influence of stirring speed on the dissolution of copper from the sulfidized sample was studied in experiments conducted at 140 The effect of oxygen partial pressure on the dissolution of copper is shown in On the other hand, the leaching temperature affects significantly the dissolution of copper from the sulfidized mixed concentrate. The experimental results presented in The results concerning the copper dissolution from various sulfidized samples are shown in All of the arsenic in the sulfidized sample is present in the form of enargite (Cu In this equation, The apparent kinetic constants for the various temperatures were determined from the slopes of the curves in The dissolution data of copper and iron is shown in In spite of the high dissolution of the iron from the mixed sulfidized concentrate obtained in leaching at 180 From the experimental results of sulfidation and pressure leaching of copper concentrates containing enargite, the following can be concluded. The sulfidation of chalcopyrite–enargite concentrate with elemental sulfur at 350–400 In the pressure leaching in sulfuric acid–oxygen, temperature had the largest effect on the rate of dissolution of copper from the sulfidized chalcopyrite–enargite concentrate, while the partial pressure of oxygen affected little the copper dissolution rate in the range of 507–1520 The rate of dissolution of copper from the enargite in the mixed sulfidized concentrate was faster than the rate of dissolution from the pure enargite concentrate. This accelerated dissolution of enargite in the mixed sulfidized concentrate could be due to a galvanic couple with the pyrite phase or due to the indirect leaching mechanism by the ferric ions generated in the leaching system. The dissolution kinetics of enargite in the mixed concentrate proceeded according to the shrinking core model with chemical reaction control with activation energy value of 71 Finally, the sulfidation followed by pressure leaching at medium temperatures of chalcopyrite concentrates containing appreciable amounts of enargite is a viable alternative to recover all the copper contained in both chalcopyrite and enargite minerals. The authors acknowledge the