In this paper we present some considerations on the computation of optimal flow rates for the heap leaching process of solid reactants from porous pellets. We use a model already published by authors, which is suitable in applications where the scale-up is necessary. This approach allows to obtain better flow rates. Novelty of this approach is the simple form of the models and the easy way to compute good flow rates as used in actual operations in industry, for instance, alternate flows. We propose, also, an exponentially decreasing flow rate which is optimal from the mathematical point of view and the model being used. Due to the model simplicity, they can be used without mathematical complexities. We present a brief sensibility analysis to identify important operation variables that are relevant to change usual constant flow rates of lixiviant agents. Through simple optimization and case studies, we find better flow rate to minimize the acid and water consumed in the process under consideration.Heap leaching has become a widely used operation to leach minerals such as copper, zinc, nickel, uranium and gold, and even less common minerals such as caliche ( In In industry applications sometimes, one needs to deal with complex mathematics to model the process (see for instance The main goal of this work is to compute some optimal flow rates by using analytical models ( In this section we develop models based on the first order kinetic equation, using the approach followed by They used the subscript Considering that the leaching phenomenon occurs on different scales of size and time, and also in relation to different phenomena that participate in the leaching process, one can use expressions similar to Eq. We now assume inclusion of both scales in the processing of the heap, that is, both at the particle and the heap level, considering that the total recovery will be the sum of the recoveries on both scales, Eq. Now, we present the recovery model suitable for scale-up which we analyze in what concerns its sensitivity with respect to some heap parameters. We recall that the recovery, as a function of time, and after some simple manipulation, is given by, The recovery with respect to time We present now, in The figure shows that the effect of the flux rate is less important when the time increases. The latter suggests that the lixiviant agent can be reduced when the leaching time evolves. Just for the sake of completeness we present some formulae (ordinary and partial derivatives) to get our sensitivity analysis and the relevant things to do the optimization. We present several formulae but we consider the important things to consider here are the flow rate of lixiviant agent, height of the heap and particle radius. Now, with respect to the flow rate We note this expressions actually depends on time, therefore, animations can be viewed just by plotting the aforementioned formulae, for instance, with some symbolic mathematical commercial software. The simulations show that the acid and water flow rates can be optimized. Moreover, the flow rate is strongly important at the initial phase of the process. If we consider also the sensitivity behaviour with respect to Also, the mathematical expression for the sensitivity behaviour with respect to the flow rate We now present We now state the heap leaching parameters for a constant and alternate flow rates. We use the following parameters (that come from industrial experiments) that were used in Now, we use as a basis a standard constant superficial bulk flow velocity It can be seen from We now present a reasonable choice for an optimal flow rate which is, as a control system, almost the inverse of the recovery. Let us suppose, for instance, an optimal flow rate given by, The recovery functions are considered with the parameters summarized in Then, we have the following two recovery functions, Then, by using least squares to find the minimal distance between the two recovery functions and by assuming that The optimal flow rate and the recovery are presented in  A flow rate optimization methodology for heap leaching, based on analytical modeling, has been presented. The analytical model is developed by using the combination of an underlying Bernoulli-type model together with phenomenological relations in order to obtain an analytical model able to scale-up the heap leaching process. A sensitivity analysis is presented to have enough insight to optimize the acid flow rate. The methodology is useful for the analysis, design, control and optimization of the heap leaching process. One can see that alternate flow rates, which are actually being used in industrial applications are justified. Moreover, we have proposed an exponential decreasing flow rate path that can be used as an alternative with the corresponding economical benefits. There of course, other optimal flow rates can be proposed. Mario E. Mellado, Edelmira D. Gálvez and Luis A. Cisternas wish to thank