This study presents a new approach to enhance preparation of superior-quality refractory materials by microwave sintering of the mixture of ferronickel slag and sintered magnesia with addition of alumina up to 10 wt %. It was shown that in the process of microwave sintering, the proper addition of alumina could contribute to formation of forsterite with fine and relatively uniform particle size. It also promoted the generations of high melting point magnesium aluminate spinel (MgAl2O4), magnesium iron aluminate spinel (MgFe0.6Al1.4O4), and magnesium aluminum chromate spinel (MgAl0.5Cr1.5O4) which replaced magnesium chromate spinel (MgCr2O4) formed during sintering without addition of alumina, eventually improving refractoriness and other properties of the resulting refractory material. By adding 4 wt % alumina to the mixture of slag and 25 wt % sintered magnesia for sintering at 1250 °C in only 20 min, the resulting refractory material obtained refractoriness of 1790 °C. Compared with that prepared in the absence of alumina, the refractoriness was increased by 156 °C. The method proposed in this study has good potential in improving valorization of ferronickel slag into value-added materials, exhibiting both apparent economic and environmental benefits.Ferronickel slag is a main solid waste discharged from high temperature smelting of laterite ores for ferronickel production [ By now, ferronickel slag has been used to produce cement aggregates [ For further intensification of the process, some additives, e.g., alumina, may be used. It was reported that the reaction between Al The ferronickel slag sample was taken from a ferronickel smelting plant in China. It mainly contained SiO The influence of Al The phase compositions and microstructural changes of the resulting refractory materials were determined by an X-ray diffraction spectrometer (XRD, D8 Advance, BRUKE, Germany) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Utral55, SIGMA, Germany) equipped with an energy-dispersive (EDS) detector, respectively. The refractoriness of the materials was measured by complying with the Chinese National Standard Test Method GBT 7322–2007. The bulk density/apparent porosity was measured by following the Chinese National Standard Test Method GBT 2997–2000 and the compressive strength of the materials was measured according to the Chinese National Standard Test Method GBT 5072–2008.   When the Al As the addition of Al By adding 6 wt % Al For further assessment of the influence of Al  When the Al As the Al When the Al As the Al By increasing the addition of Al The above analysis proved that Al In fact, the above changes were strongly related to the microwave responses of the multiple phases formed during preparation of the refractory materials. Previous studies have shown that spinels had the strongest microwave response in all the phases [ Apart from the formations and transitions of spinels which would have great influence on the quality of refractory material, the changes of the main phase, forsterite, in the materials should also be evaluated. The densification of the refractory material is closely associated with its microstructure, especially the particle size distribution of forsterite [   The above findings prove that the quality of the resulting refractory materials was sensitive to the presence of Al In this study, a novel approach was developed to enhance the quality of refractory materials from ferronickel slag by adding alumina to the mixture of ferronickel slag and sintered magnesia for microwave sintering. It was found that by controlling the addition of alumina, MgO derived from sintered magnesia reacted well with SiO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was partially supported by the