Mo-incorporated SBA-15 (Mo-SBA-15) catalysts with different Mo:Si molar ratios were synthesized by a direct hydrothermal method, and SBA-15-supported Mo catalysts (Mo/SBA-15 and K-Mo/SBA-15) were prepared by an incipient-wetness impregnation method. The structures of the catalysts were characterized by means of N2 adsorption–desorption, XRD, TEM, FT-IR, and UV-Raman, and their catalytic performance for the oxidation of ethane was tested. Turnover frequency and product selectivity are strongly dependent on the molybdenum content and catalyst preparation method. Furthermore, the addition of potassium promotes the formation of isolated tetra-coordination molybdenum species and potassium molybdate. The K/Mo-SBA-15 catalysts possess much higher catalytic selectivity to acetaldehyde in the selective oxidation of ethane than the supported molybdenum catalysts (Mo/SBA-15 or K-Mo/SBA-15). The highest selectivity of CH3CHO+C2H4 68.3% is obtained over the K/Mo-SBA-15 catalyst. Analysis of kinetic results supports the conclusion that ethane oxidation is the first-order reaction and ethane activation may be the rate-determining step for the oxidation of ethane. Ethylene is a possible intermediate for acetaldehyde formation.One of the major challenges for the petrochemical industry is to manufacture valuable products by oxidizing lower alkanes instead of olefins or aromatics for effective utilization of abundant natural gas resources. The direct transformation of methane and ethane to useful olefins and oxygenates has attracted much attention from chemists and chemical engineers. Compared with the processes of naphtha oxidation and methanol carbonylation (currently used to obtain acetic acid), direct selective oxidation of ethane is more attractive for easier separation of products and lower cost of ethane A variety of catalysts for the selective oxidation of ethane have been examined. Vanadium- Alkali metals are another important component in the catalysts. In most cases, they are employed as promoters to improve the catalytic performance. In recent years, significant improvements in the catalytic performance of alkali metal-modified catalysts have been reported for several very important reactions In this work, we report the synthesis and catalytic behavior of a novel framework-incorporated Mo-containing SBA-15 mesoporous mixed oxide, denoted as Mo-SBA-15, for the selective oxidation of ethane. The effects of the preparation method and the presence/absence of potassium on the structure of MoO Mo-incorporated mesoporous molecular sieves, Mo-SBA-15, were synthesized by the direct hydrothermal (DHT) method using tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and ammonium molybdate ((NH In addition, supported molybdenum and potassium–molybdenum catalysts including Mo/SBA-15, K-Mo/SBA-15, and K/Mo-SBA-15 samples were prepared by the incipient-wetness impregnation method using ammonium molybdate and/or KNO Nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms at −196 The catalytic reactions were carried out in a fixed-bed flow reactor at atmospheric pressure. A quantity of 300 The Mo content of Mo-SBA-15 and K/Mo-SBA-15 catalysts was determined by XRF and is presented in The XRD patterns in the range 0.5° To gain more insight into the structure of DHT catalysts, morphologies of the Mo-SBA-15 and K/Mo-SBA-15 catalysts were examined by TEM. Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms for the catalysts synthesized by different methods are presented in The FT-IR spectra of the DHT and the IWI catalysts are shown in UV-Raman spectroscopy is a powerful technique for the characterization of catalytic materials and has been widely used to characterize molecular sieves.    Turnover frequency (TOF) is defined as number of ethane conversions per Mo site per second. Ethane conversion over Mo sites in a catalyst is determined by subtracting the conversion over pure SBA-15 from the total conversion over the catalyst. To calculate TOF values, the active sites should be identified and quantified; however, this is almost impossible even if dispersion data are available, because not all surface Mo atoms are equally active. Therefore, we use the “apparent TOF” to assess an “averaged” efficiency of Mo in different catalysts for catalyzing the reaction To investigate the stability of catalysts, the effects of reaction time on ethane conversion and on product selectivity at 575 The conversion of C The rate of ethane consumption increases almost linearly with the increase in ethane concentration, as illustrated in To elucidate the reaction network for ethane oxidation, the experiments were performed using different hydrocarbons as reactants, such as ethane or ethylene. The selectivity of products for the partial oxidation of ethane as a function of ethane conversion is illustrated in Study on the kinetics of selective oxidation of alkanes is helpful in obtaining important information about the reaction mechanism. Even though the kinetic studies cannot determine the molecular mechanism, they allow the exclusion of certain reaction pathways and help evaluate particular reaction routes and different catalytic sites in the proposed mechanism No ethanol was detected in the ethane oxidation reactions over K/Mo-SBA-15 catalysts. Therefore, acetaldehyde formation via Eq. (2) can be excluded from possible reaction routes under these reaction conditions. This may suggest that CH The reaction scheme for ethane oxidation includes parallel reactions forming ethylene and acetaldehyde, and ethylene may be further oxidized to acetaldehyde. Linke et al. reported that the consecutive reactions are favored at low temperatures It is noted that the selectivity to acetaldehyde from ethane is lower than that from ethylene, as shown in In this work, framework-incorporated Mo-SBA-15 mesoporous molecular sieve catalysts with different Mo:Si molar ratios were successfully synthesized by a one-step hydrothermal method. They were further modified by potassium by the incipient-wetness impregnation method. The results show that highly ordered mesoporous structures of Mo-SBA-15 materials are formed with large surface area and uniform mesoporous structures. XRD, IR, and Raman results demonstrate that Mo ions are incorporated into the framework of SBA-15. For both DHT and IWI catalysts, the structural regularity of SBA-15-based mesoporous material decreases with increasing Mo content and is destroyed in the Mo-SBA-15 catalysts at Kinetic data suggest that the selective oxidation of ethane is approximately first order with respect to ethane concentration and that ethylene is a possible intermediate for acetaldehyde formation. The activation of ethane may be a rate-determining step in the overall oxidation of ethane. The potassium-modified catalysts give supercatalytic performances for the selective oxidation of ethane to acetaldehyde. TOF values also increase in the presence of potassium. Among all catalysts, K/Mo-SBA-15 (initial K:Mo:Si This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 