Low-energy self-ion bombardment effects on the crystallographic orientation and oxidation behaviours of arc-ion-plated pure Cr films were investigated. Microstructurally compact Cr films as observed by SEM were obtained under ion-bombardment energy of 50–250 eV. Stronger ion bombardment induced crystallographic orientation of Cr (200) and slight self-sputtering effect in the Cr films. Oxidation of the Cr films at 900 °C showed that the stronger self-ion bombardment induced formation of the more compact chromia scales with significantly lowered growth rate, indicating that self-ion bombardment can be an effective approach to improve the oxidation resistance of metal films.Chromium as one key engineering metal is usually used as protective films or coatings for metallic components to resist aggressive wear, corrosion and high temperature oxidation attack encountered in industry, due to its relatively high hardness, and high thermal and chemical stabilities by spontaneously forming a dense surface chromia layer. For instance, in mining engineering, hydraulic guide rod normally relies on a surface Cr film to resist abrasion and corrosion. It is also a good protective film for gun barrel to resist severe instant erosion and high temperature oxidation induced by hyperthermal gunpowder smoke during firing. Conventionally, Cr film is obtained by electrodepositing in chemical solution bath. Although such technology is cost-effective, the chemical solution used is usually containing toxic hazards such as hexavalent chromium ions which are prohibited to use in industry in most countries at present. Vacuum arc ion plating (AIP) as one physical vapor deposition (PVD) technology would be a suitable method to achieve high quality Cr films or coatings, due to the fact that it is advantageous at generating almost fully ionized metallic vapors during depositing metallic films or coatings [ In depositing multicomponent materials, such energetic ion-bombardment could induce composition deviation in the deposited films. For instance, a higher substrate bias would induce a relatively lower content of Al in depositing TiAlN or metallic TiAl films using a TiAl alloy target [ For single-element metal film, however, the issue of composition deviation induced by ion bombardment is no longer the concern. Hence, distinctly different effects might be expectable by the self-ion bombardment [ It has been reported that energetic self-ion bombardment has been found to produce nanoscale patterning effect on bulk materials surfaces [ Hence, in this study, we investigated the self-ion bombardment effects on the oxidation behaviour of pure Cr film deposited on a high-strength steel CrNi3MoV. A variety of relatively lower energy levels of Cr ions that are below 300 eV were employed in order to form a pure Cr film and avoid alloying with the substrate surface. The microstructure of the pure Cr films deposited under different energy levels of self-ion bombardment was characterized. Surface morphology and cross-sectional microstructure of the chromia scales grown on these pure Cr films were investigated. A high strength steel used for gun barrel CrNi3MoV (Changjue Metals Co., Ltd., Kunshan, China) was employed as the substrate for the deposition of pure Cr films. The nominal chemical compositions of the substrate steel are listed in The pure Cr films were prepared in an AIP machine (DH-7, Beiyu vacuum technology, Shenyang, China) with water-cooled cylinder vacuum chamber. The chamber size is about 1.2 m in diameter and 1.2 m in height. Prior to the Cr film deposition, the vacuum chamber was evacuated to about 6 × 10 X-ray diffraction (XRD, X’ Pert PRO, PANalytical Co., Almelo, the Netherlands, Cu Kα radiation at 40 kV) was employed for phase identification of the as-prepared Cr films before and after oxidation. During XRD detection, the specimen kept static as the point of origin, while the incident X-ray and the detector rotated simultaneously around the origin in opposite direction. The included angle between the incident X-ray and the normal direction of the specimen varied between 10°–45°. In the meantime, the detector rotated symmetrically around the origin. Hence, the detected range of 2θ is 20°–90°. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, InspectF 50, FEI Co., Hillsboro, OR) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, INCA, X-Max, Oxford instruments Co., Oxford, U.K.) were used for observation of surface morphology, cross-section and analysis of composition of the films and surface oxide scales. Surface morphology analysis was carried out by statistical average of the measured sizes of five typical oxide grains that were clearly exposed to the surface for facilitating the measurements. Isothermal oxidation tests were conducted at 900 °C in air in a muffle furnace. Each specimen was heated for 5 h at 900 °C. Such short term oxidation is designed according to the application of the steel, due to the fact that the gun barrel subjects to high temperatures for only milliseconds of time during each fire. The overall exposure time of the steel at high temperatures would be seldom longer than 5 h. For the oxidation tests, specimens were directly put into the furnace which had been preheated to 900 °C in advance. The time required for temperature rise of the small specimen to 900 °C was usually around one to two minutes. After oxidation for 5 h, the specimens were taken out of the furnace to be cooled in air. Electroless nickel plating was introduced to coat the specimens after oxidation to assist analysis of the oxide scales in cross-sectional view [       The interesting crystallographic orientation of the Cr films deposited under the self-ion bombardment could be quit confusing. It is easy to conclude that the orientation is attributed to the ion bombardment-induced selective sputtering of the other crystal planes of the film during the deposition, according to the observation that the film thickness is coherently thinning as deposited under the ion-bombardment. Moreover, the presumably sputtered crystal plane (110) is just the close-packed plane of Cr, being identical to the reported results on the selective sputtering of single crystal Cu [ Ion bombardment is normally considered to be beneficial for improving microstructural compactness of the deposited films, which has been particularly identified in deposition of multicomponent alloy coatings such as NiCrAlY [ It has been reported that different crystal planes of a single-crystal metal showed different oxidation behaviours in terms of oxide grain morphology and kinetics [ In comparison with bulk metals, gas inclusion effect might not be ruled out in considering the oxidation characteristics of their film counterparts as obtained by physical vapor deposition [ However, the phenomenon of gas inclusion is insufficient for explaining the growth of chromia grains with interestingly different morphologies on the Cr films deposited under various energetic self-ion bombardments. A plausible explanation is that higher energetic ion bombardment may produce extra strain energies that stored in the lattice thus lower down the activation energy for oxidation of Cr and facilitate nucleation of chromia grains. Moreover, although the Cr films showed the oriented growth under higher energetic ion bombardment, no similarly orientated growth of the chromia scale with a normal along the normal of the substrate was observed. By virtue of arc ion plating, deposition of pure Cr films under different energy level (50–250 eV) of self-ion bombardment is readily achieved. The Cr-ion bombardment with the energy level of 250 eV induces crystallographic orientation of Cr (200) and self-sputtering effect on the Cr film, resulting in a relatively lower deposition rate. As the ion bombardment energy was increased from 50 eV to 250 eV, the Cr The stronger self-ion bombardment induces formation of the more compact chromia scales which showed significantly lowered growth rate, indicating that self-ion bombardment can be beneficial for promoting the oxidation resistance of metals. Hence, our results demonstrate that self-ion bombardment can be an effective approach to lower down the oxidation rate of metals. This work was supportedby the All research data supporting this publication are directly available within this publication.