Background
                  Trochanteric fractures are one of the most common fractures in elderly people. The use of intramedullary nails is an option for their treatment, especially in unstable patterns. Nail breakage is a rarely reported complication. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of nail breakage in our center. Secondary objectives are to show the management of this complication in our institution as well as the technical problems, complications and final outcomes of these patients in our hands.
               
                  Material and Methods
                  In a retrospective case series review between 2010 and 2015, we analyzed 1481 patients with trochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures who had been treated by cephalomedullary nailing in our centre. 13 patients with nail breakage were identified.
               
                  Results
                  The percentage failure rate in our institution is 0.87%. 9 (69.2%) patients were women and 4 (3.8%) were men, with a mean age of 74.6 years (range 47–90). In all cases the mechanism of injury was a simple fall from standing height. Initial fracture types were: 1 case of AO/OTA 31A1, 6 cases of AO/OTA 31A2 and 6 cases of AO/OTA 31A3. Only 3 cases had a good overall reduction with a correct TAD, an optimal femoral neck-shaft angle and absence of fracture gaps >5 mm after surgery. The average time from the first surgery to the diagnosis of implant breakage was 333 days (range 70–1460), 11 months. Breakage occurred at the nail junction with the lag screw in 11 cases and in the distal nail aperture in 2 cases.
               
                  Conclusions
                  An insufficient reduction with varus and fracture gaps >5 mm, the use of short nails in unstable patterns with subtrochanteric involvement and patients with certain comorbidities are facts observed that can contribute to the development of delayed or nonunion with subsequent nail breakage. Different salvage treatments, conversion to hip arthroplasty or revision osteosynthesis, may be considered but we think that prevention has to be the best treatment.Trochanteric fractures are one of the most common fractures in orthopaedic surgery with a high cost for the public health system in our country. They represent an important cause of hospitalization, morbidity and mortality for elderly patients [ Excellent results have been reported with the use of intramedullary nails. However, a variety of complications have been reported [ Implant failure usually occurs when the fracture does not achieve the consolidation and after excessive nail exposition to shear and bending forces the nail breaks from material fatigue. Management of this complication includes conversion to hip arthroplasty or revision with a new osteosynthesis [ We identified from the prospective database of surgical patients of our institution, all patients who have been treated with an IM nail for a trochanteric fracture between January 2010 and December 2015 (1481 patients) and, from those, we identified the ones who had a salvage surgery due to nail breakage (13 patients). Patients with trochanteric fractures treated with DHS and patients with breakage of intramedullary nailing that received this treatment because of oncological etiology were excluded from the analysis. Retrospective revision of the computerized medical records was made for all thirteen patients included. In all cases we collected demographic data (age, sex, date of injury), injury data (mechanism, type of fracture and patient comorbidities), data from the surgery performed and postoperative x-ray analysis ( Initial fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA classification of proximal femoral fractures based on their X-rays: Simple trochanteric fractures (31A1), multifragmentary trochanteric fractures with subtrochanteric extension (31A2), intertrochanteric fractures (31 A3) [ A postoperative X-ray analysis was done after the first procedure. On the anteroposterior and lateral view, the tip apex-distance (TAD) was evaluated [ Regarding the salvage procedures, a variety of different methods were used depending on the type of previous fracture, quality of the remaining bone, patient function, ability to remove broken implants as well as the surgeon criteria. Before any revision surgery was performed, all patients were studied to rule out a hidden infection with standard serum biomarkers: white blood-cell count (WBC), c-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) [ Between January 2010 and December 2015 a total of 1481 trochanteric fractures underwent surgery in our institution using an intramedullary nail. Thirteen cases that underwent surgery had a salvage procedure due to nail breakage. The percentage failure rate in our institution is 0.87%. From the 13 cases of implant breakage, 9 (69.2%) patients were women and 4 (3.8%) were men, with a mean age of 74.6 years (range 47–90). The right hip was affected in 8 of 13 cases (61.5%) and left hip was injured in 5 cases (38.5%). In all cases the mechanism of injury was a simple fall from standing height. Initial fracture types were: 1 case of AO/OTA 31A1, 6 cases of AO/OTA 31A2 and 6 cases of AO/OTA 31A3. With regard to the associated comorbidities, all patients had at least one disease or treatment that slows bone healing (diabetes, malnutrion, alcoholism, tobacco use or treatment with corticosteroids). 6 patients had already the diagnostic of osteoporosis by a dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). Initial operative treatment was conducted using a short cephalomedullary nail in 7 cases although 3 of those cases present subtrochanteric involvement. A long cephalomedullary nail was used in the other 6 patients. With reference to the radiological study, the TAD was lower than 25 mm in all cases, fracture gaps greater than 5 mm were observed in 9 cases and varus reduction with a neck-shaft angle lower than 125° was seen in 4 cases. Only 3 cases had a good overall reduction with a correct TAD, an optimal femoral neck-shaft angle and absence of fracture gaps>5 mm ( The average time from the first surgery to the diagnosis of implant breakage was 333 days (range 70–1460), 11 months. Breakage occurred at the nail junction with the lag screw in 11 cases and in the distal nail aperture in 2 cases. Three patients had also broken the lag screw in association with the nail ( The surgical salvage procedures used were: 5 cases had revision osteosynthesis using a long reamed intramedullary nail with cervico-cephalic lag screw, 2 patients had conversion to bipolar hip hemiarthroplasty and 2 cases had conversion to a total hip arthroplasty with constrained polyethylene. The infected non-union case was treated by conversion to a total hip arthroplasty with constrained polyethylene in two stages. In 3 cases, a proximal femur resection tumoral arthroplasty with bipolar head was used. Cultures obtained during revision procedure were all negative, except the case that was previously biopsed where the same bacteria were isolated. Broken IM nails were removed by pulling out them directly through the proximal broken aspect or indirectly using guide-wires as reported in previous articles [ After revision surgery all patients presented good course at final follow-up recovering the ability to ambulate and, in different grades, their functionality and independence for the daily activities. Intramedullary nailing is the most commonly used device for the treatment of trochanteric fractures, especially if they are unstable [ In our study, the average time from the first surgery to the diagnosis of implant breakage was 11 months (333 days). Similar results were found in literature that refers a mean time to implant breakage of 9 months (range 3–24 months) [ Twelve of the fractures identified were initially classified as unstable fractures. This data is also in accordance with previous reports where breakages occur mainly in complex unstable fracture patterns [ The 84% of cases in our report suffer the breakage in the proximal nail aperture for the cephalic lag screw that is the weakest point of the implant because the cross-sectional area is reduced by approximately three quarters ( In reference to surgical salvage procedures after breakage, the treatment decision in each case was made depending on the type of previous fracture, quality of the remaining bone stock in the trochanteric area and femoral head, patient age and functional demand, ability to remove broken implants as well as the surgeon criteria. We consider that patients who suffer a cephalic screw rupture that makes the implant removal very difficult, the ones who had a poor remaining bone femoral head stock or cases with previous hip arthrosis are candidates to arthroplasty. Three different strategies were followed in the arthroplasty group: 1) Patients with previous arthrosis, still active and with the calcar area respected were treated with total hip arthroplasty using a conventional cemented stem but using a constrained polyethylene in order to avoid dislocation 2) Patients without acetabular disease, with low functional demand and a respected calcar area were treated with cemented bipolar hip hemiarthroplasties like Wee et al. recommend in their article [ On the other hand, we consider that high functional demanding patients, with good bone stock in the head, without acetabular disease, and with isolated simple non-unions in the intertrochanteric or subtrochanteric area are candidates to a new osteosynthesis. In all our cases, we revised this group of patients by reaming the canal after the broken nail extraction and by inserting a new thicker long cephalomedullary IM nail. Bone allograft was used in the non-union site after its debridement. Additional Dall-Milles cerclage wiring was used in three cases to assist the reduction ( This is a retrospective study and its inherent limitations should be taken into account. No comparative analysis could be performed due to absence of a control group. Over a period of 5 years this cohort consists of only 13 cases, a fact that can be explained by the rarity of this complication. For this reason we think that all the conclusions should be interpreted with caution. In conclusion, the prevalence of nail breakage in this large series is 087%. Mechanical implant breakage is a rare but relevant complication of IM nailing systems especially in unstable fractures. An insufficient reduction with varus and fracture gaps > 5 mm, the use of short nails in unstable patterns with subtrochanteric involvement and patients with certain comorbidities are facts observed that can contribute to the development of delayed or nonunion with subsequent nail breakage [ Tomás-Hernández J MD and Teixidor-Serra J MD are consultants for Smith & Nephew, ZimmerBiomet and Stryker. Guerra-Farfan E MD is consultant for Smith & Nephew and Stryker.