One of the limitations to the application of columns to solvent extraction in the minerals industry is their relative inefficiency in slow kinetic systems such as those used for the separation of copper. In order to overcome this, this work examines the performance of a new kinetic internal and compares it to standard column internals for both a fast and slow kinetic system.
                  The mass transfer performance of a pilot scale pulsed solvent extraction column with Tenova Kinetics Internals (TKI) and standard disc and doughnut internals (DDI) are compared, including the effect of pulsation intensity, continuous and dispersed phase velocities using the H2SO4 – Alamine® 336 system, a fast kinetic system, and CuSO4 – LIX® 84 system, a slow kinetic system. The height of mass transfer unit (Hoc) for the CuSO4 – LIX 84 system increased with continuous and dispersed phase velocity and decreased with the increase of pulsation intensity. The Hoc for TKI was lower than the DDI for the same operating conditions and the TKI reduced the impact of both phase velocities on mass transfer. TKI can maintain the mass transfer performance for the fast kinetics H2SO4-Alamine 336 system compared to standard disc and doughnut internals and improve mass transfer performance for slow kinetics CuSO4- LIX® 84 system. An empirical correlation to predict the height of mass transfer unit in both internals was developed with absolute relative errors of 28.0% and 19.2% for the H2SO4 – Alamine 336 system and CuSO4 – LIX 84 system, respectively.Solvent extraction is one of the most effective separation processes to be applied widely in industries such as hydrometallurgy, pharmaceuticals and waste treatment ( Pulsed disc and doughnut columns have been successfully applied to kinetically fast systems, such as the extraction of Uranium by Alamine 336 and Nickel by Cyanex 301. Trials with slower kinetic systems, such as copper with a range of oximes, has not been as successful due to the high height required to achieve sufficient recoveries. Recently, Tenova Kinetics Internals (TKI) have been developed to improve column performance, particularly in kinetically slower systems. TKI have “teeth” on the edges of disc and doughnut sheets which are designed to enhance breakage of the dispersed phase droplets, and therefore achieve less backmixing and improved mass transfer for the same flux. Our previous studies of the hydrodynamic ( This study investigates the potential of using columns for a kinetically slow system, particularly with the newer design internals. The mass transfer performance of the TKI and DDI are compared. The height of mass transfer unit (H The mass transfer performance of pulsed solvent extraction columns is influenced by the interfacial area ( The overall mass transfer coefficients, k During practical operation of most pulsed liquid-liquid extraction columns, the axial dispersion of the continuous phase is significant inside the active section of pulsed columns. This leads to a concentration jump near the continuous phase inlet, which impacts the mass transfer outcomes. The diffusion model presented by The diffusion model may be solved using boundary conditions (Eqs. Both the height of a mass transfer unit (H Numerous empirical and theoretical correlations for both individual mass transfer coefficients (k    For d → c direction of mass transfer and 11.73 < For c → d direction of mass transfer and 9.45 < The correlation constants were calculated using the least squares method with “Eviews software”. Model predictions obtained had a relative deviation of 10.52% upon comparison with the experimental data.  Recently, Two liquid-liquid systems were selected for investigation in this study, one slow and one fast kinetics systems. The fast system selected was ~ 0.04 M sulphuric acid solution (aqueous phase). The solution was prepared via dilution of 98% sulphuric acid (Sigma Aldrich) with Milli-Q water. The organic phase was a mixture of 3 A 2-metre-high pilot scale pulsed solvent extraction column was used in this study. The detailed column design was reported in our previous works ( The two different structures of column internals, which are TKI and DDI (see to Prior to commencing operation, the main section of pulsed column was filled with the organic continuous phase. Following this, the pulsation intensity (pulsing amplitude and frequency) and the flowrates of the continuous (v The concentration of solute for H To estimate the mass transfer performance, the equilibrium data for both liquid-liquid systems were measured via lab-scale isothermal shake up tests.  According to the reaction, the pH will decrease with more cupric ions extracted and low pH will slow the extraction rate of cupric ions from aqueous phase to organic phase. Therefore, it is necessary to keep the pH of the pilot-scale system stable so that the mass transfer performance can be estimated with the equilibrium line for a given pH. Particularly in this study, the pH buffer sodium acetate was added to the aqueous phase before column operation to maintain the extraction pH condition in the range 4.4 to 4.8. The height of mass transfer unit (H The effect of pulsation intensity, the continuous and dispersed phase velocities on the height of mass transfer unit and overall mass transfer coefficient based on the continuous phase with DDI and TKI using H It is shown in Alternatively, the H To compare the impact of the different column internals, the height of a mass transfer unit for H The effect of the continuous phase velocity on the height of mass transfer unit (H Similarly, the dispersed phase velocity (v The empirical correlation for H The overall mass transfer coefficient (k The conclusions from this work can be summarised as follows: For CuSO For H A correlation (Eq.  Interfacial area, m pulsation amplitude, m solute concentration in liquid phase, M drop equivalent sphere diameter, m Sauter-mean drop diameter, m molecular diffusivity, m actual axial mixing coefficient, m pulsation frequency, Hz gravity acceleration, m/s height of mass transfer unit based on continuous phase, m individual mass transfer coefficient of dispersed phase/continuous phase, m/s overall mass transfer coefficient of dispersed phase/continuous phase, m/s equilibrium constant in Langmuir equation, L/mol active column height, m slope of equilibrium line, dimensionless total number of stage, dimensionless reaction rate of liquid – liquid system, m/s Reynolds number, Péclet number, Schmidt number, Sherwood number dispersed phase velocity/continuous phase velocity, m/s slip velocity, m/s volume fraction holdup of dispersed phase, dimensionless the fractional free area, dimensionless interfacial tension, N/m viscosity of dispersed phase/continuous phase, Pa·s constant equal to 3.1416 density of dispersed phase/continuous phase, kg/m density difference between phases, kg/m maximum sorption capacity, mol/l mechanical power dissipation per mass unit, W/kg  continuous phase dispersed phase an inlet to column an outlet from column rigid drop conditions equilibrium value The authors would like to acknowledge the funding provide by the Australian Research Council through Linkage grant LP130100305 and BHP Billiton, Olympic Dam, for this project, and would also like to thank the Particulate Fluids Processing Centre – a Special Research Centre of the Australian Research Council for the resources provided for this project.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at