It has been over 110 years since the Jones fracture was originally described, and in the modern era the clinical management of this entity continues to improve. With respect to the anatomy, the vascular implications driving union abnormalities are well understood. However, optimizing the clinical outcome depends on identifying the correct orthopedic intervention. Intramedullary fixation has proven to be a reliable repair method, with both strong clinical outcomes and a relatively simple operative method. Though, when considering the elite athlete, there is a well-documented complication rate. Plating has been useful in cases of severe communition, however the lateral hook plate has been shown to be biomechanically inferior compared to the intramedullary screw. In our study we will investigate the history of the Jones fracture, and analyze the methodology that drives the modern day operative algorithm. Furthermore, we will discuss the indications and techniques for plating and intramedullary fixation.Proximal fifth metatarsal (MT) fractures are the most common fractures of the foot. Modern literature highlights the importance of identifying the proper classification of proximal fifth MT fracture subtypes, and understanding the relative vascular implications, which have been eluded to over the past century. The modern treatment of Jones fractures typically entails the use of solid partially-threaded intramedullary screws. The use of IM screws in Zone 2 Jones fractures has been well described. The use of plating has been documented in the treatment of Jones fractures as a whole. Zone 2 fractures are believed to occur with a plantarflexed ankle, and a substantial adduction force on the forefoot. Zone 3 fractures occur in the proximal 1.5 Chuckpalwong et al Optimizing screw length and diameter is paramount in proper IM fixation of proximal fifth MT fractures. Plating of fifth MT fractures has not been well described in the literature. IM fixation has been recommended in a number of studies. The Jones fracture is a well-documented injury, with a rich clinical history. The progress made over its documented lifetime has laid the foundation for optimizing a clinically difficult injury. Intramedullary fixation is the “gold standard,” and for the average patient with the previously described indications this modality of treatment is satisfactory. Plating has its use in particular treatment scenarios, and when considering the larger incision size and higher complication rate it should not be used interchangeably with the intramedullary screw. As modern medicine continues its advancement toward personalized medicine, the use of specialized fixation constructs will continue to improve clinical outcomes (as was seen with the Charlotte Carolina screw). Further, the development of custom implants based off an individual’s anatomy may be of particular use in maximizing clinical outcomes for Jones fracture patients.