A zinc dross was cast into anodes and electrorefined in an ammoniacal ammonium chloride electrolyte (NH3–NH4Cl) to produce high purity zinc. The influence of several factors, such as zinc concentration, current density and temperature, on cathodic current efficiency and power consumption were investigated. The results indicated that increasing Zn concentration increased the current efficiency, but, very high Zn concentrations affected the progress of the electrolysis of zinc dross. The power consumption can be decreased effectively by increasing the temperature of electrolyte. High current density adversely affected the quality of the cathodes and increased the power consumption. The morphology of cathodic zinc can be improved by increasing Zn concentration at an appropriate current density and its purity was very acceptable. All the experimental results obtained showed a technical feasibility of the NH3–NH4Cl system as an electrolyte system for electrorefining of zinc dross.Zinc metal is widely used for casting industries because of its low melting point and excellent fluidity. During its melting process, the surface layer of the melted zinc can be very easily oxidized to zinc oxide which would adversely affect the quality of the cast. Accordingly, there is quite a portion of zinc dross produced during the founding process ( The pyrometallurgical process for metal recovery requires costly equipment investment and quite high energy consumption ( With regard to an electrorefining process, the selection of the electrolyte system is the most important thing. The ammonia–ammonium chloride system (NH In this paper, the effect of Zn concentration, temperature and current density on the current efficiency and power consumption on the electrorefining of zinc dross in an NH Zinc dross was melted by rapidly heating to 400 °C and casting into a steel mould ( Electrorefining of the cast anodes was performed in a polythene cell ( The cathodic zinc obtained was stripped every 10 h and analyzed for its quality by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The chemicals, ammonia, ammonium chloride, zinc oxide and gelatine, were analytical reagents. The composition of the dross is shown in Preliminary experiments showed that to obtain acceptable zinc morphology gelatine was required at 0.1 g L These results indicated the cathodic current efficiency was very high for all the electrorefining tests. Clearly, this is due to the almost total elimination of hydrogen evolution in ammoniacal ammonium salt system due to the much decreased evolution potential for hydrogen in alkaline solution ( The growth of dendrites on the edges of the cathode became important when the current density was increased to 600 A m High cathodic current efficiencies were obtained even at Zn concentrations of 20 g L The temperature plays a significant role in reducing the power consumption by increasing solution conductivity. However, increasing temperature would also increase volatilization of the ammonia making an ammonia recovery system necessary. It is reasonably expected that an increased conductivity can be obtained by addition of further salts to the electrolyte. This would lead to decreased power consumption through solution voltage losses.  On increasing the current density from 300 to 600 A m The cathodic zinc obtained in 4.0 M NH In this paper, the electrorefining of zinc dross in NH This work was supported by the Research Project of Science and Technology of Zhejiang Province (No. 2006C31039).