Natural gas dew point temperature is a vital quality parameter. The effective control of this specification is important if the natural gas integrity and quality are to be maintained. The present work focuses on improving the dew point and condensation production rate of south Dabaa field dew point control unit (DPCU) located in the Egyptian western desert and owned to the South Dabaa Petroleum Company. Influence of the operational variables on outlet gas dew point and produced condensate were investigated. The simulation results illustrated that feed gas inlet temperature, composition and flow rate, Joule Thomson (JT) valve downstream, and upstream pressure and hot bypass flow rate have a great effect on the sales gas dew point as well as the condensate throughput. A field experiments were conducted to validate the simulation results. It is noticed that there is a good agreement between simulation and experimental results, considering the outlet gas dew point at different operating conditions. Lingo optimization software was used to find the plant optimum conditions. Two quadratic equations were developed based on regression analysis for calculating the dew point and plant condensate rate at any operational variables. The impact of replacing the existing JT valve by a turbo expander was studied. The simulation results indicate that the turbo expander is more effective in comparison with JT valve refrigeration system in decreasing the sales gas dew point and increasing the condensate production rate.Hydrocarbon dew point has always been a vital operational parameter; it is becoming a critical tariff parameter for the natural gas industry. At the beginning of the natural gas processing chain, it is highly important to control the gas dew point. The dew point controlling process aims to ensure that liquids (either hydrocarbons or water) are not formed in the pipelines and consequently, a safe and reliable transportation can be achieved. The byproduct liquid which is recovered or produced by this process could be used as a valuable fuel or alternatively stabilized and marketed as condensate ( The dew point is dependent on pressure, temperature and the composition of the gas ( Recovery of natural gas liquids (NGL) components is required for hydrocarbon dew point control of natural gas as well as a source of revenue ( The expansion across JT valve method is a relatively simple hydrocarbon dew point control system used in gas producing plants where pressure drop is available and very low temperatures are not required. The pressure drop across the valve causes the gas to expand and subsequently cools it. The produced liquids primarily pentane components and heavier, C Liquefied gases with very low boiling temperatures are called cryogenic fluids and are increasingly utilized in industrial, domestic and scientific applications. Cryogenic process plants in recent years are almost exclusively based on the low-pressure cycles which use a radial inflow turbo expander to generate refrigeration. The use of radial inflow turbo expanders brings forth attractive features like better efficiency and reliability in the operating range of the cryogenic process plants. It considerably affects the economical parameters of the process plants ( There are many factors that should be taken into account when choosing the best hydrocarbon dew point controlling technology. The main factors include inlet conditions (gas pressure, richness and contaminants), downstream conditions (i.e. residue gas pressure), and overall conditions (i.e. utility costs and plant location). In addition to feed gas composition and operation mode, the most decisive technical characteristics of any process are the feed gas pressure and permissible unit pressure drop ( The DPCU of south Dabaa Egyptian field was chosen for accomplishing the present study. JT valve is the refrigeration technique applied in this plant. The main objectives of this work are: To study the influence of the operating conditions on outlet gas dew point. This objective was achieved by using Aspen HYSYS simulation program of version 7.3. To identify the optimum operating conditions of the investigated DPCU. The considered operating conditions are gas inlet temperature, inlet gas flow rate, JT valve upstream pressure, JT valve downstream pressure, hot bypass flow rate, and gas composition (C6 To develop two correlations for relating gas dew point and condensate throughput to the DPCU operational variables. To investigate the influence of replacement JT valve by a turbo expander refrigeration technique on the PDCU operation. The case study on which this research was applied is the DPCU of south Dabaa field, located in the western desert of Egypt and owned to a South Dabaa Petroleum Company. The DPCU under consideration operates at an acceptable limit for each operating variable. The inlet gas flow rate, inlet gas temperature, JT valve upstream pressure, JT valve downstream pressure, hot bypass stream flow rate, and concentration of C6  Dew point depression of the inlet gas is achieved through the use of a single Joule Thomson (JT) expansion. As the high pressure stream is expanded across a JT valve to a lower pressure, its temperature will decrease. This reduction in temperature causes heavy hydrocarbons to condense out of the gas phase to form liquids, resulting in a residue gas with a lower dew point. A hot gas bypass on the JT skid is the second piping line and valve controlling the flow of the inlet gas stream within the JT skid. This hot gas bypass allows “trim” temperature control of the cold separator by bypassing inlet gas around the gas/gas exchangers. This gas stream allows a portion of the inlet gas to heat up the cold separator. Due to this action, either the gas flow or inlet gas temperature or pressure will be changed. The condensed hydrocarbon liquid and wet ethylene glycol are separated within the LP separator with an internal liquid-liquid plate pack coalesce, which assists in separating the fairly viscous glycol from the liquid hydrocarbon. Liquid hydrocarbon overflows an internal weir to a surge section. The wet glycol exits out through a glycol boot which is further regenerated and pumped to reinjection points within the plant. About 80 wt% ethylene glycol is injected into the inlet of the gas/gas exchangers, the gas/liquid exchanger and JT services to inhibit gas hydrates formation while the gas is cooled. Prior to the JT expansion, any liquids that may have formed due to precooling are removed in the pre-separator. The pre-separator is a two phase vertical vessel which allows for two phase separation. The liquids discharge under level control to the LP separator and the gas is routed to the JT valve. Gas is expanded over the JT valve and the liquids that have formed are removed in the cold separator. The gas from the cold separator is sent back to the gas/gas exchanger, where it exchanges heat with the inlet gas before being routed to the sales gas compressors. The sales gas compressors boost the residue gas up to a sales gas pressure of 1350 psi The LP separator receives the liquid discharges from the pre-separator and cold separator. The LP separator is a horizontal vessel which facilitates the degassing of the hydrocarbon liquids prior to the stabilizer tower. The gas leaving the LP separator is boosted in pressure through the flash gas compressor and routed to the suction of the sales gas compressors. The liquid hydrocarbons from the LP separator are sent back to the gas/liquid exchanger to exchange heat with the inlet gas and discharged to the stabilizer tower. In the stabilizer tower, the liquids are reboiled and stabilized to meet the required specification by separating the butanes and lighter components. The present work which applied to the hydrocarbon DPCU of the south Dabaa Egyptian field aims to study the natural gas dew point control process to improve the quality of outlet gas to meet pipeline specification requirements as well as to increase the plant profit. In addition, the optimum operating conditions were identified, using LINGO optimization software, version 14. Thus, the first part of results was directed to investigate the effect of the plant operational conditions on sales gas dew point and condensate production rate. The second part of this section introduces two correlations for calculating dew point and condensate rate in relation to the plant operational conditions. In the third part, the optimum conditions for obtaining the maximum condensate rate when keeping the outlet gas dew point at constant value of −5 °C at 700 Psi The effect of increasing the JT valve upstream pressure on dew point and condensate production rate was studied. It is obvious that as the JT valve upstream pressure is increased, the gas dew point is decreased. This can be attributed to the increase of the pressure drop through JT valve with increasing the upstream pressure and this consequently resulted in temperature drop of the gas. This reduction in temperature causes more condensation of heavier hydrocarbons that leads to obtain a residue gas with a lower dew point. It is also shown in This study also considered the influence of JT valve downstream pressure on the sales gas dew point at different hot bypass flow rates. The hot bypass stream is a quantity of gas that bypassed gas/gas exchanger and gas/liquid exchanger and goes directly to cold separator. Feed gas flow rate, C The simulation results presented in The influence of increasing C It is obvious from the last discussion that the effecting gas hydrocarbon composition on dew point temperature was taken as C6 The influence of increasing C5 The influence of C5 The effect of gas composition on condensate production rate at different values of JT valve downstream pressure was studied with keeping other variables constants. The hot bypass flow, inlet temperature, upstream pressure, and feed gas flow of the plant were maintained at 2 MMSCFD, 28 °C, 1240 psi The present work considered also the influence of gas composition on condensate production rate at different values of feed gas inlet flow rates. The hot bypass, inlet temperature, upstream pressure, and downstream pressure were maintained at 0 MMSCFD, 32 °C, 1160 psig, and 730 psig respectively. According to At last, the effect of gas composition on condensate production rate at different flow rates of hot bypass stream was studied. The other operational variables were maintained at constant values. The inlet flow rate, inlet temperature, upstream pressure, and downstream pressure were maintained at 20 MMSCFD, 24 °C, 1200 psig, and 790 psig respectively. The experimental results presented in To validate the obtained simulation results of the considered case study, it is important to compare between the simulation and experimental results. These results provide an investigation of the effect of operational conditions on the outlet gas dew point and condensate production. The influence of each operating variable was studied keeping the other variables constant. The inlet gas flow rate, inlet gas temperature, JT valve upstream pressure, JT valve downstream pressure, hot bypass stream flow rate, and concentration of C6 This work is interested also in introducing two correlations; these two correlations are used to represent the effect of the independent variables (feed gas temperature, feed gas flow rate, hot gas bypass flow rate, JT valve upstream pressure, JT valve downstream pressure, and the hydrocarbons concentration) on both the gas dew point temperature and the condensation production rate, respectively. Regression analysis is used to extract the introduced correlations, depending on the experimental data. . The significance of these conditions is identified from the analysis of variance (ANOVA) method. The two resulted correlations to estimate the gas dew point and condensate production rate are as below: Where DP Equations Where the subscript R denotes the reduced value of the corresponding parameter; for example, T As discussed above, it is found that there is a great influence of the DPCU operating conditions on the dew point of outlet sales gas as well as on the condensate production rate. Thus, the present research work aims to identify the plant optimal conditions. The optimization of this process can be obtained by a new method, namely the Adomian decomposition method ( The problem formulation for the optimization problem could be summarized in the following equations and their constraints; where the objective function is to maximize the condensate rate; Constraints for upper and lower bounds of each variable are formulated as follows: This research work investigated also the effect of replacing JT valve by a turbo expander in the considered DPCU at the predetermined optimum operating conditions. To achieve this objective, Aspen HYSYS version 7.3 with Peng Robinson equation of state “PR EOS” was used as a simulation tool. The replaced JT valve specifications are: line size is 6 inches; valve size is 3 inches, body is globe style, flange rating and size 600 Psig and 3 inches respectively, actuator spring and diaphragm type is fail close. However, the investigated turbo expander has the following specifications: delta T across it is −17.4 °C, delta P is 335 Psig, normal molar flow is 33.72 MMSCFD, expander duty is 185 KW, and nozzle diameter is 0.164 ft. The simulation results show that the replacement of JT valve by a turbo expander decreased the hydrocarbon dew point from −4.6 °C To −10.3 °C and condensate production increased by 150 bbl/day (from 925 bbl/day to 1075 bbl./day). From the economic view point, replacing JT valve by turboexpander requires buying a turboexpander and a second stage compressor; as the sales gas line pressure is high. The sum of the equipment and installation costs for turboexpnder and the compressor, according to Aspen HYSYS, version9, will be $458,300 and $1,731,400 respectively. The corresponding extra operating costs including the utility costs are assumed to be 30% of the equipment and installation cost. This means that a total of $2,846,610 is required. On the other hand, the increased amount of condensate, with a price 45 $/bbl, would result in a revenue of $2,430,000/year. This means that the Return On Investment (ROI) will be about 85.5%, which is a reasonable impact. These results indicate that it is preferable to replace the JT valve by a turbo expander in the studied plant. The first objective of the present work aims to study the influence of the operational conditions on the sales gas dew point and the condensate production of south Dabaa field. The simulation results showed that the sales gas dew point was increased with increasing inlet gas temperature, JT valve downstream pressure, and hot bypass flow rate. However, increasing of JT valve upstream pressure, and plant feed gas flow rate decreased the gas dew point. It is also noticed that increasing C6+ hydrocarbons concentrations in feed gas from 0.165 up to 0.543 mol% has no significant influence in increasing the gas dew point. But at concentrations higher that 0.543 mol%, the effect of increasing these heavier hydrocarbons concentration on increasing the gas dew point was noticeable. Results also illustrated that the condensate production rate was increased with increasing feed gas flow rate, C5+ hydrocarbons concentration in feed gas, and hot bypass flow rate. On the other hand, condensate rate was decreased with increasing feed gas inlet temperature and JT valve downstream pressure. It is important to note that the flow rate of hot bypass affects the condensate rate only at higher concentrations (>0.95 mol%) of C5+ hydrocarbons in feed gas where a moderate increase of the condensate rate was achieved by increasing bypass hot flow rate. The present study aims also to identify the DPCU optimum conditions for obtaining the maximum condensate rate when keeping the outlet gas dew point at its desirable value of −5 °C (measured at 700 Psi By using regression analysis, two correlations for predicting dew point and condensate rate in relation to the plant operational conditions were introduced in this work. The last part of the present study was directed to investigate the impact of replacing the JT valve with a turboexpander on the sales gas dew point and condensate production of the considered DPCU. The simulation results obtained at the predetermined optimum conditions indicates that the replacement of JT valve by a turboexpander decreased the hydrocarbon dew point from −4.581 °C to −10.32 °C and increased condensate production by 150 bbl/day. This shows the effectiveness of the turboexpander in improving the plant dew point temperature and condensate production rate. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at