Century Mine, operated by Zinifex, is one of the largest zinc and lead deposits in Australia. The ore contains sphalerite and galena as valuable minerals, and carbonaceous material is present among the gangue minerals. The presence of carbonaceous matter is detrimental to the concentration of zinc and lead by flotation. Therefore, preflotation, which is flotation in the absence of collector and prior to galena flotation, is employed to remove some of the organic carbon, some of which is naturally hydrophobic, from the flotation feed. The main issues affecting the effectiveness of preflotation are: (i) low carbon recovery, (ii) low selectivity against zinc, and (iii) very high frother (methyl isobutyl carbinol, MIBC) consumption. The present study revealed that: (a) most of the MIBC added during flotation disappears from solution due to its high adsorption onto ore particles and especially on fine carbon enriched particles which have high surface area, (b) the addition of diesel oil can reduce MIBC consumption by 50% (in laboratory flotation tests) and (c) polypropylene glycol (PPG 192) showed lower affinity for carbon surfaces due to this reagent’s higher hydrophilic/lipophilic balance, producing stable froths at 50% of the current MIBC addition.Zinifex Century is one of the largest producers of Pb and Zn concentrates in Australia. Century ore, besides galena and sphalerite, also contains a substantial amount of carbonaceous material. Sphalerite exists in two, approximately equally abundant, textural varieties of “porous” and “nonporous” sphalerite, while galena infills fractures and cavities ( Instances of the adverse effects of naturally occurring carbonaceous material in mineral processing has been documented elsewhere. For example, reduction in gold recovery during cyanide leaching of gold concentrates due to adsorption of dissolved gold onto carbonaceous material has been observed ( Adsorption properties of carbonaceous materials with respect to frothing reagents have been reported and studied previously. Adsorption of MIBC on coal surface has been reported by It appears that natural hydrophobicity of carbonaceous materials is a driving force behind their ability to adsorb frothers from solution. If adsorption of frother onto carbonaceous materials occurs through hydrophobic interactions then a strategy is to minimise these interactions. The use of depressants may not give satisfactory results on Century ore, since it may also affect the flotation recovery of the valuable minerals. Seeking an alternative frother with lower affinity for carbonaceous material could be a better strategy for reducing frother consumption at plant scale. It is well established that frother molecules have moieties that are hydrophobic and hydrophilic ( In order to better understand the mechanisms responsible for (i) loss of carbon from the preflotation circuit, (ii) poor selectivity against zinc, and (iii) very high frother (MIBC) consumption at Century, detailed plant and laboratory based studies were undertaken. The plant studies included characterising the recovery by size of carbon and zinc, surface chemistry analysis (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy – XPS), as well as the analysis of the deportment of frother down the flotation circuit. The laboratory study comprised the effect of diesel oil addition on MIBC consumption, frother adsorption onto ore particles as a function of particle size, and screening of alternative frothers. Samples of preflotation rougher feed, concentrate and tailings were chemically analysed for total carbon (C Size-by-size chemical analysis was performed on selected samples of preflotation rougher feed and concentrate collected from the plant. Samples were first wet screened at 38 The preflotation concentrate and preflotation tailings surface composition was determined using XPS. XPS analysis was performed using a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD with a non-monochromated Mg K Slurry samples were collected from different points of the plant flotation circuit during the metallurgical survey. They were sub-sampled, filtered through 0.45 The specific surface area (SSA) of preflotation feed, concentrate and tailings was determined using Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) technique ( The regents used during the laboratory study were MIBC and three different polypropylene glycols (PPGs) designated according to their molecular weight (MW). Their molecular weights and hydrophilic/lipophilic balance (HLB) values are shown in A sample of graphite (3 Samples of slurry suitable for flotation tests were prepared in the laboratory in order to accurately reproduce plant feed composition. Three different ores from Century were crushed and blended in the proper proportion, obtaining a preflotation rougher feed with average head grades of 3.6% C, 12.0% Zn, 2.16% Pb and 48.3% SiO Two series of laboratory flotation tests were carried out after replacing some of the MIBC with diesel oil (100 To test MIBC adsorption behaviour by particle size, the preflotation feed was first wet screened at 38 Adsorption tests were conducted on preflotation feed and tailings, as well as on two ideal carbon systems, graphite and activated charcoal. Each sample was conditioned for 2 Diagnostic foaming tests were also undertaken using either MIBC or polypropylene glycol (PPG) of different molecular weight. Froths were generated in a laboratory column ( Adsorption of PPGs onto preflotation rougher feed was investigated. Slurry samples were filtered and filtrates collected for frother concentration analysis (by Gas Chromatography). PPG 192 and PPG 425 were analysed by solvent extraction, followed by derivatisation to a trifluoroacetate ester and GC–MS (gas chromatography mass spectrometry) analysis of the PPG–trifluoroacetate ester. PPG 1000 analysis was conducted using liquid chromatography. This method involves solvent extraction (as for PPG 192 and PPG 425), followed by derivatisation to form a dinitrobenzoyl ester. The PPG 1000-dinitrobenzoyl ester is chromatographed by reverse-phase HPLC (high performance liquid chromatography) with UV (ultraviolet) detection. The unsized recoveries of C Seventy-six percent of the total C in the preflotation feed is TOEC, One-hundred percent of the total C in the preflotation concentrate is TOEC. This confirms that the carbon collected in preflotation is totally in the form of organic matter. Carbonates do not report to the concentrate in preflotation. Therefore, the use of total C recovery as an indicator for the removal of the organic matter in the ore is justified. This was done in this study to simplify chemical analysis of samples. Seventy-four percent of the total C in the preflotation tail is TOEC, suggesting that there is still a significant proportion of the organic material which is not floated. Two samples of preflotation rougher feed and concentrate, collected from the plant, were sized and analysed for chemical composition. Samples were analysed for carbon and zinc. The mass and carbon distribution shows that carbon is distributed in all size ranges in the preflotation rougher feed, with a slight enrichment in the C7 size range ( The effect of recovery by entrainment was also investigated. The recovery by entrainment was calculated using the method by Surface characterisation of the preflotation rougher concentrate and tailings particles was performed by XPS. Possible compositional changes with etch depth, as well as chemical states of the carbon at the immediate surface for the two samples were investigated. The results of argon etching are summarised in A similar XPS study on Mt. Isa ore was reported by Differences in the chemistry of the exposed carbon in the preflotation rougher concentrate and tailings were also investigated. A high resolution scan was performed on the C 1s peak of the XPS spectra, and deconvolution of the signal attempted ( Frother consumption at the Century plant is very high. Frother (MIBC) addition of ∼400 However, the residual frother concentrations are extremely low, if compared to the amount of MIBC added (∼160 The theoretical values of MIBC in solution (under the hypothesis of no adsorption onto the solids), and the actual (measured) values were compared. The difference between theoretical and measured values is significant in the preflotation rougher stage, where the amount of organic material in the feed is high. From the balance between frother added and residual frother measured in solution, it can be estimated that 94% of the frother added to the preflotation rougher had been removed from solution by the first cell of the bank. In order to possibly link frother disappearance from solution to adsorption onto the surface of particles, the specific surface areas of the preflotation feed, concentrate and tailings were determined. It is expected that high specific surface area is an indicator for high adsorption potential of particles. The analysis showed that the preflotation feed, concentrate and tail have very high specific surface areas, with the preflotation concentrate the highest at 41 Diesel oil is widely used as a collector in the flotation of coal ( Reduction of MIBC adsorption on carbon. Enhanced hydrophobicity of carbon. Better delivery of reagent (through an emulsion). Diesel oil can significantly reduce the amount of MIBC needed (which in the plant is between 400 and 500 Diagnostic adsorption tests were undertaken to investigate if frother (MIBC) is preferentially adsorbed on a particular mineral phase (carbonaceous matter) and/or on particles within a certain size range (fine particles, having high surface area) in the ore. Adsorption tests on three different size fractions of the preflotation feed were undertaken. Adsorption of MIBC was measured for additions up to 1200 Adsorption tests on model carbon systems were conducted in order to compare their behaviour with that of carbonaceous material in Century ore. Graphite and activated charcoal were chosen as model carbon systems. It is well known that activated charcoal has very large specific surface area, significantly larger than that of graphite. The total surface area available for adsorption was about 36 In order to investigate possible difference in the adsorption properties of carbonaceous material present in the preflotation tailing with the carbonaceous material in preflotation feed (possibly related to different hydrophobicity), a laboratory preflotation test was conducted, and residual adsorption of MIBC measured on the preflotation tailings. Carbon recovery in the preflotation concentrate was about 20%. This is expected to represent the most hydrophobic fraction of the carbonaceous material in the ore. The results of adsorption tests on the preflotation tailings suggest that most of the highly hydrophobic carbonaceous material had been removed during laboratory preflotation and that the remaining material (preflotation tailings) adsorbs a considerably lower amount of MIBC compared to the preflotation feed sample ( In order to reduce frother consumption at plant scale, it appears to be sensible to seek an alternative frother that would produce stable froths at lower concentrations compared to MIBC. This possibility is discussed further below. The aim here is to identify reagents having lower affinity for carbon surfaces, therefore remaining in solution and producing a stable froth at lower overall addition. Diagnostic foaming tests were undertaken using PPGs of different molecular weight, as described previously. The tests undertaken revealed high adsorption of frother from solution for all PPGs, since a significant amount of reagent was needed to form a stable froth (from 200 to 1000 In contrast to PPG 192, reagents PPG 425 and PPG 1000 show higher adsorption at the plant addition compared to MIBC. It appears that PPG of the lowest molecular weight and the highest ratio of hydrophilic to lipophilic groups (PPG 192, MW In order to address issues of loss of carbon from the preflotation circuit and high frother consumption, detailed plant and laboratory studies were undertaken. Size-by-size analysis revealed that although carbon is distributed in all size ranges in the preflotation feed, only very fine particles (<12 The addition of diesel oil, as an emulsion with MIBC, was found to increase the flotation rate of carbon and to reduce the amount of MIBC needed to form a stable froth. The addition of 100 The study on alternative frothers showed that PPG of the lowest molecular weight (PPG 192) and the highest HLB value adsorbed the least onto the carbonaceous surface and produced the most stable froth at the lowest reagent addition. In the case of MIBC, approximately 400 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the sponsors of the AMIRA P541B project and the Australian Research Council (ARC). Support from Zinifex Century personnel during each campaign is also gratefully acknowledged. We acknowledge Chris Bassell of the Scientific Services (IWRI) for XPS analysis, as well as Russell Schumann and Irina Ametov of Levay & Co. for GC–FID and HPLC analysis.