Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the interactions between proteins and mineral surfaces, among them a combination of electrostatic, stereochemical interactions and molecular recognition between the protein and the crystal surface. To identify the mechanisms of interaction in the lysozyme–calcium carbonate model system, the effect of this protein on the precipitation kinetics and morphology of calcite crystals was examined. The solution chemistry and morphology of the solid were monitored over time in a set of time-series free-drift experiments in which CaCO3 was precipitated from solution in a closed system at 25°C and 1 atm total pressure, in the presence and absence of lysozyme. The precipitation of calcite was preceded by the precipitation of a metastable phase that later dissolved and gave rise to calcite as the sole phase. With increasing lysozyme concentration, the nucleation of both the metastable phase and calcite occurred at lower Ωcalcite, indicating that lysozyme favored the nucleation of both phases. Calcite growth rate was not affected by the presence of lysozyme, at least at protein concentrations ranging from 0 mg/mL to 10 mg/mL.
                  Lysozyme modified the habit of calcite crystals. The degree of habit modification changed with protein concentration. At lower concentrations of lysozyme, the typical rhombohedral habit of calcite crystals was modified by the expression of {110} faces, which resulted from the preferential adsorption of protein on these faces. With increasing lysozyme concentration, the growth of {110}, {100}, and finally {001} faces was sequentially inhibited. This adsorption sequence may be explained by an electrostatic interaction between lysozyme and calcite, in which the inhibition of the growth of {110}, {100}, and {001} faces could be explained by a combined effect of the density of carbonate groups in the calcite face and the specific orientation (perpendicular) of these carbonate groups with respect to the calcite surface. Overgrowth of calcite in the presence of lysozyme demonstrated that the protein favored and controlled the nucleation on the calcite substrate. Overgrowth crystals nucleated epitaxially in lines which run diagonal to rhombohedral {104} faces.Organisms induce the precipitation of a large variety of minerals Certified chemical reagents (Sigma) were used to prepare stock solutions of CaCl The precipitation experiments were carried out at 25°C and 1 atm total pressure in 12 isolated environmental chambers, specially designed for these experiments. Each chamber consisted of a glass Petri dish (2 × 10 cm diameter) containing six microbridges (for sitting drop crystallization; Crystal Microsystems) with CaCl Free drift precipitation experiments were performed in the absence of lysozyme (control experiment) using pure CaCl The NH A set of time-series experiments was run for each one of the master solutions. Twelve replicas of the same experiment were run in parallel. Each replica was terminated at different times (0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, 4, 5, 7, or 7.5 and 9 h after sealing the system), and both solution and solid were withdrawn from the microbridges for chemical and morphologic analyses. Long-term experiments were run for 19.5, 27.5, and 52.5 h (after sealing the system), and the solid phase was recovered to study the crystal morphology. To study the effect of the protein on the overgrowth of calcite substrates, rhombohedral calcite crystals selected from the control experiments (lysozyme-free) were used as substrates. To begin a run, a drop of 40 μL of the master solution and two rhombohedral calcite crystals (collected from the control experiment) were placed on each microbridge. Three mL of the NH Solution pH was measured using a micro-electrode (PHR-146, Lazar) after calibration with standard buffer solutions for temperature and slope correction. To measure the pH while maintaining the system sealed, the microelectrode was introduced into a hole made in the lid covering the Petri dish. Total calcium concentration in solution (Ca The speciation program EQ3/6 Activities and activity coefficients for Ca Saturation state with respect to a given mineral phase is defined as Ω = IAP/K Calcite growth rate was calculated following the methodology described in Appendix 2 of Solution pH increased from 5.0 to 8.7 during a representative control experiment (lysozyme-free; For the control experiment, total calcium concentration in solution Ca The presence of lysozyme in solution strongly affected the waiting time for precipitation ( The saturation of the system with respect to calcite went up from 0 to ∼2250 (in the control experiment), to ∼2870 (lysozyme at 0.1 mg/mL), to ∼2250 (lysozyme at 10 mg/mL), and to ∼720 (lysozyme at 50 mg/mL) ( Calcite growth rate varied from 10 Mainly spherulites were observed during the first stages of the control experiments. These spherulites later disappeared (at ∼1 h after detection), thus giving rise to perfect rhombohedra. The same sequence was observed in lysozyme-bearing experiments. However, the transformation rate (spherulites to calcite crystals) became faster as lysozyme concentrations increased. No spherulites were observed in the experiment run at 50 mg/mL of lysozyme. The effect of lysozyme–calcite interaction on the morphology of calcite crystals is illustrated in a morphogram ( At an intermediate protein concentration (10 mg/mL), rhombohedral faces became smaller and second-order prismatic faces {100} were expressed in addition to the {110} faces ( Nucleation took place much earlier on calcite substrates (120 min at most) than in bulk solution (up to 6 h). During the initial stages (∼120 min after closing the system), overgrowth calcite crystals were only observed on substrates at higher lysozyme concentrations (>10 mg/mL). At this time a few 3-D nuclei started to form at the edges of the rhombohedral faces of the calcite substrates. After 24 h, calcite 3-D nuclei covered all the faces of the calcite crystal substrate. Overgrowth crystals grew epitaxially since they displayed the same crystallographic orientation as the substrate. Interestingly, overgrowth crystals nucleated in lines which run diagonal to the rhombohedral faces of the substrate ( Solution pH varies over time in the master solution due to the following factors: 1) NH The evolution of calcium ions in solution was directly related to the precipitation and dissolution of calcium carbonate. The first minimum observed in Ca The precipitation of this first phase removed calcium from the solution, favoring the formation of the stable phase (calcite) and triggering the competition of these two phases. The increase in Ca The first Ca At the time of metastable phase precipitation (∼1.5 h) and calcite precipitation (∼3 h), the values of Ω Modifications in crystal growth One possibility is that lysozyme functional groups interact more directly with calcite surfaces at the atomic level. However, lysozyme size is quite large (∼30 Å), a factor of >4 times greater than the distances between carbonate groups (or calcium) in the calcite faces (4 to 8 Å). The packing of these protein molecules cannot match the arrangement of sites on the calcite faces at the atomic level, and it is therefore difficult to maintain that geometrical matching at atomic scale exists. Another possibility is that interaction between proteins and calcite faces may also be determined by the orientation of carbonate groups in calcite surfaces. Proteins preferentially interact with those faces where carbonate groups are perpendicular to the surface, e.g., such crystal faces running parallel to the calcite In the absence of proteins, epitaxial growth of calcite on calcite crystals takes place through the screw dislocation mechanism or two-dimensional nucleation Our results also showed that lysozyme favored and controlled heterogeneous nucleation of calcite on the calcite substrate. In the presence of lysozyme, the nucleation on calcite substrates occurred significantly earlier than in the bulk solution. The reason for the enhancement of the nucleation may be that an adsorption layer of protein forms on calcite surfaces Free-drift calcite precipitation experiments were conducted in the presence of lysozyme to examine the effects of the protein on the precipitation kinetics of calcium carbonate and on calcite crystal morphology. Nucleation and growth of calcium carbonate crystals were primarily driven by the dissolution of NH Regardless of the presence of lysozyme, calcite precipitation was preceded by the precipitation of a metastable phase. With increasing concentration of lysozyme, the precipitation of the metastable phase occurred at lower values of Ω The presence of lysozyme drastically modified the morphology of calcite crystals, which preferentially interacted with faces parallel to the We are grateful to the Spanish Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia for financial support through the Picasso Program and the EU project “European Bio-Crystallogenesis Initiative” (BIO4-CT98-0086). We would like to thank Prof. Christopher Romanek, Prof. Yves Nys, Dr. David E. Cole, and two anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. Thanks also to Marco Bettini for the English editing. 