Induced air flotation was used to recover oil from synthetically prepared sludge containing oil. A commercial surfactant was used as the collector and frother. The effects of various parameters, namely flotation time, initial amount of oil in the feed and the amount of surfactant used on the recovery of oil were investigated. Within the range of operating conditions studied herein, the maximum oil recovery obtained was about 55%. A detailed study of flotation kinetics based on oil recovery was carried out. It showed that the process followed first-order kinetics.A huge amount of oily sludge is generated from petroleum refineries during their storage operations. This sludge contains a reasonable amount of oil (hydrocarbons). Most of the storage tanks and other vessels in a refinery contain bottom sediments which accumulate over time. These sediments contain solids settled along with the hydrocarbons and water. During cleaning operations, all these wastes are removed and dumped in a nearby pit. The typical composition of sludge is solids 10–12%, water 30–50% and oil 30–50% by weight ( Froth flotation is a widely used technique in mining, metallurgical and mineral industries, owing to its very high throughput and efficiency ( The present work involves the use of induced air flotation to recover oil from sludge containing oil. A commercially available surfactant with the major constituent sodium dodecyl benzene sulphonic acid was used as both a collector and frother. Effects of the flotation time, initial amount of oil in the feed and the amount surfactant used on the recovery of oil were studied in detail. A first-order kinetic model for oil recovery was proposed and the variation of the flotability constant with the amount of surfactant used was established empirically. The following first-order kinetics for recovery of oil from a batch flotation cell were used ( Therefore, a plot of the left-hand side of the above equation with time results in a straight line passing through the origin. Mobil oil (20-W-40, specific gravity 0.89 and kinematic viscosity 139.60 The flotation cell was procured from M/s, Humboldt Wedge, Germany. The capacity of the cell is 2 Seventy grams of dry, pulverized soil from a termite mound was taken in a tray and a known amount of oil (in weight) was added to it and the mixture became muddy, similar to the industrial sludge. A known amount of water was added to the sample and was kept for 2 days for stabilization. The prepared sludge was mixed with a known amount of surfactant and charged in the flotation cell with a constant stirring speed of 3000 About 1 The froth from the cell was collected in a tray and was transferred to a separating funnel. The mixture was then left for 12 The variations of percentage oil recovery from the float with flotation time are shown in The effect of initial amount of oil in the feed on the oil recovery is also apparent from these figures. After 15 As discussed earlier, it may be observed from As mentioned earlier, a first-order kinetics for oil recovery is proposed. According to Eq. Froth flotation can successfully be applied for oil recovery from sludge using induced air flotation. Commercial surfactant can be used as both the collector and frother. Oil recovery of up to 55% can be achieved. The optimum time of flotation was found to be around 12 This work is partially supported by a Grant from the Ministry of human Resource Development (Scheme no. F. 27-1/2004.TS.V), New Delhi, Government of India. Any opinions, findings and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of MHRD. The structure of the surfactant, sodium dodecyl benzene sulphonic acid is presented in