The influence of an anionic polyacrylamide–acrylate copolymer (PAM) and a nonionic polyethylene oxide (PEO) polymer on the surface chemistry, shear yield stress, settling rates and consolidation behaviour of kaolinite dispersions has been investigated at pH 7.5. The magnitude of the particle zeta potential decreased with increasing flocculant concentration for both flocculants but was much greater for PEO, due to an increased adsorbed layer thickness compared with PAM. Furthermore, the adsorption studies showed a higher affinity for PEO than PAM. The optimum flocculation for improved clarification rate occurred at less than half the plateau adsorbed amount for both polymers. At similar polymer concentrations, the kaolinite floc sizes were larger and the settling rates greater in the presence of PEO than PAM. Upon shear, the consolidation of pre-sedimented kaolinite slurries significantly improved under flocculation with PEO, while PAM produced no such effect. The magnitude of yield stress was strongly dependent upon the polymer structure, with greater yield stress (stronger interparticle bridging forces) observed for PEO than for PAM flocs. The difference in shear sensitivity of the flocculated slurries may be attributed to polymer structure-related adsorption and interfacial conformation behaviour. PEO polymer chains adsorb via hydrogen bonding interactions between the ether oxygen (Lewis base) and OH groups (Bronsted acid) associated with aluminol and silanol groups, which led to flexible and compressible floc structures. For PAM, however, although the adsorption is still via hydrogen bonding between the silanol and aluminol OH groups at the particle surface and the polymer's primary amide functional groups, the interactions appear to be weakened as a consequence of electrostatic repulsion between the polymer's COO− pendant groups and the negatively charged kaolinite surface. This, in conjunction with possible steric hindrance due to PAM polymer chain branching, led to the formation of loose, open and fragile flocs. A strong correlation between the polymer structure type and flocculation, shear sensitivity and the dewatering behaviour of kaolinite dispersion was established.Conventional methods used to dewater colloidally stable clay dispersions (e.g. kaolinite) involve high molecular weight polymer-aided flocculation and sedimentation in thickeners or centrifuges. In recent years, more effective thickeners have been introduced to maximise the dewatering behaviour of mineral waste tailings. In many cases, high settling rates (1–10 m/h), accompanied by space filling thickener underflow tails of relatively low solid loadings (e.g. 20–30 wt.%), have been achieved for kaolinite tails with the aid of polyelectrolytes Kaolinite is one of the predominant minerals encountered in clay tailings. A 1:1 tetra-octahedral aluminosilicate with the general formula Al Flocculation of fine particles may occur by polymer bridging, charge compensation or neutralisation, polymer–particle surface complex formation and depletion flocculation or by a combination of these mechanisms Extensive research has been dedicated to optimising various low and high molecular weight polymers as flocculants for improved dewatering of fine particle suspensions Several studies have shown that high molecular weight anionic polymers (e.g. polyacrylamides) are commonly used in dewatering of negatively charged kaolinite and smectite clay particles There exists a certain class of “flexible” polymers (e.g. high molecular weight PEO), not commonly used as flocculants in the mineral industry, whose interactions with clay mineral particles lead to the formation of large, fast settling flocs which can undergo irreversible and profound densification under compressive and shear forces typical to those experienced near the bottom of plant thickeners A comparison of anionic PAM and PEO for the flocculation of a wide variety of clay slurries was studied by Colloidal size kaolinite particles (K15GM, 99% pure, quartz and mica 1%, Commercial Minerals, Australia) were used in this work. The particle density and BET surface area were 2.60 kg dm Kaolinite dispersions of 8 wt.% of solid were prepared by thoroughly mixing a known mass of kaolinite particles with a known mass of 10 To perform flocculation and settling tests, a known volume of 0.1 wt.% PAM or PEO polymer solution was added in a single step to an 8 wt.% solid slurry using a syringe and mixed by moving a perforated plunger up and down eight times to ensure the suspension was well dispersed by visual inspection. All tests were carried out at pH 7.5. The initial settling rates of the flocculated suspension in the 500-cm A batch depletion method was used for determining polymer adsorption isotherms at 22 °C. The adsorption measurements were conducted in 20-cm The PAM solution concentration was determined by complexation using the starch–triiodide method Particle zeta potential ( The hydrodynamic adsorbed layer thickness ( The rheological measurements, which provided an indication of the particle interactions, were evaluated with respect to slurry interfacial chemistry, enabling the existence of DLVO and non-DLVO forces to be probed. Given the complex rheological (shear-sensitive) behaviour of the highly structured, PEO-flocculated kaolinite dispersions, high yield stresses (>20 Pa) involved could not be reliably determined from flow curves measured by the Haake CV20 Coutte-type rheometer. The high yield stresses were therefore directly measured using the vane technique A high resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM Philips XL30) was used to examine the kaolinite floc structures formed at 500 g flocculant/ton solid, before and after shear. Samples were analysed after vitrification to avoid drying, which can cause internal rearrangement. To vitrify, microgram size slurry samples were mounted on a cryotransfer rod and very rapidly plunged into liquid propane to “solidify” and arrest all supramolecular motion. The vitrified water in the sample was then removed by sublimation at −90 °C for 5 min, avoiding local melting by excessive temperature rises. The samples were subsequently analysed at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV after coating with platinum.  The thickness of the adsorbed polymer layer is one of the key factors in determining the effectiveness of polymers in flocculating or stabilizing colloidal dispersions. The adsorbed layer thickness, shown as a function of PEO and PAM flocculant concentrations, indicates an increasing adsorbed layer thickness with increasing flocculant concentration The adsorption densities of both PEO and PAM onto negatively charged kaolinite particles at pH 7.5 are shown in The Langmuir adsorption isotherm model was applied to analyse PEO and PAM adsorption onto kaolinite The nature of the anionic PAM versus nonionic PEO in the adsorption and flocculation behaviour plays a pivotal role in particle interactions, network structure and strength. The floc strength was estimated from the Bingham shear yield stress, which is a measure of the maximum force per unit area that the floc structure can withstand before rupturing. It may be related to the total energy ( The effect of PEO and PAM on the shear yield stress and the corresponding energy of separation (floc strength) of kaolinite particles is shown in Further analysis of the rheological data of the flocculated dispersions was performed using the particle interaction model of The results of 8 wt.% solid pulp settling tests at pH 7.5 indicated that both flocculants had a marked effect on settling rates The effect of flocculant type and concentration and shear rate on sediment bed consolidation, determined as final bed height, is shown in The investigation of the effect of impeller speed on consolidation of slurries flocculated at 500 g flocculant/ton solid shown in The nature of floc structure is an important factor in dewatering. SEM micrographs of floc structures of the kaolinite dispersions flocculated with PEO and PAM at 500 g/ton solid dosage, before and after shear at 250 rpm, are shown in The adsorption of nonionic PEO and anionic PAM during flocculation of kaolinite, impacting upon the zeta potential, particle interactions and dewatering behaviour has been found to be strongly dependent on the polymer structure type. While both polymers have a common alkyl backbone, the variation in their chemical functionality strongly influenced their adsorption onto the kaolinite particles, producing flocs with “shear sensitivity” behaviour. PEO adsorption is perceived to be via an acid–base interactions involving the lone pair of electrons of its ether oxygen (a Lewis base) and the strong Bronsted acid sites associated with aluminol and silanol groups on the edge face of the kaolinite particles It appears that the adsorbed conformation of the loops and tails variety, which enabled the re-conformation of adsorbed PEO chains upon shear, allows more particles to be bridged, as shown by the shear-induced consolidation behaviour. Flocs are known to grow as a result of increased frequency of collisions between particles and polymer chains to adhere to one another on contact Certainly, the improved knowledge and understanding gleaned from these studies constitutes a strong foundation which will facilitate the development and use of shear-sensitive polymeric flocculants, such as PEO, in conjunction with mechanical forces, to significantly increase pulp dewaterability of plant tailings in future studies. The findings will be beneficial to the minerals industry in identifying alternative, shear-sensitive polymers with an extended and flexible (or elastic) configuration such as PEO. The advantage of such flocculants is to produce strong flocs capable of withstanding moderate shear forces without rupturing, compared with the inelastic polyacrylamides commonly used in industry The influence of polymer structure type on flocculation, particle interactions, settling rates and consolidation of kaolinite dispersions has been investigated. The flocculant structure type had a marked effect on the particle zeta potential, whose decrease in magnitude was much greater in the presence of PEO than PAM. PEO produced a higher adsorption affinity and adsorbed density than PAM, with maximum plateau value of ∼0.12 mg m The floc size and initial settling rates showed a strong dependence on polymer structure type and concentration. Larger floc sizes and higher settling rates were achieved in the presence of PEO than PAM. A strong shear-sensitive polymer structure-dependent consolidation behaviour was observed. Upon shear, PEO produced stronger interparticle bridging and high floc compaction behaviour while PAM produced no such effect. PEO produced flocs capable of withstanding moderate shear forces without rupturing to form more compact structures. Solid loadings in excess of 40 wt.% were achieved for PEO in contrast with ∼25 wt.% for PAM-flocculated slurries, currently achieved in industry. The different shear-sensitive behaviour displayed by PEO and PAM is believed to be due to specific polymer structure-related adsorption and conformation mechanisms. PEO adsorbs via strong hydrogen bonding between the ether oxygen (Lewis base) and OH groups (Bronsted acid) associated with kaolinite surface aluminol and silanol groups, which led to flexible and compressible floc structures. For PAM, however, although the interactions are still via hydrogen bonding between the silanol and aluminol OH groups and amide groups on the polymer, there is an additional antagonistic effect resulting from electrostatic repulsive interactions between the polymer's COO Financial support for the project is gratefully acknowledged from the minerals industry (De Beers (South Africa), ERA Ranger Uranium Mine, Anglo Platinum (South Africa), Cable Sands, Iluka Resources, Newcrest Mine, Outokumpu, Rio Tinto and Tiwest Joint Venture) through the Australian Minerals Industries Research Association (project P523). PM gratefully acknowledges the receipt of an IWRI scholarship and Anglo Platinum funding.