The spacing of water curtain boreholes is important for underground oil storage. It was usually determined using empirical method, in this study, a method for determining the optimal spacing of water curtain boreholes for underground oil storage was developed from the percolation theory of fractured rock masses. The connectivity of fractured rock masses with different fracture densities and geometric parameters was investigated considering two typical flow configurations, i.e., unidirectional and radial flow configurations. The percolation threshold was defined as the critical value with increasing fracture trace length. It was found that the percolation threshold in the unidirectional flow configuration was higher than that in the radial flow configuration. From the perspective of percolation theory, a method was developed for evaluating fracture network connectivity. In this method, the probability of connection of water curtain boreholes was related to a percolation parameter, which depended on the fracture density and trace length. The spacing of water curtain boreholes for the Huangdao underground oil storage facility was determined using the proposed method. The optimal spacing of the water curtain boreholes was validated against the connectivity tests in the field, indicating that the determined spacing was reasonable and that this method can provide guidance for the design of water curtain boreholes for other underground oil storage facilities.In hard rock, such as granite, almost all groundwater flow occurs through fractures, and connected fractures are the key pathways for groundwater flow; thus, the connectivity of fractures is the most important factor in estimating the responses of groundwater in fractured rock masses subject to underground storage, tunneling, mineral extraction and oil and gas production ( For underground storage, one of the critical issues is the design of the water curtain system. A water curtain is composed of a group of boreholes drilled systematically. Laboratory and field tests have been performed to evaluate the performance of water curtain boreholes (WCBS) in terms of the containment property of the storage caverns. Intuitively, the connectivity of the WCBS is related to the geometrical properties of the fractures. Percolation theory applies to a system where the flow is concentrated in a sparse population of elements, such as fractures or faults, in an impervious matrix. The theory links the global physical properties (connectivity, permeability, etc.) to an average measure of its geometrical properties ( In this study, the connectivity of the water curtain system for the Huangdao underground oil storage facility was analyzed using percolation theory. First, the method of percolation theory was introduced, and the connectivity of fractured rock masses was investigated. Specifically, the connectivity of a fractured rock mass was investigated in both unidirectional and radial flow configurations. In the unidirectional flow configuration (UFC), the groundwater flow lines that developed were mutually parallel, while in the radial flow configuration (RFC), the groundwater flow lines intersected at the excavation space. Then, a method for analyzing the connectivity of WCBS was proposed from the perspective of percolation theory. Considering the method, the probability of the connection of WCBS was related to a percolation parameter, which depends on the fracture densities and trace lengths. The optimal spacing of WCBS at the Huangdao oil storage facility was determined using this method. Finally, the optimal spacing of WCBS was validated against the field connectivity test results. The connectivity of fractured rock masses can be described using percolation theory. In this study, a percolation parameter In this study, the lengths of the fractures around the Huangdao facility are assumed to follow a normal distribution ( The discrete fracture network (DFN) method treats the fractures in a fractured rock mass as a discrete fracture network ( DFN models with different sizes were generated, and one of the models, with 800 fractures and an area of 300 × 300 m For the UFC, the DFN model is connected when there is a flow path from one boundary to the opposite boundary (from the left boundary to the right boundary in this study). As shown in In general, the percolation threshold is the Taking Case #1 as an example, the relation between the probability of connection and The relation between the probability of connection and As listed in The distributions of hydraulic pressure in the fracture networks in the UFC and RFC are shown in For the distribution of hydraulic pressure in the UFC, as shown in In the UFC, According to previous studies, two important geometric parameters of the fractures influencing the percolation threshold are the fracture length and dip angle ( Using the above-mentioned method, the results for different cases were obtained, as shown in The average fracture dip angle is 50°, and the angles between the fracture direction and flow direction for Case #1 and Case #4 are 50° and 40°, respectively. According to In this section, percolation theory was applied to determine the optimal WCBS spacing. The project is described in The study is based on the Huangdao facility, which is the first large underground oil storage facility in China. The site area is hilly: the average ground surface elevation is approximately 220 m, and the highest and lowest ground surface elevations are 350.9 m and 97.50 m. The underground facility is composed of storage caverns, access tunnels and water curtain systems, as shown in The water curtain system of the Huangdao facility includes 5 water curtain tunnels, four of which are perpendicular and one of which is parallel to the storage cavern. The WCBS are horizontally arranged and parallel to the storage cavern. The length of the boreholes is approximately 100 m, and their diameter is 180 mm, as shown in From the perspectives of percolation theory, a method for analyzing the connectivity of WCBS and determining the optimal spacing of WCBS was proposed. The steps of the method are as follows: Generate the “base” DFN model value according to the statistical fracture parameters from field mapping, including the fracture length, density and dip angle. The sampling DFN models related to the WCBS spacing are obtained from the “base” DFN model. Obtain the probability of connection of different sampling DFN models. The method for this process is described in Determine the optimal WCBS spacing according to the probability of connection and percolation threshold. The WCBS spacing in the Huangdao facility was determined using this method, which is further described in the following section. Horizontal and vertical sections of the WCBS are shown in For the DFN model in the RFC, the fracture parameters are shown in To investigate the connectivity of the WCBS with different spacings, sampling DFN models with different sizes were extracted from the “base” DFN model. For the sampling DFN models in the UFC, the lengths of the models representing the WCBS length were 100 m, and the widths of the models representing the WCBS spacing ranged from 10 to 90 m, as shown in From the relations between the probability of connection and the WCBS spacing, as shown in The relations between the probability of connection and the ratio of fracture length to WCBS spacing are shown in When the WCBS are completely connected, the probability of connection is 99%, the mean fracture length is 28 m, and the WCBS spacing was calculated to be 13.67, 14.43, 18.46 and 19.76 m for The relation between the WCBS spacing and the According to the statistical results, the relation between the linear and areal fracture densities is obtained as follows: Ignoring the standard deviation, the WCBS spacings under different fracture lengths and linear fracture densities were obtained, as shown in According to the geological data of the Huangdao facility, the linear fracture density is 0.11 ~ 0.3 pieces/m, and the mean fracture lengths in different areas of the site range from 22 to 30 m, so the possible WCBS spacing for the Huangdao facility is shown by the shaded area in In a practical project, there are usually two options for WBCS arrangement: one is parallel to the storage cavern, and the other is perpendicular to the storage cavern. For WCBSs in different directions to the storage cavern, according to previous studies, the directions of the WCBSs influence the connectivity of the boreholes. According to It is difficult to determine the probability of connection of WCBS in the field. However, the connectivity of water curtain system boreholes can be obtained from the results of connectivity testing, which can indirectly verify the correctness of the WCBS spacing, which is determined using the method in According to The spacing of WCBS for the Huangdao facility ranges from 8.8 to 38.2 m according to Percolation theory was used to determine fracture network connectivity. The connectivity of fracture networks with different fracture densities and geometric parameters was investigated for the UFC and the RFC. The results showed that the probability of connection of fracture networks increased with fracture density and fracture length, but the fracture dip angle had only a small influence on the connectivity of fracture networks. In addition, the flow configuration had a great influence on the connectivity of the fracture network, and the percolation threshold in the unidirectional flow configuration was larger than that in the radial flow configuration. A method for analyzing the connectivity of WCBS was proposed from the perspective of percolation theory. In this method, the connectivity of the water curtain borehole was investigated, and the WCBS spacing was determined based on the probability of connection of the fracture networks between the WCBS. The WCBS spacings for the Huangdao facility under different linear fracture densities and fracture lengths were obtained and range from 8.8 to 38.2 m. The initial spacing of the WCBS was 10 m, and the proportion of connected WCBSs was 39%, which did not meet the requirement of connectivity. The proportion of connected WCBS increases with 106 additional WCBS, and the equivalent WCBS spacing decreases from 10 m to 8.8 m, which meet the requirement of connectivity. The validation of the method was confirmed and provides guidance for the design of WCBS. This research is about the connectivity of 2D DFNs. However, 3D DFNs are present in nature. Compared with a 2D DFN, the connectivity of a 3D DFN is more complex and may be related to the fracture length, dip angle and other geometric parameters. In addition, it may be difficult to obtain the apparent fracture length and dip angle in field applications. Further development concerning the connectivity of 3D DFNs is required. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: