Nano is a buzz word in materials science just as much as any other branch of research. It was a theme addressed in terms of hardmetals at PowderMet 2009 in Las Vegas where Ken Brookes picked out some of the more notable papers…Overshadowed by the famous Plansee Seminar, which took place in Reutte, Austria, just a few weeks earlier, MPIF's PowderMet 2009 in Las Vegas faced a formidable task in presenting new and useful papers to the hardmetals and refractory metals communities. To its credit, the objective was achieved successfully, especially in a group of papers based around the theme of nanomaterials. As usual, some of the best contributions in this area came from Professor Zhigang Zak Fang and his students at the Department of Metallurgical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City. First of these, interesting and commercially useful, but in one respect decidedly controversial, was entitled Sintered or cemented carbides consisting of hard tungsten carbide (WC) particles embedded in a ductile cobalt (Co)-based metallic binder are well-established composite materials for cutting tools and a variety of wear applications. The author gave the cobalt compositional range for WC/Co hardmetals as 3-30%, but should perhaps have stated that this was the typical industrial range, rather than the limit of possibilities. Krupp-Widia, for example, had for many years a commercial product (Elmarid) with only 2% cobalt and exceptional wear resistance. In this case, through low carbon content, most if not all of the cobalt was converted to eta-phase, a double carbide of W and Co, during sintering, leaving little or no metallic binder in the finished product. Many hardmetal manufacturers, in attempts to achieve maximum compressive strength or wear resistance without completely sacrificing toughness, have carried out experiments with Co contents significantly lower than 3% in the sintered product. The massive dies employed in synthetic diamond manufacture are especially noteworthy in this regard, where shrunk-on steel rings ensure that the sintered carbide is always in compression and therefore never subject to damaging shear or tensile stress. As explained by Wang, in cemented carbides with lower Co binder contents higher temperatures and pressures were needed to produce dense compacts. WC powders without binders were difficult to consolidate using conventional processes due to its high melting point. Consolidation of WC without metallic binder required temperatures above 1700° and high pressures, or field-assisted sintering techniques, to achieve high densities. Elevated temperatures and long heating time could also result in excessive WC grain growth, decreasing hardness. To obtain WC-base materials with full density, methods for enhancing the sinterability of WC powders were required. One of the promising methods was to begin with very fine grain size in the starting powder. Literature searches indicated that reduction of starting-powder grain size shifted the temperature range for densification to lower temperatures. The finer the initial particle size, the lower the sintering temperature and the shorter the sintering time. As a result, it was decided to explore sinterability of nanocrystalline WC powders. A “simple and efficient” high-energy milling method was used to mill WC powders and the effect of milling time on sintering behaviour was studied, as were mechanical properties including Vickers hardness and Palmqvist surface fracture toughness. The nanocrystalline tungsten carbide powders for this research were produced in an ultrahigh-energy planetary mill (UHEM), with an acceleration field nearly 60 times the force of gravity. Commercial WC powder (grain size ∼0.8μm) was milled in heptane using WC/6Co milling balls. Powders were milled for five, 10 and 20 hours, designated WC-5h, WC-10h, WC-20h respectively. Following milling, Co contents of the powders were measured by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy and grain sizes determined by x-ray diffraction (XRD) line-broadening analysis. Powders were dried in vacuo and cold-pressed into cylinders at 150MPa. Sintering behaviour of powders with different milling times were studied using a dilatometer, measuring linear shrinkage along the cylinder axis. Other samples were sintered in a vacuum furnace between 1400 and 1500°, for measuring mechanical properties. Microstructures of powders and sintered samples were examined by high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Vickers hardness was measured on a polished sintered sample at 30kgf load. Palmqvist surface fracture toughness was calculated from hardness, applied load and total crack length. XRD patterns, XRD line broadening analysis and typical morphology of WC powders milled from 0-20 hours are shown in High resolution SEM images of the dispersed WC powder were employed to confirm the grain size reported by X-ray diffraction. The SEM image of  The effect of milling time on the shrinkage of WC powder during heat-up to 1480° at 10K/min and holding for one hour is shown in As shown in   In discussion following the presentation, there was near agreement by the few with commercial experience that the research demonstrated, not a new method for making binderless carbide, but just how little binder was needed in order to initiate liquid-phase sintering. This was thought to account for the near-complete sintering at only 1470°. But I'd go a little further. Commercial tungsten carbide powder and sintered hardmetals inevitably contain a tiny proportion of impurities, and these contaminants have a tendency to concentrate in the binder during liquid-phase sintering and to lower its melting point. In the normal sintering of conventional hardmetals, the amount of impurities is too small to have a noticeable effect, but with only a small amount of binder (in this case just 0.28%) low-melting-point phases may be detectable – indirectly – by such means as dilatometry measurements. In this study, shrinkage certainly began at temperatures well below the accepted WC/Co pseudoeutectic temperature. Without further information, however, or a more complete chemical analysis, it is difficult to differentiate this effect from possible solid-state sintering. Either factor, or both, could account for the low shrinkage onset temperatures. One thing that seems to be well proven by this research is that, if a truly binderless WC product is targeted, milling the powder with WC/Co balls should be minimised and, if possible, eliminated. Ideally, WC of the desired grain size should be achieved by carburising tungsten of corresponding particle size, which in turn should be reduced from similarly fine tungsten oxides. But the question that then arises is whether such a product would be easier to manufacture and possess a better overall range of properties than the low-binder variant studied in this research. Thus, although its title is misleading and the results claimed open to argument, in the longer run this investigation may have greater importance than if it had worked in the way intended. The next contribution, though following the theme of nanocrystalline powders, is different in almost every other respect. However, though the preceding contribution implies the possibility of dramatic effects from concentrated minor constituents, in this latter case somewhat similar effects have been confirmed, followed and documented in considerable detail. The paper describes a study of Titanium carbonitride-based cermets are widely used as metalcutting tool materials because of their excellent wear resistance and toughness, superior to those of the TiC/Mo(or Mo The coarse ceramic phase in the microstructure exhibited a core/rim structure, in which a Ti(C, N) or TiC core was surrounded by a rim of differing composition. Investigations found that too great an addition of Mo The author explained that optimisation of Mo content had become a key factor in the study of titanium carbonitride-based cermets with Co/Ni addition. Some researchers had also found that properties such as hardness, fracture toughness and flexural strength could be improved by incorporating nanoparticulate powder into conventional materials. Though there had been many investigations of the microstructure and mechanical properties of conventional titanium-carbonitride-based cermets and the production of nano powder, there were few such studies of the microstructure, mechanical properties and application of TiC-based cermets with nano TiN additions. Additionally, the effect of Mo additions on the microstructure and mechanical properties of TiC-based cermets with nanograined cores had not so far been reported. This investigation examined the influence of Mo addition on the microstructure and mechanical properties of cermets in the TiCN/WC/Mo/5Ni system. Characteristics of the commercial-grade starting powders are listed in Sintering cycles termed Processes 1 and 2 ( Employing the same sintering Process 1, the two systems Ti(C,N)/Ni/Mo and Ti(C,N)/Ni/Mo When using Process 1 with added Mo, a large number of white point-like ceramic particles with a diameter of less than 100 nm were found in the microstructure ( Phase identification was carried out by X-ray diffraction. Described in the paper in considerable detail, it showed that the nanosized inclusions were of complex composition and crystal structure, typically Ni The author went on to discuss the possible modes of formation of these and other precipitates, their interactions during heating and cooling, and their effects on macro properties. He found that previous publications were inadequate in these areas. It was concluded that rapid cooling through the liquidus from 1450° caused the complex carbide Ni Mo additions promoted the formation of Ni Although academic in nature, this paper adds considerably to our store of knowledge of complex carbonitride hardmetals.