Comparative mineral liberation and separation tests of hematite ores were conducted for three comminution flowsheet options to produce relatively fine products at the 70% and 90% passing 74 µm: Option A uses a high pressure grinding roll (HPGR) with screening and subsequent ball milling, Option B uses an HPGR with an air classification, and Option C uses a jaw crusher with screening and subsequent ball milling.
                  Cracks growing inwards are relatively flat along the direction of applied force during conventional crushing. However, cracks surround the weak interface during HPGR crushing, generating a large number of “mosaic-type” locked-particles. Mineral liberation was only affected after the final grinding mode, not by the crushing method before grinding. “Mosaic-type” locked-particles produced via the particle-bed breakage have no better way to liberate in downstream ball-mill grinding.
                  Fine mineral grains are then detached from the ore under the high compressive stress, which leads to a significant and clean liberation of the mineral phases in HPGR coarse grinding. Overall, HPGR grinding is more beneficial to the quartz liberation, while ball mill grinding is more beneficial to oxidised iron minerals at a coarse grinding fineness; these advantages disappeared after the further fine grinding.
                  The coarse-sized liberated quartz, although well-liberated, raised rejection of coarse gangue in magnetic separation during HPGR grinding. Finally, recovery of the HPGR grinding process increased by 4.4–5.2 percentage points higher than that of the ball milling process.Recovery of minerals using ore dressing and concentration operations is based on methods that separate particles via their physical or chemical properties. Individual minerals can be separated completely only if each particle contains a single mineral. Separating minerals at the particulate level is referred to as liberation since the individual minerals are liberated from each other in a physical way. Liberation of the valuable minerals from the gangue is accomplished by comminution, which involves crushing, and, if necessary, grinding. The grinding is performed until the particle reaches such a size that the product is a mixture of relatively clean particles of mineral and gangue ( Comminution in an HPGR is the result of high inter-particle stresses generated when a bed of solids is compressed, while moving down the gap between two pressurized rolls. The specific pressure (SP) (i.e., total force divided by projected roller area) is typical in the range of 3–9 N/mm Particle-bed breakage, via the use of an HPGR, has often been suggested as a way to enhance mineral liberation properties relative to conventional breakage methods. When the fracture pattern developed in the ore during comminution is not independent of the mineralogical texture, the fracture process is considered to be non-random ( In this study, we report a detailed investigation into the mineral liberation properties of a hematite ore as a function of the breakage method employed, using the modern Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) based technologies that are currently employed for accurate and reliable liberation analysis. Three flowsheet options were tested in the present study to comminute the samples of two different product sizes (70% and 90% passing 74 µm). Then, the mineralogical properties of the progeny particles were measured on a size-by-size basis using MLA. Flowsheet A is comprised of an HPGR closed with a 2-mm screen, producing feed for a downstream ball mill that generates the final product (HPGR+BM grinding), while flowsheet B is comprised of the same HPGR closed with an air classifier that generates the final product (HPGR grinding). Flowsheet C is comprised of a jaw crusher closed with a 2-mm screen, producing feed for a downstream ball mill that generates the final product (JC+BM grinding) (see Hematite samples were taken from Qidashan Mine in China. The sample has a In flowsheet A, a laboratory-scale CLM-2510 HPGR manufactured by CHENGDU LEEJUN INDUSTRIAL CO., Ltd, in China, was constructed with two counter-rotating rolls, each 250 mm in diameter and 100 mm in width, with a work gap between 4 mm and 9 mm. This fully instrumented mill was powered via two 5.5 kW D.C. motors. The working pressure, roll speed, and power consumption were logged by a computer with Lab-view software. The controlling parameter were the specific pressing force of 5.2 N/mm2 and the roll speed of 0.18 m/s ( For each crushing cycle, 20 kg of sample was passed through the HPGR and jaw crusher followed by dry screening in a 2-mm screen. Feed for the next cycle was produced by adding fresh feed equivalent to the amount removed by the screen undersize to the screen oversize. Circulating loads remained stable (approximately 180% for HPGR and 300% for jaw crusher) after four locked cycles. Another four locked cycles were performed again. All −2 mm products were combined, homogenised and split to produce a 500-g sample for grind testing and size analysis. Grinding experiments were performed in a 140 mm × 160 mm (D × L) steel mill with a smooth inner surface. The mill was loaded with a 3.75-kg ball charge and a 25-mm (13 balls), 20-mm (23balls) and 15-mm (5balls) size distribution, also had a running speed of 310 rpm. For every test, hematite ores of the HPGR and CC products were individually ground to a mass of 500 g, with a solids percentage of 65% (wt) in the pulp. Two different-sized final grinding products were obtained at approximately 70% and 90% passing 74 µm. A full-size distribution of the collected product was obtained using nested screens in decreasing size order from the top screen down to the 15-µm screen. Liberation of progeny particles was then measured, on a size-by-size basis, using an MLA. A rotating wheel air classifier was utilised to control the final product sizes of the test work, comprising a motor, product storage and dust cyclone. The air classifier was joined together via a bucket elevator ( Particulate materials are fractured primarily by the compressive stress applied with a fairly rapid impact. Subsidiary fracture is caused by high shearing stress, particularly at the surface of the particle. The former leads to cleavage and shattering, while the latter leads to attrition and wear. Patterns of fracture by mechanical comminution mainly include shatter, cleavage, attrition and chipping. The fracture patterns of conventional crushing equipment (jaw crusher, cone crusher, etc.) are mainly used for impact and cleavage, applied to dynamic loading. However, the fracture patterns of HPGR are mainly compression, auxiliary attrition and chipping, applied to the static load.  The different crushing types lead to large differences in the morphological features and particle liberation of the crushed products (See Particle surfaces of HPGR products are relatively rough. There are visible grain boundary cracks and valuable minerals are in the “mosaic” of gangue minerals. Fracture mainly refers to grain-boundary breakage, and the mineral crystal structure remains intact. After the observation by SEM of crushing products from HPGR ( Size analysis is of primary importance when determining the quality of comminution and when establishing the liberation degree of valuable minerals from the gangue at various particles sizes. Sieve analysis is one of the oldest size analysis methods, accomplished by passing a known weight of the sample material through successively finer sieves to determine the percentage weight in each size fraction. The weighted average particle size ( ess and uniformity of the products, and the equations ( At a fineness of 70% passing 74 µm, Flowsheet A and Flowsheet C have similar At a fineness of 90% passing 74 µm, all The process of “grinding-stage separation” is usually used in Anshan-type hematite ores: grinding fineness in the first stage mill is 70% passing 74 µm, and in second stage mill is 90% passing 74 µm. In view of this, to determine the liberation degrees of a variety of crushed products of coarse and fine grindings, −74 µm content in coarse grinding products is approximately 70%, and that in fine grinding products approximately 90%. This has a greater impact on MLA tests of −15-µm size fractions due to fineness, poor dispersion and easy adhesion. The liberation degrees of −15-µm size fraction is assumed to be 100%, and there is no need for MLA test analysis. This is also excluded from the analysis. A general requirement for iron ore concentrate quality is >90% Fe oxide by grade; on this basis, particles of a single mineral content above 90% were seen as liberated particles. The proportion of each phase that is 90–100% liberated, for each size fraction, following both types of size reduction, is shown for quartz and oxidised iron minerals in At a fineness of 70% passing 74 µm, flowsheet B yields a better liberation for quartz (liberation degree increases by 5–10% for coarse size only based on At a fineness of 90% passing 74 µm, for quartz liberation, flowsheet B yields a better liberation (increases by 2–9%) in particle sizes >31 µm, while yielding a worse liberation (decreases by 4%) in fine sizes (<31 µm). For oxidised iron minerals, flowsheet B shows a worse liberation (decreases by 6%) in the +74 µm sizes, while yielding a better liberation (increases 4%) in fine sizes (<31 µm). Liberation degrees of oxidised iron minerals with a −74+43 µm size fraction are similar. Overall, HPGR grinding is more beneficial to quartz liberation. Ball mill grinding is more beneficial to oxidised iron minerals at a coarse grinding size, but that advantage disappears with the further fine grinding. As This phenomenon shows that “HPGR” is more conducive to the mineral liberation of fine-grained minerals in coarse grinding. Under high compressive-stress in HPGR, fine-grained mineral are detached from the ore during comminution, which leads to significant and clean liberation of the mineral phases, which is observed in “mosaic-type” locked-particles. The method of liberation of conventional ball milling refers to comminution liberation due to the mechanical decrease of particle size in rocks and minerals. It is possible that single mineral particles are liberated only when the geometry size of the particles is smaller than the mineral grain. Therefore, in comminution liberation, the mineral liberation degree has a linear relationship with grinding fineness. For the fine-grained minerals, the high liberation degree is achieved only on the condition of fine grinding. The typical separation process of “Magnetic separation – Reverse flotation” ( Under the premise of the similar concentrate grade, the recovery of Flowsheet B has increased by 4.4–5.2 percentage points higher than that of the ball milling process. This is because magnetic separations of two stages have low-grade tailing. The one-stage grade is approximately 7.29%, one percentage point less than ball milling product, and the two-stage grade is 20.52%, four percentage points less. Combined with the liberation test results, the coarse grinding products (70% passing 74 µm) in Flowsheet B have a uniform particle size (as shown in The aim of this work was to investigate and compare the minerals liberation and separation properties of three comminution flowsheets to produce a relatively fine product. Flowsheet A is comprised of an HPGR with screening and subsequent ball milling (HPGR + BM), while flowsheet B is comprised of the same HPGR with an air classification (HPGR grinding). Flowsheet C is comprised of a jaw crusher with screening and subsequent ball milling (JC + BM). Some important conclusions were as follows: Cracks growing inward are relatively flat along the direction of applied force due to a serious loading tip in conventional comminution. However, cracks connect together along weak interfaces due to slow compression in HPGR comminution. The different fracture methods lead to large differences in the morphology features and particle liberation types of the crushed products. The particle surface of a conventionally crushed product is relatively smooth, not obvious for the grain boundary crack. Quartz exhibits a shell-like fracture and iron minerals have a stepped fracture. While, the particle surfaces of HPGR products are relatively rough. There are visible grain boundary cracks, and valuable minerals in the “mosaic” of gangue minerals. Mineral liberation properties were affected only by the final grinding mode, not by the crushing method before grinding. “Mosaic-type” locked-particles produced by particle-bed breakage, have no trends that suggest a better liberation in downstream ball mill grinding. Fine mineral grains are detached from the ore via high compressive stress, which leads to a significant and clean liberation of the mineral phases in HPGR coarse grinding. Overall, HPGR grinding is more beneficial for quartz liberation. Ball mill grinding is more beneficial for oxidised iron minerals at coarse grinding fineness; however, that advantage disappears with further fine grinding. The typical separation process of “Magnetic separation – Reverse flotation” was used to recover hematite. Better liberated quartz with coarse size after HPGR grinding raised rejection of the coarse gangue after magnetic separation. Finally, the recovery via HPGR grinding process increased by 4.4–5.2 percentage points higher than that of the ball milling process. This work was financially supported by the