In the present project, attrition in pneumatic conveying—as in fracture mechanics and comminution—is regarded as a result of a process function (stress conditions) and a material function (influence of material properties). The first part of the paper describes the results of the determination of the stress conditions, where special emphasis is put on the numerical simulation of dilute-phase conveying. In the second part, results of single-particle tests are discussed. They simulate the two basic stress modes: impact and friction. The results show that the attrition behavior of the polymers tested changes between both stress modes. It is currently evaluated which material properties are suitable to describe this experimentally observed behavior.For the transport of bulk solids, pneumatic conveying often is the process of choice. This is mainly due to advantages like flexibility in routing (horizontal and vertical conveying), the possible distribution of bulk solids to different areas in the plant and the dust-free transportation of solids ( So far, it was possible to reduce the attrition of bulk solids during pneumatic transport to a tolerable amount for most applications, e.g., by installing additional cyclones or filters. Consequently, process improvements were focused on different problems like the erosion of conveying pipelines and in particular, the wear of pipe bends ( Therefore, as The scope of the present research project is to identify the mechanisms leading to attrition as well as the relevant material properties of the bulk solids. With the obtained results, test procedures will be developed to reduce the extent to which the above tests have to be applied. Furthermore, weak spots in routing and bend geometry can be identified, which will ultimately lead to reduced attrition rates resulting in simpler process setups, better product quality and reduced investment and operational costs. The long-term goal is to develop a physical model, allowing the prediction of attrition just by knowledge of material properties and conveying installation design. The first step towards reaching these goals is the transfer of concepts used in fracture mechanics and comminution. As This approach was transferred to attrition in pneumatic conveying. As in comminution, the attrition of particles can be regarded as a result of the stress conditions the particles are subjected to in the conveying pipelines (process function) and the material properties governing attrition formation (material function). Knowledge of these two functions (see Attrition in pneumatic conveying occurs regardless of the material transported and the mode of conveying. As reported in In order to determine the material function, single-particle tests are carried out simulating the above-mentioned basic attrition mechanisms. Their results are compared to material properties of the bulk solids in order to identify those governing attrition formation. The previously determined stress conditions are used as input parameters for these experiments where possible to assure conditions similar to those in industrial processes. By conducting further tests in pilot plant or industrial-scale conveying installations, the obtained results will be verified. Due to the versatility of the above concept, it is believed that it can be applied to every process in which attrition occurs. It is thus likely that the results obtained in the present project can also be transferred to other processes like, for example, fluidized beds or riser-reactors bearing the potential for improvements in these processes. Pneumatic conveying is extensively used to transport granular polymers. Consequently, the experiments presented are focused on this class of bulk solids. Vanadium steel and aluminum discs of different surface topographies were used for stimulating the wall in the single-particle sliding test apparatus. The results presented in this paper were obtained for sandblasted vanadium steel, with a center line average As stated in The procedure for the calculation of the process function has been given in detail elsewhere ( For the determination of the stress conditions in dilute-phase conveying, a commercial Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Code—CFX-Tascflow from AEA Technology—was used. With this Code, the trajectories of individual bulk solids particles can be calculated by using the approach by Euler and Lagrange ( In contrast to the fluid phase, the particles of the disperse phase are modeled separately (Lagrange). The trajectories that the particles follow through the conveying pipes are calculated by considering the forces acting on them by applying the well-known Basset–Boussinesq–Oseen (BBO) equation ( For the determination of the stress conditions, a pipe bend model possessing the geometry shown in The particle inlet is at the right-hand side of the pipe. For means of reduced calculation time, the model was created as a symmetric half model. Particle wall collisions were modeled as fully elastic with a coefficient of restitution of 1 because no experimental values for the polymers used were found in literature. For the determination of the stress conditions, only the first particle wall impact in the pipe bend was analyzed. Knowledge of the exact value of the coefficient of restitution is thus not essential in this context. The particle trajectories resulting from two different calculations are shown in Unfortunately, no information can be gained directly from CFX-Tascflow about the impact conditions of individual particles. For this purpose, suitable tools had to be developed by using macros and Fortran routines. Details on how the impact conditions are extracted from the results of the numerical simulations and are given elsewhere ( Basically, by analyzing the particle positions in terms of their By using cylindrical coordinates to describe any point on the inner pipe wall surface in conjunction with a coordinate transformation, the impact conditions can be calculated from the In The gas velocity was set to approximately 41 m/s. Because measured values of experiments in the pipe bend installation were used as starting parameters, the initial particle velocity varied between 40 and 45 m/s. The particle diameters and densities were experimentally determined in a helium pycnometer and were set according to It is interesting to note, that the tangential component of the impact velocity is significantly higher than the normal component. This might be an indication that opposed to what was assumed in Because the low impact angles were unexpected, an arbitrary initial velocity component In contrast to dilute-phase conveying, the determination of stress conditions is rather difficult for dense phase or plug flow conveying because little is known about the particle movement inside the plugs. During conveying, a moving plug is subjected to fluid pressure force, wall friction force and resistance force caused by the stationary bed, which usually exists in-between the plugs. This results in an axial compressive stress which originates a radial stress since the pipe wall prevents radial deformation of the plug. It is obvious, that the highest stress intensities will occur where the highest pressures and relative velocities between particles or between particles and pipe walls exist. If it is assumed that all particles in the plug are transported with approximately the same velocity, the highest relative velocities are apt to occur between the particles forming the shell of the plug and the pipe wall. It is further assumed that the particles of the plug are fixed relative to each other, which results in sliding contact of the shell particles with the pipe walls. These assumptions are supported by two experimental studies carried out by They also measured the wall pressure exerted by moving plugs with pressure transducers. For a conveying velocity of 5.4 m/s and plastic pellets ( As a result of the above considerations, two different kinds of single-particle tests were conducted with the polymers. The scope of the first one was to simulate particle wall impacts whilst the second one was used to simulate particle wall sliding friction. For the investigation of normal particle wall impacts, a device originally developed by For the experiment, 20–25 g of a bulk solid are used. After the experiment, the particles as well as the attrition debris are collected in the impact chamber (4). To measure the amount of attrition, the particles are sieved and cleaned with pressurized air. The cut size of the sieve was 2 mm, which is approximately half the measured initial particle size (3.9 to 4.1 mm). The amount of attrition A was calculated as the relative loss of mass: The setup of the attrition test apparatus for sliding friction is shown in the right part of The sliding velocity The polymer particles were weighed on a microscale (Mettler Toledo UMT2) with a resolution of 10  The diagram on the right hand side of The attrition rates in the sliding friction experiments are comparatively high. In the present setup, higher velocities than 10 m/s could not be measured because the particles were completely attrited within contact times below 30 s, which corresponds to a sliding distance of 300 m. If the values of the numerical simulations with velocities of up to 40 m/s were used, the attrition even during smallest contact times will be considerable. This is another hint that sliding friction plays a greater role in attrition during dilute phase conveying than was expected at the beginning. The progressive increase of the attrition rate in the impact experiments can be attributed to fatigue. For the sliding experiments, another effect has to be taken into account. Frictional energy is always partly dissipated into heat, which leads to high temperatures at the contact interface. Based on temperature measurements ( With respect to material properties, a comparison with Besides that, the fracture toughness or critical stress intensity factor What is most striking about the comparison of the experiments is that the relative attrition behavior of the polypropylenes is different in the impact and the sliding friction experiments. Obviously, the same material can react quite differently to the different stress modes applied. The main conclusion which can be drawn from the above experiments is that—for the polypropylenes investigated—the initial assumption that attrition in dilute-phase conveying is caused by almost normal particle wall impacts is wrong. The numerical determination of the stress conditions, as well as the single-particle tests, for normal impacts and sliding friction indicate that friction plays a major role. In normal impact experiments carried out with velocities close to those obtained from the numerical simulations, the attrition rate was hardly detectable. The attrition rate in the sliding experiments on the other hand is comparatively high at sliding velocities, being significantly lower than those calculated. These results indicate that opposed to what was assumed, attrition in dilute-phase conveying is dominated by friction. The fact that the relative attrition behavior of the polymers changes between the impact and sliding friction tests provides an opportunity to evaluate which mechanism prevails in dilute and dense phase conveying. For this purpose, experiments in a pipe bend installation possessing the same geometry, as the computational domain, will be carried out. This way, the results of the calculations can be verified by conducting experiments under identical conditions. Furthermore, due to its simplicity in geometry, the stress conditions in the pipe bend are well defined. This is a major advantage in comparison with industrial pilot plant conveying installations. The results obtained in this installation will be compared to the results of the single-particle tests. This will give valuable hints whether impact or sliding friction dominates in attrition during dilute-phase conveying. It has been pointed out that in contrast to semibrittle materials (