Background
                  Plating of the posterior malleolus (PM) is a common procedure for treatment of PM fracture but its osteology was seldom mentioned. In this study, we evaluated the anatomy of the PM in relation to the choice of plate.
               
                  Method
                  A total of 122 adult patients with normal distal tibia computed tomography films were recruited. The width available for PM plating, total width of the PM, the inclination angle of the groove for the posterior tibial tendon, and the proportions of the width available for plating with reference to the total width were obtained.
               
                  Results
                  Presence of the groove was found in 98.4% of the patients (n
                     =120). The mean width available for plating was 20.4 mm for male patients and 18.4 mm for female patients (p
                     <0.05). The mean inclination angle was 36.9° for male and 28.9° for female patients (p
                     <0.05). The ratio comparing the width available for plating with the width of the PM at the level of syndesmosis was 0.49 for both sexes.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our study demonstrated the importance of understanding the anatomy of the PM for safe and effective plating of PM fractures. It provided estimations for appropriate width of plate and the method to evaluate the correctness by comparing with the width of the tibia.Plating of the posterior malleolus (PM) is a common procedure for fixation or buttressing of sizable PM fracture. The lower end of the tibia is slightly expanded and its inferior aspect shows a saddle-shaped surface, which articulates with the talus. The posterior aspect of the distal tibia forms the PM. It is not a complete flat surface and there is a gentle curvature from the lateral side to the medial side. Understanding the anatomy of the PM is essential in choosing the appropriate plate for the PM. Poor fitting of the plate can lead to suboptimal fixation or buttressing of the fracture. Worse still, impingement of tendon or medial neurovascular bundles can occur if the plate is placed too medially. In this study, we try to measure the width of the PM that is available for plating using axial computed tomography (CT) and to investigate any influence by the groove morphology on our plate selection. We recruited 122 Chinese adult patients admitted to our hospital from April 2012 to April 2015 with normal distal tibia CT films. Demographic data including age and sex were recorded. The width available for the PM plating was measured from the axial CT cut showing the most prominent groove and the value was obtained from the best-fit straight line slightly lateral to the groove to just medial to syndesmosis articulation (green line in The inclination angle of the groove was measured as the angle subtended by the best-fit line and the projected line from the medial groove edge (180° minus the angle subtended by the yellow lines in The location of the deepest part of the groove ( Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 13 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Paired This study included 122 patients (60 male and 62 female patients) with mean age of 47.2 years. Of the 122 patients, the groove was absent in two patients (1.6%). For those with the groove ( The mean ratios comparing the width available for plating with (1) the total width of the PM and (2) the tibial width at the level of syndesmosis were calculated. These measurements help to determine, under anteroposterior ankle X-ray, whether the size of plate is appropriate by comparing the relative size of the plate with the distal tibia. The mean ratio between the width available for plating and the total width of the PM was 0.59 for both sexes. By contrast, the mean ratio when comparing with the tibial width at syndesmosis was 0.49 for both male and female patients ( The mean distance from the deepest part of the groove to the superior joint surface was 10.3 mm for male and 8.2 mm for female patients ( Appropriate sizing is essential in PM plating. Whereas an undersized plate can lead to suboptimal fixation or buttressing, an oversized plate can lead to impingement of medial-side tendon or neurovascular bundle. Preoperative planning and understanding of the anatomy of the PM are essential in choosing the correct implant. It is particularly important when the surgery was performed through the posterolateral approach because the medial-side structures including the neurovascular bundles can be very difficult to appreciate intraoperatively. However, the anatomy of normal PM and guidelines for proper plating were lacking in literature. According to our study, the grooves for the tibialis posterior tendon were present in 98.4% of patients. Therefore, we have to consider this when applying the implant in nearly all patients. For buttressing or fixation to be effective in the PM, it should be as close to the ankle joint as possible. Our results showed that the groove for the tibialis posterior tendon is located exactly at the optimal position for plating. The grooves were in close proximity to the joint line in both sexes (10.3 mm for male and 8.2 mm for female patients). This again indicates that this groove is an important anatomical consideration when fitting the plate. The inclination angles were measured in our study. This is because a high inclination will hinder the surgeon from properly fitting a straight or mildly curved plate over the medial side of the PM. We found that the inclination angles of both sex groups were more than 28° (37.0° for male and 28.9° for female patients). These are steep angles and overhanging would occur if it is too large or if it is placed too medially. Therefore, to avoid medial overhang or impingement on medial-side structures, the proper width should be the one measured from the lateral surface near the fibula articulation to the position just lateral to the groove. We found that the maximum width for men should be 20 mm and 18 mm for women. The commonly used plates in our unit that can be safely applied for PM fracture include 1/3 tubular plate, 3.5 mm reconstruction plate, and 3.5 mm or 2.4 mm dynamic compression plate. However, the widths of these plates were less than 10 mm and may not be large enough to provide adequate buttressing or fixation, particularly for those fractures with comminution. By contrast, T-shaped plates (2.4 mm or 3.5 mm) should be used with caution as the distal width of the implants was larger than 20 mm. Cutting out one of the distal screw hole or placing the plate in an oblique orientation may avoid medial structures impingement. Therefore, to facilitate PM fixation or buttressing, there is a demand in designing appropriate anatomical plate in Chinese population. From our study, the location of the groove for the tibialis posterior tendon was close to the joint at about 10 mm from the joint line (10.3 mm for male and 8.2 mm for female patients). We made use of this position to measure the width of the PM at the level of syndesmosis. The ratio between the width available for plating and the width of the PM at syndesmosis was 0.49. Intraoperatively, we can measure the width of the distal tibia at the level of syndesmosis, 1 cm above the joint line for male and 0.82 cm for female patients, horizontally from the medial edge of the tibia to just medial to the fibula ( As shown in By contrast, assessing the correct width by comparing with total width of the tibia would be more difficult as the total width of the PM is better appreciated using CT rather than intraoperative X-rays. However, the accuracy of measurement using intraoperative X-rays can be adversely affected by multiple variables. They include position of the ankle during X-ray taking, magnification factor of fluoroscopy, the presence of displaced fractures, and the presence of syndesmotic disruption. However, it can still serve as a reference for any gross oversize or undersize of the implant. Together with the mean values of width available for plating, appropriate size of plate can be determined more confidently. In case of displaced fracture or syndesmotic disruption, the measurements can be performed on the contralateral intact ankle during the operation. By contrast, preoperative CT scan of the injured leg or the contralateral leg would be more accurate to assess the exact anatomy and determine the width available for plating of each individual patient. This is the first CT study investigating the influence of PM's anatomy on the choice of plating in Chinese patients. It showed that in nearly all patients, the most medial area of the PM is not available for plating. The appropriate width of implant can be estimated with our findings (20.4 cm for male and 18.1 cm for female patients) or using the proportion of the plate with respect to posterior tibial width. Our CT study of 122 patients showed the importance of understanding the anatomy of the PM to achieve effective and safe plating of the PM in Chinese patients. It also provided estimations for appropriate width of plate in different sex groups and the method to evaluate the correctness by comparing with the width of the tibia. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. No funding or financial support were received for the work described in this article.