The specific heat capacity (Cp
                     ) of one copper and three nickel concentrates was determined using a self-heating apparatus and by drop calorimetry over the temperature range 50 to 80°C in the presence of 6% moisture. The Cp
                      values from both techniques were comparable and shown to be measuring the same property. The Cp
                      values were similar for all four concentrates increasing from ca 0.4 to 1.4Jg−1
                     K−1 as temperature increased from 50 to 80°C. Uses of Cp
                      to identify self-heating risk and to modify the Rosenblum standard test are discussed.Substances possess characteristic properties that determine their physico-chemical behavior ( Self-heating of sulphide minerals is known to commence at temperatures <100 In this work, the specific heat capacity of one copper and three nickel concentrates is determined in the presence of moisture as a function of temperature below 100 There are two ways of expressing the specific heat capacity of materials. One is the heat capacity at constant volume (  Most sulphide materials encountered in mining are mixtures. Therefore Eq. The procedure using the self-heating apparatus of  Eq. Drop calorimetry is a technique in which the amount of heat given up by a substance is measured by cooling it from an initial temperature ( The samples were three Ni-concentrates, two from Raglan (Nunavik, Canada, Raglan 1 and Raglan 2) and one from Voisey’s Bay (Labrador), and a Cu-concentrate from Voisey’s Bay. As a substance of known The self-heating (SH) apparatus and the experimental procedures are described in The procedure is based on the standard test of An example heating curve is given in At the end of the test, after 1 The calorimeter was a Dewar from Dilvac (UK) made of a double-walled glass chamber covered by metal. The specifications were: capacity; 1 The heat capacity can be determined by measuring the temperature change when a known mass of water at elevated temperature is added to a known mass of water at lower temperature ( A 150  The A specimen calculation of Repeating these calculations for all conditions, the 95% confidence interval (95% CI) for The heat capacity of the calorimeter was measured 3 times by setting the cold water temperature accurately at about 15 The 95% CI for the The specific heat capacities (95% CI) determined as a function of temperature using Eq. The precision of measurement was similar for both the SH and DC techniques, the pooled estimate of standard deviation on To assess whether the two methods are measuring the same property, the Bland–Altman plot was used ( The The argument has been advanced that the self-heating apparatus of Rosenblum et al. can be treated as a calorimeter and thus can be used to measure physico-chemical properties related to self-heating (SH) ( The use of the SH apparatus has advantages determining the The The concentrate The difference in The determination of The magnitude of The specific heat capacity ( Initial funding was under a Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada (NSERC) Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) grant sponsored by the Canadian Mineral Industries Research Organization representing Vale, Teck Resources, Xstrata Process Support (XPS), Golders, and Cytec, and subsequently under the Chair in Mineral Processing NSERC-CRD grant sponsored by Teck Resources, Vale, XPS, Barrick, Shell Canada, COREM, SGS Lakefield and Flottec. This support is gratefully acknowledged.