Introduction
                  Few clinical studies have analyzed the utility of distal interlocking screws in stable and unstable intertrochanteric fractures treated with intramedullary devices. We performed a prospective analysis comparing short unlocked versus short dynamic and short static distal locked intramedullary nails.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Nine level-II trauma centres were involved in the study. 240 patients over the age of 65 with a stable (AO/OTA 31-A1) or unstable intertrochanteric fracture (AO/OTA 31-A2) were prospectively investigated. The same type of nail was used in every patient. Patients were randomly divided into 3 groups according to the type of distal locking used. Intra-operative variables were examined and patients were followed clinically and radiographically at 1, 3, 6, 12 months postoperatively. All complications were recorded.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 212 patients completed 1 year of follow-up visits. In the Unlocking Group (UG) the operation time, blood loss, fluoroscopy time, total length of incision were significantly decreased compared to both the Dynamic Group (DG) and the Static Group (SG) (p < 0.05). Conversely, no reliable differences in intraoperative variables were noted between the Dynamic Group and the Static Group (p > 0.05). In terms of time of fracture union we found no differences among the three Groups (p > 0.05). Moreover, no cases of limb shortening >1 cm or varus collapse were detected in any group. The 3 Groups were similar in terms of HHS, SF-12 and Barthel index results at 1-year follow-up (p > 0.05). Finally, no significant differences were demonstrated across the three Groups in terms of major complications.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This clinical study further confirms the hypothesis that short intramedullary nails do not need to be locked for stable and unstable intertrochanteric fractures.According to recent estimates the number of hip fractures worldwide will drastically increase in the next few decades, with an anticipated incidence of 500,000 fractures per year by 2040 [ When addressing the distal locking issue, some authors have stated that distal locking is not necessary for most intertrochanteric fracture (AO/OTA 31-A1 and A2); they then used their samples to confirm that unlocked nailing was safe and not associated with increased complications [ In our previous clinical study [ In the current study we expanded our prior prospective comparative analysis introducing a third configuration of nail : short dynamic distal locked nails. The study protocol used was equivalent to our previous research. To our knowledge, this is the first clinical prospective study comparing short nails with three types of distal locking configuration (unlocked, static and dynamic) in the treatment of stable and unstable intertrochanteric fractures (AO/OTA 31-A1 and A2). Our main purpose was to further confirm our hypothesis that unlocked nails are equivalent to both static and dynamic distal locked nails regarding clinical and radiological outcomes, providing the advantage of intraoperative variables’ reduction. The study was approved by our regional ethics committee and our institutional board. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. From January 2015 to March 2016, a total of 330 patients were assessed from emergency departments for eligibility. Nine level-two trauma centres in our area (Puglia - Italy) were involved in the study. The inclusion criteria were the presence of an acute (treatment within 15 days from trauma) stable (31-A1) or unstable (31-A2) intertrochanteric fracture and patients over 65 years able to walk before the injury with or without crutches. Patients with medical contraindications, medical illness or cognitive disorders precluding participation in the follow-up examination, unwillingness to participate, open fracture, bilateral fractures, pathological fracture and previous ipsilateral hip or femur surgery were excluded. Among 330 patients assessed, 48 did not meet the inclusion criteria, 29 refused to participate in the study and 13 patients were treated with Dynamic Hip Screws (DHS) ( 240 patients with a stable or unstable intertrochanteric fracture made up the initial sample. In all cases fractures were caused by a low-energy trauma, generally a fall from a standing height. Fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA classification system [ Patients were randomized in three groups according to computer-generated random numbers, which were secured in sealed envelopes. 80 patients did not receive any distal locking (Unlocking Group - UG), 80 patients received a dynamic distal locking (Dynamic Group - DG) and 80 patients a static distal locking (Static Group - SG). ( Ten different surgeons with more than 10 years of experience performed surgeries. In this study the Endovis BA 2 Citieffe nail (Calderara di Reno (BO), Italy) was used in all patients. This implant supports both dynamic or static distal locking configuration. Some intra-operative variables were recorded for each patient (blood loss, fluoroscopy time, blood transfusion, length of incision, surgery time). Early and late post-operative complications were also investigated and recorded. Depending on their general condition, patients of all groups were allowed to sit upright on the second postoperative day; partial weight-bearing with a walker was allowed on the fourth postoperative day. Patients were followed clinically and radiographically at 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, 12 months postoperatively. At 1-year follow-up, 22 patients (10.4%) died. Six patients (2.8%) declined participation because they were satisfied with their hip surgery and refused further examination. We included 212 patients (138 women and 74 men) in the final analysis at 12 months postoperatively ( Fracture healing was assessed for each patient using the Harris Hip Score (HHS) and radiographic examinations (anteroposterior and lateral X-ray) during follow up. Fracture union was defined by a full weight-bearing patient along with radiographic evidence of a bridging callus on radiographs. At the last follow-up patients were invited to answer the SF-12 questionnaire and the Barthel Index. They were also asked to express their level of satisfaction with the function of the injured hip (0–10; with 10 representing complete satisfaction). Residual hip and thigh pain were also investigated during the follow-up. We used the analysis of variance (f-test), with 5% confidence level, to check the difference in continuous variables. We use the Chi-Squared test, with 5% confidence level, to check the difference in the frequency of complications between the groups. The three groups were similar with respect to gender, age, side of fracture, OTA classification, co-morbidity and ASA score (American Society of Anesthesiologists scoring) without significant differences, as shown in The mean operation time (starting from skin incision to wound closure) was significantly shorter in the UG (33.8 ± 6.3 min) compared to both the DG (39.4 ± 4.7 min) and the SG (40.1 ± 3.7 min) (f-test; p < 0.05). ( Similarly, the mean fluoroscopy time was significantly briefer in the UG (48.4 ± 3.3 s) than in the DG (56.3 ± 7 s) and in the SG (54.2 ± 8 s)(f-test; p < 0.05). ( In the UG, the mean blood loss was 152.6 ± 43 ml and 26% of patients (n.19) required blood transfusion. In the DG the average blood loss was 172.4 ± 38 ml and transfusion was needed in 30.8% of patients (n.20). In the SG the mean blood loss was 174.2 ± 3.4 ml with 28.1% of patients (n.20) requiring blood transfusion. Blood loss in both the DG and SG was more than that in the UG, whereas the proportion of patients requiring transfusion was similar between the groups. ( The total length of incision (the sum of the length incision for the introduction of the nail, proximal and distal screws) was significantly shorter in the UG (11.4 ± 2.2 cm) compared to DG (13.5 ± 2.3 cm) and to SG (13.8 ± 3 cm) (f-test; p < 0.05). ( The mean length of hospital stay per patient was 5.9 days (range 5–13) for the UG, 5.4 days (range 4–10) for the DG and 6.2 days for the SG (range 5–12). No significant differences were found. ( In terms of time of fracture union we found no differences between the UG (9.6 ± 1.1 weeks) the DG (10 ± 0.6 weeks) and the SG (10 ± 0.2 weeks). ( The compression of the two main fragments was also evaluated according to the backing out of lag screws from the lateral wall of the nail. No statistical differences were recorded between the three groups (f-test; p > 0.05). Moreover, in all the groups the entity of fragments’ compression depended on the stability of the fracture. In fact, as reported in The statistical comparison demonstrated no differences among the three groups in terms of total complication rate, with few major complications occurring and equally distributed between the groups. A summary of the postoperative complications is reported in The seven cases of post-operative hematomas (2-UG; 3-DG; 2-SG) resolved spontaneously within few weeks. Only one case of DVT was detected in the SG and treated with high-doses LMWH. Four cases of lag screws’ cut out were detected (1-UG; 1-DG; 2-SG). In two cases (1-DG; 1-SG), re-osteosynthesis with an intramedullary nail was selected. In the other two patients (1-UG; 1-SG) with femoral head necrosis, we performed a conversion to total hip arthroplasty. Seven cases of diaphyseal fracture were reported (2-UG; 3-DG; 2-SG). In all cases the fracture occurred due to a second traumatic event. No cases of intra-operative fracture were reported. In 3 patients (1-UG; 2-DG), internal fixation was performed using a locking plate. In the other 4 cases (1-UG; 1-DG; 2-SG) the short nail was removed and substituted with a long nail. All fractures healed within 16 weeks after reoperation. Finally, all cases of wound infection (3-UG; 2-DG; 3-SG) were successfully treated with debridement and antibiotic therapy. No cases of deep infection occurred. Clinical outcomes of all patients at 1 year follow-up are shown in After 1-year follow-up, 22 patients (10.4%) died from causes unrelated to the procedure (6 UG – 9 DG - 7 SG). No significant differences were found with respect to the mortality between the groups. The evaluation of functional scores, SF-12 questionnaire and the Barthel Index, showed no differences among the groups at 1-year follow-up. Full weight–bearing was reached by 50 patients (68.4%) in the UG, 47 patients (69.2%) in the DG and 49 patients in the SG (69%). In the UG, 20 patients (27.4%) walked with a walking aid and 3 patients (4.2%) used a wheel chair. In the DG, 17 (25%) patients walked with crutches and 4 patients (5.8%) used a wheel chair. Finally, in the SG, 18 patients (25.4%) needed an aid to walk and 4 patients (5.6%) used a wheel chair. At the last follow-up the level of overall satisfaction with the function of the injured hip was on average 7.1 in the UG, 6.9 in the DG and 7.0 in the SG, with no significant differences. Additionally, the mean Harris Hip Score was 75.3 ± 7.2 in the UG, 76.4 ± 6.7 in the DG and 75.1 ± 8.1 in the SG. Also in this case, no statistical differences were reported. We also investigated the residual hip and thigh pain using a visual analogue scale (VAS) (0–10 with 10 most severe). In terms of hip pain, we did not observe any differences among groups during the follow-up. On the contrary, we observed thigh pain to be relatively higher in the DG and SG compared to the UG up to 1 year follow-up ( Biomechanical advantages and minimal invasiveness are the key points of the increased use of intramedullary nailing in the treatment of intertrochanteric fractures [ Intramedullary nails work as internal splints with load sharing characteristic. The load bearing of any intramedullary nail largely depends on the fracture pattern and the achieved reduction [ On the basis of these biomechanical and anatomic considerations, many authors have progressively abandoned the use of locking screws in their clinical practice [ In their retrospective clinical study including 107 patients, Vopat et al. [ The aim of the current study was to further investigate whether a proximal femoral nail can be implanted without the distal locking screw in stable and unstable intertrochanteric femur fractures. In particular, our main purpose was to demonstrate that unlocked nails are equivalent to both static and dynamic distal locked nails regarding clinical and radiological outcomes, providing the advantage of intraoperative variables’ reduction. We therefore conducted a prospective multicentric study comparing three groups of patients treated with unlocked, static distal locked and dynamic distal locked short nails. The three groups were homogeneous for age, sex, side of fracture, OTA classification, co-morbidity and ASA score Our results showed that when using identical postoperative rehabilitation, no statistically significant differences occurred regarding clinical outcomes and healing time. As emerged in other studies [ Similarly to our previous study, by avoiding the use of distal locking screws, we had the added advantage of decreased operation and fluoroscopy exposure time, blood loss and total length of incision. Additional radiation exposure is not to be taken lightly and is a growing problem among orthopaedic surgeons. One study estimates a relative risk for cancer of 5.37 with respect to the general population [ It is our strong belief that distal locking in the application of intramedullary nails should be considered prudently and with caution. Furthermore, any consideration of the use of the distal locking screws must take into account the potential stress riser effect. These stresses may lead to local cortical hypertrophy, mid-thigh pain and fractures around the distal locking screws [ This clinical study further supports our belief that short intramedullary nails do not need to be locked for stable (31-A1) and unstable (31-A2) intertrochanteric fractures. The use of static or dynamic distal locking screws doesn’t bring any benefits in terms of clinical and radiological outcomes with a similar proportion of complications compared to unlocked nails. By contrast, unlocked nails showed subtle advantages in reducing blood loss, operation and fluoroscopy exposure time, length of incision as well as reduction of residual thigh pain. No funding was received in support of this study. None of the other authors have any conflicts of interest to declare.