The low emission and high fuel economy standards set by regulatory agencies are causing an increase in the number of electrified (hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and battery electric) vehicles reaching the marketplace. In order for students to obtain a better understanding of the architecture of these vehicles, a 1974 Volkswagen Super Beetle was converted into a plug-in series hybrid electric vehicle with a generator that runs on used canola oil biodiesel. Moreover, this vehicle is connected to a solar photovoltaic charging station for a comparison of recharging on or off the electrical grid. To analyze this recycling of a vehicle including renewable energy sources requires a life cycle energy and emissions analysis (LCA). To this end, this effort utilizes the Argonne National Laboratory Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in Transportation (GREET) model. Moreover, a Matlab-based vehicle dynamics simulation coupled to GREET provides a localized driving cycle examination in the LCA. The resulting outcomes presented include the reduction in energy use and emissions through recycling and component reuse for a vehicle. In addition, on-road testing with model validation demonstrates fuel savings using a more efficient vehicle over the baseline design. Finally, this effort documents improvements in the sustainability of the vehicle by incorporating solar energy for charging.Amount of individual electricity type used in the mix [kWh] Total amount of electricity used in the mix [kWh] Aerodynamic drag force [N] Pump-to-Wheels biodiesel emissions factor [g/L] Well-to-Pump biodiesel emissions factor [g/L] Gradation force [N] Linear acceleration force [N] Rolling resistance force [N] Tractive Force [N] Default GREET biodiesel emissions factor for Pump-to-Wheels [g/km] Default GREET biodiesel emissions factor for Well-to-Pump [g/GJ] Individual default electricity emissions factor [g/kWh] Kilometers per liter [km/L] Lower heating value [GJ/L] Number of electricity types in the mix [–] Road angle relative to the horizontal [deg] Recent legislation by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), California Air Resources Board (CARB), and other emission regulatory commissions require that automotive manufacturers must reduce exhaust emissions to miniscule levels ( These pollution concerns coupled with ever-rising oil prices have led many companies to investigate the use of electric drive components in order to increase efficiency and lessen emissions. Electric drive vehicles are defined as any vehicles that “ In order to quickly train students and increase the pace of understanding regarding EVs while starting a new automotive program from scratch, the simplest approach involves replacing the drive train in an existing vehicle in order to retain the body, chassis, and other particular elements (e.g., transmission) that do not hinder the conversion from an ICEV to an EV. To this end, Das Autohaus of Lawrence, KS generously donated a 1974 Volkswagen (VW) Super Beetle for this effort. Since this vehicle is one of the top selling automobiles in history, it maintains widespread availability of replacement parts, and allows for other institutions to reproduce the results of this paper ( Prior to an estimation of an LCA for the VW, it is pertinent to review the literature briefly regarding the reuse of vehicle components and the benefits of vehicle conversion to a more efficient platform. Later sections document an improvement to current LCA techniques through incorporation of a vehicle dynamics model coupled to a full energy and emissions analysis. Manufacturing vehicle components is a highly energy intensive process, and thus is important to this study when considering the parts reused from the original vehicle. Studies calculate energy consumption in the creation of vehicles ranging from 19.9 to 33.9 GJ, producing anywhere from 1.04 to 2013 kg of CO This energy intensive process of vehicle manufacturing and eventual disposal leads to the potential of component recycling and reuse as a methodology for widespread energy and emissions reductions. This is of interest around the world as indicated by Moreover, A number of studies following this program analyzed the energy and emissions savings induced, including These earlier efforts investigate the replacement of the complete vehicle with a more modern design; however, this work implements a modular approach not a wholesale change. As discussed, the reuse of vehicle components will have significant energy, emissions, and landfill reduction benefits. This is a function of reduced vehicle manufacturing, limited disposal of parts, and the implementation of a higher efficiency powertrain. Thus, the savings would be greater in comparison to Lenski et al.'s findings by effectively eliminating a significant fraction of the third area. For practicality, it is important to consider a pertinent vehicle platform in order to promote large-scale applications. In particular, the conversion process of this study is directly applicable to situations similar to the VW Beetle taxi replacements in Mexico City, thus giving this work a widespread consumer base ( This study analyzes the energy and environmental benefits from reusing a majority of the VW parts as part of an LCA incorporating Argonne National Laboratory's GREET Model, specifically GREET2.7 (coupled with the default GREET 1 series 1.8c), released in 2006 ( Recycling and component reuse, and the energy use and emissions avoided in this process, Fuel savings through the use of more efficient vehicles over their baseline components studied through model validation and testing, and The use of renewable energy in improving the fuel sustainability of EVs. With respect to vehicle operation, the authors drove the Beetle in three different modes: as a hybrid operating in EV mode (i.e., the generator present, but not running), as a series hybrid in extended range mode (i.e., with the generator running), and in EV mode with the generator removed. The use of all three operating modes facilitates analyzing the benefits and drawbacks to each driving style, including showing the balance between the added weight of the generator and the benefit of the extended range in easing range anxiety. Furthermore, this work studies the energy use and emissions among the three driving styles in improving the vehicle LCA. This work implements a vehicle dynamics model in calculating the energy use and emissions from driving the vehicle, taking into consideration a number of sources of energy including solar PV as a renewable source. This will improve the LCA by providing a realistic profile of vehicle usage. The next sections outline the vehicle model, the solar PV charging station used in charging the converted EV, and the experimentation performed in collecting data and validating the model. In order to understand electric drive vehicle energy usage, this work utilizes a model implementing Newton's Second Law (conservation of momentum) for a constant mass object. The model includes typical physical vehicle parameters and energy flow algorithms in predicting vehicle performance while utilizing relatively simplistic inputs. In particular, the simulation of virtually any conceivable route happens using only vehicle velocity and elevation data. Calibrating the model to the test vehicle allows further efforts implementing a generic drive cycle, such as the EPA's Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule (UDDS) ( At each time step in the model, a total tractive force balance is calculated: This power requirement coupled with driveline effects determines battery energy effects via a transient battery model. Details of this process as well as other model implementation features can be found in previous work by the second author ( This effort implements a solar photovoltaic electricity charging station in order to study the effects of renewable energy on the life cycle emissions of the vehicle. The solar array utilized in the fueling station (shown in The system implements a Xantrex XW device controlling the charge of an intermediate storage battery pack. This controller was chosen for its power capabilities since it is able to handle up to 60 VDC with 140 A input current. The intermediate battery pack includes four Intimidator AGM 8A31DTM lead acid batteries that are similar in chemistry and capacity to the batteries utilized in the high voltage pack in the Beetle, thus serving as a comparable auxiliary storage unit. The final 12 VDC system consists of four batteries wired in parallel for 5.0 kWh of energy storage. Finally, an AIMS 5000 W pure sine wave inverter converts the stored DC power to the 120 VAC power required by the Beetle's on-board charger. The system implements a Micro Circuit Labs SDL-1 Solar Data Logger, measuring and recording the available solar irradiance at the site. Data collected over the course of one-year yields a balanced estimate of the average solar irradiance per day of 4.44 kWh/(m In order to investigate model accuracy, the 1974 VW ( The route covers over 34.1 km with an average velocity of 40.7 kph, top speed of 121 kph, and 722 m of cumulative elevation change. The authors implement seven route traces with a focus on maintaining the posted speed limit as much as possible to aid in route consistency. Three runs feature the biodiesel powered generator in the vehicle but not in operation (hybrid operating in EV mode), one test features the generator running and charging the batteries (hybrid mode), and three tests feature the generator removed from the car in battery electric vehicle (BEV) mode. This combination allows the authors to model the effects of operating in hybrid mode, as well as the effects of the generator weight on vehicle performance. Recording of battery and motor performance data uses the interface module provided with the NetGain Classic Motor Controller and a Race Technology DL1 GPS based data logger collects test data on a compact flash card while measuring speed, acceleration, and elevation data. An external battery pack powers the DL1, thus eliminating outside effects on the vehicle battery pack.  The series hybrid mode has a higher battery pack voltage since the generator is constantly charging the battery pack during the route. In addition, this results in lower current draws because higher pack voltages require less current needed in order to deliver the same amount of power. In BEV mode, the voltage and current are typically between the values of either hybrid mode. This relates directly to the weight savings by removing the generator; e.g., better than the hybrid with generator off, but not as good when the generator is on. For monitoring the charging process of the vehicle from the conventional grid upon return, this work used Energy Detective 5000 (TED) hardware. The TED hardware is a power line communication system integrated into the electrical system of the building in which the vehicle is stored. This allows for measurement of vehicle charging curves in order to investigate the energy usage profiles of the vehicle.  According to the irradiance data collected, during the months of December and January the average available energy is only 2.75 to 3.00 kWh/(m At this point, enough information exists in order to compare and contrast a VW simulation with the real world test data. This comparison between the experimental data and the model begins by comparing the measured energy usage to the modeled energy usage. All of this experimental effort allows the authors to utilize this model in order to calculate the energy used in driving this vehicle. This significantly improves the energy and emissions LCA by providing a representative driving profile. Of importance, this validated model now allows for a transferrable calculation of the energy required in other drive cycles. For example, utilizing a drive cycle typical of Mexico City allows one to study the effects of electrifying the ICE taxi fleet currently being phased out of use ( Equipped with a better understanding of the energy usage requirements and solar energy availability, this work can now analyze the energy use and emissions profile over the vehicle's life cycle. Section This work seeks to explore the energy use and environmental effects of recycling VW parts, first performing a full energy and emissions analysis on the conversion process. The calculation of energy use and emissions avoided in reusing stock parts of the VW utilizes many of the default assumptions in GREET, retaining a generalized analysis. In particular, GREET 2.7 determines the amount of different materials utilized in the production of the vehicle on a by-weight ratio of the overall vehicle weight. Thus, this study utilizes a modified inventory list retaining the individual part default compositions. The total vehicle emissions generated in the production process, which includes manufacturing the components, assembly, disassembly, and recycling the parts, accurately represents the savings through reuse. This work utilizes the default material constituents of the components as depicted in The GREET 2 series analyzes the processes for creating these materials and components, calculating the energy use and total emissions produced therein. The calculation of transportation and distribution energy requirements uses the GREET 1 series; specifically, the authors utilized the coupled version to GREET2.7, GREET1.8c, for this task ( GREET 1.8c analyzes a number of pollutants, including carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO In order to study the inherent energy use and emissions produced in electricity generation, this work utilizes GREET1 2011 to analyze the electricity and biodiesel used in vehicle operation. Although using electricity does not produce emissions, the processes involved in extracting the fuel, refining, transportation and distribution, as well as burning the fuel are energy intensive. The vehicle in this study utilizes a combination of solar energy, standard grid energy, and biodiesel produced from used canola oil. Solar energy is inherently clean aside from the production of the panels. However, the production of the silicon panels is out of the scope of this study as it involves the creation of the power plant (i.e., the panel). Including this analysis requires a similar analysis on building the facilities to produce electricity and biodiesel in order to retain a consistent LCA. However, as found the limitations of the solar array do not allow for a complete charge at the full capabilities of the on-board charger. Thus, the authors developed an electricity emissions weighted average based on the United States Energy Information Administration's Monthly Energy Review released in 2011, specifically the United States 2010 Electricity Generation profile for all sectors (  In order to obtain a consistent comparison, the authors utilized the gasoline-biodiesel equivalency ratio according to These results show that although the emissions per kilometer are slightly higher when in series hybrid mode due to fuel use, some emissions are slightly lower, including PM Finally, These results show the large amount of energy required in producing the electricity used in the drive cycles, as the series hybrid driving style has the lowest total energy use. Furthermore, operating as a series hybrid relieves some of the range anxiety in EV use, making it more approachable to the public. Solar energy is once again the best energy source studied here, though it does suffer from the previously stated availability issues. This work outlines a Well-to-Wheel energy and emissions analysis of a plug-in series hybrid conversion from a 1974 Volkswagen Super Beetle using the GREET energy and emissions model and a computer vehicle model. The authors performed a materials life cycle energy and emissions analysis using GREET2.7 on parts reused in the conversion to an EV, showing over 2400 kg of CO The authors implemented a vehicle model based on Newton's Second Law, studying vehicle energy use, validating this model using data collected on a combination city/highway drive cycle with significant elevation change. The results from these drive cycles show the effects of running a series hybrid in three different scenarios; (1) hybrid operating in EV mode, (2) hybrid mode, and (3) BEV mode. Furthermore, this data provided input for an emissions and inherent energy use analysis in a WtW fuel study using GREET1 2011. The results show that, when utilizing rapeseed oil biodiesel and the 2010 US average electricity consumption mix, the emissions range from 150 to 199 g of CO One issue with utilizing solar energy is in its availability. This study shows the ability of this PV system to charge the VW in a single day during the summer. However, during the winter months, multiple days of optimal irradiance are required in order to charge the VW back to full capacity. Furthermore, an average solar irradiance of 4.44 kWh/(m