Based on the negative effects caused by siderite in the reverse flotation of hematite, different molecular arrangement and adsorption behaviors of flotation reagents on siderite, hematite and quartz were investigated by molecular simulations in order that the mechanism of depressant, activator and collector would be clearly understood and the adverse effects of siderite could be eliminated. Flotation results showed that both the grade and recovery of iron decreased with the increasing content of siderite and the decreasing grain sizes. Molecular arrangement of the flotation reagents in solution was visually displayed by the optimum adsorption models on different mineral surfaces. As the relative concentration shown, starch and oleate ions could be adsorbed on siderite surface which caused the mixture of concentrates and tailings. Ca2+ had little effects on siderite and hematite, but it had strongest effect on quartz. The formation of Ca(OH)+ and the connection between COO− and Ca(OH)+ made quartz be collected. But Ca2+ could not active the quartz covered by siderite. So it is essential to prevent siderite from entering the second stage of two-step flotation.The past years, as elucidated by former literature, showed no doubt about the dominant roles played by flotation in mineral processing [ Due to the consumption of high grade ores and increasing demand of iron, refractory iron ores such as carbonate iron ores were considered to be developed and employed [ Siderite, which was one of the major carbonate minerals, was considered to be recovered for high iron recovery. But it could cause heterogeneous coagulation with hematite or quartz on account of its characteristic of grindability. As a result, it was difficult to separate hematite and quartz, which in turn made low recovery of iron [ Starch, CaCl At this work, the effect of siderite on reverse flotation results and adsorption behavior of flotation reagents on mineral surfaces were deeply explored by laboratory flotation tests and molecular dynamics simulation. The objective of the research was to investigate the molecular arrangement of starch, Ca All the minerals including single mineral and actual products of dressing plant were took samples from Anshan Iron and Steel Group Corporation (AISG) in China. High grade siderite, hematite and quartz were hand-sorted, crushed in jaw crusher, and ground in porcelain mill. All single minerals were screened to collect particles under 0.150 mm. Siderite was further sieved into −0.150 mm + 0.010 mm and −0.010 mm. The purity of siderite, hematite and quartz was about 87%, 98% and 99%, respectively. Products in situ, siderite concentrates, hematite concentrates and tailings included, were collected and dried under 60 °C for analysis. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH), which were used as pH regulators, were analytical pure and obtained from Kemiou Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. The activator (CaCl Laboratory flotation tests were carried out in a 50 ml XFG laboratory flotation cell with 4.0 g samples and 40 ml deionized water loaded. The impeller speed in the whole flotation progress was kept at 1600 r/min. The pH value of slurry was adjusted to 11.5, the value consistent with optimum flotation condition, by 0.1 wt% HCl and NaOH solution. After conditioning for 1 min and adjusting pH value, slurry was well prepared for flotation reagents reaction. Depressant, activator and collector were added to flotation cell in order in the optimum dosage mentioned above. There was 3 min interval in the middle of each operation. At last, concentrates were collected for 4 min. Both the concentrates and the tailings were dried for further analysis. The flotation flowsheet was shown in The initial adsorption models had been built in Materials studio 8.0 software and COMPASS (Condensed-phase Optimized Molecular Potentials for Atomistic Simulation Studies) force field had been chosen for calculate inter- and intraatomic interactions [ Based on natural cleavage plane and the surface energy calculated in former research, the mineral surfaces of siderite, hematite and quartz were built for constructing adsorption models [ For efficient simulation, representative starch fragment was selected to construct the adsorption configuration. The homopolymer of amylose fragment was consisted of 10 glucose molecules with orientation of head to tail as shown in The dynamic and optimization process subjected to the system could be divided into several steps. Energy minimization and geometry optimization were applied to initial configurations using smart algorithm with convergence tolerance of 0.0001 kcal·mol In all simulation boxes, a 15 Å vacuum layer was considered to eliminate periodic boundary conditions. The frames in last 1 ns dynamics simulation were saved as the trajectory files for computing the interaction energies and average properties of molecular structures. As shown in In order to effectively confirm the main causes, different products of dressing plant were taken samples for analyzing the distribution of siderite, which was presented in Particle size of siderite in Based on the aforementioned flotation figures in dressing plant, flotation was carried on mixed ore, which included unclassified hematite and quartz, as well as 5.8% siderite at different levels of granularity, for exploring the effects of different size fraction of siderite on reverse flotation in two-step flotation. As Mass ratio of siderite was one of the crucial factors that influenced the reverse flotation of hematite in two-step flotation. When it came to −0.010 mm siderite, problems in reverse flotation were due to worsen. Not only grade but also recovery of the concentrates dwindled as the content of −0.010 mm siderite increased. Compared with siderite with whole size range, less −0.010 mm siderite could result in concentrates with lower recovery and lower grade. After 9% −0.010 mm siderite being added to mixed ores, the recovery of tailings was 13.68% higher than that of concentrates. In addition, Fe grade of the tailings was up to 25.82%, while it was 41.09% in concentrates. Therefore, it is rational and essential to carry out the first step, direct flotation of siderite, to prevent siderite slipping into flotation cells of hematite. In order to investigate the depressing, activating and collecting differences of corresponding flotation reagents on surfaces of dominant minerals in reverse flotation, molecular dynamics simulation was carried out in light of the actual conditions. It means that depressant, activator and collector were added to the solution models in order to clearly explore the function of the three reagents on mineral surfaces. Based on those interaction models, the interaction energy between three reagents and mineral surfaces, siderite, hematite and quartz included, in every step, was calculated and shown in After CaCl After sodium oleate added, it had lowest interaction energy with quartz being treated by starch and CaCl The adsorption models of starch on mineral surfaces were displayed in The relative concentration of starch was evaluated as a quantitative indicator referring to the starch molecule arrangement on mineral surfaces. As Ca  To sum up, CaCl Quartz collecting was the critical stage after depression and activation stages in reverse flotation. It could be concluded from Therefore, siderite could also be partly collected by sodium oleate because of the weaker depression effects of starch. When fine siderite covered the surfaces of hematite and quartz, it was hard to separate. So it was essential to remove it by direct flotation before it entered the reverse flotation in two-step flotation. Moreover, siderite should be recovered as many as possible on account of awful flotation result caused by a little amount of siderite. The low recovery of iron in the two-step flotation was ascribed to the heterogeneous coagulation of siderite with hematite and quartz. It was shown from the flotation of mixed ores that both the higher content and finer grains size of the siderite could severely deteriorate the iron concentrate. As molecular simulation shown, starch could be adsorbed on the surfaces of not only hematite but also siderite. So some quartz surface covered by siderite might be depressed during the reverse flotation. Ca This work was supported by the