The aim of this work was to study the operation costs of treating a real effluent from an integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) power station located in Spain. The study compares different homogeneous photocatalytic processes on a pilot plant scale using different types of radiation (artificial UV or solar UV with a compound parabolic collector). The efficiency of the processes was evaluated by an analysis of the total organic carbon (TOC) removed.
                  The following processes were considered in the study: (i) a photo-Fenton process at an artificial UV pilot plant (with the initial addition of H2O2), (ii) a modified photo-Fenton process with continuous addition of H2O2 and O2 to the system and (iii) a ferrioxalate-assisted solar photo-Fenton process at a compound parabolic collector (CPC) pilot plant. The efficiency of these processes in degrading pollutants has been studied previously, and the results obtained in each of those studies have been published elsewhere. The operational costs due to the consumption of electrical energy, reagents and catalysts were calculated from the optimal conditions of each process.
                  The results showed that the solar photo-Fenton system was economically feasible, being able to achieve up to 75% mineralization with a total cost of 6 €/m3, which can be reduced to 3.6 €/m3 by subtracting the electrical costs because the IGCC plant is self-sufficient in terms of energy.Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have emerged as a viable technology for the treatment and removal of pollutants present in wastewater that are refractory to conventional treatments ( Generally, research on AOPs includes the study of different pollutants and the effect of operation variables. Sometimes, the technical efficiencies of different processes are compared in the literature. However, few studies include economic information that can help to calculate the costs of different technologies in the context of industrial applications. In this work, different AOPs previously tested and published by the authors to treat real wastewaters coming from IGCC power stations have been compared economically. Technical data about the processes can be found in recently published studies ( The following processes were selected for this study: A homogeneous photo-Fenton process at an artificial UV pilot plant (with an initial addition of H A homogeneous photo-Fenton process at an artificial pilot plant with continuous addition of H A homogeneous photo-Fenton process assisted by ferrioxalate at a solar CPC pilot plant. The operational costs considered in the economic study are those related to electrical energy consumption, chemical (reagents and catalysts) consumption and the replacement of UV lamps. A summary of the different processes compared in this work are shown in The initial wastewater to be treated in each process may have a different composition because of changes in the operating conditions in the IGCC power station, which is typical in industrial plants. Thus, the economic study will consider the percentage of final pollutant degradation and the mass of removed pollutant. Waste waters contained up to 10 ppm of cyanides and 1700 ppm of formates. Cyanides were completely degraded in an early stage, so that pollution in the water after the treatment is mainly due to the presence of formates.  It can be observed that the modified photo-Fenton process was more technically efficient than the other processes because it could remove more TOC during the same amount of operation time. However, this apparent advantage must be confirmed in economic terms. The prices of materials (reagents and catalyst) and the electrical consumption of the different devices used for calculating the costs are shown in The economic analysis was carried out by analyzing the mineralization process (degradation of total organic carbon present in wastewater).   Costs increase with the amount of TOC removed for the three processes, especially when high amounts of TOC are to be removed. If low or intermediate amounts of TOC are to be removed, both the modified photo-Fenton process and the solar treatment are comparable in economic terms. Finally, In the solar treatment, a TOC removal rate of 75% (selected as optimal) corresponds to 4.5 g of TOC removed. Photochemical treatment costs can be reduced when total mineralization is not achieved and residual organic content (necessary for the later development of microorganisms) is present in treated wastewater at the end of the degradation reaction. Pre-treating wastewater using this type of processes results in an enhanced biodegradability of the water (  Finally, maintenance expense and depreciation have been calculated. Depreciation expense is the deduction of a portion of the original cost of the pilot plant, whereas maintenance expenses are those expenditures incurred to keep the installation in good operating order. Depreciation was calculated using a simple financial accounting depreciation computation, the straight-line method. It allocates an equal portion of the cost in each period of the pilot plant’s life. Straight-line depreciation expense is calculated by deducting the salvage value from the cost of the installation and dividing the result by the plant’s estimated useful life. The formula is: On the other hand, for small-volume plants, it is reasonable to estimate the total maintenance cost as a function of the plant’s capital. A value of 2% has been previously selected (   Different photocatalytic processes at the pilot plant scale (with artificial or solar UV radiation) were compared. The operational costs due to the consumption of electrical energy and reagents were calculated. Although the modified photo-Fenton process is capable of reaching higher mineralization degrees over a shorter period of time, the most profitable system was the solar photo-Fenton/ferrioxalate-assisted process. In the solar process, the treatment cost was 6 €/m Financial support from the