Lithium–sulfur batteries (LSBs) are promising alternative energy storage devices to the commercial lithium-ion batteries. However, the LSBs have several limitations including the low electronic conductivity of sulfur (5 × 10−30 S cm−1), associated lithium polysulfides (PSs), and their migration from the cathode to the anode. In this study, a separator coated with a Ketjen black (KB)/Nafion composite was used in an LSB with a sulfur loading up to 7.88 mg cm−2 to mitigate the PS migration. A minimum specific capacity (C
                     s) loss of 0.06% was obtained at 0.2 C-rate at a high sulfur loading of 4.39 mg cm−2. Furthermore, an initial areal capacity up to 6.70 mA h cm−2 was obtained at a sulfur loading of 7.88 mg cm−2. The low C
                     s loss and high areal capacity associated with the high sulfur loading are attributed to the large surface area of the KB and sulfonate group (SO3
                     −) of Nafion, respectively, which could physically and chemically trap the PSs.The lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are indispensable parts in electronic and portable devices since their commercialization by Sony in 1991 Over the past several years, extensive studies have been carried out to overcome the technical limitations of LSBs through cathode Various materials have been used as excellent Celgard polypropylene (PP) separator coating materials, including black phosphorus The coating of the separator with a carbon material could mitigate the PS shuttle effect. Carbon is a lightweight material having a relatively high electronic conductivity and various porous architectures. However, nonpolar carbon materials exhibit weak intermolecular interactions (0.1–0.7 eV) with the PSs KBN and ABN coating slurries were produced by mixing 26.7 wt% of KB and AB, respectively, with 72.4 wt% of a Nafion solution and 0.8 wt% of a 1.5 wt% polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) dispersed in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. For the analysis at a high sulfur loading, 52.5 wt% of a Nafion solution was mixed with 46.6 wt% of KB to modify the Celgard PP by a similar method. The slurry was prepared at ambient temperature followed by stirring for 30 min. The slurry was coated onto one side of Celgard PP-2500 using the doctor blade method ( A CNT/sulfur composite (CNT-70) was prepared by a melt-diffusion method. Pure sulfur (70 wt%) and CNTs (30 wt%) were mixed using a pestle and mortar. The mixture was placed inside a glass vial and heated in an oven at 155 The electrolyte solution was prepared using 1,3 dioxolane (DOL) and 1,2 dimethoxymethane (DME) in a ratio of 1:1, 1 M of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, and 0.1 M of LiNO The morphologies and structures of the KBN and ABN samples before and after full discharging were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; SU-3500) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS; Oxford X-MAXN) detector. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of the KB and AB were determined using a Tristar II instrument (Micromeritics VacPrep 061). The contact angles of electrolyte drops on the coated separators were measured using an optical tensiometer (OCA 15 E/B). The electrical conductivities of the KBN- and ABN-coated separators were determined using the four-point probe method with an Agilent B1500A semiconductor device analyzer. A thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA, Perkin Elmer, Diamond TG) of CNT-70 was performed in a nitrogen atmosphere to measure the mass loss at a heating rate of 10 LSBs were assembled inside an Ar-filled glove box. A hydraulic crimping machine (MSK-110 Crimper) was used to prepare 2032-type stainless-steel coin cells. The LSB performances were evaluated in a galvanostatic mode using a Landt system within a voltage window of 1.7–2.8 V (Li/Li DFT calculations of the adsorption energies of PSs on Nafion were carried out using the Dmol A conceptual schematic of the binding of the PSs by KBN is presented in The surface topographies are modified after the battery operation ( The wettabilities of ABN and KBN by the electrolyte are crucial for the electrochemical performances of the LSBs. A low wettability or nonuniform wetting can lead to an inhomogeneous Li The surface area also need to be considered as it determines the physical confinement of the PSs into the larger pore volume Besides the electrolyte wettability ( The The Nafion polymer exhibits strong chemical interactions with the PSs. By In this study, to reveal the binding of the PS species with Nafion through polar–polar interactions, a systematic theoretical analysis was carried out on the chemical absorptions of PSs (Li Further, an XPS analysis of the KBN-coated separator after the cycling operation was performed to discern the surface chemical species. The survey spectrum of the KBN coating after the operation is shown in The galvanostatic cycling behaviors of the LSBs with the uncoated (black color), KBN-coated (blue color), and ABN-coated (green color) Celgard PP separators were primarily assessed at 0.5 C, as shown in The LSB with the Celgard PP separator having a high sulfur loading (3.37 mg cm The cycling performance of the ABN-containing LSB (0.35 mg cm The charge/discharge profiles of the LSBs with the uncoated, KBN-coated, and ABN-coated Celgard PP separators at 0.5 C after 30 cycles are shown in The low performances of the Celgard PP cell with the high These results demonstrate the higher performance of the KBN-coated separator than those of the ABN-coated and uncoated Celgard PP separators ( Based on the above results, the optimized KBN coating loading of 0.50 ± 0.10 mg cm The ultralow Areal capacity is another important parameter, which directly depends on the sulfur loading In this study, a simple process was introduced for the coatings of the Celgard PP separator with ABN and KBN. The performances of the LSBs with the ABN- and KBN-coated separators were measured and compared. The KBN-coated separator exhibited an excellent initial capacity and low The KBN coating could stop the PS migration through physical and polar–polar interactions. KBN exhibited a contact angle of almost zero and high electrolyte uptake tendency, which could promote the smooth transport of Li KB exhibited a larger surface area, which could act as a reservoir for PSs and electrolyte to easily wet the electrode. The low coating loading of KBN (0.43 mg cm Masud Rana is thankful to the Australian Government and University of Queensland for the research training program scholarship and research facilities used in this study. The authors also acknowledge the facilities and scientific and technical assistance of the Australian Microscopy and Microanalysis Research Facility at the Center for Microscopy and Microanalysis and the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF-Q) at the University of Queensland. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 