Objectives
                  The optimum treatment with intramedullary nails (IMN) or sliding hip screws (SHS) for type 31-A2 trochanteric fractures remains controversial. Therefore, we performed a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to compare IMN with SHS in AO/OTA 31-A2 trochanteric fractures.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Databases including PubMed, Cochrane, and Embase were searched to identify RCTs published before December 2016, which compared IMN with SHS for intraoperative and postoperative outcomes in AO/OTA 31-A2 trochanteric fractures.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 909 patients from six RCTs were subjected to the meta-analysis. The results showed that the IMN group was associated with less operative blood loss, leg shortening, wound infections, length of hospital stay, and days to mobilization with walking aids and also yielded a higher Parker score as compared to the SHS group. No significant difference was seen in the other parameters including operative details, fracture fixation complications, postoperative complications, and 1 year mortality.
               
                  Conclusion
                  IMN fixation was found to be the superior treatment of choice for 31-A2 trochanteric fractures as compared with SHS fixation in our meta-analysis. The adverse effects appeared comparable between the two groups. However, due to the variations in the included studies, more large-sample, measures-unified, and high-quality RCTs are needed to validate these conclusions.Intertrochanteric (IT) fractures are common fractures among the elderly. Due to the increase in the aging population, the incidence of IT fractures is also on the rise The aim of this meta-analysis is to evaluate the relative effects of IMN versus SHS for AO/OTA 31-A2 trochanteric fractures from randomized controlled trials (RCTs). This meta-analysis was performed in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) reporting guidelines in the conduct of meta-analysis of intervention trials A systematic electronic search of PubMed, Cochrane, and Embase Database was performed on November 10, 2016 for all published literature. The following key phrases were used: [(Hip Fractures) OR (Fractures, Hip) OR (Trochanteric Fractures) OR (Fractures, Trochanteric) OR (Intertrochanteric Fractures) OR (Fractures, Intertrochanteric)] AND [(Fracture Fixation*, Intramedullary) OR (Fixation*, Intramedullary Fracture) OR (Intramedullary Fracture Fixation*) OR (Osteosynthesis, Fracture, Intramedullary) OR (Intramedullary Nailing*) OR (Nailing*, Intramedullary)] AND [(Extramedullary Fixation*) OR (Dynamic hip screw*) OR (Sliding hip screw*)]. In addition, we also conducted a hand search of reference lists from the original articles and reviews that were identified. The inclusion criteria for this meta-analysis were: (1) RCTs; (2) inclusion of adults with type AO/OTA 31-A2 trochanteric fractures; and (3) comparison of IMN with the SHS. Exclusion criteria were: (1) biomechanical reports or radiologic studies, All articles, in general, were independently reviewed by two reviewers (Q-Z.Z., X-D.X.) according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The full texts of all the relevant studies were obtained and reviewed. Any disagreement between the two reviewers was settled by another senior reviewer (P.L.). Each study was evaluated for methodological quality using the Cochrane Collaboration Risk of Bias Tool, which includes random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other bias The following data were recorded for each study: first author's name, year of publication, sample size of the IMN and SHS groups, mean ages, gender distributions, and durations of follow-up. The following outcomes were sought: (1) operative details including length of surgery, operative blood loss, number of patients transfused, radiographic screening time; (2) fracture fixation complications including operative fracture of the femur, later fracture of the femur, cut-out of the implant from the femoral head, reoperation (within the follow-up period of the study), wound infection (deep or superficial), other complications; (3) postoperative complications, including pressure sores, pneumonia, thromboembolic complications (deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism), other medical complications, length of hospital stay; (4) leg shortening; and (5) final outcome measures, including 1 year mortality, days to mobilization with walking aids, Parker score The weighted mean difference or standard mean difference was calculated for continuous outcomes, and the relative risks (RRs) were calculated for dichotomous outcomes, with both adopting a 95% confidence interval (CI). The heterogeneity was assessed using Chi square (χ The details of search and exclusion criteria are displayed in the flow diagram ( Of the six trials, there was one study with inadequate random sequence generation and concealment of allocation GRADE of evidence was used to measure the strength of recommendations. The evidence quality for each outcome is shown in Length of surgery was reported in four studies Operative blood loss was reported in three studies Number of patients transfused was reported in three studies Radiographic screening time was reported in four studies Operative fracture of the femur was reported in three studies Later fracture of the femur was reported in three studies Cut-out of the implant from the femoral head was reported in five studies Reoperation (within the follow-up period of the study) was reported in five studies Wound infection (deep or superficial) was reported in five studies Other fracture fixation complications were reported in four studies Pressure sores were reported in two studies Pneumonia was reported in three studies Thromboembolic complications (deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism) was reported in three studies Other medical complications were reported in three studies Length of hospital stay was reported in five studies Leg shortening recorded in two studies The 1 year mortality was reported in four studies Days to mobilization with walking aids was reported in two studies Parker score was reported in two studies To the best of our knowledge, this is the first meta-analysis of RCTs comparing IMN and SHS for AO/OTA 31-A2 trochanteric fractures. The results indicated IMN produced less operative blood loss, wound infections, length of hospital stay, leg shortening, and days to mobilization with walking aids, yet a higher Parker score compared to SHS. No difference was found between groups on other parameters including operative details, fracture fixation complications, post-operative complications, and 1 year mortality. The operation using IMN allowed surgeons to use minimal invasive techniques. Soft tissue dissections could be minimized, thereby reducing blood loss, infections, and wound complications. This meta-analysis confirmed a significant reduction in operative blood loss and fewer wound infections (deep or superficial) in the IMN group. Nevertheless, these results should be interpreted with caution. There was a notable heterogeneity in the analysis of blood loss, which could probably be explained by the different counting methods used to calculate blood loss. Sensitivity analysis showed insufficient evidence to verify the difference in wound infections. Compared to type A1, type A2 trochanteric fractures had comminution fragments of the lesser trochanter, greater trochanter, or both, in addition to the oblique fracture line running between the trochanters Early mobilization after surgery could reduce complications such as pneumonia, thromboembolic complications, and pressure sores, as well as length of hospital stay Parker score is a pure mobility score for assessment of functional status This meta-analysis showed no significant differences in other fracture fixation complications and other post-operative complications. Parker et al. The meta-analysis by Li A.B. et al. The present study has some limitations. First, there was no comprehensive subgroup analysis in this meta-analysis due to shortage of adequate data, which limited the validity to a certain extent. Second, substantial heterogeneity was observed when comparisons were made between IMN with SHS in terms of blood loss and days to mobilization with walking aids, and sensitivity analysis showed there was insufficient evidence to verify any between-group differences in wound infections and length of hospital stay. Third, non-uniformity of study measures ultimately reduced the number of observations of any given endpoint. For instance, three of the included studies reporting final outcomes were not used for meta-analysis due to the different outcome measures. Fourth, due to the limited number of clinical research which had exclusively investigated type A2 proximal femoral fractures, only six studies with 909 patients were included in this meta-analysis. Finally, all six studies might be compromised by performance bias and detection bias. IMN was associated with less operative blood loss, wound infections and length of hospital stay. Better results in terms of leg shortening, days to mobilization with walking aids and Parker score were obtained in the IMN group. Therefore, IMN fixation was found to be the superior treatment choice for 31-A2 trochanteric fractures as compared with SHS fixation. But, the adverse effects may be comparable between the IMN and the SHS groups. However, due to the variations in the included studies, more large-sample, measures-unified, and high-quality RCTs are needed in the future to demonstrate the efficacy and safety of IMN as compared to SHS for type 31-A2 trochanteric fractures. This article is a meta-analysis and not related ethical issues. The authors declare that they have no funding for your research. Qianzheng Zhu and Xiaodong Xu had full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Qianzheng Zhu and Xiaodong Xu were involved in study design, study management, study analysis and interpretation, preparing the outline of the first draft of the manuscript and were responsible for the overall conduct of the study. Peng Lin was involved in study design, conducting the study, supervision of the statistical analysis, interpretation and presentation of the results and helped to revise the manuscript. Xi Yang and Xingzuo Chen participated in the design of the study and helped to revise the manuscript. Liqiang Wang and Chenggang Liu were involved in the study design, study analyses, interpretation of the results and presentation of the results. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. Reviewregistry190. Peng Lin accept full responsibility for the work and/or the conduct of the study, had access to the data, and controlled the decision to publish.