Experimental studies of wear, cutting forces and chip characteristics when dry turning ASTM Grade 2 austempered ductile iron (ADI) with polycrystalline cubic boron nitride (PcBN) cutting tools under finishing conditions were carried out. A depth of cut of 0.2mm, a feed of 0.05mm/rev and cutting speeds ranging from 50 to 800m/min were used. Flank wear and crater wear were the main wear modes within this range of cutting speeds. Abrasion wear and thermally activated wear were the main wear mechanisms. At cutting speeds greater than 150m/min, shear localization within the primary and secondary shear zones of chips appeared to be the key-phenomenon that controlled the wear rate, the static cutting forces as well as the dynamic cutting forces. Cutting speeds between 150 and 500m/min were found to be optimum for the production of workpieces with acceptable cutting tool life, flank wear rate and lower dynamic cutting forces.The automotive industry, which is extremely competitive, is interested in austempered ductile iron (ADI) because it offers properties similar to those of heat-treated alloy steels. These include high strength, high hardness, excellent toughness, high ductility, good fatigue properties and useful wear characteristics at lower cost and reduced weight. Because of these properties, ADI is difficult to machine in the austempered condition. With regards to other engineering ductile cast irons, the relatively high strength and hardness of ADI as well as the inclination of its retained austenite to strain hardening lead to short contact length and higher mechanical loads on the cutting tool's edge ( In these conditions, cutting tools for machining ADI should fundamentally yield at the same time: high hot hardness and strength, excellent hot chemical inertia as well as high toughness. Such cutting tools are ideal and do not rigorously speaking exist in the present cutting technology. However, they are the purpose of the continuous research undertaken in the field. Coating technology appears to be an alternative. Nowadays, coatings on cutting tools are being used to improve the tribological properties of cutting tools in this ideal way ( Machining of ADI in its austempered condition is highly desirable because it can yield the tight tolerances and surface finishes generally required ( This very complex issue attracts great interest from the cutting tool industry since nearly two decades. The comprehensive research conducted hitherto on the machinability of various grades of ADI is almost very little. It has so far addressed few fundamental questions concerning the cutting performance and wear mechanisms of various types of cutting tools under various machining parameters and conditions.   In order to elucidate the mechanism of poor machinability of ADI,    There is strong interest in extending the application of polycrystalline cubic boron nitride (PcBN) cutting tools beyond the traditional machining of hardened steels, flake graphite cast irons and steels produced by powder metallurgy methods ( In an earlier investigation,  The dependence of cutting performance upon size and volume fraction of cBN grains was also corroborated by  Data accumulated so far on the machinability of ADI in its austempered condition with PcBN cutting tools allowed obtaining, although partially, fundamental understanding of interactions involved. However, these database need to be extended and consolidated in terms of tool life, wear rate, cutting forces, surface finish and geometric accuracy of the machined components, chip formation mechanisms, surface integrity of the machined components, wear mechanisms of cutting tools, etc. with regards to the recent improvements in the PcBN cutting tool processing technology. This paper focuses on experimental studies of wear (wear mode, wear mechanism, tool life, cutting length to end of tool life, ratio of volume of metal removed per unit flank wear, flank wear rate), cutting forces and chip characteristics when dry turning ASTM Grade 2 ADI with PcBN cutting tools under finishing conditions. The ASTM Grade 2 ADI workpieces used had the following chemical composition: 3.51% C, 2.61% Si, 0.19% Mn, 0.016% P, 0.009% S, 0.002% Ni, 0.62% Cu, and 0.044% Mg. These workpieces were characterized in terms of their hardness and microstructure. The microstructure was first studied with an optical microscope followed by a more detailed examination in a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Dry finish turning experiments were designed so as to investigate the wear (wear mode, wear mechanism, tool life, cutting length to end of tool life, ratio of volume of metal removed per unit flank wear, flank wear rate) of uncoated Seco CBN 100 PcBN cutting tools when machining ADI workpieces at different cutting speeds, according to the ISO Standard 3685-1977(E) for single point turning ( After a certain cutting distance (cutting time), turning was stopped, the cutting tool insert removed from the toolholder and the flank wear and crater wear scar morphologies were assessed by means of microscopic examination on the optical microscope. The maximum width of the flank wear scar was then measured. The insert was then carefully replaced in the toolholder, and the procedure repeated until the tool wear exceeded the criterion. Experiments were repeated in order to measure the cutting forces. Plots of maximum flank wear The volume of flank wear per unit of engagement length Power regression was used to fit the plots of A tri-axial dynamometer mounted on the turret's lathe and coupled to a multi-channel amplifier was used for the measurement of cutting forces. The force signals acquired were analysed so as to evaluate the static and dynamic cutting forces corresponding to a time. The static cutting forces were estimated as the average of the signals. The dynamic cutting forces were estimated as the variation from the static cutting forces ( Chips were collected after each cut and examined visually. Their morphology and microstructure were investigated with an optical and a scanning electron microscopes. The chip hardness was measured to assess the interplay between strain hardening and thermal softening. The morphology, microstructure, hardness and average thickness of chips were investigated after mounting in cold resin and metallographic preparation. Bright field optical microscopy and differential interference contrast (DIC) techniques were used. The DIC technique was used to improve the contrast between the primary and secondary shear zones. Transmission electron microscopy was used to examine the nanostructure of the secondary shear zone. Hardness tests of ADI workpieces were done on a ground surface using a Leco V-100-A2 Vickers hardness-testing machine. Hardness tests were done using a load of 30 Dry finish turning experiments were carried out on a LA 200 L Liouy-Hsing CNC Lathe rated at 14.72 A Quartz 3-Component Kistler Dynamometer Type 9257B was used for the measurement of cutting forces. A multi-channel Kistler amplifier Type 5070 A was coupled to the dynamometer. Dynoware acquisition software Type 2825A-02 Version 2.4.1.3 was used for data logging. The dry finish turning experiments were carried out using a depth of cut of 0.2 Chip hardness measurements were made with a Leco M-400A microindentation hardness-testing machine. A load of 50 An Olympus BX41M optical microscope coupled to an Olympus Camedia Camera was used to measure the width of the flank wear scar and to obtain optical micrographs. A Philips XL 30 ESEM-FEG XL series scanning electron microscope was used to obtain SEM micrographs. Chip samples for transmission electron microscopy were prepared with focused ion beam (FIB) using 30 The hardness of the ADI workpieces was 312 Image analysis of optical micrographs of unetched samples gave a volume fraction of graphite of 15%, a distribution of graphite particles of 190 Damage to the cutting tools over the entire range of cutting speeds was mainly in the form of flank and crater wears. Early formation of crater scar was noticeable at cutting speeds greater than 150 The Taylor cutting tool life equation was derived from the plot in The flank wear rate and the ratio of volume of metal removed per unit of flank wear are shown in The static and dynamic cutting forces corresponding to a cutting time of 1 The static cutting forces were low. They increased rapidly with increasing cutting speed up to a speed of about 150 The dynamic cutting forces decreased with increasing cutting speed up to a speed of about 200 “Bluing” and chip oxidation started to be evident at cutting speeds greater than 200 At a speed of 50 At a cutting speed of 100 At speeds of 150 The chips were continuous with occasional segmentation and highly coiled for cutting speeds of up to 150 For cutting speeds between 150 and 200 At cutting speeds above 200 Examination in the STEM of the secondary shear zone in chips produced at a cutting speed of 800 Plots of average chip thickness and chip hardness against cutting speed are shown in Conversely chip hardness increased for speeds of up to 200 The value of The absolute value of the velocity exponent (1.9781) is much higher than 1 which is the absolute value of this exponent in cases where abrasive wear is the dominant wear mechanism ( It is well known that in the Taylor equation, the cutting speed influences tool life through its effect on temperature ( The plot of flank wear rate against cutting speed ( When considering chip hardness and average chip thickness ( When considering flank wear rate ( At speeds of up to 200 The low feed (0.05 Kinks on the curves of static cutting force at cutting speeds lower than 150 The sudden drop in static cutting forces between 150 and 200 Above 200 For speeds of 150 At cutting speeds lower than 150 The decrease in dynamic cutting force in the range between 50 and 200 Beyond 150 Thus, in order to produce workpieces at lower dynamic cutting force (better surface finish and dimensional accuracy), cutting speeds in the range of 150–500 The gradual, continuous and asymptotic decrease in the average chip thickness ( The asymptotic decrease in average chip thickness ( The nano-sized equiaxed grains that appeared in the secondary shear zone of chips at cutting speeds greater than 150 The refinement of the microstructure of the primary and secondary shear zones may be expected to increase the diffusion rates in the chip and enhance the diffusion of cutting tool constituents into the chips. At cutting speeds greater than 150 However, shear localization in the secondary shear zone was nearly reduced by the partial melting that occurred on the chip underside, through its lubrication effect. In fact, the increase in average chip thickness that should be favoured by the onset of shear localization in the secondary shear zone ( The partial melting that occurred on the chip underside could be expected to increase the rate of thermally activated wear of the crater face of the PcBN cutting tools.  Flank wear and crater wear were the main wear modes for cutting speeds in the range 50–800 The absolute value of the velocity exponent of the Taylor cutting tool life equation suggested that abrasion wear and thermally activated wear were the main wear mechanisms. These indications on tool wear mechanisms also emerged when considering the flank wear rate, chip hardness and average chip thickness curves. At cutting speeds less than 150 At cutting speeds greater than 150 At cutting speeds greater than 150 At cutting speeds greater than 150 At cutting speeds greater than 600 Cutting speeds between 150 and 500 The authors would like to express their thanks to the DST/NRF Centre of Excellence in strong materials, University of the Witwatersrand, for financial support.