Uniform and non-uniform ohmic contacts on GaN were investigated by using a newly developed transfer length method (narrow TLM). The contact resistivity and the series resistance of laser diode (LD) were calculated from a conventional and a newly developed narrow TLM and a laser diode structure. The contact resistivity of uniform Pd contacts did not change with varying the width of the contacts, while that of non-uniform Ni/Au contacts showed an increase with narrower contacts. These results were attributed to a decrease of ohmic contact area in the Ni/Au sample as a result of non-uniform ohmic contact formation. Investigation of Pd (uniform) and Ni/Au (non-uniform) ohmic contacts with the newly developed narrow TLM indicated that the contact resistivity of a p-contact metal on a ridge waveguide laser diode should be considered using narrow TLM, particularly for non-uniform ohmic contacts, to enhance the performance of laser diodes.Recently, remarkable progress on the development of blue–violet laser diodes (BV-LD, The ridge waveguide LD has a rectangular shape ridge which has a high aspect ratio (cavity length to the width of the ridge). The typical ridge is 1 The TLM originally proposed by Shockley is used to measure the contact resistivity on a semiconductor The transfer length (  Fabricating a non-uniform ohmic contact on the open area of the narrowly patterned ridge waveguide results in increasing the series resistance of the LD, and the overall performance of the LD would be obtained even though a low contact resistivity is calculated from the conventional TLM. We attribute this to the small effective ohmic contact area and an increase in the transfer length by forming a non-uniform ohmic contact. If such a conventional TLM method is used for evaluating the contact resistivity of a non-uniform ohmic contact, it would underestimate the contact resistivity. Therefore the conventional TLM method cannot calculate an accurate contact resistivity in the case of non-uniform ohmic contact formation. It is therefore to design a new contact resistivity measurement method for evaluating accurate contact resistivity of non-uniform ohmic contacts. The newly developed TLM with narrow widths has 10 different widths of rectangular contact patterns [5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 15, 20, 50 and 100 A Mg-doped p-type GaN epitaxial layer on an undoped GaN layer for narrow TLM measurements and laser diode structure for measuring the series resistance were grown on a c-plane sapphire substrate using metalorganic chemical-vapor deposition (MOCVD). The laser diode structure includes an InGaN multi-quantum well, a GaN waveguide layer, an AlGaN/GaN superlattice cladding layer, an AlGaN electron blocking layer and a Mg-doped GaN contact layer. A ridge waveguide laser diode was fabricated with 600 The fabrication of the narrow TLM patterns was as follows. The substrates were first cleaned using organic chemicals and HF followed by a deionized water rinse. After this step, SiO The contact resistivity and series resistance for Ni/Au and Pd on a substrate with LD structures grown and a substrate with p-GaN layer grown are shown in To investigate the effect of the contact width on the contact resistivity, a newly developed narrow TLM was applied on both Pd and Ni/Au contacts on p-GaN substrates. The contact resistivities for Pd and Ni/Au samples are plotted (in The results reported here show that the newly developed narrow TLM method can be used to accurately evaluate the contact resistivity of a non-uniform ohmic contact. According to the results of Ni/Au narrow TLM on a p-GaN substrate, the contact resistivity of Ni/Au in a LD structure would be much higher than 5.9 The effects of contact width on ohmic contacts were investigated by measuring the contact resistivity of both uniform and non-uniform contacts with newly developed narrow TLM. Non-uniform ohmic contacts (Ni/Au) showed an increase in the contact resistivity with narrower contact width. In contrast, the contact resistivity of uniform ohmic contacts (Pd) remained stable within the experimental error. These results indicate that the newly designed narrow TLM method can distinguish uniform and non-uniform ohmic contacts and show good correlation between the contact resistivity and the series resistance of laser diodes. In addition, non-uniform ohmic contacts on LDs, especially p-type ohmic contacts, are not suitable for ridge waveguide laser diodes. The authors wish to thank the members of photonics STU in Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology and the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy (MOCIE) through the project of Regional Research Center (RRC) for supporting this research.