This paper addresses the effects of processing technique on the synthesis of mullite from pyrophyllite and alpha-alumina powder. The influence of firing temperatures were examined in order to optimize the fabrication process to achieved a suitable mechanical properties. Feedstock powders, with stoichiometric composition, were wet milled in an Attritor mill. The dried powders were consolidated using spark plasma sintering (SPS) in the temperatures range 1400 °C to 1700 °C under pressure of 50 MPa, with a heating rate of 100 °C/min at different holding times. Densities of 3.25 g/cm3 and 3.17 g/cm3 were obtained for the samples sintered at 1400 °C and 1600 °C respectively, with a 10-min holding time. The XRD and SEM/EDS were employed to characterize the firing transformation and microstructure of the samples. The SEM micrograph of samples, sintered at 1600 °C with 10 min holding times, revealed that the sample retained its equiaxed grain structure. The XRD results show a reduction in alpha-alumina content after the sample was fired. Hardness and fracture toughness values up to 11.73 GPa and 1.99 MPa•m1/2 respectively were obtained.Mullite (Al Previous studies have shown that the formation of the stoichiometric composition and the phase of mullite depend on the synthesis technique, as well as the kind of raw material employed ( However, there is virtually no reported study available on Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS) of pyrophyllite and reactive alumina to fabricate mullite and their post heat treatment behavior. The Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS) process has been used in the fabrication of transparent mullite ( Pyrophyllite powder, mined in Ottosdal in South Africa, and reactive α-alumina (P172SB) of 99.7% purity (CERadvance Engineering Ceramics (Pty) Ltd., South Africa), with a particle size of 0.4 μm were combined to prepare mullite specimens. The as-received pyrophyllite powder has a particle size of <63 μm. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and powder X-Ray Diffraction (RXD) were used to characterize the morphology of the particles and identify the phases present in the as-received powders. PANalytical X-ray fluorescence (model AXIOS mAX spectrometer at 50 kV and 50 mA) was used to characterize the chemical composition of as-received pyrophyllite powder. The removal of any organic residues was done by placing the Pt crucibles and LOl dish in a furnace at 1020 °C for half an hour. Approximately 1 g of powder sample was placed in LOI dish and Ignited at 1020 °C for 40 min. The analysis was performed by superQ software. The as-received pyrophyllite powder was then milled down to 0.5 μm and fired in a tube furnace at 800 °C for 30 min to produce a dehydroxylated pyrophyllite powder. The powder was prepared with 40 wt% dehydroxylated pyrophyllite and 60 wt% alumina to obtain 3:2 mullite. In order to homogeneously mix these powders, the fired pyrophyllite powder was milled for 30 min with 150 ml of isopropanol in an Attritor mill. The alumina balls with 4.5 mm diameter were used as milling media. Alumina powder was then added to the milled pyrophyllite, with 50 ml of isopropanol and milled for 3 h; after which approximately 100 ml of isopropanol was added and the powder milled for a further 2.5 h. The slurry was oven dried at 60 °C and the dry powder was passed through a 90 μm sieve to break down soft agglomerates. The particle size distribution was then determined. The powders were consolidated by spark plasma sintering (HPD5, FCT Systeme GmbH). They were loaded into a 20 mm in diameter graphite die, the loaded mass being set such as to obtain a sintered sample thickness of 5 mm. A sheet of graphite foil was placed between the punch and the powders for easy removal of the sintered sample. In addition, the side walls, top and bottom of the graphite die were coated with fine hBN slurry in order to limit the diffusion of carbon to the compacts. The powders were sintered under a vacuum of 1 hPa. A constant pulse-to-pause ratio of 10:5 (10 ms on and 5 ms off) was applied throughout the sintering of the sample. The holding pressure throughout the sintering cycle was kept at 50 MPa. Sintering was done at temperatures ranging from 1400 °C to 1700 °C for 10–30 min, with heating rates of 100 °C/min. The SPS sintered samples were placed inside the muffle furnace and heat treated at different temperature and holding time in order to understand the microstructure evolution of pyrophyllite and alumina on producing mullite. XRD analysis was used to identify the phases present in the samples, using a Bruker D2 Advance diffractometer with copper as the anode material at 30 kV and 10 mA. The samples were scanned at a step scan mode of 0.02°. Diffractograms were collected over a 2θ range between 10° and 90° at room temperature. High Score Plus software was used for the identification of the constituent phases. The densities of sintered samples were measured using the Archimedes method. The samples for analysis were cut, hot mounted, ground and fine polished. The polished samples were thermally etched for 20 min at 1350 °C lower than the sintering temperature. The etched samples were coated with the combination of carbon and gold‑palladium and examined by FESEM (Carl Zeiss Sigma) equipped with Oxford x-act EDX. The Zeiss Cross Beam X540 FEGSEM was also used to examine the microstructure of the fired sample. Vickers hardness tester (FM 700) was used to measure hardness and fracture toughness of the sintered samples. Indentations were made with a diamond indenter, at a load of 5 kg held for 10 s, according to the technique described by  The X-ray diffraction pattern was used to identify the mineralogical phase of as-received pyrophyllite powder. It was observed that apart from the pyrophyllite as the majority phase, a small amount of silica with three unique crystal structure different from each other were detected by XRD analysis.  X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained for all the samples sintered at different temperatures for 10 min holding time. The XRD trace revealed the presence of the orthorhombic phase of mullite, with crystal structure of Al There is no significant difference in the identity of the peaks present in the XRD traces of the samples sintered at 1400 °C and those of 1700 °C, with 10 min holding time. The intensities at alumina peaks gradually decrease with an increase in sintering temperature. This suggests that at a sintering temperature of 1400 °C with 10 min holding time, the milled powder transformed into mullite as a result of the decomposition of pyrophyllite and subsequent rejection of excess silica that reacted with the added alumina ( In order to gain insight into the formation of mullite from pyrophyllite-alumina, mixed powders of these components were sintered at 1600 °C for different holding times. X-ray patterns of the three mullite samples sintered at 1600 °C and held for 10, 20 and 30 min respectively are presented in Preliminary sintering experiments were carried out between 1400 °C and 1700 °C on a pyrophyllite-alumina powder sample at different temperatures and holding times, in order to determine the optimal conditions to produce mullite. The sintered densities of samples produced are summarized in The shrinkage displacement rate during the SPS process was used to explain the densification behaviour of the feedstock powder sintered at 1600 °C, with holding time. The shrinkage displacement rate measured in sintered mullite samples, as a function of temperature and holding time, is shown in    Fracture toughness (K A processing technique was developed to synthesize mullite from pyrophyllite using spark plasma sintering (SPS). Pyrophyllite powder was mixed with α-Al Funding support by the