The Jameson flotation cell has been commonly used to treat a variety of ores (lead, zinc, copper etc.), coal and industrial minerals at commercial scale since 1989. It is especially known to be highly efficient at fine and ultrafine coal recovery. However, although the Jameson cell has quite a simple structure, it may be largely inefficient if the design and operating parameters chosen are not appropriate. In this study, the design and operating parameters of a pilot scale Jameson cell were optimized to obtain a desired metallurgical performance in the slime coal flotation. The optimized design parameters are the nozzle type, the height of the nozzle above the pulp level, the downcomer diameter and the immersion depth of the downcomer. Among the operating parameters optimized are the collector dosage, the frother dosage, the percentage of solids and the froth height. In the optimum conditions, a clean coal with an ash content of 14.90% was obtained from the sample slime having 45.30% ash with a combustible recovery of 74.20%. In addition, a new type nozzle was developed for the Jameson cell, which led to an increase of about 9% in the combustible recovery value.Froth flotation is the most widely used method for fine coal benefication and approximately 142 million tonnes of fine coals are beneficiated by flotation worldwide annually The Jameson cell was developed jointly by Mount Isa Mines and Prof. G.J. Jameson of the University of Newcastle in the late 1980s. It is a high intensity and high efficiency flotation device, which uses induced air from atmosphere. In this technology, air is absorbed from the atmosphere into the downcomer through the influence of the jet action caused by the highly pressurized pulp. This innovative flotation device can produce very fine bubbles (∼ Although the Jameson cell has a simple structure, there are some important things in its design that must be put into consideration; for example, the height of the nozzle above the pulp level, the immersion depth of downcomer and the ratio of the downcomer diameter to that of the cell are important factors that play a major part in the cell performance. In a study conducted by Güney et al. In recent times, studies aimed at improving the performance of the Jameson cell have focused on the nozzle (or orifice) systems, because the performance of the Jameson cell largely depends on the energy of the jet created by the slurry passing through the nozzle. By increasing the energy of the jet (i.e. high jet velocity), both the bubble-particle collision and the number of bubbles increased leading to high flotation efficiency. A special nozzle developed by Xstrata Technology has made it possible to increase the energy of jet at a constant feed pressure. By the use of this nozzle referred to as Slurry Lens Orifice, the power consumption of the pump has decreased by 10–15%. In the experimental studies carried out within the scope of this study, it was observed that the nozzle type had a great effect on the flotation performance of the Jameson cell. Therefore, investigations were conducted, which aimed at the most appropriate nozzle type in order to maximize the combustible recovery value using three different nozzle types. As an alternative to the conventional one-hole nozzle, a “moon type” nozzle was developed, which is mentioned here for the first time. By using the moon type nozzle both, combustible recovery and ash rejection increased significantly due to dual jet forming in the cell. Other parameters affecting the performance of the Jameson cell relate to operating conditions: these are the dosage of frother and collector, the percentage of solids and the froth height. In a Jameson cell, generally the optimum dosage of frother added to the feed varies from 200 to 400 g/t, with the collector dosage ranging between 500 and 2000 g/t. The percentage of solids in the pulp varies depending on the particle size distribution of coal treated and it is usually ∼ The coal sample used in the flotation experiments was collected from a thickener underflow stream of a coal preparation plant treating the Zonguldak seam in Turkey. The results of the chemical analysis of the test sample are given in  In this study, a test program was conducted to evaluate and optimize the Jameson cell design and operating parameter values with the goal of maximizing recovery of combustible material over a range desired product ash content value. In order to determine optimum nozzle type, 3 different type nozzles were tested in the Jameson cell. The diagrams representing their cross sections are given in The nozzle height is another important design parameter which affects on flotation performance of the Jameson cell. When the nozzle height exceeded 20 cm, intensive turbulence and froth swelling were observed in the froth zone. Accordingly, at a height of 40 cm, a product with the highest ash content (21.10%) was obtained. In the case of the height less than 10 cm, the combustible recovery value fell to ∼ The best flotation performance was obtained when the immersion depth of the downcomer was 10 cm. Low immersion depths (< The most suitable downcomer diameter for a cell 54 cm in diameter was found to be 15 cm. Using a downcomer 6 cm in diameter, the combustible recovery value fell to around 40%. On the other hand, though great downcomer diameters (> Under the conditions in given  The optimum percentage of solids in the pulp was determined to be 4%. When the percentage of solids was increased from 4 to 10, the combustible recovery value drastically decreased from 74.80% to 56.45%. In addition, the highest product ash (∼ In the Jameson flotation cell, the rejection of entrained ash particle depends on the froth height and wash water flow (constant at 4 L/min). If the froth is not high enough, ash particles will be carried into the froth product and thus the ash content of product will increase. If the froth is high enough, the probability of particles dropping back from the froth to the pulp will increase and results in the froth product being further cleaned. As seen in The optimum design and operating parameter values for a Jameson cell 130 cm in height and 52 cm in diameter were investigated for Zonguldak (Turkey) bituminous coal slime to be cleaned in the best way. The findings obtained are summarized in