A variety of restructured meats have been marketed successfully over the last 30 years in the UK, the USA and elsewhere. The success of these products has arisen from consumer demand for convenience, variety, consistent quality and, also, the economic desirability for the manufacturer to upgrade meat raw materials. Products are referred to, variously, as 'restructured', 'reformed', 'flaked and formed', 'chopped and shaped' and 'chunked and formed' determined to a large extent by the size of the constituent pieces ( In the UK, products are usually frozen, may be breaded and coated, and are usually rib or steak-shaped, with an appropriate coined name (e.g. joysteak, grillsteak or ribsteak). Restructured meats may also be used as an alternative to ordinary diced meat in canned meats or ready meals. Some products are sold in a bun or as the main component in a ready meal. The largest, and most easily identified, sector is that for grillsteaks. A UK survey of grillsteak-type products showed that most have a meat content of 93% or above, though some were as low as 55% ( Meat restructuring 'involves the assembly of meat pieces into a cohesive product which aims to simulate or retain the texture of high quality muscle' Most of the published research has emanated from the United States (see for example, The manufacture of UK-style grillsteaks involves a series of operations, summarised in Most products are made from frozen meat (at - 18 Meat at 18 Two methods of tempering are used: cold room or microwave, or sometimes a two-stage temper (microwave followed by cold room tempering), the latter giving better control over temperature. The main disadvantage with cold room tempering is that several days are required to reach the target temperature which, in turn, requires production to be forecast several days in advance. Cold room tempering often gives rise to temperature variation within (the surface being warmer than the interior) and between blocks ( The main advantage of microwave tempering is speed; it also requires less space. Experiments carried out at Bristol demonstrate that frozen blocks, processed directly from frozen storage, can be tempered in about five minutes to - 3 A variety of designs of pre-breaker exist such as chippers, flakers, guillotines and grinders. These differ markedly in the mode of action but all effect a reduction in size sufficient for further processing. In the UK pre-breaking by grinding is probably the most common, using a kidney-shaped pre-break plate and 'knife'. Most models require the meat to be tempered before pre-breaking. However, there is an attraction of pre-breaking blocks directly from the freezer store and the more powerful machines can do so, but at the expense of product quality. Product cohesiveness is adversely affected when meat is pre-broken by grinding at low temperatures, and accompanied by increased cooking losses ( Flaking appears to be the method of choice for grillsteak manufacture, though ostensibly there is no reason why other methods of comminution could not be used. Comminution by flaking is relatively new, the equipment being developed in the 1960s by Urschel International, based on Comitrol machines used originally for cutting, slicing and dicing vegetables. The main purpose of comminution is to reduce the size of sinew and gristle, which would otherwise result in objectionable toughness. Fat is also comminuted and not easily discernible in the final product, especially using smaller flaking heads, even at high fat contents. Cutting is effected by an impeller that rotates at 3000 Salt, typically 0.5- 1%, is added during mixing, together with any other added ingredients such as rusk, phosphate, onion powder, wheat gluten, caseinate, dextrose, sulphite (as preservative), soya flour, concentrate or isolate, MSG, pepper and spices. Water, added to cheapen formulation costs, may necessitate the addition of rusk or soya to reduce cooking losses. A small quantity of added Initially the comminuted meat mass is relatively free flowing but as mixing proceeds becomes tacky and tends to 'ball together' due, presumably, to protein extraction. Mixing times vary but typically are around five minutes, depending on the product and type of mixer. This allows sufficient time to distribute any added ingredients uniformly through the meat mass and, more importantly, to solubilise myofibrillar proteins. Though it is difficult to prove, using analytical techniques, protein solubilisation can be inferred from the clear effects that added salt has on cooking losses and cohesive strength. Short mixing times are usually associated with a loose, friable texture whilst excessive mixing times usually result in an objectionably rubbery texture. Optimal mixing times are usually determined by trial and error or a subjective appraisal of the appearance of the mix. Invariably, optimal mixing times vary from experiment to experiment ( The use of a high-speed patty former is the most popular means of imparting shape to the finished product and achieving accurate portion control. A wide range of formers are available but all operate on roughly similar principles, employing a reciprocating mould plate and a means of transferring the meat from a hopper and to the mould. Mould plates (round, steak or rib-shaped, etc.) can be changed according to the product required. Most formers operate well over a relatively small temperature range, outside of which weight control becomes more variable and product can become ragged ( An alternative method of forming is to extrude the meat into a log which is then tempered and sliced, as required. In the production of Bernard Matthews turkey roasts, lean turkey meat is co-extruded with a coating of fat in cylindrical form for subdivision into joints or steaks. Some products may be battered, coated and fried. Salt does not produce a good bind in the raw state and so most products are therefore frozen, usually cryogenically, using liquid nitrogen or liquid carbon dioxide, sprayed onto the food. Cryogenic freezing is rapid and has the advantage of reducing evaporative losses ( Salt is a pro-oxidant increasing the rate of lipid oxidation (see, for example, Conceptually, a restructured meat product can be viewed as comprising meat pieces in a matrix of solubilised meat protein ( Lean meat at slaughter contains about 75% water. The proportion which freezes depends on the temperature and can be expressed by the equation Temperatures usually rise during processing, whilst the ice content falls ( The factors influencing particle size have been reviewed elsewhere ( Meat pre-broken by grinding ranged in size from tiny fragments of less than 1  Providing the temperature is low enough (usually less than - 2 In order to understand and predict the effects of high-speed processing on the behaviour of meat during comminution, various authors have investigated the mechanical properties and fracture behaviour of meat under different conditions, to determine tensile strength, work of fracture and other properties using traditional ways employed by materials scientists ( Brittle behaviour is favoured by high strain rates ( As mentioned earlier, the re-assembly of meat pieces once they have been comminuted is an essential requirement in restructuring. Good adhesion ('bind') between meat pieces is widely regarded as a key determinant of quality, usually achieved by adding salt, sometimes in conjunction with phosphate, added dry during mixing. Other means of achieving adhesion are discussed later. In addition to its effect on adhesion, salt also increases water retention, reduces cooking losses and may also increase tenderness slightly. The underlying mechanism involves depolymerisation of myosin and dissociation of actomyosin, at appropriate concentrations, which in turn (i) allows expansion of the myofibrillar lattice ( In order to control and manipulate the beneficial action of salt and phosphate on the properties of restructured meats, it is important to understand the factors affecting them ( Myosin is the most abundant muscle protein ( This apparent conflict has been resolved by arguing that the effective salt concentration during mixing is much higher than to be expected on a simple weight basis due to localised salt concentrations, particularly during the initial stages of mixing ( The influence of temperature on the extractability of muscle protein has been a matter of some controversy. Phosphate, like salt, is a mild structure breaker but its chemistry is more complicated. Though it can be used alone to improve water retention, juiciness and tenderness at levels of 0.25-5 Studies, using 'model' adhesive junctions, in which the adhesive is sandwiched between two meat pieces, have shown that myosin is a stronger adhesive than actomyosin ( Cooking losses are important because cook loss not only affects the final weight and, therefore, portion size but also the perceived juiciness of the product and possibly texture as well. Losses can vary widely depending on product formulation, the conditions of processing and the cooking method. For a given cooking method, salt and phosphate levels are probably the most important factors ( Cooking distortion is a persistent problem with products - including burgers and grillsteaks - formed using a high-speed patty former ( Shrinkage during cooking can also lead to an increase in height (doming) of the product and the development of an air-filled vacuole within the middle of the product. Sometimes fluid accumulates in the vacuole, a phenomenon sometimes referred to as 'welling'. Doming and welling are less common than lateral shrinkage, more variable in nature and difficult to control. Some types of flame- grilled grillsteaks seem especially vulnerable to distortion. The causes of doming and welling were investigated in two factory-based trials conducted by  A wide range of sensory tests - ranking, category and profiling techniques - have been used to assess the tactile, appearance, texture, flavour, juiciness and hedonic (i.e. liking) attributes of restructured meats (e.g. Consumer tests, involving large numbers (typically in excess of 100) of untrained assessors, are concerned primarily with preference or liking decisions ( In another trial ( In another trial, consumers were asked to evaluate restructured beef steaks made using different aperture sizes, ranging from 1.5 Taken together these trials challenge the idea of generating an 'optimal' product (in terms of separate characteristics such as bind, texture, or flavour or, indeed, in terms of the product's overall characteristics) since consumers vary markedly in their individual preferences. Of course, there is considerable scope for generating products with particular characteristics (e.g. a good bind or a firm bite) and marketing these in such a way to target certain segments of the population in order to match product characteristics with individual preferences. Salt is the ingredient of choice to bind restructured meats. There is, however, growing consumer pressure against the use of salt in foodstuffs, for medical reasons. Technically, also, salt has its drawbacks, being a pro-oxidant it accelerates the production of metmyoglobin, thus reducing colour stability and accelerates the rate of lipid oxidation. This, and the fact that product cohesion is poor in the raw state, effectively precludes the marketing of restructured meats in the chilled state. Among consumers there is a perception that fresh is better than frozen and consumers are willing to pay a premium for fresh product. The potential to market grillsteak-type products in the fresh state is illustrated by the growth in sales of freshly chilled burgers whose manufacture is very similar to that of grillsteaks, and, like grillsteaks, traditionally have sold in a frozen form. In developing a market for fresh grillsteak type products, the main requirement is to maintain colour stability and minimise bacterial growth. The former can be achieved satisfactorily by using alternative binders to salt, that do not accelerate the formation of metmyoglobin, and using an appropriate packaging system to extend the colour shelf-life (e.g. a modified atmosphere pack containing 70% oxygen and 30% carbon dioxide). Bacterial growth can be minimised by using sodium bisulphite. One innovative solution to overcoming these problems involves the use of the polysaccharide sodium alginate, whose use in meat for this application was first advocated in the patent of Another system capable of producing cohesion in the raw state involves the use of extracted plasma thrombin and fibrinogen ( A third system employs purified transglutaminase ( Most process development and product formulation has been largely empirical, on a trial and error basis, without any real understanding of the underlying principles that govern end product quality. However, there are exceptions which deliberately set to out to overcome some of the obstacles encountered in developing a comminuted product with a steak-like texture. These so-called 'second generation' products ( This chapter has considered the processing of restructured meats, a subject that has been reviewed extensively elsewhere ( Good control over temperature is vital when processing below the Some quality problems are highly interactive and machine specific and, therefore, difficult to control. The results obtained in one system need not necessarily apply under other conditions. There are enormous obstacles to producing a steak-like texture and this goal, perhaps, is unattainable using existing methods of comminution, mixing and forming. Consumers vary widely in their individual preferences - for degree of bind, optimal level of fat and salt, etc. - and there is scope for targeting segments of the population to match product characteristics with their particular preferences.