Slime contamination is an urgent problem that should be solved in coal flotation. The adverse effects of slime contamination, by which low-ash clean coal is covered by high-ash fine slime and hence cannot be separated through the direct flotation process, have been recognized for the past decades. In this investigation, to reduce slime contamination, the reverse-and-direct flotation process was proposed. Flotation results indicated that, based on the similar ash content, the concentrate yield increased by 7.36% using the reserve-and-direct flotation process compared with the two-steps direct flotation process. XPS (X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy) and SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy) results verified that the reduction of fine clay minerals coating on the surface of clean coal was achieved and hence the flotation performance was improved with the reverse-and direct flotation process. Therefore, it can be arrived that the reverse-and-direct flotation process is a potential and effective separation method to upgrade the flotation performance of fine coking coal.Recently, the role of gangue minerals, including kaolinite, quartz and calcite slimes, in the flotation of minerals was intensively investigated [ The results among the above literatures provided profound insights into the slime contamination, however, the method of removing the slime contamination was not sufficient. Peng et al. [ The abovementioned literatures referred to the methods of reducing slime contamination, including simultaneous ultrasonic flotation and the addition of regulators, however, no studies have been published about the optimization of flotation process to reduce the slime contamination. The aim of the present study is to investigate the effect of the reverse-and-direct flotation process on slime contamination as well as fine coking coal flotation. The flotation result between the two-steps direct flotation process and the reverse-and-direct flotation process was directly compared and fully discussed. Additionally, the XPS and SEM tests were also conducted to verify the role of the reverse-and-direct flotation process in the reduction of slime contamination. Coal sample collected from Jinhuilongchang Coking Coal Preparation Plant (Shanxi province, China) was used in the investigation. The proximate analysis of coal sample describes a composition of 1.98% moisture, 22.26% volatile, 26.61% ash and 49.15% fixed carbon. Kerosene, 2-octanol, hydrochloric acid (HCL), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), dodecylamine (DDA) and starch were purchused from Aladdin Reagent. Flotation tests were conducted in a 0.75 L XFD laboratory flotation cell. In all flotation tests, a 60 g sample was used, the impeller speed was set at 1920 rpm, and the aeration rate was 0.24 dm The XPS experiments were conducted to compare the surface property difference of the concentrate between the two-steps direct flotation process and reverse-and-direct flotation process [ The purpose of SEM test analysis was to identify the surface morphology of concentrate particles of both the two-steps direct flotation process and the reverse-and-direct flotation processes [  Reverse flotation was used as a pre-desliming method to reduce the content of high-ash fine slime in the pulp. Hence, the effect of three parameters, namely, DDA-HCL dosage, starch dosage and pH value, on the reverse flotation was investigated and the results are shown in The direct flotation results of the reverse-and-direct flotation process are given in  To further investigate the difference in slime coating on the concentrate between the two-steps direct flotation and the reverse-and-direct flotation processes, SEM tests were conducted and the results are shown in Possible mechanism of the reduction of slime contamination are shown in In this investigation, the results between the two-steps direct flotation and the reverse-and-direct flotation were compared and the reduction of high-ash fine slime coating was fully discussed. Reverse-and-direct flotation is an potential separation process for fine coking coal. When the ash of concentrate was similar, the concentrate yield of the reverse-and-direct flotation was about 7% higher than that of the two-steps direct flotation. During reverse-and-direct flotation process, much more high-ash fine slime was removed through reverse flotation, and hence slime contamination on the low-ash clean coal was reduced during the following direct flotation. Both XPS and SEM results verified that fine clay minerals coating on the low-ash lean coal was reduced and hence the flotation performance was improved through the reverse-and-direct flotation process. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest with others. The financial supports for this work from the