Three solvent impregnated resins (SIRs) were first prepared using two types of nonreactive polystyrene-divinylbenzene polymers (HZ818 and HZ830) and one type of reactive weak basic ion exchange resin (D301) as supports and HEHEHP (2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono(2-ethylhexyl) ester) as the extractant. Then the first two prepared SIRs were coated by poly-vinyl alcohol (PVA)-H3BO3 to improve their stability. The two types of coated SIRs were called HZ818-CSIR and HZ830-CSIR, and the third type of SIR was called D301-SIR. The three adsorbents were characterized by scanning electron microscopy and infrared spectrometer. The adsorption properties of iron (III) with three adsorbents were studied by batch method from sulfuric acid medium in the range of pH 0.9–1.9. The optimal pH values of all adsorbents were found at 1.5, and the saturated adsorption capacities of HZ818-CSIR, HZ830-CSIR and D301-SIR were determined as 16.7 mg·g−1, 15.9 mg·g−1 and 25.6 mg·g−1 at 298K, respectively. The adsorption isotherms were found to be fitted with Langmuir isotherms. The adsorption kinetic behaviors of HZ818-CSIR and HZ830-CSIR were fitted with pseudo-second-order kinetic model, while that of D301-SIR with Lagergren first-order kinetic model. The adsorption mechanisms of the three adsorbents were investigated with methods of saturation, equimolar series change and infrared adsorption spectra. It was found that the adsorption mechanism of Fe(III) with HZ818-CSIR and HZ830-CSIR could be deduced as cation exchange between Fe3+ and H+ from P-OH of HEHEHP accompanied with coordination between Fe(III) ion and the phosphoryl oxygen from HEHEHP. While for the D301-SIR, only a cation exchange between Fe3+ and H+ from P-OH of HEHEHP can be proposed.In most of hydrometallurgical process, the presence of iron in acidic leach liquor is a common problem ( For this reason, solvent impregnated resins (SIRs) technology has been considered as an alternative process that combines the easy management of solid sorbents and the high efficiency and selectivity of readily available extractants ( Meanwhile, the relatively low stability is the main drawback for application of SIRs because the extractant can be leached from the supports during recycle test. The drawback limits a wide application of SIRs in hydrometallurgy and other industries ( Here in this work, two types of coated SIRs (CSIRs) with PVA-boric acid cross-linking technique and one type of novel adsorbent based weak basic ion exchange resin were synthesized. The stability of the first two types of CSIRs was realized through preparing a semipermeable coat around each bead of SIRs using poly-vinyl alcohol (PVA) to form the protective layer with porous structure and boric acid as the cross-linking agent ( EHEHHP (2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester) was supplied by Shanghai Rare-earth Chemical Co., Ltd, China, which is weak acid (p Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) with polymerization degree of 1750 The shapes and surface morphology of the samples were examined on a scanning electron microscope (SEM), JSF5600LV, JEOL, Japan. Infrared spectra were recorded on a Nicolet MAGNAIR 550 (series II) spectrophotometer, test conditions: potassium bromide pellets, scanning 32 times, resolution are 4 Before impregnation, HZ818 and HZ830 supports were kept in ethanol for 4 HZ818-SIRs were first prepared using a dry impregnation method. Five grams of HZ818 support was placed in 50 mL of HEHEHP– The preparation of HZ830-CSIRs was the same as that of HZ818-CSIRs except that support HZ818 was displaced by HZ830. Considering the extractant impregnated in HZ818-CSIRs or HZ830-CSIRs is acidic type, the content of extractant was determined by NaOH solution titration. First, 0.5 g of HEHEHP impregnated resins was shaken with 25 mL of ethanol to elute the extractant completely, and then the elution was titrated with 14.84 The preparation operation of D301-SIRs was shown as follow. Five grams of D301 resin was impregnated in 50 mL of HEHEHP– In the batch method, 25 mL of Fe(III) solution with known concentration was taken in 100 mL glass-stoppered flask, and pH was adjusted to the desired value. Then a known amount of adsorbents was introduced. The suspension in flask was shaken for equilibrium in a thermostatic bath. After phase separation, the concentration of Fe(III) ion in the aqueous phase was analyzed by UV-2550 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan) using orthophenanthroline method ( In this equation, The appearance and morphology of different adsorbents were examined using scanning electron microscopy. The representative SEM photographs of HZ818-CSIRs were shown in The change of characteristic absorption peaks in the three types of adsorbents was investigated by FTIR. The FTIR spectra for HZ818-CSIRs and HZ830-CSIRs before and after cross-linking reaction of PVA and boric acid were shown in No changes of characteristic peaks before and after cross-linking reaction were found (see FTIR spectrum for D301-SIR before and after impregnated was shown in The solution pH is the important parameter for the removal of Fe(III) from aqueous solution. In order to establish the effect of pH on the adsorption of Fe(III) on adsorbents, the adsorption experiments in sulfuric acid medium were carried out by varying the initial pH in the range of 0.9–1.9 of 40 In order to understand the adsorption behaviors of the three types of adsorbents, the influence of concentrations on Fe(III) adsorption was investigated at different temperature (288 The Langmuir model represents one of the first theoretical treatments of nonlinear adsorption and suggests that uptake occurs on a homogeneous surface by monolayer adsorption without interaction between adsorbed molecules. In addition, the model assumes uniform energies of adsorption onto the surface and no transmigration of the adsorbent. The Langmuir isotherm is represented in the following equation ( The linearized plots of Calculation monolayer sorption capacity of all adsorbents (13.94, 21.41 and 24.93 mg·g The value of The adsorption kinetics of adsorbents for Fe(III) at pH 1.5 were studied at 298 It could be observed from To investigate the adsorption mechanism for Fe(III) from sulfuric acid solution, three methods such as saturation adsorption method, equimolar series method and infrared spectra method were employed. According to the “Section 2.3. Batch method,” 25 mL of Fe(III) ion solution at the optimal pH 1.5 was taken in 100 mL glass-stoppered flask at 298 From the above work, the saturation adsorption capabilities of Fe(III) for HZ818, HZ830 and D301 were 16.7 mg·g The molar ratio of HEHEHP in the resin to Fe(III) in the solution ( Considering Fe(III) ion exits as Fe For HZ818-CSIR and HZ830-CSIRs For D301-SIR where subscript “a” represents adsorbent phase A further indication of the change in mechanism was provided by the infrared adsorption spectra for HZ818-CSIR (see Similar changes are observed for the adsorption of Fe(III) from sulfuric acid solution with HZ830-CSIR. Hence, for HZ818-CSIRs and HZ830-CSIRs, the mechanism of Fe(III) adsorbed onto adsorbents could be deduced as not only cation exchange between Fe Hence, the adsorption mechanism infers drawing of HZ818-CSIR and HZ830-CSIR can be expressed as The IR spectrograms before and after the adsorption of Fe(III) with D301-SIR were shown in From the results of this work, some conclusions may be drawn: HZ818-CSIRs and HZ830-CSIRs were stabilized by formation of PVA-boric acid protective layer. The D301-SIRs was stabilized by the formation of ion bands between the functional group − For HZ818-CSIR and HZ830-CSIRs, the mechanism of Fe(III) adsorbed onto adsorbents could be deduced as cation exchange between Fe This project was supported by the