MgO is one of the sintering aids most commonly used in the processing of mullite bodies. However, few studies have investigated the influence of MgO on the densification and microstructural development of mullite bodies, and the amount of MgO to be used as dopant is still a matter of controversy. Thus, this work investigated the efficiency of small amounts of MgO in the sintering of industrial mullite. MgO was added to obtain dopant concentrations of 0.1 and 0.5wt.% in the mullite samples. Doped and nondoped samples were produced by cold isostatic pressing (CIP) at 200MPa and pressureless sintering at 1500, 1550, 1600 and 1650°C for 2h. The use of 0.1 and 0.5wt.% of MgO increased the final density of the sintered samples, with the doped samples reaching densities of 99% and the nondoped samples reaching densities of 95%. Elongated mullite grains were observed in the nondoped samples when their density fell below 95%, while the microstructures of bodies containing 0.1wt.% of MgO were controlled up to densities of 98%. The 0.5% doped samples required lower sintering temperatures, however elongated mullite grains were observed when densities of 99% were reached.Mullite (3Al Mullite and mullite-matrix composites have received considerable attention because of their excellent high-temperature mechanical properties, good chemical stability, low thermal expansion coefficient, low thermal conductivity, low dielectric constant, high creep resistance, etc., which make them useful for structural and electronic packaging applications ( Bulk mullite bodies have been obtained by powder processing routes, using conventional shape-forming methods (such as pressing, extrusion, slip-casting, etc.) and pressureless sintering ( The majority of studies on mullite have focused on enhancing its mechanical behavior and toughness through reaction sintering between zircon and alumina to produce zirconia-toughened mullite. Few researches have investigated the sintering behavior of mullite itself ( Few studies ( It has been reported ( An analysis of the data reported in the literature indicates that a basic understanding of the effect of MgO on the sintering of commercial powders is still limited. Thus, this work aimed to evaluate the efficiency of small amounts of MgO (below 0.5 Commercial mullite (99.5%, SCIMAREC MP40) powder was used in this work. Its chemical composition was supplied by the manufacturer and is given in the The mullite powder was dispersed in an aqueous median by ball milling for 4 Densities of the sintered samples were determined by the water-immersion Archimedes method (T.D. of 3.17  The mullite powder had a   The densification behavior of the samples sintered at 1550 The sintering at 1600 As  The microstructures of the M01 samples were similar to those of the nondoped mullite, with large grains surrounded by small grains and predominantly inter-granular pores. The grain size increased with the temperature, but the elongated grains observed in the nondoped mullite fired at 1650 The grain size of the M05 samples increased with the sintering temperature, but elongated grains were not observed in the samples sintered at 1550 The SEM micrographs did not reveal glassy phase at multiple grain junctions in the doped samples (M01 or M05 samples). Glassy phase generally appears in microstructures of samples doped with high amount of MgO and helps to fill up residual porosity, but also decrease the mechanical properties of mullite bodies. It can be understood from the MgO–Al The microstructures of the doped bodies were generally less porous, showing grains of uniform size, smaller than those of the nondoped samples. The additional of just 0.1 and 0.5% significantly changed the microstructure of the mullite bodies (and improved densification). Other researchers who used commercial mullite (  A number of dopants such as B The efficiency attained with small amounts of MgO (0.1 and 0.5 The authors would like to thank the financial support provided by the following Brazilian agencies: FAPESQ/MCT/CNPq (Research Foundation of the State of Paraíba, process number 004/06) and CNPq (Ministry of Science and Technology Financing Agency, process number 476382/2004-1) and FAPESP (Research Foundation of the State of São Paulo, process number 05/60095-9).