A synthesis of silver ammonium jarosite has been carried out obtaining a single-phase product with the formula: [(NH4)0.71(H3O)0.25Ag0.040]Fe2.85(SO4)2(OH)5.50. The product consists on compact spherical aggregates of rhombohedral crystals. The nature and kinetics of alkaline decomposition and also of cyanidation have been determined. In both processes an induction period followed by a conversion period have been observed. During decomposition, the inverse of the induction period is proportional to [OH−]0.75 and an apparent activation energy of 80 kJ mol−1 was obtained; during the conversion period, the process is of 0.6 order (OH− concentration) and an activation energy of 60 kJ mol−1 was obtained. During cyanidation, the inverse of the induction period is proportional to [CN−]0.5 and an apparent activation energy of 54 kJ mol−1 was obtained; during the conversion period the process is of 0 order (CN− concentration) and an activation energy of 52 kJ mol−1 was obtained. Results obtained are consistent with the spherical particle model with decreasing core and chemical control, in the experimental conditions employed. For both processes and in the basis of the behaviour described, two mathematical models, including the induction and conversion periods, were established, that fits well with the experimental results obtained. Cyanidation rate of different jarosite materials in NaOH media have also been established: this reaction rate at 50 °C is very high for potassium jarosite, high and similar for argentojarosite and ammonium jarosite, lower for industrial ammonium jarosite and negligible for natural arsenical potassium jarosite and beudantite. These results confirm that the reaction rate of cyanidation decreases when the substitution level in the jarosite lattice increases.Jarosite materials plays an important role in several fields of mining and metallurgical processes but also in geological ones. In the hydrometallurgy of zinc, the most widely process employed for the iron and sulfate control is the jarosite process, that consists in the iron precipitation as ammonium or sodium jarosite ( Jarosite phases account for 10% of the weight of gossan ores (Rio Tinto, Huelva, Spain); silver is present in solid solution in arsenical potassium jarosite and in beudantite ( Jarosite materials retaining silver are also formed in another hydrometallurgical circuits such as during pressure leaching of zinc sulfide concentrates ( This paper is a study of the silver ammonium jarosite cyanidation in NaOH medium; because the process takes place in alkaline media for obvious reasons, the nature and kinetics of the alkaline decomposition process, the nature and kinetics of the overall cyanidation process and a comparison of the rates and dependences of both processes, including mathematical modelling is presented. A comparative study of reactivity of this jarosite in these media with respect to other jarosites is also included. The ammonium jarosite of formula [(NH The experimental procedure used was similar to that employed in previous works ( In the decomposition experiments the progress of the reaction was followed by taking samples of the solution throughout the experiment and testing S by emission spectrometry by inductively coupled plasma (ICP). In the cyanidation experiments, the progress of the reaction was followed by testing Ag by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). Variations in the mass balance due to the sampling and reagent addition were corrected. Solids obtained at different conversion values were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray energy dispersive analysis (EDS) and electron microprobe (EPMA). The experiments of alkaline decomposition and cyanidation involved in this study present the same behaviour as was observed in the previous studies about the reactivity of different jarosites ( Some preliminary experiments were carried out in NaOH media and in NaOH/CN In these experiments the process shows an induction period; during this period the jarosite remained unchanged: there was not change in the colour of the original jarosite and XRD, SEM and EDS not detected any change in the examined surface. The induction period can be attributed to the highly sulfate concentration from the synthesis medium; these sulfates can be adsorbed on the jarosite surface. An experiment consisting on grinding jarosite samples and then leached with OH The induction period has been observed in the decomposition process of the synthetic jarosites (jarosites from laboratory and from industrial plants), but it has not been observed in natural jarosites ( The induction period was followed by a conversion period until the total decomposition of the jarosite, confirmed by XRD and chemical analysis. Results obtained during the conversion period fits well the shrinking core model for chemical control ( In all cases, the decomposition residues are amorphous in nature as was observed in almost all of the jarosites studied in the previous works. Chemical analysis by ICP shows that during these processes, sulfates and ammonium ions passes to the solution; during cyanidation, silver also passed to the solution. This fact was confirmed by EPMA. Consequently, the stoichiometry of the decomposition process in the conditions studied can be expressed as: During cyanidation, silver passes to the solution as cyanide complex that is more stable than the corresponding ammoniacal complex. The effect of (OH The effect of the (OH The effect of temperature in the induction time and in alkaline decomposition is shown in In the experiments at different particle size, and during the conversion period, the plot of the experimental rate constants against the inverse of diameter is linear and passes through the origin. These results, jointly with the activation energy obtained (60 kJ mol According to the results obtained for the induction period, the expression for this parameter is:  From the expressions  The study was carried out to determine the effect of (CN In these conditions (1 The effect of the (CN The effect of temperature in the induction period is shown in According to the results obtained for the induction period, the expression for this parameter is:  From the expressions  By comparing the experimental constant values for alkaline decomposition and for cyanidation, it can be concluded that both processes runs at the same rate, after the induction period; thus, cyanidation occurs in a two-step process: 1) decomposition of silver ammonium jarosite, slow step and 2) complexation of the silver from the decomposition solids, fast step. Values of experimental rate constants ( A very high rate was obtained for potassium jarosite (  The decomposition and also cyanidation of silver ammonium jarosite in NaOH media present an induction period, during which any changes on the jarosite surface occurred, and a conversion period until the total decomposition of the jarosite. During the conversion period, sulfates and ammonium ions (and silver in cyanidation) passed to the solution and amorphous iron hydroxide was formed. In the decomposition in NaOH medium, (1 In the cyanidation in NaOH medium, (1 Based on the behaviour described, two mathematical models, including the induction and conversion periods for the alkaline decomposition and cyanidation processes were established, that fit well with the experimental results obtained in this study. The alkaline decomposition and cyanidation, proceeds, after the induction period at the same rate; thus, cyanidation occurs in a two-step process: 1) decomposition of silver ammonium jarosite, slow step and 2) complexation of the silver from the decomposition solids, fast step. During cyanidation of different jarosite materials in NaOH media, the reaction rate at 50 °C is very high for potassium jarosite, is high and similar for argentojarosite and ammonium jarosite, lower for industrial ammonium jarosite and negligible for arsenical potassium jarosite and beudantite. These results confirm that the reaction rate decreases when the substitution level in the jarosite lattice increases. The authors thank the CONACYT of the México Government for their financial support. Thanks are also due to the “Serveis Científicotècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona” for their assistance in this work.