The effect of freeze-thaw cycles (FTC) on the flexural strength of granite panels is investigated in this paper. Specimens from three different types of Australian granite were sampled. Fifteen specimens were used as control (unweathered) specimens while another 36 specimens were subjected to accelerated weathering consisting of 100 FTC over a period of 34days. A controlled freeze-thaw chamber and a temperature range between −10°C and +70°C was used for this purpose. Ultrasonic pulse velocity (UPV) of the specimens was measured before and after FTC testing. Flexural strength tests were conducted after the FTC were completed. Results showed that thin granite veneers suffered physical degradation accompanied by a noticeable reduction in UPV, density and flexural strength following FTC. Correlation between flexural strength and UPV and between unweathered and weathered UPV is proposed for the three types of Australian granite used in this paper.Failure of cladding panels can lead to expensive restoration works as well as serious risks from falling debris. Numerous incidents of stone cladding failures have been reported around the world Over the past few decades, an increasing demand for aesthetically pleasing, structurally adequate thin structural stone veneer as cladding panels on buildings, particularly high-rise, has been observed. Among thin structural cladding veneers, Granite is the most commonly used (Pires et al. Although destructive testing methods (such as four point bending test) are still preferred in conventional engineering practice, recent developments in non-destructive testing (NDT) methods such as acoustic emission, rebound hammer, laser scanning and ultrasonic pulse velocity (UPV) have facilitated detailed structural investigation and retrofitting of modern structures It is well known that thin structural stone veneers possess low tensile strength, usually <10% of its compressive counterpart. While more research is focused on the compressive strength of thin structural stone veneers The effects of freeze-thaw cycling on the flexural strength of a series of granite cladding panels using UPV and four point bending tests are investigated in this paper. Specimens from three different types of Australian granite, namely; Calca, Imperial Black and Grandee were considered in this study. The specimens were partially immersed in water and placed in a controlled freeze-thaw chamber to simulate accelerated weathering through FTC. Based on test results, correlations between UPV of weathered and unweathered specimens and between UPV and flexural strength are established. Ultrasonic NDT, freeze-thaw cycling and flexural testing of the granite cladding specimens were conducted at the Civil Engineering laboratory of the University of Queensland. Details of the experimental program are discussed in this section. Three common Australian granite types were considered in this study. These are; Calca, Imperial Black (or Adelaide Black) and Grandee. Calca and Imperial Black stones are quarried in the Eyre Peninsula and Black Hill regions of South Australia while Grandee in the Mulliandry district of central New South Wales. These three stone types are characterised by high compressive strength, hardness, durability and visible crystalline structure with interlocking crystals of medium to coarse grain. The three stones are distinguishable by their appearances as shown in Sample dimensions were selected based on ASTM The pulse velocity test set-up depends on: the natural resonance frequency of the used transducers Since the pulse propagation velocity FTC were performed considering the ASTM The accelerated FTC were conducted using a large freeze-thaw chamber shown in The specimens were subjected to eight hours freeze-thaw cycles. Each cycle comprising five hours of freezing and three hours of heating between −10  UPV measurement of all granite specimens before and after the FTC testing was conducted using a transient wave test method. The test instrumentation and UPV measurements along the width and length of the specimen are shown in The flexural strength testing of the granite specimens were carried out in accordance with the ASTM The 4-point bending test was performed on the specimens with a span length (L) of 320 The flexural tensile strength ( The ultrasonic and 4-point bending test results of the unweathered and the weathered (FTC) specimens are discussed in this section.  The results shown in    Figs. As expected, the obtained load-deflection curves confirm the brittle nature of granite material; the load increased linearly until the ultimate capacity followed by a sudden sharp drop corresponding to failure. These plots will be particularly useful in modelling and validating the flexural response of weathered and unweathered granite, and veneer walls comprising of granite claddings.  The mass of the specimens before and after FTC testing was recorded. Similarly, the volume of each specimen was calculated using the measured dimensions of the specimen. Then the density of each specimen is obtained using the measured mass and volume. The mean density for each granite type is calculated using the density of all the specimens within that particular granite type. The mean density of the unweathered and weathered granite specimens are shown in Furthermore, loss in density of the granite specimens due to FTC is apparent in  A correlation between UPV of unweathered and weathered granite specimens for the three stone types is shown in Linear correlation between UPV values measured along the length and width dimension of the granite specimens is shown in As already mentioned in the previous sections, the flexural tensile strength The proposed Eq.   This paper investigated the effect of accelerated weathering using FTC on thin granite panels used in veneer claddings. A total of 51 specimens from three types of Australian granite (Calca, Imperial Black and Grandee) were used in the experimental program. UPV of the specimens were measured before and after FTC testing. A controlled freeze-thaw chamber was used for the weathering process and the specimens were subjected to 100 cycles of freezing and thawing for a period of 34 Results from the FTC test showed noticeable evidence of physical degradation of the granite specimens. The UPV results clearly showed a reduction in UPV following FTC, which correlates to strength reduction. This was validated by flexural strength testing. Flexural strength reduction due to FTC of Calca, Imperial Black and Grandee were 24.5%, 28.5% and 16.7%, respectively. Noticeable changes in density and anisotropy were also observed following FTC. The UPV of the Australian granite specimens falls at the higher end of the UPV spectrum for thin structural stone veneers. This is consistent with their higher density and strength. A correlation between UPV and flexural strength of weathered and unweathered granite was established using the 51 test results reported in this work. Furthermore, a correlation between UPV of unweathered and weathered granite using 36 test results was also presented. This can help in predicting the UPV, and hence strength, of granite during its service life. Further research on the influence of other weathering conditions such as cyclic wetting and drying on the structural properties of Australian granites worth investigating. The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of Lucy Cuddihy and Royce Erwin in conducting the experimental work and Dr R. Blackwell for his comments and discussion.