In this study, an attempt was made to investigate the influence of temperature on the stability and compactness of gypsum rock. The fracture toughness was tested using a real-time online high temperature system, and the sample was characterized by scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction in order to further investigate the fracture characteristics and mechanisms. The results showed that (1) The change in gypsum fracture toughness (K
                     IC) with temperature can be divided into four stages: a slow decrease with increasing temperature between 20 and 100 °C, a sharp decrease from 100 to 300 °C, a slow decrease from 300 to 600 °C, and a rapid decrease from 600 to 700 °C; (2) When gypsum is at the low-temperature stage (20–300 °C), the fracture surfaces are smooth and flat. The main failure mode is trans-granular fracture. In the high-temperature stage (400–700 °C), the fracture surface is rough. The fracture morphology is complex and diverse, with fibrous stripes and secondary cracks being observed on the fracture surface. Intergranular fracture is the main fracture mode. (3) When the temperature of gypsum is between 100 and 300 °C, weakening occurs by thermal dehydration and calcium sulfate dihydrate is dehydrated to β-calcium sulfate and γ-calcium sulfate. At temperatures ranging from 300 to 700 °C, the weakening mechanisms are thermal fracturing and crystal distortion of calcium sulfate. The results of this study provide theoretical guidance for evaluating the stability and compactness of nuclear waste storage.International Society of Rock Mechanics X-ray diffraction Semicircular bend Scanning electron microscopy Temperature (℃) Sample radius (mm) Sample thickness (mm) Pre-crack length (mm) Calcined gypsum Correlation coefficent Fractal dimension Total number of boxes Size Dimensionless stress intensity factors Mode I Fracture toughness (MPa·m Deviation distance (mm) Support span Load (kN) Peak load of specimen failure (kN) The ease of promoting nuclear fission and the relatively low environmental pollution, energy consumption, and fuel cost arising from its exploitation have led to increasing development of nuclear energy The decay of radioactive elements (137Cs, 60Co, 90Sr, etc.) can increase the temperature of the rock surrounding a nuclear waste repository to up to 1000 °C. Previous research has shown that differences in the coefficients of thermal expansion of different components of the rock lead to local thermal stress and formation of micro-cracks in the rock Till date extensive research efforts have been devoted to the study on fracture toughness In summary, temperature has a major effect on the fracture characteristics of rocks. However, no relevant studies have yet been reported on the effect of real-time high temperature on the fracture toughness of a gypsum interlayer: previous studies have mostly tested the fracture toughness of rocks after high-temperature treatment. According to Tao et al. Therefore, in order to accurately assess the safety and stability of nuclear waste repositories, it is necessary to test the fracture toughness of gypsum interlayers under real-time high-temperature conditions. Thus, in this study, the fracture toughness of gypsum interlayers was tested under real-time high-temperature conditions and the characteristics of fracture in gypsum were further explored by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Based on fracture mechanics, the fracture propagation can be divided into three modes: mode I, Mode II, and Mode III. Mode-I fracture occurs most commonly in underground geotechnical engineering The data obtained from the experiment were calculated and processed according to the method recommended by the ISRM. The fracture toughness   where The dimensions of the SCB specimens used for this study are as follows: The gypsum cores were collected from the Yunying area in Hubei Province, China. The main components of gypsum are illustrated in The process of sample preparation can be divided into the following three parts:  (2) The core is machine-cut into 25-mm thick semi-circular discs. The two sides of the specimen are then ground until level with 30-mesh fine sandpaper. (3) The semi-circular specimen is gripped with flat-jaw pliers, and crack prefabrication equipment is used to cut cracks into the specimens with a 0.4-mm thick saw blade. The size of the sample is 50 mm × 25 mm, and the length of the groove is 12.5 mm Eight different temperature settings were employed in the experiment. These are room temperature (20 °C), 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, and 700 °C, respectively. Three specimens were tested under each temperature condition, making a total of 24 specimens. The experimental procedure is as follows:  (2) After the holding time elapsed, real-time high-temperature fracture toughness tests were carried out on the specimens on the high-temperature universal testing machine. The displacement loading mode was adopted, with a loading rate of 0.002 mm s (3) After the breaking of the specimen, it was cooled down to room temperature (20 °C), and the fracture trajectory was quantitatively characterized by using fractal theory.   Analysis of the experimental force–displacement curves of the gypsum samples shown in The force–displacement curves of different gypsum specimens at the same temperature exhibit similar variation patterns, thus, only representative force–displacement curves from room temperature (20 °C) to 700 °C are presented herein as shown in According to Formula At real-time high temperature, the fracture toughness of gypsum specimen changes with temperature as shown in  The changes in fracture toughness indicate that gypsum undergoes a brittle–ductile transition with an increase in temperature. The fracture toughness results are generally widely dispersed at each temperature. This is mainly due to structural differences within the gypsum itself. The fracture toughness of gypsum varies with temperature as follows. The effect of temperature on the fracture characteristics of gypsum specimens was characterized qualitatively and quantitatively by investigating changes caused to the surface morphology and fracture trajectory of gypsum specimens by high temperature. This study investigated the characteristics of the fractures formed in gypsum specimens at different temperatures through inspecting their cross-section fracture morphology. Cross-sectional fracture morphology is mainly affected and restricted by mineral composition, structure, external load, and temperature. Gypsum is composed of mineral particles and cements. Heating causes both chemical reactions between mineral particles and cements (for example, the thermal dehydration and lattice distortion both cause the color of gypsum to change from gray–black to gray–white with increasing temperature) and physical reactions (for example, to a weaker and looser structure with increasing temperature). These effects cause major changes in the strength and cohesion of the mineral particles, eventually leading to marked changes in the cross-section fracture morphology.  (2) (3)   In summary, we can draw the following three conclusions regarding the fracture morphology of gypsum specimens at different temperatures (20–700 °C):  (2) The fracture surface of gypsum specimens is smooth and simple at low temperature. However, it is rough, complex, and diverse at high temperature, showing signs of minor plastic deformation. This change is mainly caused by the intensification of the thermal movement of mineral particles, crystals, and atoms in the rock under the influence of high temperature. When the rock is subjected to external load, fracturing may occur at a wider range of locations. (3) This study observed the morphology of fractures formed in gypsum specimens at high temperature via SEM technology and obtained the change rule of fracture morphology from room temperature (20 °C) to 700 °C. The cross-sections of the specimens are smooth at temperatures between 20 and 200 °C. When the sample is heated above 300 °C, the morphology at the fracture surface gradually transforms from step-like to mainly acicular. Secondary breakage occurs on fibrous crystals between 400 and 700 °C. Lattice distortion of gypsum crystals also occurs, which is mainly manifested in the transformation of crystals from fibrous or acicular to powder. This is because an increase in temperature directly leads to an increase in thermal cracking. The cementation between mineral particles is also obviously weakened, which affects the mechanical strength. This directly affects the fracture toughness of the gypsum. This study assessed the failure mode and crack propagation path of gypsum under real-time high temperature. The shape and trajectory of rock fracture are controlled by the micro-fracture mechanism and can thus directly reflect the fracture characteristics of the rock. A schematic illustration of a failure crack is shown in    To accurately evaluate the weakening process of gypsum specimens at low temperatures, the data were divided into two stages for detailed analysis. When gypsum is heated from room temperature (20 °C) to 200 °C, the fracture toughness of gypsum samples exhibits a slow decrease. The weakening mechanism at these low temperatures is mainly chemical: the dehydration reaction. Dehydration causes continuous changes in the microstructure and mineral composition of gypsum.  When the temperature is further increased to 200 °C, the intensity of the CaSO Tao et al. The figure clearly reveals that different fine spectra of the gypsum specimens broaden to varying degrees at different temperatures from 300 to 700 °C and that there is an increase in the diffraction broadening coefficient with an increase in temperature. The change in the shape of the diffraction line of gypsum after high-temperature treatment is obvious. This clearly indicates that thermal dehydration does not occur at this temperature stage, leaving the basic crystal structure unchanged. According to literature studies Temperature has important effects on mechanical properties. Gypsum enters into an unbalanced state as time goes by, and the destruction process of gypsum is an irreversible process involving energy dissipation and release. Changes in temperature result in major changes in fracture toughness. For example, above 100 °C, the evaporation of interlayer and adsorbed water can lead to clay hardening, increasing the fracture toughness of rock In the first stage (20–100 °C), the fracture toughness of gypsum decreases slowly, and no obvious cracks appear. These findings indicate that little thermal cracking occurs. The cross-section of the gypsum specimen is smooth, and there is little change in the deviation distance of the crack. Thus, heating exhibited little effect on fracture toughness. In the sharp decline stage (100–300 °C), chemical reactions cause the fracture toughness to decrease sharply. On the one hand, this is due to dehydration. Evaporation of half of the water changes both the microstructure and mineral composition of the gypsum. On the other hand, the presence of cracks on the surface of the fracture and inside the sample and of surface debris, which make the surface morphology more fragmented than that at room temperature, show that thermal rupture also occurs in this stage. The fracture surface of gypsum at 200 °C shows a large amount of damage, which affects its mechanical properties During the second slow descent stage (300–600 °C), the gypsum samples are mainly affected by thermal expansion, heterogeneity, anisotropy, and stress. With the increase in the temperature, the gypsum experienced that temperature became larger and the corresponding moisture constantly lost. Finally, thermal fracture occurs, which affects fracture toughness. It can be observed from the SEM images that the fracture mode is mainly intergranular fracture. Intergranular fracture occurs due to thermal expansion between particles under the action of temperature. Intergranular fracture leads to the change in the deviation distance of the crack from the central axis: the more intergranular fracture damage, the greater the deviation During the relatively rapid descent stage (600–700 °C), the fracture toughness of gypsum decreases rapidly because an increase in temperature directly leads to an increase in thermal cracking. The cementation between mineral particles is obviously weakened. The main failure mode is intergranular fracture. However, unlike at lower temperatures, secondary breakage occurs in fibrous crystals, perpendicular to the orientations of those crystals. When the temperature rises to 700 °C, numerous holes become obvious in the cross-section. Fragmentation is serious, and the diffraction broadening coefficient increases due to defects in gypsum crystals and lattice distortions. The lattice distortions are caused by a change in mineral form in the gypsum (from α-CaSO The fracture morphology of rocks is determined by the microstructure, and this fracture morphology can directly reflect the failure of rocks. Gypsum is a brittle material, thus its tensile property is weak. A theoretical study by Cotterell and Rice Feng Gan This study experimentally studied the fracture toughness and fracture characteristics of the gypsum interlayers that commonly occur in rock salt used for nuclear waste storage. The main conclusions are as follows. The fracture toughness of gypsum samples decreases with an increase in real-time temperature. The trend in fracture toughness can be divided into the following four stages: The cross-section morphology and fracture mode of gypsum change under the action of temperature. From room temperature (20 °C) to 200 °C, The trajectory of fractures in gypsum changes under the influence of temperature. The deviation distance of gypsum fracture was 0.6 mm at room temperature (20 °C), whereas it was 2.7 mm at 700 °C, an increase of 77.78%. The degree of deviation increases with an increase in temperature, as it causes a gradual expansion and evolution of the crack. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was supported by the