Background
                  Acetabular fractures remain challenging to diagnose, particularly when they are complex. An accurate diagnosis is nevertheless crucial to select the best surgical strategy. None of the training methods described to date relies on the Letournel classification with a detailed analysis of each abnormality seen by computed tomography (CT). We therefore prospectively assessed a CT-based diagnostic method by (1) determining the rate of correct diagnoses by orthopaedic surgeons before and after training in the method, (2) comparing the times needed to read the CT images before and after training, (3) and assessing the repeatability of the method.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Training in the CT-based diagnostic method significantly increases the rate of correct diagnoses.
               
                  Method
                  The CT-based diagnostic method involves analysing eight anatomical landmarks in the anterior, posterior, and no man's land zones. From our institutional database (450 cases between 2007 and 2016), we selected 35 acetabular fractures that replicated the overall distribution of fracture types. The images were reviewed by 10 inexperienced and 3 experienced readers before and after they received training in the CT-based diagnostic method. The rates of correct diagnoses and times needed to read the images were compared. Finally, an additional reading was performed to allow an assessment of reproducibility.
               
                  Results
                  After training, the rate of correct diagnoses by the unexperienced readers improved by 16.64% for all fractures combined (from 212/350, 60.5% [37–83%] to 270/350, 77.14% [63–86%]; P
                     =0.001) and by 25.9% for associated fractures (from 90/180, 50% [11–89%] to 114/140, 75.6% [61–90%]; P
                     =0.003). Mean time required by the inexperienced readers to interpret the 35 sets of images decreased after training, from 66.1 to 47.6min (i.e., a 1.22-minute decrease per patient, P
                     =0.001). None of the study variables changed significantly after training of the experienced readers (P
                     >0.05). Reproducibility among the inexperienced readers was 0.78.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Analysing the eight anatomical landmarks located in the anterior, posterior, and no man's land zones is a simple and reproducible method for diagnosing all fracture patterns defined by the Letournel classification.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III, non-randomised prospective case–control diagnostic study.The diagnosis of acetabular fractures is challenging, yet of the utmost importance to select the best surgical strategy Nevertheless, diagnostic errors remain common, particularly among inexperienced surgeons and radiologists In our department, the diagnosis of acetabular fractures rests on computed tomography (CT) with 3D reconstructions. In previous studies, 3D CT was superior over conventional radiography Two orthopaedic surgeons (PJ and GR) selected 35 cases from our institution's database, which included 450 acetabular fractures managed between 2007 and 2016. The 35 cases were classified according to Letournel based on the radiographs, CTs (multiplanar reconstruction [MPR] and 3D reconstructions), and intra-operative findings. Cases for which the two surgeons disagreed about the fracture type were excluded. The 35 fractures were distributed as follows: 14 elementary fractures (anterior wall, The diagnostic method involves analysing eight anatomical landmarks on MPR and 3D CT images ( Among inexperienced and untrained medical students and residents who performed rotations in our department, 10 were selected at random to participate in this prospective study. The controls were 3 orthopaedic surgeons who were well beyond the learning curve for acetabular surgery (over 50 procedures for each) For each acetabular fracture, the CT image set included native axial slices, MPR reconstructions, and the following standardised 3D reconstructions: anterior and posterior views of the pelvis, an endopelvic view of the fractured hemi-pelvis, and an exopelvic view of the fractured hemi-pelvis after subtraction of the femoral head ( When the readers interpreted the images for the first time, before training, they were given only the list of fracture types described by Letournel, with no instructions regarding image interpretation. The readers received training in the diagnostic method 2 weeks later. To minimise the risk of recognition bias, the second reading session occurred 2 weeks after training, i.e., 4 weeks after the first reading session, and the 35 cases were given in random order. The readers were also instructed to refrain from obtaining additional training between the two reading sessions and to base their diagnosis solely on the diagram of the Letournel classification. The total time spent on each of the two reading sessions was recorded. Finally, a third session was held 6 weeks after the second to allow an evaluation of reproducibility. SPSS 18.0 software (International Business Machines Corporation, Armonk, NY) was used. Fisher's test was applied to compare the proportion, percentage, standard deviation, and range of correct diagnoses between groups. The times needed for the reading sessions were compared using Student's The smallest required sample size was computed as follows: In the inexperienced readers, the overall diagnostic rate increased significantly after training in the diagnostic method, from 212/350 (60.5%; SD, 14; range, 37–83%) to 270/350 (77.14%; SD, 8; range, 63–86%), a difference of 16.86% ( Mean total time needed for the inexperienced readers to interpret the 35 CT image sets was 66′6″ before training and 47′36″ after training; the difference was of borderline significance ( Reproducibility of the diagnosis after training was substantial (ICC, 0.78) in the inexperienced group and near-perfect (ICC, 0.91) in the experienced group. Acetabular fractures are challenging to diagnose, although they are better understood since studies reported by Judet and Letournel A few limitations of our study should be acknowledged. First, the number of participants ( The Letournel classification is the most widely used today This study demonstrates that analysing eight anatomical landmarks in three categories – anterior, posterior, and in the no man's land zone – is a simple diagnostic method that improves the diagnosis of associated fractures by readers with limited experience, while diminishing the time needed to interpret the images. In addition, this method is reproducible for all fracture types in the Letournel classification. Its contribution is limited, however, among experienced readers. A multicentre study would be useful to assess the external validity of this diagnostic method. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.