Recently, a flexible ultrasonic lithotrite probe has been developed (UreTron, Med-Sonics Corp., Erie, PA) for use with a flexible ureteroscope. This novel device has potential application in the treatment of stones where probe deflection may be an advantage. We conducted in vitro testing of the UreTron flexible probe to assess the effect of ureteroscope deflection on stone comminution. A hands-free in vitro test system was designed to objectively assess the efficiency of stone penetration by the UreTron US-flex-probe. The US-flex-probe was passed through the workingchannel of a Wolf Cobra flexible ureteroscope. The Cobra was mounted upright with the probe extending into a water-filled, optically clear test chamber. Deflection angle was set at 0, 15 or 30 degrees. The US-flex-probe was advanced 5 mm past the end of the Cobra and a gypsum artificial stone was centered on the probe tip with a counter weight atop the stone to provide constant force. Irrigant flow through the US-flex-probe was set at 15 ml/min. The UreTron was operated on the hard-stone setting and time for stone penetration was measured. All six UreTron probes tested were able to penetrate the test stone material at an average rate of 2.25 mm/min. However, the probes did differ significantly in penetration rate, with average times ranging from a slowest value of 2.02 +/− 0.14 mm/min to the fastest of 2.50 +/− 0.16 mm/min (P<0.0001 by multi-factor ANOVA). Deflecting the tip of the ureteroscope by 30 degrees reduced the stone penetration rate by an average of 3.4% compared with no deflection (P=0.02). The probes performed well long after the manufacturer's stated lifetime of 7 minutes, with a fall-off of penetration rate of only 5.3% on average after 30 minutes of use. The ability of the UreTron flexible ultrasonic probe to fragment stones is quite novel. Assessment using our hands-free in vitro test system, in which stone penetration time is not affected by operator bias, shows that increased angle of deflection affects the performance of the probe. Further in vitro and in vivo testing is warranted.