Various testing methods have been proposed to measure rock abrasiveness as an input into the prediction models for estimating the tool wear in mechanized tunneling and mining. Among the proposed tests, LCPC test has been used by many researchers for assessment of rock abrasivity. In this study, 20 rock samples from various locations in Pakistan were subjected to comprehensive testing of various properties. The tests included LCPC (Laboratorie Central des Ponts et Chaussees) rock abrasivity tests as well as a complete suite of standard rock physical and mechanical property tests. Whilst the standard LCPC test is run in dry samples, this study compared the results of the LCPC method in dry and saturated conditions, performed at water contents of 15, 30, 45 and 60%. Overall abrasivity [measured as ABR (g/t)] decreased with the increase in water content with peak values of ABR (g/t) attained at 15% water contents for low porosity rocks and 30% water content for high porosity rocks when compared to dry tests. Similarly, a gradual decrease in the LCPC Breakability Index (BR%) was noted in the case of low porosity rocks with the corresponding increase in water content. However, for high porosity rocks there was a cyclic fall and rise in breakability (BR%) at 15% and 30% moisture levels, respectively. This was in contrast to dry tests. A steady drop in BR% was also observed at higher water contents. This paper discusses the result of the testing as well as practical implications of these measurements on predicted wear of cutting tools used in mechanized excavation in mining and tunneling applications. Preliminary statistical analysis of the data and correlations between ABR, water contents, and petrographic and engineering rock properties are also included in this paper.Rock and soil abrasivity is one of the governing parameters which must be considered in selection of cutting tools as well as prediction of tool wear in excavation and drilling processes for mining, tunneling, geo-technical, and petroleum engineering applications where extensive rock/soil excavation operations are involved. The term abrasiveness can be defined as the potential of a rock or soil to cause wear on a tool ( Moreover, the excavation of rock either by conventional drill and blast system or by mechanized excavators mostly encounters rocks in both dry, wet, and saturated conditions. For instance the urban tunneling or underground construction activity conducted in soft grounds especially beneath the groundwater table is usually carried out by the application of earth pressure balanced (EPB) tunneling machines ( To date a number of rock abrasivity tests are available for the estimation of tool wear in rock cutting, however, CERCHAR, LCPC, and AV/AVS test proposed by NTNU/SINTEF, are the most frequently cited laboratory tests that are globally accepted for the assessment of abrasiveness of rock ( The LCPC abrasivity test was introduced by the Laboratorie Central des Ponts et Chaussees (LCPC), regulated under the French Standard P18-579 ( The LCPC test is an extensively researched method. In recent years, the application of LCPC test for the initial investigations of tunneling and underground construction projects has been reported in some cases ( In tunnel construction, the use of tunnel boring machines (TBMs) has become increasingly common in recent years ( This paper presents research work conducted at the Mining and Geological Engineering Departments, University of Engineering and Technology (UET), Lahore, Pakistan, which was focused on evaluating the abrasivity potential of selected rocks from different formations of Pakistan. Past literature shows that the LCPC test finds applications for the measurement of abrasivity of rocks, soil samples and soft grounds specifically under the groundwater table. Therefore in the current study, the LCPC tests were performed on 20 selected rock samples in the dry as well as saturated condition to simulate the rock excavation activity in wet ground. Water was added in fractions of 15%, 30%, 45% and 60% of 500 g of sieved rock aggregate, in the beginning of each test. For this study a total of 20 rock samples were collected from 14 different rock formations of Pakistan. These samples are considered to be a good representation of abrasiveness and geo-mechanical properties of dominant formations in the country. A complete set of laboratory tests comprising the LCPC abrasivity tests, petrographic studies and physico-mechanical rock property tests including UCS, BTS, density, porosity, and pore-space volume were performed. To conduct mechanical and physical property tests, rock cores were cored orthogonal to the bedding planes of collected rock boulders (having minimum 28,317 cm In this study the LCPC tests were carried out by using a locally fabricated machine ( where; ABR = LCPC abrasivity index measured in grams/ton;    where; In addition to the dry tests, LCPC tests were also performed by varying the water content of the test samples, in order to explore the impact of moisture on the rock abrasivity value (ABR). For this purpose water was added to the rock fraction prior to the start of test in quantities of 75, 150, 225, and 300 g which corresponds to water content of 15%, 30%, 40%, and 60% by weight, respectively. The petrographical studies including mineral contents and grain sizes were performed by using a polarized light microscope. The grain size measurements were carried out by measuring the mean intersection length method as suggested by where;  n = number of minerals. The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) represents the strength of intact rock in compression and is one of the most frequently used rock properties in geotechnical engineering. UCS tests in this study were performed according to Rock porosity and density of the samples were measured on Brazilian test samples by using the saturation and caliper technique of the  Abrasion value measurement by LCPC test was conducted in samples with minimum water content level of 15% since at lower water contents the sample would stick to the walls of the mould thereby the rotating impeller would rotate freely without any contact with the crushed rock. A similar moisture content level has also been suggested in another study ( At 30% water content the test results ( Finally, it can be seen in  Finally the LCPC abrasivity coefficient values dropped gradually ( The wear mechanism in the LCPC test even with varying water contents, involves the flowing motion of water and solid rock grains and through abrasion and surface fatigue mechanisms as suggested by Moreover mechanical excavators used in mining and tunneling operations normally require addition of water through high pressure water jet (i.e. up to 40 to 50 MPa) sprays (5–10% of the weight of rock debris), particularly for dust control at the working face, reduction of frictional sparks, and cooling of the cutting tools to improve bit life. However, this level of water content can substantially increase the abrasivity of the excavated muck produced during the rock cutting process ( In practice, during the course of rock excavation, the water content of the rock debris can be examined and controlled as needed to produce the optimum results relative to bit life and wear of machine parts. In case the water content at the working face is near the critical water content values identified in the tests that mimic the working conditions of the machine and for the particular rock type, addition of extra water to the muck can be beneficial to reduce rock abrasivity. However, the increased water content of the muck where the rock is nearly dry can result in excessive wear and making the muck more aggressive in wearing machine parts. If the rock being excavated is very porous, the amount of water sprayed through high pressure water jets may need to be increased so that the overall water content at the working face approaches an optimum moisture level. This may help to reduce the abrasion and wear on the rock cutting tools. When using additional water to decrease the wear, environmental nuisance and greater maintenance of rock debris conveying systems may become an issue. Overall, this points to the need to conduct relevant tests to optimize the water content for a given operation to balance between the bit wear, machine maintenance, and overall production and cost of the operation. Reduction in abrasive wear by the medium can be accomplished by the addition of conditioning agents to the tribo-systems. An example was presented by The rock samples selected for LCPC tests at the pre-defined water contents were further processed by oven drying to explore the influence of water content variation on LCPC breakability index BR (%) of rocks ( It is interesting to note that at 30% water content, there is an abrupt rise in BR (%) as compared to the 15% water content which clearly shows increased interaction between the rock fraction and test propeller. This behavior showing initial decrease (15% water content) and an increase afterwards (30% water content) in LCPC breakability, is in contradiction to the experimental findings of Similarly, LCPC test is not as common as most other rock tests and also when it is available, it is labor intensive and there is limited experience with performing the tests in conditions other than with the dry samples. In other words, the standard LCPC test is performed in dry samples and to assess the impact of the water content as well as the possibility of estimating ABR values when the test is unavailable, it was decided to examine the possibility of developing empirical models based on the available data from the limited number of rock samples used in the current study. The SPSS-21.0 statistical analysis software package was used for the regression analysis seeking equations linking ABR values to moisture contents as well as UCS, BTS, dry density ( To validate the significance of proposed models for the prediction of ABR (g/t), the F-test statistical analysis technique was adopted. The F-test is frequently used to check the strength and validity of statistical models ( The present study has focused on the evaluation of rock abrasivity under dry and saturated rock conditions by using the LCPC abrasivity test. A total of 20 rock units encompassing a broad range of abrasivity and engineering rock characteristics were selected from a variety of rock formations of Pakistan and subjected to a complete suite of laboratory testing, including LCPC tests and rock mechanics and physical property tests in the air dried state. The LCPC tests were conducted by varying the water contents including 15%, 30%, 45% and 60% by weight of rock sample fraction. The objective was to observe the variability of rock abrasion in a variety of conditions that can be encountered in different mining and tunneling applications. The findings of this study can be summarized as follows: The LCPC wet tests indicated two characteristic trends towards ABR (g/t) values that can be linked to the porosity of tested rocks. In the case of seven high porosity rock samples (n = 10.84–24.70%) at 15% moisture level there was initially an abrupt drop in abrasivity values (ranging from 6% to 83%) followed by peak ABR values (i.e. increase of 45–179%) at 30% water content. This is compared to the ABR% measured in the dry condition. For the thirteen rock samples with relatively low porosity (n = 0.12–3.61%), peak values of abrasivity (i.e. rise of 21–490%) in the majority of cases (eight samples) were reached at 15% water level and the remaining rock specimens reached their peak ABR values at 30% water content, compared to dry ABR values. Finally, at 45% and 60% water contents, there was a gradual fall in ABR values for both high and low porosity rock specimens probably due to the decreased density of the water–solid mixture, lubrication effect of the water, and high pore pressures that could reduce the contact stresses between the grains and rock fragments - tool. The results point to the need for evaluation of the impact of water content on rock abrasion for a given application. In case the water content at the point of contact between the ground and machine parts (i.e. working face) is near the critical water content, addition of extra water to the muck can be beneficial for reduction of rock abrasivity and wear. If the rock encountered during excavation is considerably porous, the amount of water added to the system can be increased so that the overall water content reaches an optimum value that is often higher than the values for non-porous rocks. Addition of chemicals can also help this process in the form of foam or other lubricants that have been introduced for rock/soil excavation. The results of LCPC tests at various moisture conditions showed two distinctive trends in LCPC breakability index (BR, %), based on porosity of the rock samples. In the case of low porosity rock samples an overall decrease in LCPC breakability index (BR%) was noted with the peak values observed in dry condition, and gradually decreasing in the tests performed at 15–60% water contents. However, for high porosity rocks the breakability initially dropped sharply at 15% moisture content, in contrast to the LCPC dry tests, followed by an increase at 30% water content, and finally decreasing trends at 45% and 60% water content. Additional tests in other rock samples and analysis of available data is underway to fine tune the results and to explore the interdependence of the rock properties and its abrasive behavior. Finally, multiple regression modeling was performed to propose best fit prediction equations for the estimation of ABR (g/t) at 0, 15, 30, 45 and 60% water contents, for the rock samples with given petrographical (Ø-Q and Ø) and mechanical properties (BTS and UCS). The empirical models so developed can facilitate a quick approximate estimate of ABR at specified moisture content from rock properties generally determined in laboratory testing.