In this study, fabrication of functionally graded materials from elemental powders of Ti and B by utilizing combustion synthesis technique was investigated. The technique was chosen because it exploits the exothermic reaction between titanium and boron. The control of the reactions was achieved by selecting compositions away from the stoichiometry without resorting to adding a third element into the system. Compositionally graded trilayered (Ti-10–18 wt.%B, Ti-5–15 wt.%B) and five layered (Ti-5–10–15–18 wt.%B) green compacts were ignited. The influence of the composition selection and the temperature on propagation and product formation was studied. In order to achieve more control of the exothermic reactions, the titanium side was ignited first. Therefore in functionally graded material (FGM) compacts, a relatively longer ignition time and higher reaction temperatures were recorded compared to corresponding single compositions. X-ray diffraction studies showed that, due to high exothermicity, TiB and TiB2 formed even at off-stoichiometric compositions. Such reactions produced FGMs with titanium on one side to Ti–TiB–TiB2 on the other. The as-fabricated Ti–TiB–TiB2 graded composite materials exhibited continuous and crack free interfaces.A functionally graded material (FGM) is a composite material consisting of two or more phases in which the volume fractions of the constituents change such that the composition, microstructure and properties vary gradually in one direction. The reason for this is to avoid abrupt transitions from one material to another, thus avoiding sharp local stress concentrations. Designing FGMs allows manipulation of many material properties including strength, toughness, stiffness, optical properties, electrical properties, thermal properties etc. Many industrial applications such as aircraft engines, computer circuit boards, medical implants, armor, and optical devices, can benefit from utilization of the FGM concept. As a consequence of this, there is an increased interest in devising inexpensive and versatile methods of fabrication. Manufacturing of FGMs requires careful attention to materials selection, processing parameters, and specimen geometry. Various production methods are available for manufacturing graded structures. These methods vary from novel processes such as laser cladding to widely used industrial processes such as case carburization for steel. A large fraction of the research on FGMs is based on constructive processes in which the gradients are produced by stacking layers Combustion synthesis, offers a fast, cheap, and a reliable method for producing FGMs. The energy required is provided by the strong exothermic reaction between the constituents without requiring any expensive equipment making it an economical process. The control of the combustion temperature is an important issue in the combustion synthesis of FGMs. The temperature must be sufficiently high everywhere to cause densification yet not so high to avoid uncontrolled reactions. Because of the fast kinetics, it was reported that FGM fabrication by combustion synthesis is less prone to homogenization. Therefore, the gradient structure is generally preserved In this study, Ti–B binary system was chosen for several reasons. Both TiB and TiB Elemental Ti (325 mesh, purity: 99%, Johnson Mathey, Ward Hill, MI, USA) and crystalline B (average 15 μm or less, purity >99%, Cerac, Milwaukee, WI, USA) powders were used as raw materials. The graded layers were prepared by stacking up the different compositions (5, 10, 15, and 18 wt.% boron–titanium) in a steel die in a layered fashion. The required amount of powder (approximately 2 g) for each layer was loaded into the cylindrical steel die. Each layer was tapped gently before the next layer was added to obtain flat interfaces and uniform compaction. The precompaction of the powder mixtures was accomplished first by uniaxially pressing cylindrical compacts. A stainless steel die with double acting rams was used and an axial pressure of 60 kPa was applied. The geometry and a picture of the green compact is shown in Prior to combustion experiments, the as-prepared samples were degassed at 600 The experimental set-up is shown in The samples were cross-sectioned and the phase constituents were identified at room temperature by X-ray diffraction (Siemens D5000, Ni filtered CuKα radiation) employing a Cu tube (wavelength: 0.15406 nm), operating at 40 kV and 30 mA. The step scanning employed was 0.05° per second in the range of 2 As explained previously, functionally graded samples were prepared by stacking up different compositions. A brightly glowing zone moving along the specimen from the ignition site was observed. The combustion was recorded by a video camera through a view port. When the samples were ignited from the boron rich layers, they deformed and in some cases exploded. Therefore, we chose to ignite the reaction from the Ti layer. Combustion wave velocities were obtained by noting the time involved for the reaction front to travel from the top to the bottom of the sample. The cylindrical compacts of three-layered FGMs ignited from the Ti side after a sufficient amount of energy transferred from the tungsten coil to the sample. The reaction front propagated along the length of the sample in a controlled fashion as shown in In FGMs, interfaces initiate failure. Therefore, the interface is an important factor controlling the properties of FGMs In Compared to single composition samples, the precombustion time was longer with FGMs Similar to the time–temperature profiles obtained from the single compositions In The samples were cross-sectioned and graded layers were cut through the interface boundaries. For phase identification, XRD was utilised on each layer. Typical XRD patterns of individual layers of FGMs after combustion experiments are shown in Our work on processing in the Ti–B binary system by using combustion synthesis led to the following conclusions: The results obtained demonstrated that the fabrication of Ti–TiB–TiB Combustion wave experiments produced longer precombustion times and higher local temperatures with FGMs compared to single composition experiments. This is attributed to igniting the reactions from the top layer consisting of titanium. XRD of FGM layers showed similar results to that of the corresponding single compositions indicating TiB and TiB The work was supported by a grant from Army Research Office DAAG-55-9810281.