The dynamics of solution, soluble species, and gas in increasing scales of heap leaching apparatus were quantified with tracer tests to explain differences in their gold leaching behaviors. The tracer methods included tracer injection in the feed solution and monitoring soluble species during rinsing. Hydrodynamics of the heap systems were evaluated during (1) the scale-up from a 350 kg column to a 55 tonne crib to a 6300 tonne heap, and (2) the change in ore properties from run-of-mine to crushed to agglomerated ore in 55 tonne cribs. The tracer data was interpreted by the Levenspiel compartment flow model that considers a packed bed as a black box filled with ore, air, and moisture, the latter occurring as active flow, by-pass flow, plug flow volume, well-mixed volume, and stagnant/dead volume. This model was useful as a diagnostic tool but would not be a predictive tool.
                  It was established that gold recovery could be correlated to the amount of stagnant solution in the system. Columns and cribs that achieved excellent gold recovery had as little as 0% to 18% of the solution retained in a stagnant form. The 6300 tonne heap had poor gold recovery and contained a significant stagnant volume (57% of the total solution retained in the heap). The proportion of stagnant solution was proportional to the proportion of fines in the ore and the lack of structural support (e.g. column walls) in the heap, the latter translating into a higher bed density.
                  In contrast to the wide distribution of particle size in the run-of-mine and crushed ores, the agglomerated ore was more uniformly-sized, which led to a lower proportion of stagnant solution. The agglomerated ore had a lower bulk density of 1.7 t/m3 (vs 2 t/m3) and a lower proportion of stagnant solution 0% (vs 88%). Gold extraction from the agglomerated ore was aided by the air available in the pores, while good solution transport out of the packed bed was attributed to the absence of stagnant zones.
                  Tracers proved to be simple and effective to quantitatively diagnose the inner workings of heap leaching systems of various scales. A narrow particle size distribution, a low fines content, and a low bed bulk density were keys to achieving good solution, solute, and gas dynamics, hence high gold recovery.Roughly 15% of the world's gold and copper are produced by heap leaching, a simple process in appearance which consists of stacking coarse ore particles into a pile, irrigating the pile with a leach solution for anywhere from 60 days for oxidized gold ores to 500 days for copper sulfide ores, and recovering the dissolved metal value in the leach solution emerging at the bottom of the pile. Metallurgy and hydrodynamics come face to face in heap leaching processes; the former is more extensively studied and much better understood than the latter. During the development of the design criteria for the heap leaching a particular ore, the metallurgical response of the ore is typically measured in systems of increasing size. Initially, column tests are performed to roughly outline the optimum leaching conditions, and then larger scale tests are performed. Cribs, large silos at heights equal to anticipated heap lift heights, are often employed at the conclusion of successful column tests. Demonstration heaps, isolated or embedded piles that can range from 1000 to 100,000 t, are also used to confirm the metallurgical response before commercial implementation. Insights into the hydrodynamic behavior of the ore emerge only at the crib and heap scale. The hydrodynamic response is usually not well defined, the methods to quantify it can be expensive, and the interpretation of the data can be complex. It is important that the solution that is irrigated on top of the heap is well distributed as it travels by gravity to the bottom of the heap so that all of the ore is contacted and can be leached. It is also important that this solution only fills up part of the void spaces so that the air blown into the bottom of the heap also has a well distributed path through the heap. The quantity, size and distribution of void spaces and the percentage of them filled with air or solution can be affected by several aspects of the heap. The percentage of void space in a heap is set by the bulk density of the heap, which in turn is affected by the crush size and agglomeration of the ore. The percentage of void space filled by solution can be partially controlled by changing the irrigation rate, but is also controlled by the bulk density of the ore, and the size distribution of the ore being stacked. The following are some examples of the parameters defining the hydrodynamic response and the methods employed to measure them. Others have used tracer tests (radioactive iodine, radioactive bromide, ZnSO The majority of the model fits indicated the presence of a significant volume of stagnant solution wetting the particles. In this paper, tracer tests using sodium bromide and sodium chloride were conducted to characterize the hydrodynamic behavior of heap leach systems. The normalized tracer curves were fitted with a mixed flow model where the total volume of solution held in the pile of ore particles is split between plug flow, well-mixed, and stagnant/dead volumes and where the total solution flow is split between a by-pass stream and an active flow. This paper investigates the hydrodynamics of heap systems in three ways. First, we present the results of tracer tests in columns, cribs, and heaps, three systems of widely different scale, and all three loaded with the same material (a gold ore from Nevada). Second, we investigate the hydrodynamic behavior of agglomerated, crushed, and run-of-mine ore, the three most typical materials stacked in heap leach piles, with all three prepared with the same ore. Third, we relate the metallurgical performance of the gold ore tested to the hydrodynamic behavior of the heap pile stacked with said ore. The hydrodynamics of soluble species (solutes) were measured in columns, cribs and a demonstration heap using a combination of methods described below. A PVC pipe 6.1 m long and 25 cm in diameter was equipped with flanges to become a column apparatus. The column was filled with 350 kg (dry) of gold ore particles that were previously agglomerated with the leaching solution and with 0.3 kg/t of a commercially available binder. These agglomerates were also loaded in Crib #3, which is described in the next section. The moist agglomerates were loaded in the column to an initial height of 6.1 m, giving an initial bulk density of 1.14 t/m Three concrete cribs, each 2.4 m wide The ore used in all cribs was the same gold ore, only that it was prepared differently. Crib #1 was loaded with 63 t (dry) of run-of-mine ore to an initial height of 5.8 m. Crib #2 contained 62 t of − The irrigation mode of the column could obviously not be repeated in the cribs because of the large surface area to irrigate. Instead, the irrigation mode chosen was that of real commercial heap, During the 12 months of testing, the concentration of gold, reagents, and leach products in the feed and discharge solutions was measured, as well as the flowrate of these streams. The crib bulk density was calculated based on the ore volume and tonnage. On occasion, drill cores were extracted using a Pionjar split-spoon drill from the surface to the bottom of the crib beds. At the end of the leach, a step-down tracer test using only water was performed. In a step-down tracer test, water is applied to replace the moisture retained in the crib. The water does not contain any tracer. The reagents contained in the moisture retained in the crib become the tracer. As the reagents were pushed out of the crib by the incoming water, their concentration in the discharge solution dropped. A regular monitoring of the concentration of reagents in the discharge solution generated a tracer curve. A heap leach pad was built with the same ore as in the columns and cribs. The principal difference between this ore and the ore used in the columns and cribs was the higher fines content (25% The whole heap was 55 m long The top and sides of the heap were irrigated with a leach solution applied with drip tubes, using the same drip tubes and the same drip layout as the cribs. The irrigation rate was set to 3 L/m During the course of the leach, solution samples were taken from the feed solution, discharge solution, and from within the heap using six porous ceramic cups that were buried within the heap. By creating a vacuum in the cup, the solution in the vicinity of the cup was sucked into it, pumped through a tube extending to the surface, and then assayed. The heap bulk density was calculated from knowledge of the heap volume and the tonnage stacked. The heap was sampled with a Pionjar drill for cores during the leach, and with a shovel for grab samples after leaching. At the end of the leach, the feed solution was replaced with water containing 100 mg/L of sodium bromide. Simultaneously, the heap underwent two tracer tests, the first corresponding to the step-up injection of bromide, the second corresponding to the step-down release of species present in the heap. The tracer curves that were produced from each testing apparatus were modeled to diagnose the flow and solute dynamics in order to better explain the gold recovery in each apparatus. In this study, the testing apparatus were very large, which potentially could have given rise to 3D fluid and solute dynamics. It was not the purpose of this study to develop a 3D model, but rather to diagnose, rather than predict, the fluid and solute dynamics using a simple model having few but meaningful parameters. This study uses the concepts of Levenspiel to model a packed bed as a combination of one or more flow volumes ( The relative importance of each volume in relation to the total volume of solution held up in the ore bed can be determined from a tracer curve. By definition, a tracer curve is performed under non-steady state condition. Using the non-steady data from the tracer test, it is possible to determine the respective volumes under steady-state conditions. Therefore, while the model has time as an independent variable, it is very much a steady-state model. Another interesting feature of the model is the absence of When performing a step change in concentration in the feed solution, either up or down, the tracer concentration in the discharge solution is measured over time until a new steady state is established. The discharge tracer concentration can be normalized with respect to the feed concentration in a step-up tracer test, or with respect to the initial concentration in the bed in a step-down tracer test. Normalizing the tracer concentration bounds it between 0 and 1. The normalized concentration is denoted (1 In Eq. Because of the different irrigation rate and moisture content in the various setups, it was suitable to normalize the test conditions using the parameter “ratio of applied solution/moisture content” defined as: This parameter is dimensionless, has a unit of 1 when exactly 1 pore volume of solution has been applied, and modifies Eq. When the Let us now examine some special cases that arise from simplifying either Eq. For this modeling purpose, it was satisfactory to treat each apparatus as a black box containing multiple volumes, but it was not critical to find out the actual position of each volume relative to the others. What the Levenspiel model lacks in predictive capability and rigorous treatment of flow and solute movement, it makes up in its simplicity of use and its interpretation of the diagnosis. This section quantifies the solute hydrodynamics as a function of the testing scale and ore properties. To study the influence of the testing scale, ore agglomerated under similar conditions was placed in columns containing 0.35 t of material, in a crib containing 54 t of material, and in a heap containing 6300 t. To study the influence of the material properties, run-of-mine ore, crushed ore, and agglomerated crushed ore were stacked into separate cribs holding up to 63 t of material. The following two sections analyze the hydrodynamic behaviour of these systems. After 2 weeks of irrigation, the column bulk density increased from 1.14 to 1.37 t/m The same model was fitted again to the same data, but with the distinction that the total solution volume The presence of a plug flow volume could be associated to the mode of solution application, which consisted of discharging at once every 15 min the volume of solution that would otherwise have been applied continuously for 15 min. Every 15 min, a pulse of solution was applied evenly over the column surface, which resulted in very good solution distribution. Crib #3 was loaded with the same agglomerates at the column, but was irrigated with drips rather than pulse distributor. After two weeks of irrigation, the bulk density increased from 1.53 to 1.73 t/m The moisture content of the crib was examined by drilling and testing the core. Surface evaporation reduced the moisture content at the surface of the crib, but elsewhere in the crib, the moisture content could not be related to the depth, to the position between drip emitters, or to the time of leaching. Application of two times the volume of solution held in the crib rinsed out approximately 90% of all soluble species. The shape of the rinsing profile shown in The well-mixed conditions that existed in the crib led to fairly uniform gold leaching with depth. In the middle of the leach cycle, the gold extraction averaged 65% out of a maximum of 90% and the extraction at the top of the crib was 5% higher than at the bottom. At the end of the leach cycle, the gap in the extraction between the top and bottom was reduced to about 2% because of the further leaching at the bottom; the gold extraction averaged 69%. At any time, the gold extraction was not correlated to the position of the drip emitters. Both halves of the heap, one agglomerated without binder and the other with, slumped from 3.4 to 2.3 m within a few days of irrigation. The bulk density increased from 1.45 t/m The heap retained on average 14 wt.% moisture. The moisture content was the same everywhere in the heap, whether in the presence of the binder-agglomerated ore or not, whether at the beginning or near the end of the leach, or whether under irrigation or drainage. There was a slight increase in the moisture content with increasing depth of the heap. The most significant increase in the moisture content was noted at the very bottom of the heap where it reached 20 wt.%. During leaching, the average reagent concentration was the same at the top and bottom of the plateau of the heap, but larger on the sides of the heap. The larger concentrations on the sides can be explained by the higher evaporation rate leading to increased concentrations. At the end of the leach, the heap was rinsed with a 100 mg/L sodium bromide solution to examine solution flow through the heap. During the rinse, the concentration of reagent (other than bromide, but the same as in the column or crib) on the sides of the heap dropped significantly, even though the irrigation to the sides had been turned off. Bromide was detected at concentrations of up to 70 mg/L on the sides of the heap indicating that lateral diffusion from the plateau to the sides of the heap occurred. Soon after the start of the rinse, the reagent concentration dropped very rapidly in the discharge solution. After 1 pore volume applied, the concentration of reagent in the discharge solution was reduced to 15% of its initial concentration in the heap ( The top curve in This analysis can be taken one step further by comparing it to the bromide data. Let us remember that the bromide tracer test is a step-up tracer test, while the reagent tracer test is a step-down tracer test. That distinction is very important when comparing which volumes exchange solutes and which do not. By the time 1 pore volume of bromide solution had been pumped, 39% of the bromide species was retained in the heap, and 61% passed through the heap without being retained. The moisture in the heap that picked up the bromide is the same moisture that released the reagent. This moisture is the well-mixed moisture of 43% according to the reagent data, and 39% according to the bromide data. Conversely, the moisture in the heap that did not release the reagent must not have picked up bromide. This moisture is the stagnant/dead moisture of 57% according to the reagent data, and 61% according to the bromide data. Overall, there is a very good agreement between the bromide data and the model prediction: 39% In his model, Levenspiel considers the stagnant/dead volume as only one volume. We demonstrated that the stagnant/dead volume in the heap was in fact stagnant. To reach this conclusion, we monitored over time the gold concentration in the solution retained in the heap by collecting moisture into 6 porous ceramic cups embedded in the heap. During leaching, 6 out of 6 porous cups indicated that the gold concentration in the moisture around the cups changed. During rinsing, only 3 of the 6 cups saw a change. If the stagnant/dead volume has been strictly dead, only the 3 cups that saw a change during rinsing would have also seen a change during leaching. Since this was not the case, it can be concluded that the solution was not held in dead pore volumes. The solution being predominantly stagnant, it would have taken more than 1 pore volume to wash out the 60% of reagent still remaining in the heap after rinsing. This conclusion also implies that soluble gold could have been recovered from any parts of the heap, albeit very slowly. This section summarizes the changes in density and flow models characterizing the column, the crib, and the heap. As the bed of agglomerated ore grew wider, the final bulk density after wetting increased from 1.37 t/m Differences in the flow models were also noted between column, crib, and heap. The plug flow volume decreased from 65% in the column, to 12% in the crib, to 0% in the heap. The well-mixed volume reached a maximum in the crib (88% in the crib The particle size distribution of the ore may have contributed to the large proportion of stagnant pores in the heap. The ore contained 25% of − This section describes the hydrodynamic behavior and leach performance of each of the 3 cribs, and follows a commentary on the similarities and differences observed between cribs. Let us recall that the main difference between Cribs #1 and #2 was the particle size distribution of the ore, Crib #1 saw its bulk density increased from 1.85 to 1.97 t/m Crib #2 also saw its bulk density increased from 1.68 to 1.88 t/m For the same reasons as Crib #1, gold recovery in Crib #2 was poor. Most of the gold that was recovered came from the top third of Crib #2. The extraction in the bottom two-thirds of Crib #2 was close to nil. Crib #3, which contained crushed agglomerated ore, was irrigated 3 L/m The final bulk density of the cribs decreased from 1.97 t/m The hydrodynamic behavior of Cribs #1 and #2 was identical. 88% of the solution retained filled up dead volume completely disconnected from the remainder (12%) of the solution considered to be well-mixed that may have flowed along the crib walls. There was 0% air porosity in Cribs #1 and #2. The measured air permeability was low, not permitting upward flow of air at irrigation rates larger than 3 L/m The hydrodynamic behavior of Crib #3 was more ideal than Cribs #1 and #2. 100% of the solution was well-mixed. There were no dead zones. Air occupied 10% of the crib volume. Gold leaching occurred at practically the same rate and to the same extent (69%) everywhere in Crib #3. Because of improved solute dynamics due to agglomeration creating a more porous bed of lower bulk density (< This study showed that the compartment flow model developed by Levenspiel effectively modeled solution transport in various unsaturated packed beds, from columns, to cribs, and to a demonstration heap. All packed beds were stacked with gold ore particles undergoing leaching. Under all conditions tested, a simplified or generalized form of the compartment model fitted well the normalized concentration data obtained from a step-up or step-down tracer test in the packed bed. None of the systems tested were either 100% plug flow, 100% well-mixed, or 100% stagnant volume. The closest to 100% plug flow behavior was a column 25 cm in diameter where 61% of the volume was plug flow. The closest to 100% well-mixed behavior was a crib of 2.4 m In tests where good gold recovery was obtained, there existed significant well-mixed and plug flow, the stagnant/dead volume was small or zero, and there was good air porosity. The bulk density after slumping appeared to be the best predictor of whether there was significant stagnant/dead volume. For this ore in these systems, a bulk density of 1.75–1.80 t/m This work demonstrated that column testwork provides useful information solely about the metallurgical response of the ore; the hydrodynamic behaviour of the column was not scalable to cribs or heaps. Valuable insights into the metallurgical and hydrodynamic response of the ore can be obtained from crib tests, but little to moderate confidence should be assigned to the hydrodynamic response from a crib when dealing with problematic ores (high clay content, high fines content, significant decrepitation, need for agglomeration). Agglomeration of the ore appeared to be the most effective way to keep the bulk density low, avoiding the presence of stagnant/dead volume and low air porosity. Unfortunately, agglomeration did not work in all cases as the demonstration heap, stacked with agglomerated ore, had one of the highest initial bulk densities tested, then slumped significantly to reach the highest bulk densities tested. To reduce the bulk density, screening the fines prior to agglomeration seems to be the most sensible approach to heap leach this ore. The authors express sincere thanks to the staff of the Barrick Technology Centre for assistance in the execution of the testwork and to Barrick Gold Corporation for authorization to publish this paper.