This paper reports and discusses results from pumping experiments conducted with heterogeneous slurries containing coarse particles of apatite and hematite industrial concentrates and quartz, clustered in two ranges of particles size (d): Class 1 (0.210mm<
                     d
                     <0.297mm), and Class 2 (0.105mm<
                     d
                     <0.149mm). Using two recirculating pipeline testing loops of pipe diameter (D) of 25mm and 50mm and mineral slurries with volumetric concentrations ranging from 8% to 27%, it was possible to vary bulk flow velocity (V) and measure the horizontal pipe pressure gradient (ΔP/L). The results were depicted by curves ΔP/L versus V. The limit of particle deposition in the pipe was addressed as a critical velocity (VC
                     ) of slurry flow at which a moving bed of particles started to form on the bottom of the pipe. Based on the experimental results, a model was proposed to predict VC
                      using process variables, yielding a deviation of less than 10% from the predicted versus observed data. The sensitivity of the input variables can be evaluated from the magnitude of the powers term of any process variable.The hydraulic transport of slurries containing coarse particles ( Regarding heterogeneous slurries, where the inertial effects present an important role on the slurry velocity and the particles are not well distributed over the cross sectional area of pipe, to achieve stable operation of a pipeline, bulk slurry velocity ( Regardless of using The limit of deposition ( A method for predicting the limit slurry flow velocity ( Considering as fine those particles which exhibit a diameter smaller than the thickness ( Based on the assumptions of Many other correlations have been proposed to predict Pumping experiments were conducted in two recirculating pipeline test rigs, with pipe diameters ( Any pumping test approached a particular mineral sample (characterized by its specific gravity and sphericity), particle size, solids concentration and pipe diameter. It started with a slurry flow velocity under which no settled particles were observed at the bottom of the pipe. Flow velocity was gradually decreased until a critical value at which particles started to form a moving bed. This particular value of flow velocity was visually observed and named Mean flow velocities were measured by collecting samples from the exit gutter, at the end of pipeline versus time. These samples were weighed and dried to accurately determine delivered concentration. The slurry flow velocity was obtained from the volumetric flow rate and the continuity equation. The pressure tapping were located at a distance of 20 pipe diameters from the pipe bend, to ensure fully developed flow. Samples of concentrates of apatite (from Cajati-SP-Brazil), hematite (Itabira-MG-Brazil) and quartz (Descalvado-SP-Brazil) were obtained from their respective mineral processing plants. They were sized by wet screening and clustered in two size classes: Class-1 (0.210 As the variable Mineral concentrates were mixed with tap water in order to prepare slurries with a desired volumetric concentration of solids ( Pumping experiments yielded plots of pressure drop per meter of horizontal pipe (Δ Regarding the influence of particle size (Class-1 versus Class-2) on Taking into account the influence of solids concentration ( For the effect of density, we follow the work of The effect of the modified Reynolds group (Eq. where The two layer model of The introduction of a shape factor in the modelling of  The new suggested model for predicting the critical velocity was based on the work of where This new suggested model of A comparison of some predictive models for critical/deposition velocity in function of pipe diameter ( Many correlations have been developed to predict the deposition velocity and we are far from reasonable agreement amongst them. The semi-empirical correlation used in the foregoing work has presented a satisfactory prediction of critical velocity of deposition ( CAPES is fully acknowledged for providing scholarships to one of the authors.