 Intraarticular calcaneal fractures with ≥2 mm step off of the posterior facet, and intraarticular calcaneal fractures with Böhler angle <15° on lateral radiographs of the foot or ankle Contraindications: vascular insufficiency, poorly controlled diabetes, smokers, and noncompliant patients Relative contraindications may include various medical comorbidities Surgical intervention with extended lateral incision may be performed urgently before swelling occurs, or within 1–3 weeks with the resolution of swelling and fracture blisters  Use of a foot pump to decrease edema prior to operative intervention Age, smoking, workman’s compensation, substance abuse, extensive comminution, poor vascular supply, and various medical comorbidities including uncontrolled diabetes, heart disease may be relative or absolute contraindications to open reduction internal fixation (ORIF)  Examination of the foot for closed calcaneal fractures often reveals significant swelling, ecchymoses, and fracture blisters, which may be serous or serosanguinous. Patients are unable to load their heels. Open fractures often indicate greater energy of impact. Open fractures are typically medial although may be lateral or plantar. Pain with passive motion of the toes may indicate an impending compartment syndrome, which may be confirmed by monitoring deep plantar and calcaneal compartment pressures. Late signs of compartment syndrome include pallor, paresthesia, and loss of pulses. As much as 10% of calcaneal fractures are associated with spine fractures and 25% with additional lower extremity fractures. A thorough physical examination should be performed.  Lateral views of the calcaneus and foot should be obtained in both the injured and contralateral feet. Lateral radiographs may show fractures of the calcaneus associated with a double contour at the level of the subtalar joint or below, flattening of Böhler angle, normally 25–40°, and loss of calcaneal pitch (  Axial cuts (1 mm) with large overlap should be obtained with the following reconstructive views oriented: Perpendicular to the posterior facet to visualize gapping or step off and identify the constant fragment containing the sustentaculum tali ( Parallel to the plane of the floor to obtain cuts perpendicular to the calcaneocuboid joint ( Sagittal views to visualize the orientation of the fracture fragments of the posterior facet (  Calcaneal fractures may be treated nonoperatively with bulky Jones dressings and splinting for comfort. The foot should be kept level, avoiding a dependent position. Early foot and ankle range-of-motion exercises should be initiated as soon as tolerated at 1–3 weeks to decrease stiffness; additionally, cool Epsom soaks may further reduce the swelling. Weight bearing is started at 3 months. Complications associated with nonoperative protocols include subtalar stiffness, pain, posttraumatic arthritis, loss of foot dorsiflexion, widening and/or axial deviation of the heel, peroneal dislocation, lateral wall impingement, calcaneofibular abutment, and difficulty walking on uneven ground. Operative treatment of closed fractures with an extensile lateral incision may be performed immediately, or with resolution of swelling and fracture blisters (positive wrinkle test). Percutaneous or mini-open reduction techniques should be performed within the first week, while the fracture fragments are still easily mobilized. Some surgeons utilize lateral incisions over the sinus tarsi, or medial incisions, which will be discussed in separate chapters (see  Open fractures should be emergently irrigated and débrided. Repeat irrigation and débridement should be performed as needed. If primary closure is not an option, then a preliminary reduction may be obtained and held with Kirschner wires (K-wires) or a medial three-point distractor until definitive fixation and wound closure are performed. In Gustilo type III fractures, early soft-tissue coverage with local or free flaps can prevent infection and poor functional outcome.  The lateral calcaneal artery, peroneal tendons, and sural nerve cross the lateral aspect of the calcaneus and are not at risk with the lateral extensile incision (see The sural nerve often courses just posterior to the peroneal tendons and then along the lateral aspect of the foot (  The patient is positioned in a lateral decubitus position. An axillary roll is placed along with extra padding under the knee/peroneal nerve of the down leg with additional padding between the knees. A thigh tourniquet is applied. Utilization of pillows or large foam blocks between the legs allows for a stable surface. If a large C-arm is used, it is positioned anteriorly. Three-dimensional fluoroscopy is most useful for checking reduction intraoperatively. This requires a radiolucent extension of the operating table.  Position the down leg such that it does not interfere with fluoroscopic visualization. While a large C-arm allows for increased resolution, it may be difficult to obtain Harris and oblique views. By contrast, a mini-C-arm allows for greater flexibility but with decreased resolution and a smaller field.  An operating room table with a radiolucent extension Lateral decubitus hip positioners Foam blocks Either a large C-arm or a mini-C-arm Thigh tourniquet  Extensile lateral incision, as shown in The distal fibula is outlined as well as the entire calcaneus. With respect to the calcaneus, careful attention is paid to the posterior and plantar outlines, calcaneocuboid joint, lateral neck, and sinus tarsi. The approximate course of the peroneal tendons and sural nerve is detailed as well. The incision is marked starting at the level of the ankle joint coursing just anterior to the Achilles tendon, along its insertion on the tuber, and curving anteriorly along the plantar surface of the calcaneus (see Make a longitudinal incision parallel and just anterior to the Achilles tendon and its insertion on the calcaneus starting at the level of the ankle joint and curving anteriorly to the plantar aspect of the calcaneus. The incision is then extended distally along the plantar aspect of the calcaneus, just past the calcaneocuboid articulation. The incision is made sharply through the skin and then is carried down to the bone over the tuber. Careful dissection is made at the proximal and distal aspects of the incision to avoid transection of the peroneal tendons and sural nerve.  The sural nerve is often encountered on both arms of the incision and should be protected. Curving the incision anteriorly to expose the calcaneocuboid joint increases the risk of sural nerve transection in the distal arm. Rounding out the corner decreases the incidence of wound dehiscence and necrosis in this area. The advantage of the extensile incision is adequate visualization of the lateral neck, sinus tarsi, and posterior facet with decreased skin tension during the reduction. If carried out as described above, the incision respects the angiosome of the lateral calcaneal artery (see  With an extensile lateral exposure, restoration of Böhler angle and anatomic reduction of the posterior facet have both been shown to be associated with improved outcomes. However, percutaneous and mini-incision techniques have also demonstrated good or equal results with approximate anatomic reductions, possibly due to less soft-tissue trauma and scar formation. For the latter techniques, the reader is referred to the respective chapter of this book (see  Starting at the rounded corner, a thick flap is sharply raised off of the lateral wall of the calcaneus until the sinus tarsi, neck, and posterior facet are visualized. K-wires (1.6 mm) may be drilled into the talus and bent to gently retract this flap. Fracture-associated peroneal tendon displacement may be noted during the approach.  Scalpel Cobb Elevator K-wires  Avoid elevators with sharp corners. If the sural nerve is transected, trace it proximally and transect to avoid a stump neuroma.  Mobilization of the peroneal tendons may be difficult. The peroneal tendons are detached from the peroneal tubercle and distal retinaculum and mobilized gently within their sheet together with the raised soft-tissue flap. If possible, avoid placing the incision through fracture blisters as this may increase the risk of perioperative infection.  The lateral wall is either reflected on a periosteal hinge or removed and set aside for later replacement. Soft tissues are sharply removed with a scalpel or rongeur to allow adequate visualization of the posterior facet. The fracture fragments are identified, cleared from old hematoma, and loosened with either osteotomes or Cobb Elevators to allow for their manipulation and reduction. The articular fragments are identified, and the posterior joint facet is cleared from debris ( A 4.5-mm Schanz pin is inserted into the lateral or posterior aspect of the posterior tuber to alleviate mobilization of the fragments and manipulation of the main tuberosity fragment ( Longitudinal traction and valgus force are applied to the Schanz pin to correct for the varus malpositioning and shortening and widening of the heel. First, the tuberosity fragment is reduced beneath the sustentacular fragment and the medial wall is restored. This creates room for anatomic reduction of the lateral posterior facet fragment(s) (  4.5-mm Schanz half pin T-handle chuck Osteotomes Cobb Elevator Freer Elevator  Fracture fragments must be adequately identified and mobilized to allow for reduction. Mark lateral wall orientation prior to removal.  Fracture fragments may have increased comminution, chondral damage, osteoporotic bone, or old fractures with partial healing. Small fragments that cannot be fixed reliably have to be removed to avoid the presence of loose bodies. Failure to restore the medial wall will prevent anatomic reduction of the joint fragment(s).  A blunt lamina spreader is inserted into the sinus tarsi and opened to reduce the lateral neck and restore the Böhler angle. With the lamina spreaders engaged, the anterior half of the posterior facet should be visualized. The subtalar joint is reduced stepwise from medial to lateral ( The joint fragments are fixed at this stage with a small fragment screw that is directed to the sustentaculum tali to obtain maximum purchase and stability (  Blunt lamina spreader Dental pick 1.6-mm K-wires Rongeur  Removal of fat from the sinus tarsi and distraction of the subtalar joint with blunt lamina spreaders will usually allow improved visualization. If visualization is still inadequate, a thin elevator may be passed over the articular surface to confirm reduction. Rebuild the posterior facet starting with the most medial fragment in continuity with the sustentaculum. Use of a dental pick may help reduce the smaller fragments. Because of the convex shape of the subtalar joint facet, direct visual control of reduction is difficult once the lateral fragments are reduced. Introduction of a dry small joint arthroscope is a quick and reliable means of adequate control of joint reduction (  Loss of articular cartilage may make anatomic reduction difficult. Calcaneocuboid comminution may make it difficult to restore and maintain Böhler angle.  Comminution of the posterior facet may make anatomic reduction impossible. It is controversial whether to proceed with a primary subtalar fusion, or plate and screw fixation in this situation. The order of fixation is also controversial. Some surgeons prefer to start with reduction of the anterior process while most surgeons prefer a “joint first” strategy. ORIF of calcaneal fractures is fraught with a considerable learning curve, and every surgeon should apply the technique he/she is comfortable with.  Fine reduction of the tuberosity fragment to the reconstructed posterior joint block is achieved with the help of the Schanz screw at this stage, if needed. Reduction of the posterior part of the calcaneus regularly alleviates reduction of the anterior process. If there is a remaining incongruity at the calcaneocuboid joint, the anterior facet of the calcaneus is reduced under direct vision and fixed with K-wires introduced from lateral to medial. The anterior process is moved plantarly with the help of a laminar spreader or hook to counteract the pull of the bifurcate ligament. Reduction of the posterior and anterior portions of the calcaneus is held temporarily with K-wires introduced from the tuberosity into the anterior process. The Schanz pin is removed. The lateral wall is folded back and should fit anatomically after proper reduction of the shape of the calcaneus. An appropriate-sized calcaneal plate is applied to the lateral aspect of the calcaneus and contoured accordingly. At least one of the screws through the plate should lag the sustentaculum tali constant fragment. A minimum of two screws are placed into the anterior process and tuberosity fragments each ( Anatomic reduction, implant position, and screw length are checked fluoroscopically with a lateral, axial, and 10–40° Brodén views (  The need to fill the void with bone morphogenic protein, bone graft, or bone graft substitutes is highly controversial. Some surgeons advocate filling the void with bone cement with/without antibiotics and having the patient bear weight at 3 weeks. Other surgeons may not utilize bone graft or bone morphogenic proteins at all and refer to the regenerative capacities of cancellous bone. Sinus formation has been reported with the use of calcium phosphate bone substitutes. Locking versus nonlocking plates: There was no difference in load to failure with either plate in cadavers or sawbones. If an interlocking plate is used, the first screws should be introduced in a nonlocking manner to compress the plate down to the bone, thus increasing friction between bone and plate and avoiding soft-tissue irritation by an overlaying plate.  The goal is to achieve a tension-free closure of the skin and subcutaneous tissues to limit the potential for corner necrosis and dehiscence. The deep fascial layer of the flap is closed with an absorbable braided 0 suture from either end of the incision advancing the flap with each stitch. This ensures that the corner will close and be tension free. The subcutaneous tissues and skin are closed according to surgeon’s preference. Sterile dressings and a three-sided splint with the foot in neutral are applied.  Blanching of the skin indicates increased skin tension. If advancement of the deep layers of the flap is insufficient to obtain a tension-free skin closure, pie crusting of the skin may be performed. Usually, anatomic reduction of the calcaneus takes away the lateral bulging and allows for a tension-free wound closure.  The operative dressing is left intact for 2 weeks and removed at the first postoperative visit. A controlled ankle movement walker boot is placed; alternatively, compliant patients are mobilized in their own shoes. The patient is non–weight bearing or allowed to put the affected leg to the ground without loading (which equals about 20 kg) with two crutches or a walker for 6–12 weeks until resolution of swelling and evidence of consolidation are present on lateral radiographs. Early active range of motion exercises of the ankle and subtalar joints are shown and initiated early to avoid excessive scarring. The most common postoperative complication is tissue necrosis and wound dehiscence of the corner area. There is also a 5% infection rate for closed calcaneal fractures with ORIF. This infection rate is increased with open calcaneal fractures. With superficial wound edge necrosis, local wound care with a 30–50% peroxide solution, bacitracin, and sterile dressings is taught. Sural nerve transection or retraction may result in postoperative paresthesia. Painful hardware, malreduction, or subtalar arthritis may require later arthrodesis or removal of hardware. With restricted range of motion, implant removal and arthrolysis of the subtalar joint may be carried out at approximately 1 year postoperatively. Improvement will continue over a 2-year period. With anatomic reduction and careful soft-tissue handling, good to excellent results can be expected in 65–80% of cases as shown in clinical studies with large patient cohorts (