The potential applicability of several biopolymers, including xanthan gum, diutan gum, acacia gum, modified starch, guar gum and a cellulosic polymer, for maintaining the solid particles of a particulate grout in suspension has been evaluated through static bleeding tests. The grout material investigated was ground granulated blast-furnace slag (GGBS) cement prepared at different water to binder ratio values ranging from 2:1 to 5:1. Among the biopolymers studied, diutan gum and xanthan gum were found to have the highest performance in bleeding prevention at very low concentrations in ranging 0.25–1.0%. A synergy was observed for xanthan gum and guar gum and for xanthan gum and cellulosic polymer combinations. This helps reduce the overall amount of biopolymer required for suspension stabilization. By measuring the zeta potential and viscosity values of the biopolymer-added grouts, the mechanisms underlying the sedimentation inhibitory action of the biopolymers are discussed.In a civil engineering context, the term “bleeding” refers to the separation of water from the total volume of a particulate grout or paste Many researchers It has been an ongoing challenge for geotechnical engineers to find an additive that keeps practically all solid particles in a homogenous suspension for a reasonable length of time demanded by the grouting treatment application To understand the mechanism(s) by which the biopolymers stabilized the grout suspensions for the duration the bleeding tests, the zeta potential of dilute solutions of neat GGBS and biopolymer–GGBS grouts were first measured by means of the Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV) technique. Then, the significant changes in the rheological properties of the biopolymer–GGBS grouts were studied. By combining these two aspects of the stabilization of the GGBS based grout suspensions, the mechanism of bleeding prevention with biopolymers is illustrated. The GGBS material of superfine consistency (99% by mass finer than 22 μm, with a median size of 4 μm) employed in the present investigation was supplied by Ecocem Ireland Ltd., Dublin, Ireland. Diutan gum, xanthan gum and carboxymethylcellulose (CMC: branded as Finnfix 10000) were supplied by CP Kelco Company, UK. Guar gum, acacia gum and a modified starch (namely Starpol 136) were supplied by Cargill, Thew Arnott, UK and Tate and Lyle, UK, respectively. Diutan gum has only been recently developed by CP Kelco Company and hence there is not much information openly available about its chemistry. However, it is established that diutan gum is a linear polysaccharide with side branches containing one or two monosaccharides Xanthan gum is a polysaccharide secreted by the bacterium Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC), with a chemical formula of C Guar gum is a polysaccharide extracted from the seeds of the leguminous shrub Acacia gum is a highly water-soluble natural polymer secreted by the Acacia tree. It is mainly composed of glycoproteins and polysaccharides with a large molecular weight, estimated to be in the range of 2 × 10 Natural starch is either non-ionic or slightly anionic, depending on the material’s source. Starch is a white, tasteless, odorless powder that does not dissolve in cold water or ethanol. It consists of linear and helical amylose, along with branched amylopectin, which consists of glucose monomers. The particular starch considered in the present investigation was Starpol 136, which is derived from waxy corn starch and modified chemically to increase water solubility at low temperatures, resistance to shear breakdown, water retention, and its viscosity ( Petroleum engineers have long used the Marsh Funnel (MF) device Although initially developed for drilling muds, Eq.  To prepare homogeneous grouts, appropriate amounts of the GGBS and biopolymer materials were separately added to tap water with a pH value of 6.5, which was used for all viscosity and bleeding tests. In preparing the biopolymer–GGBS grouts, the GGBS solutions were slowly added to the biopolymer solutions and thoroughly stirred using a mixer rotating at 500 rpm for different time periods, depending on the proficiency of the biopolymer hydration in water. This approach was taken since preliminary testing indicated that the addition of dry GGBS powder to a biopolymer solution was found to create numerous small packets of GGBS material within the solution, demanding up to a few hours of agitation in order to produce a grout having uniform consistency throughout. The 800 ± 20 ml volume of each grout prepared was poured into a 1 l graduated plastic cylinder of 6 cm diameter and its mass determined in order to calculate the grout density. The level of the bleed water in each grout sample was measured over a 3-h period at 10-min intervals for the first hour and hourly thereafter. The 3-h standing period considered is a reasonable amount of time within which the grout injection process is expected to reach completion and for the cementitious grout to start setting. After this 3-h period, the bleed water that had gathered at the top of each sample was carefully drained off using a pipette and the final measured volume of this water was used in calculating the ratio of bleeding (RB, as %) value according to the following equation:  Xanthan gum and guar gum hydrated in water more readily and quickly than any of the other biopolymer materials considered. In terms of the ease of hydration, diutan gum was the most stubborn of the biopolymers and sometimes the presence of gum lumps in the water necessitated leaving the specimens overnight to achieve complete hydration. The operative should also be aware that the biopolymers’ characteristic properties arise from their long chemical chains. Consequently, improper agitation and mixing could damage these structures and may be the primary factor in accounting for the failure or reduced effectiveness of biopolymers, especially since they are generally used at low concentrations. In addition to potential concerns regarding the mixing procedure, optimum pH values usually exist for which maximum biopolymer dispersion and/or hydration are achieved. Acidic pH values facilitate biopolymer dispersion in water, whereas alkaline pH values usually bring about maximum hydration. The operative is referred to literature from the biopolymer material manufactures regarding specific pH ranges appropriate.  From the results of the bleeding tests shown in To obtain a fundamental understanding of the mechanism(s) by which some of the investigated biopolymers were capable of reducing the bleeding of the GGBS grout (or stabilizing grout suspension), the zeta potential values of grout suspensions were measured and analyzed along with the rheological investigations. The instrument used for this purpose was a Zetasizer Nano ZS device (from Malvern Instruments, UK) which is capable of measuring zeta potential using Doppler electrophoresis as the basic principle. Trial measurements obtained for initial non-diluted samples of the neat GGBS and biopolymer–GGBS grouts showed immense scatter and noise, such that these test results were deemed unrepeatable. Accordingly, dilution of biopolymeric concentrations and partitioning of the GGBS particle size range were considered in order to address these issues. A second series of trial tests was performed to identify suitable GGBS and biopolymer concentrations and an appropriate methodology for preparing the zeta potential samples. In this regard, the Zetasizer software accurately determined whether: (i) the concentration of the sample under assessment was too high or low; (ii) air bubbles were present or (iii) the sample suspension was aggregating. The particle size analysis of the GGBS material investigated ( Sufficient amounts of the biopolymer–GGBS suspensions were sampled using a double-distilled water-washed syringe and delicately injected into a folded capillary cell (type DTS1060) in order to avoid creating air bubbles within the cell. If visual inspection confirmed that there were no air bubble inclusions present, then the cell was inserted into the Zetasizer instrument and allowed to stand for a 1-min period in order to equilibrate the cell chamber temperature to a standard value of 25 °C, prior to recording the zeta potential measurements. This temperature value was set and maintained by the Peltier elements in the sample holder of the instrument. The next step was to determine how many zeta potential measurements were necessary for a given sample in order to achieve a reliable estimate of the true average value of the zeta potential for that sample. The central limit theorem (CLT) in the context of probability and statistics suggests that the minimum number of observations in an empirical study should be at least 32. However, the exact number of replicates depends on the: level of confidence chosen; acceptable margin of error; variability in the population studied and expense and time required for the data collection. In this study, the number of measurements for each sample was set to 40, meaning that the Zetasizer instrument was used to obtain 40 measurements of the zeta potential value for every test sample investigated, with the average of the data set obtained for a given sample reported as its definitive zeta potential value. The Zetasizer instrument measures electrophoretic mobility by Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV) and then applies Henry’s equation in order to indirectly determine zeta potential. Here, electrophoretic mobility is defined as the net velocity of the colloidal GGBS particles in water, which is manifested when an electric field is induced by the instrument. The relationship between electrophoretic mobility (u Smoluchowski assumed that an induced electric field in the vicinity of a solid particle is uniform and parallel to the particle surface  A number of different types of forces act on solid particles (such as the GGBS particles) suspended in a liquid medium. These include colloidal, Brownian, hydrodynamic (buoyancy and drag) and gravitational forces If the ratio value is greater than unity, then the suspension has a tendency to settle out. Inputting pertinent values for the mean GGBS particle size in Eq. Eq. For the largest GGBS particle of practically 22 μm size (see Brownian motion can especially maintain the ultrafine portion of the GGBS material (i.e., particles < ≈1.5 μm size) in suspension provided that promoted collisions of particles due to random particle movements do not lead to aggregation. This can be achieved by increasing the surface charge associated with these particles; in other words, their zeta potential. The DLVO theory (named after four authors, Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey, and Overbeek) ( In order for flocculation to occur, two approaching particles must carry sufficient kinetic energy to prevail over this energy barrier. When this condition is achieved, van der Waals attractive forces cause particles to cling together strongly and irreversibly Some biopolymers can effectively stabilize GGBS based grout suspensions at very low dosages (0.25–1.0%). Among the different biopolymers investigated, diutan gum, xanthan gum, CMC and guar gum were found to reduce the level of bleeding of the GGBS grouts to varying degrees, depending on their concentrations and w/b ratio values. In contrast, acacia gum and modified starch were found to have virtually no effect on the GGBS grouts’ bleeding characteristics. It was also observed that xanthan gum provided synergy with both guar gum and CMC, lowering the overall amount of biopolymer material required to decrease bleeding of the GGBS grout for the same w/b ratio. No significant synergistic effect occurred when CMC and guar gum were utilized together. Diutan gum and the synergistic combination of xanthan gum and guar gum showed the highest performance in terms of reducing the RB values of the GGBS grouts. It was observed that biopolymers generally contribute two principal changes to a particulate grout, depending on their chemistry and also the size, shape and density of the dispersed particles. They can alter both the zeta potential of the suspended particles and the rheological behavior of the medium of dispersion. Measurements of zeta potential for the diluted biopolymer–GGBS grouts revealed that the biopolymers were adsorbed on the surfaces of the very fine GGBS particles smaller than 2 μm, thereby raising their zeta potential. This, in turn, increases electrostatic repulsive forces acting between the GGBS particles, keeping them apart and uniformly dispersed in water for prolonged periods of time. Steric repulsion is also another consequence of the biopolymer adsorption process. Further, the viscosifying effect of the biopolymers modified the rheology of the GGBS grouts, providing a counterbalancing force against gravity, which for the coarser particles resulted in either ceasing or slowing down of their settlement velocity. In order to make an appropriate selection from the effective biopolymers identified with regard to reducing bleeding, the engineer should consider the viscosity induced by any given biopolymer as well as considering potential impacts on the final mechanical properties of the grouted ground. It is worth mentioning that while a significant increase in viscosity might seem as a limiting attribute for a biopolymer, in some practical situations, the possible contribution to the mechanical improvement of the ground could compensate for this increased viscosity. The shear-thinning property of the biopolymers should also be taken into account as this facilitates easier grout pumping and injection in practice. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding this paper. The first author acknowledges the Irish Research Council (IRC) for financial support under the Embark Postgraduate Research Scholarship Scheme 2010 (RS 2010/2571). This paper is honoring the memory of Mr. Martin Carney. Martin passed away in July 2018 after four decades of dedicated service as Technical Officer in the geotechnical laboratories of Trinity College Dublin.