Abstract
               Concentrating solar thermal (CST) technologies provide promising and diverse opportunities to power the present and future needs of humankind. All solar energy systems are designed to maximise the advantages provided by the sun as an energy source and to minimise the disadvantages. CST technologies collect and concentrate radiation from the sun to transform it into high-temperature thermal energy. This thermal energy can later be used for a plethora of high-temperature thermal applications, such as heating and cooling, process heat, material treatments, electricity production, or chemical processes. This chapter provides a background to the sun as our most valuable energy source, the defining characteristics of CST technologies, and the need and limits associated with the concentration of sunlight. It presents the competing tendencies for the efficient conversion of direct solar radiation into useful thermal energy and the subsequent transformation into work by a heat engine and explains how this leads to the existence of an optimum in the overall light-to-work conversion efficiencies of a CST system in terms either of the operating temperature or the solar radiation concentration capabilities of the system. It also provides an overview of the four main commercially available solar concentrating technologies, along with the current state-of-the art of CST technologies for electricity and process heat generation, solar chemistry, and thermal energy storage, and an overview of the major research efforts around the world to increase the cost-competitiveness of CST technologies and ensure that they will play a major role in the necessary and urgent transition to a much more environmentally friendly world energy system. Finally, the chapter presents the overall concept of this book on advances in concentrating solar power research and technology, which aims to provide an overview beyond the state-of-the-art of CST technologies, with a focus on advanced CST concepts that are emerging as incremental or step-changes in CST technology.The sun is the most important energy source available to us. Outside the Earth's atmosphere, the average power of the solar radiation perpendicular to the main direction of the sun rays is of the order of 1.36 Incoming radiation from the sun passes through the Earth's atmosphere, whereby it is partially absorbed or scattered by components of the atmosphere, such as aerosols, gases, and particles. About 30% of solar radiation is reflected without being absorbed by the atmospheric components or surface of Earth, while the amount of scattering depends on the atmospheric conditions. The scattered solar radiation reaching the surface of the Earth is called diffuse radiation and may be experienced as glare on an overcast day. The solar radiation reaching the Earth's surface without scattering is called direct radiation and is able to cast a shadow. In quantitative terms, the amount of solar energy reaching the Earth's surface, “ground-level,” is about 885 The physical impact of the sun and solar radiation on Earth affects, among other things, the currents and tides, the weather, and the biosphere. Thus, the sun is not only a direct renewable and practically inexhaustible source of energy but also the ultimate origin of most other renewable energy resources; wind energy, ocean energy, as well as biomass. It is worth noting that biomass was the original energy material source for fossils fuels, coal, shale, oil, and gas, albeit a million years in the making. This leaves geothermal and nuclear energy as the only sources of energy available on Earth that are independent of the sun. The intensity of the direct solar radiation reaching the surface of the Earth is not geographically uniform. An approximate upper limit is 1 The spectral distribution of the direct solar radiation just outside the Earth atmosphere is equivalent to that of a blackbody at 5777 The fact that solar radiation outside the Earth's atmosphere can be considered as heat delivered from a thermal reservoir at 5777 In addition, of being intermittent due to the day and night cycles, the solar radiation on Earth, at ground level, is also variable. The amount of direct solar radiation reaching the ground depends on the atmospheric conditions in general and on cloud cover in particular. This variability, however, is significantly lower than the variability of other renewable energy sources, such as wind, and decreases with increased time intervals.  All solar energy systems are designed to maximize the advantages provided by the sun as an energy source and to minimize the disadvantages. Concentrating solar thermal (CST) technologies collect and concentrate radiation from the sun to transform it into high-temperature thermal energy. This thermal energy can later be used for a plethora of high-temperature thermal applications, such as heating and cooling, process heat, material processing, electricity production, or chemical processes. In most CST technologies, once the solar radiation is transformed into thermal energy, instead of using it when the transformation takes place, the thermal energy can be stored as such and used when it makes the most sense to do it, such as to maximize economic returns. The high-temperature thermal energy derived from the solar radiation collected and concentrated in a CST system can also be hybridized; that is, mixed with thermal energies derived from other heat sources such as biomass or fossil fuels. The hybridization with biomass is particularly interesting, because it will produce a renewable energy system capable of delivering thermal energy to run industrial process or produce electricity 24 Thus, the concentration of solar radiation, its intermediate transformation into high-temperature thermal energy, the possibility of storing this thermal energy to dispatch it when needed, and the possibility of hybridizing it with thermal energy from other heat sources are the defining characteristics of CST technologies. Those that set them apart from the rest of renewable energy technologies ( Due to the relatively low surface density of direct solar radiation, to deliver a large amount of power a CST system needs a large area of solar radiation collecting surfaces. The efficient transformation of solar radiation into thermal energy however, is best done, in receivers with small surface area, since thermal losses are proportional to the area. Because of this, all CST systems collect and concentrate solar radiation using surfaces that are quite different from the receiver surfaces where the transformation of concentrated solar radiation into thermal energy takes place and much less expensive per unit area. Traditionally, in a CST system, reflective surfaces are used to collect and concentrate the direct solar radiation upon the receiver. However, refractive surfaces can also be used. Typically, the receiver of a CST system consists of an absorber material, or absorber coated material, upon which the concentrated solar radiation impinges and is transformed in thermal energy. A large fraction of this thermal energy is transformed into useful energy, for example, in the form of the increase in enthalpy of a working fluid. The rest is used to heat up the absorber material to its operating temperature and after that dissipated as thermal losses. The thermal losses are proportional to the receiver area and temperature difference between the receiver area and the ambient. Conductive and convective losses are linearly proportional to this temperature difference, while radiative losses are proportional the difference of the fourth power of these temperatures. Because of this, as the operating temperature increases, radiative losses become more and more dominant. This is the reason why, for low- to mid-temperature CST systems, the system designers make a significant effort to keep convection and conduction losses at bay, using for instant vacuum technologies to reduce these losses to a minimum, while for very high-temperature CST systems where the dominant losses are radiative these techniques are seldom used, since they are ineffective in reducing radiative losses. Thus, in order to increase the thermal efficiency, that is, the ratio of the useful energy delivered by the receiver to the concentrated solar radiation impinging upon it, the system designer can: increase the concentration, that is, the ratio between the total area of the solar collecting surfaces and the total area of the surface of the receiver; decrease the operating temperature of the receiver, thereby, reducing the temperature difference with the ambient; use specially engineered materials and techniques to increase the absorption of the solar radiation in the receiver and to minimize its thermal losses, such as spectrally selective absorber coatings, evacuated tubes, and materials and meta-materials with the appropriate thermal properties. To achieve high thermal efficiencies while operating at high temperature almost inevitably requires achieving high concentration ratios ( How much direct solar radiation can be concentrated is limited by the second law of thermodynamics. The limit is related to the fact that as seen from the surface of Earth the sun subtends a finite solid angle. This implies, that direct solar radiation is not completely parallel, but distributed over a cone of directions around the direction from the observer to the center of the solar disk defined by a half-angle of 4.58 In terms of the refractive indices at the entrance and exit of the concentrator, For linear concentrator (2D concentration) the limit of concentration is the square root of the 3D limit. Particularizing Traditional image-forming concentrators, such as parabolic troughs or parabolic dishes fall short of the concentration limits for linear and point focusing concentrators, respectively. The concentration of the best possible parabolic dish concentrator is of the order of 25% of the maximum 3D concentration limit. To approach the limits of concentration with actual physical devices, one has to use new types of concentrators that do not form images and are adequately known as nonimaging concentrators. The second law of thermodynamics also limits the conversion of thermal energy into work. The maximum efficiency at which heat taken from a heat reservoir at temperature According to this law, the efficiency of the conversion of thermal energy into work increases with the temperature at which the thermal energy is delivered to the heat engine. In a CST system designed to produce work, the overall light-to-work efficiency is the product of two efficiencies: the thermal efficiency with which the direct solar radiation from the sun is transformed into useful thermal energy; the efficiency with which the useful thermal energy is subsequently transformed into work by a heat engine. While the efficiency at which the direct solar radiation is transformed into useful thermal energy decreases with the operating temperature, the efficiency at which the useful thermal energy is transformed into work increases with it. The overall light-to-work efficiency is, therefore, the product of two functions with opposite tendencies with regard to the variation of the operating temperature of the receiver and as such it must have an optimum; that is, a value of the operating temperature of the receiver for which the light-to-work efficiency is a maximum ( Since the higher the concentration the higher the temperature at which the receiver can operate with a given amount of thermal losses, the optimum operating temperature increases with concentration. Currently, there are four main commercially available technologies to concentrate the direct solar radiation into a receiver, where this radiation will be transformed in thermal energy. Two of these solar concentrating technologies are linear-focusing technologies and the other two are point-focusing technologies. All of them are imaging technologies, but can be combined with non-imaging secondary reflectors to further increase the concentration they can achieve. Line focus solar concentrators have reflectors that concentrate solar radiation onto a linear receiver. The two dominant concentrator technologies are parabolic troughs and linear Fresnels. A linear Fresnel concentrator approximates a parabolic trough A conventional parabolic trough solar concentrator comprises a parabolic reflector, with: reflector support structure; pylons with joint attachments to allow single-axis solar tracking; pier foundations; a receiver fixed to the reflector support structure; pipework to convey the heat transfer fluid to the receiver and to its storage or utilization point. The troughs are laid out in parallel rows as a solar field with spacing between the rows to minimize shading of the reflectors, while allowing sufficient access for maintenance and minimizing the pipework and parasitic pumping energy for the heat transfer fluid. The heat transfer fluid normally enters at one end of the trough and leaves at the other, although it might also have tube-in-tube arrangement to allow entry and exit at one end ( The troughs are normally installed to maximize the annual energy output, with the collector aligned from solar north to south, allowing tracking from east to west. The troughs may also be installed to maximize the energy output at solar noon in winter, with the collector aligned from east to west. Commercially available trough solar concentrators achieve concentration ratios within the 50 to 80 range. A conventional linear Fresnel solar concentrator comprises reflectors that may be flat or slightly parabolic, with: reflector support structure; frame with joint attachments to allow single-axis solar tracking; pier foundations; a receiver fixed above, but independent of the reflector support structure; pipework to convey the heat transfer fluid to the receiver and to its storage or utilization point. The individual reflectors are laid out parallel to the ground such that each reflector has a different focal length to its receiver. The spacing of the reflectors is close to minimize the discontinuity in the reflective area or aperture. The width of the reflectors is optimized to allow access to the reflectors for maintenance, while not being too large to complicate the support structure or tracking ( While a reflector may be placed so that it can be associated with more than one receiver, access to the receiver for maintenance also needs to be considered. The alignment of linear Fresnel systems is the same as for parabolic troughs. Commercially available linear Fresnel solar concentrators achieve concentration ratios within the 30 to 70 range. Point-focus systems have reflectors that concentrate solar radiation onto a central receiver that is effectively a point compared to the reflector. The two dominant A conventional parabolic dish collector comprises a dish parabolic reflector, with: reflector support structure; pylons with joint attachments to allow double-axis solar tracking; pier foundations; a receiver, fixed to the reflector support structure; pipework to convey the heat transfer fluid to the receiver and to its storage or utilization point. The parabolic reflectors may be continuous or comprise of discrete elements conforming to a parabolic shape. The receiver is fixed to the reflector support structure so that both the dish and receiver track the sun. The size of the receiver needs to be optimized to minimize the shadow it, and its support structure, might create on the reflector. The mass of the receiver needs to be optimized to minimize the mass that needs to track the sun. The most common consideration is for a parabolic dish to have a Stirling engine placed at the receiver. Alternatively, the receiver might have a heat transfer fluid to drive an independent process or heat engine ( The dishes are laid out as a solar field with spacing to minimize collisions and shading of the collectors, while allowing sufficient access for maintenance and minimizing the pipework and parasitic pumping energy for the heat transfer fluid. Commercially available dish concentrators achieve concentration ratios of more than 2000. A conventional heliostat field-central receiver solar concentrator, comprises heliostat reflectors, that may be flat or slightly parabolic, with: reflector support structure; pedestals with joint attachments to allow double-axis solar tracking; pier foundations; a receiver mounted on a tower; pipework to convey the heat transfer fluid to the receiver and to its storage or utilization point. The heliostat reflectors are placed in a solar field surrounding the tower. The receiver and tower need to be optimized to minimize the shadow they might create on the solar field. The solar field needs to be optimized in terms of the heliostat size, closeness to minimize the discontinuity in the reflective area, or aperture, spacing to minimize collisions, while also allowing sufficient access for maintenance. The system layout needs to be optimized to minimize the pipework and parasitic pumping energy for the heat transfer fluid ( Commercially available heliostat field, central receiver solar concentrators, achieve concentration ratios within the 500 to 800 range. The current state-of-the art of CST technologies for electricity production are: parabolic trough system using synthetic oil as the heat transfer fluid, with a two-tank molten salt storage system; linear Fresnel system using water as the heat transfer fluid, for direct steam generation without storage; central receiver tower system using molten salt as the heat transfer fluid, with a two-tank molten salt storage system. These three CST commercial technologies for electricity production typically use a Rankine cycle to transform the useful thermal energy generated in the receiver or receivers into electricity. For parabolic dish systems, the most demonstrated concept uses a Stirling engine, although these systems are not fully commercially available. Parabolic troughs are linear focusing technologies, with a concentration ratio of 50–80. The trough reflects the sun's rays onto a linear receiver fixed at the focus on the parabola, and tracks the sun in one direction—normally from east to west. The receiver usually consists of an absorber metal pipe insulated inside an evacuated glass tube. A synthetic oil is generally used as the heat transfer fluid, which can be heated to temperatures of around 400°C. In heat exchangers, the hot heat transfer fluid passes countercurrent to the working fluid of the power block, which for steam means the water passes through a preheater, boiler, and superheater. The resultant superheated steam temperature is at the lower end of the subcritical Rankine cycle efficiency scale, of say 34%. The Rankine cycle is also used in thermal power plants involving biomass, fossil fuel, and nuclear energy with the thermal efficiency of the cycle being dependent upon the temperature and pressure of the steam ( More than 90% of current commercial CST power plants are based on parabolic trough technology, less than 5% based on linear Fresnel, and about 5% based on central receiver tower. Thus, the most proven CST power plants use parabolic troughs, although the rapidly emerging alternative is a central receiver tower, due to the higher temperature and higher Rankine cycle efficiency. Linear Fresnel systems are linear focusing technologies, with a concentration ratio of 30–70. The reflectors focus the sun's rays onto a fixed linear receiver by tracking the sun in one direction—normally from east to west. The receiver usually consists of absorber metal pipes in an insulated cavity with a glass window. The heat transfer fluid is normally water allowing direct steam generation at higher temperatures than is possible with synthetic oil in parabolic troughs. The higher temperatures of around 450°C with steam requires the receiver and pipework from the solar field to have a higher pressure rating. The resultant superheated steam temperature is at the lower end of the subcritical Rankine cycle efficiency scale, of say 36%. Central receiver towers are point-focusing technologies with a concentration ratio of about 500–800. A field of many mirrors, called heliostats, reflects the sun's rays onto a central receiver located on a tower. Each heliostat has two-axis-tracking to direct the sun's rays toward the central receiver, which is normally an array of absorber tubes, referred to as an external receiver. The heat transfer fluid in the absorber tubes could be molten salt, which can be heated to temperatures of around 560°C, or steam. Other heat transfer fluids are under consideration, as well as cavity receivers, which partially insulate the absorber tubes to reduce heat losses. The resultant superheated steam temperature is at the higher end of the subcritical Rankine cycle efficiency scale, of say 38%. The overall conversion efficiency of solar energy into electricity is dependent upon each step in the conversion process, including the thermal efficiency of the power block. The thermal efficiency of a Rankine cycle depends upon the temperature and pressure of the steam ( Alternative power blocks to the Rankine cycle include the Brayton and Stirling cycles. The Brayton cycle uses a gas as the working fluid, which needs to be compressed rather than pumped through the cycle to the turbine. If the cycle is open, air can be used as the working fluid, with gases such as helium, argon, and supercritical carbon dioxide being preferred for a closed cycle. The Stirling cycle also uses a gas as the working fluid, but involving a reciprocating engine to compress and convert the expanding gas into mechanical energy. The IEA 2014 roadmap reported 4 The present CST industry exists due to establishment of the initial trough plants at Kramer Junction in California USA, in the 1980s and deployment of mainly trough but also Fresnel and solar tower plants in Spain from 2005 to 2012. The 1980s trough plants saw the construction on nine solar energy generating systems (SEGS) totaling 354 CST plants are very reliable; they operate beyond their originally estimated operational life; they improve their performance and reduce their operational cost with time, as the team that operates and maintains them gets more experienced in carrying out these activities. The 30 The industry was revived in 2006 with feed-in tariffs legislated in Spain to promote deployment of renewable energy technologies. Most of these plants: were trough technology, although some used linear Fresnel and tower technology; incorporated thermal energy storage, based on nitrate molten salts, of 4–15 had a high proportion (60%) of local content, that is, goods and services from local companies. Troughs were the preferred technology due to the proven experience of the SEGS plants in California providing a low project risk for the finance sector, although CST The best market potential for CST power plants is in regions with direct solar insolation greater than 1800 The opportunities for industrial process heat present themselves in niches. While the trend to improve the performance of CST power plants is to increase the operating temperature and thereby the concentration ratio, the opportunities for industrial process heat tend to be at lower temperatures. In this section, we consider the higher The International Energy Agency (IEA) has a technology collaboration program (TCP) on solar heating cooling (SHC) that focuses on low temperature solar thermal applications for hot water, space heating for buildings, pool heating, and drying processes. Due to end-use demand, these processes consume more energy than transport or electricity, but in most instances can be readily achieved by non-CST technologies. These technologies are scalable and suited to distributed energy systems as the transport of thermal energy is an important aspect of the overall annualized efficiency. These non-concentrating technologies also benefit from the high efficiencies of thermal energy storage. The industrial process heat applications that fall between the non-CST and high-temperature solar chemistry are typically from 150 to 450°C. At the lower end of this temperature scale, CST collectors may be preferred due to the amount of heat required. These applications may include direct or indirect: boiling, drying, pasteurizing, rendering, sterilizing, and washing related to food and beverages; bleaching, drying, dyeing, and washing related to textiles, leather, clothing, and footwear; boiling, distilling, and reaction processes related to chemical production; bleaching and drying related to pulp and paper manufacture or recycle; boiling, drying, and preheating related to desalination, sludge drying, and water treatment; delivery of steam- or hot-pressurized water for driving absorption chillers, enhanced oil recovery or soil remediation, and hydrothermal processing, such as dewatering or the Bayer process. Absorption chillers are commercial cooling equipment that can be predominantly driven by thermal energy to provide cooling air-conditioning for commercial buildings, hospitals, and hotels. A two-stage absorption chiller requires a thermal input of about 180°C that can be easily met using a small aperture trough or linear Fresnel collector system and may be mounted on the roof of the building being serviced. The heat transfer in the solar collector can be oil or water based, but needs to match the requirements of the absorption chiller. Absorption chillers operate best with stable thermal input, so should include several hours of thermal storage. The distance of the absorption chiller from the collector, or chiller from its load, needs to be considered to minimize the thermal losses and parasitic energy losses related to pumping. To achieve the best outcome there needs to be an integrated design of the collectors, storage, chiller, and building. There are deployments around the world of solar-driven absorption chillers. Thermal desalination uses heat to remove salts from feed water to improve its quality. The feed water may be freshwater with salinity up to 1500 Enhanced oil recovery (EOR) uses steam to reduce the viscosity of oil to increase the rate and extent of oil recovery from oil sands. This steam can be generated using concentrating solar collectors, and this is used during the day to displace a fossil fuel normally used to create the steam. There are deployments in California of enhanced oil recovery: a 29 Hydrothermal processing uses steam- or hot-pressurized water to induce chemical reactions such as the digestion of bauxite, known as the Bayer process, or hydrothermal dewatering of lignite materials, such as biomass or brown coal. The Bayer process uses a solution of sodium hydroxide at temperature of up to typically 240°C, with a pressure of about 35 Solar chemistry covers solar-driven thermochemical processes involving reactions that convert solar energy into chemical energy by driving endothermic reactions. The reactions required to contribute to the production of fuels and materials are typically dissociation reactions that occur at high temperatures and therefore require high concentrations of solar radiation and point focus collector systems. While dissociation reactions may also be used to provide products, or intermediaries for products, as a form of long-term energy storage, these dissociation reactions may also be for more short-term thermochemical energy storage for electricity production or industrial process heat. In this section, the reactions are assumed to require direct use of the solar energy as indirect use is an industrial process heat application. The endothermic reactions of most interest in solar chemistry are: water dissociation or thermolysis, which requires temperatures above 2200°C; reduction of carbon dioxide, which requires temperatures above 1950°C; hydrogen sulfide dissociation at temperatures around 1200°C; methane reforming, albeit with steam (wet reforming) or carbon dioxide (dry reforming), or both steam and carbon dioxide (mixed reforming), at temperatures around 820°C; water splitting, involving thermochemical cycles, where the temperatures of interest range from 600 to 900°C; reduction of metal oxides where the temperatures of interest range from 600 to 900°C; sulfur trioxide dissociation at temperatures around 730°C; ammonia dissociation at temperatures around 480°C; methanol dissociation at temperatures around 360°C. While solar-driven thermochemical processes for reduction of water or carbon dioxide to produce net carbon emissions-free fuels have long-term attractiveness, the thermodynamics and high temperatures pose a range of mid-term challenges. Ammonia as a fuel with its dissociation as a reversible thermochemical energy storage system has been of significant interest. Despite the simplicity of the ammonia dissociation reaction, with just ammonia, nitrogen, and hydrogen involved, the storage of hydrogen poses a significant challenge. The production of ammonia by the Haber process involves the reaction of nitrogen (N Methane reforming is also a relatively simple reaction where methane is partially oxidized by steam (H The reduction of metal oxides can be used to process mineral ores into metals, particularly if the metal is volatile and becomes gaseous, and then condensed or as thermochemical looping cycles for short-term energy storage, particularly if the metal remains a solid. The major research programs around the world differ in priorities due to the maturity of the CST industry, policies to prevent climate change and adopt renewable energy technologies, as well as local innovation culture. Compared with other global challenges, the development of CST technologies has been predominantly led by large national research laboratories with support from the university sector. This has been due to the scale of the facilities needed to perform prototype testing. For example, a new photovoltaic solar cell can be tested at a square centimeter, but a laboratory-scale CST test may need a megawatt of thermal energy. Since 2000s there has been an increase in CST research by the university sector, which has been facilitated and supported by the Solar Facilities for the European Research Area (SFERA) program in Europe and by the Multi-University Research Initiative (MURI) in the United States, despite there being quite different research strategies. The European research strategy is driven by industry through the European Solar Thermal Electricity Association (ESTELA), while the US research strategy is driven by the Department of Energy (US DOE). The two main goals for the ESTELA Strategic Energy Technology plan are: to contribute to achieve the EU targets for 2020 and beyond by implementing large-scale demonstration projects to be carried out by industry and aimed at increasing the competitiveness of the solar thermal electricity sector; to enhance market penetration and to consolidate the European industry global leadership throughout medium-term research activities aimed at reducing generation and operation costs in solar thermal electricity generation plants. The three technology objectives that followed as part of The European Solar Thermo-Electric Industry Initiative (STEII) in 2009 were to: increase efficiency and reduce generation, operation, and maintenance costs; improve dispatchability; improve environmental profile. Details of these objectives were presented in ESTELA's “Strategic Research Agenda 2020–2025” in 2013. The first objective on efficiency and cost contains cross-cutting research issues that are independent of the CST technology as well as specific technology issues. The second objective on dispatchability considers hybridization, storage, and forecasting tools. The third objective on environmental profile considers minimizing the impact of heat transfer fluids and reduction in water consumption, including desalination. The aim of US DOE SunShot Initiative is to reduce the total installed cost of solar energy systems to 6 reducing solar field costs by reducing the cost of the collector support structure, reflectors, and receivers; identifying heat transfer fluids that operate at higher temperatures; reducing the cost and improving the operating temperature range of thermal energy storage; adopting cooling technologies that minimize water use and cost; developing advance power block technologies; while ensuring reliability and availability of materials, manufacturing and supply chains. The US DOE has had a range of research programs on aspects of these issues, often with specific target metrics for the subsystem research derived from systems analysis. In the last few years, US DOE has begun to focus on the subsystems integrated into complete systems. The much smaller Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI) has focused on the key challenges of CST power technologies. The overall goal is to significantly reduce the levelized cost of electricity over 8     This strategic research commenced at early technology readiness levels, taking a systems approach to subsystem evaluation, with the intent of progressing into subsystem demonstration(s). Other Australian research has been targeted at subsystem development at high temperatures for high efficiency, or niche concept demonstrations. In 2015, ARENA funded a specific round of projects on “Integration of renewable energy for industrial process (excluding electricity generation),” whereby the two successful projects involving CST were: integrating CST energy into the Bayer alumina process; a robotic vision system for automatic inspection and evaluation of solar plants. Countries such as China, India, and Chile, and regions such as Africa and the Middle East all have major initiatives to deploy CST technologies, as well as both near- and long-term research programs to support the local industry. This makes their programs similar to the ESTELA approach. This book on advances in concentrating solar power research and technology provides an overview beyond the state-of-the-art, with a focus on advanced CST concepts that are emerging as incremental or step changes in CST technology. The book begins by considering the mirrors to collect and concentrate solar radiation, then linear collection systems along with their heat transfer fluid and receivers. We then move into point collection systems, their heat transfer fluid and receivers. Thermal energy storage and the use of thermal energy are considered independently of the collection system. The initial focus on using power cycles is to convert thermal energy into electricity, but then alternative end uses in industrial process are heat and direct promotion of solar chemical reactions. Finally, we consider the need for control of CST plants in variable solar conditions, along with solar forecasting and now casting and the long-term solar variability for bankability assessments. The chapters and descriptions are: “Advanced mirror concepts for concentrating solar thermal systems,” which outlines significant advances in anti-soiling coatings, highly reflective mirror materials, and high-temperature mirrors for use as secondary concentrators. “Improved design for linear Fresnel reflector systems” considers the benefits and challenges of achieving higher concentration values than troughs. “A new generation of absorber tubes for concentrating solar thermal (CST) systems” discusses the durability cost and maintenance challenges and solutions for heat collector elements (HCE) or trough receivers. “Innovative working fluids for parabolic trough collectors” describes the state-of-the-art of working fluids for troughs to analyze three alternative working fluids in terms of thermohydraulic and cost issues. “A new generation of solid-particle and other high-performance receiver designs for concentrating solar thermal (CST) central tower systems” reviews novel high-temperature receiver designs but focuses on several particle receivers concepts. “Next generation of liquid metal and other high-performance receiver designs for concentrating solar thermal (CST) central tower systems” revives the concept of sodium as a heat transfer fluid and includes consideration of it boiling. It also discusses the use of mixed liquid metals. “Supercritical CO “Advances in dry cooling for concentrating solar thermal (CST) power plants” looks at the performances losses from dry cooling when electricity demand and prices are highest, and how these loses can be minimized. “High temperature latent heat storage for concentrating solar thermal (CST) systems.” “Thermal energy storage concepts for direct steam generation (DSG) solar plants” summarizes recent research from the use of the existing commercial systems with optimized power blocks, to three-part storage systems that combine the use of sensible and latent heat storage. “Advanced control strategies to maximize ROI and the value of the concentrating solar thermal (CST) plant to the grid” describes two examples of how advanced control techniques can help to optimize the operation of solar plants and thus maximize the return of investment (ROI). “Linear Fresnel reflector (LFR) plants using superheated steam, molten salts, and other heat transfer fluids” proposes the need for advanced optics and molten salt heat transfer fluids to improve this technology's market potential. “Central tower systems using the Brayton cycle” summarizes past developments and discusses the current status of solar-hybrid gas-turbine system (SHGT) technology. “Solar power towers using supercritical CO “Thermochemical energy storage for concentrating solar thermal (CST) systems” is discussed in terms of its value proposition when high-energy densities and isothermal energy outputs are required, noting integration poses significant operation challenges. “Solar thermal processing” provides an overview of applications other than electricity generation, with focus on