Ion exchange technology is situated during the last decade as an alternative to activated carbon in goldcyanide recovery process. The search for suitable resins to Au(CN)2
                     − recovery from alkaline cyanide solutions has prompted the synthesis of new resins incorporating new functionalities or modifying the polymer network properties that solve many of the existing problems. A new type of ion-exchange resins (Macronet Hypersol MN100 and MN300) incorporating mixtures of tertiary and quaternary groups, linked onto a styrene-divinylbenzene macroporous hyper-reticulated network are evaluated in this work. The total N content is 0.85 mmol/g for MN-100 and 1.14 mmol/g for MN-300 and the proton exchange capacity is 0.45 mmol/g for MN100 and 0.91 mmol/g for MN-300. Accurate titration curves were used to determine pK
                     a values of the tertiary amine groups (pK
                     H(a)=6.2±0.2 and 6.9±0.2 for MN100 and MN300, respectively). The Hypersol Macronet resins (MN100 and MN300) extract Au(CN)2 via two different modes of metal extraction based on the tertiary amine groups of the resin and in the small portion of the quaternary ammonium groups present in the resins. The extraction isotherms of Au(CN)2
                     − show loadings of 16 mg Au/g and >40 mg Au/g for MN100 and MN300, respectively. Efficient stripping of Au(CN)2
                     − from the resin was achieved by using ethanol/water or acetone/water solutions of sodium hydroxide and sodium cyanide. Metal extraction from cyanide solutions, including Brazilian mine leach solution, showed considerable preference for gold and silver in comparison to base metals (copper, iron and nickel).The application of hydrometallurgy to the recovery of precious metals from dilute ore sources is increasing in use Although, this processing is performed using activated carbon, in recent years, research efforts have attempted its substitution by Ion Exchange (IX). The main objective with the application of IX is solving existing problems associated in the activated carbon use by improving the selective recovery of goldcyanide; increasing loading and stripping efficiencies; and developing integrated processes of leaching and extraction as resin-in-leach (RIL) and resin-in-pulp (RIP). Commercially available strong base anion exchange resins have been unable to compete with activated carbon due to poor selectivity, mechanical breakdown of the beads and the requirement for complex elution and regeneration processes However to overcome this problem weak base anion-exchange resins (WBA) could be use to extract Au(CN) This paper describes the evaluation of hyper-reticulated macroporous ion exchange resins that aspires to fulfil the needs expressed. Resins have been characterised chemically and physically determining their acid–base properties, gold extraction capacity and dependence on pH. Its acid–base properties were characterised from titration data and were correlated with IR. Hypersol Macronet Resins in the wet form were conditioned by cyclic exhaustion with 1 M HCl and regenerations with 1 M NaOH and finally washed thoroughly with a large volume of distilled water and stored in water. Resins had 0.85 mmol N/g resin and 1.14 mmol N/g resin for MN-100 and MN-300, respectively ( NaCN solutions with pH maintained above 11 by using sodium hydroxide to avoid hydrogen cyanide formation, were used to dissolve metalcyanide complexes. Stock solutions were prepared by dissolving K Hydrochloric acid, sodium chloride and sodium hydroxide (Merck, AR) were used in the preparation of the different solutions for titration of the resin. Potassium bromide (Merck, for spectroscopy) was used for the preparation of the pressed disks for FTIR. Real cyanide leach liquors were obtained by leaching of a gold mineral ore from Riacho dos Machados Mine (Brazil). The gold ore sample was crushed to 100% passing −100 mesh (<0.149 mm). A filtrated leaching solution (LIX) was treated with CaO to increase pH values around 9–10. The composition of LIX leach liquor is shown in Macronet resins (MN) were converted to the chloride form by treating with 1 M HCl solutions overnight. Finally were washed thoroughly with a large volume of distilled water and dried between filter sheets and stored in wet condition. The MN-100 resin has a practical proton exchange capacity of 0.44 mmol/g (dry) as compared to the total Practical exchange capacity of both resins was determined by two different procedures. In the first procedure, 0.2 g of resin in the chloride form was equilibrated with an excess of a standard NaOH solution overnight and later the excess of NaOH was titrated with a standard HCl solution. In the second procedure, titrations of 0.2 g of resins with a standard NaOH solution were performed. The acid–base properties of MN resins were investigated by titrating the free base form of the resin with standard hydrochloric acid solutions. The supporting electrolyte was a 0.2 M NaClO For measurement of equilibrium sorption, small-scale dynamic contacts between resin and metalcyanide complexes were used. Samples between 0.1 and 0.2 g of resins, were mixed mechanically in special glass stoppered tubes with an aqueous solution (20–250 ml) until equilibrium was achieved. The composition of the aqueous solutions varied depending on the nature of the experiment. After phase separation with a high-speed centrifuge, the equilibrium pH was measured using a Methrom AG 9100 combined electrode connected to a CRISON digital pH-meter. Metal content in both phases was determined by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (Perkin–Elmer 2380 AAS with air-acetylene flame) or Inductively Coupled Plasma Spectrophotometry (ICP) (SpectroFlame, Kleve, Germany) depending on solution composition. The extent of sorption was calculated from the residual concentration of the metalcyanide complexes in the equilibrated solution. For measurement of equilibrium stripping, small-scale dynamic contacts between loaded resins and stripping solutions were carried out. Samples between 0.1 and 0.2 g of resins, were mixed mechanically in special glass stoppered tubes with an aqueous solution (20–250 ml) until equilibrium was achieved. The composition of the stripping solutions varied depending on the nature of the experiment. After phase separation the equilibrium metall content in both phases was determined as described previously. FTIR spectra of MN100/MN300 resin samples equilibrated with aqueous solutions of different pHs (4, 6, 11 and 13) were recorded with a BOMEM MB120 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (4000–700 cm The necessity for protonating the amine groups of weak-base resins before interacting with metal cyanide anions promoted an investigation of acid–base properties of the ion exchanger. The basicity of a weak-base resin is determined by the pH value at which protonation of the functional group takes place. In turn this is influenced by factors such as the aqueous-phase basicity of the amine; and inductive and steric effects. Such factors may be introduced by the attachment of the functional group to the matrix of the resin. Accurate titrations curves of the MN100 and MN300 resins were used for the determination of p The Modified Henderson–Hasselbach Analysis of the IR spectra of the resins equilibrated to different pH values shown the absence of bands in the zone 2500–2200 cm Hypersol Macronet The equilibrium extraction of Au(CN) The basicity of a weak-base ion exchange resin has a profound effect on its capacity for goldcyanide at a particular pH value. The basicity of a weak base anion-exchange resin is determined by the pH value at which protonation of the functional group take place. This is influenced by factors as: (i) the aqueous-phase basicity of the amine and (ii) inductive effects, which may be introduced by the attachment of the functional group of the resin. Properties that are influenced by these factors could be the p Both pH The extraction behaviour of MN resins may be attributed to the fact both resins, as determined earlier, contains two different types of functional groups. Taking into account the p (1) at pH<p (2) at pH>p The infrared spectra of the loaded resin samples (MN100 and MN300) showed a sharp band at 2140 cm The peak observed at 2142 cm The effect of total cyanide concentration on goldcyanide extraction was evaluated in the concentration range expected from the processing of mineral ores. Cyanide concentration changes through the mineral leaching step from values of 1000 ppm (starting point) to 100–200 ppm (closing point). The loaded resin phases obtained in the extraction experiments were used to study the elution of Au(CN) During elution operation cycles MN100 and MN300 resins were shown stable under operating conditions. Their chemical stability and mechanical strength is higher than that of most ion exchange resins. Because of their high porosity and surface area, osmotic forces are quickly dissipated hence resistance to osmotic shock is high. The extraction efficiency and selectivity of MN resins for Au(CN) Besides the ability to extract Au(CN) The selectivity order for both resins may be arranged as follows: Au(CN) When evaluating the mineral leaching solutions gold, silver and copper are selectively extracted over iron and niquel as it is shown in Hypersol Macronet Sorbent Resins MN100 and MN300 with a mixture of weak base functionality and a strong base functionality show promising results when applied to the extraction of goldcyanide from cyanide media in terms of pH behaviour, loadings and separation factors. This behaviour shown by Macronet resins appear to be determined by a combination of factors, among then the following could be pointed out: (a) the acid–base properties of the functional group; (b) the balanced degree of hidrophobicity of the polymer matrix; (c) the high surface area of the resin. Gold cyanide extraction properties shows a typical S shape function congruent with an ion exchange mechanism of a weak-base resin, with a decrease in the extraction due to the deprotonation of the Macronet resins with a weak base functionality (tertiary amine group) show not very high capacity when applied to the extraction of gold cyanide from cyanide media in terms of loading capacities achieving gold loadings of 16 mg/g MN100 and <40 mg Au/g MN300 at basic pH values close to those, normal conditions of resin in leach or resin in pulp operations. Those values are comparable with loading values achieved with activated carbon and weak-base anion exchange resins and slightly lower than those achieved with strong base resins Stripping of the gold cyanide complex from the MN resins was achieved efficiently by acetone or ethanol sodium hydroxide/or sodium cyanide solutions, while partial recovery was achieved when with aqueous sodium cyanide and hydroxide solutions. We wish to acknowledge MCYT Project QUI02-C02-002 (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia de España) and to Education Ministry of Spain and Brasil (CAPES) for their finantial support under the bilateral program for Science and Technology Cooperation project PH2000-53. We also thank Jim Dale and Isidor Almirall for Hypersol Macronet samples supply.