Urolithiasis is an important disease of small ruminants and research efforts are often directed at prevention of disease using dietary modification. Studying urolithiasis for the comparison of urolith incidence across dietary treatments is challenging due to the sporadic development of naturally-occurring disease in populations and the difficulty in detection of subclinical stone formation. Ten, 1-year old Boer-cross nonpregnant doelings were fed a calculogenic diet. Four experiments were performed utilizing zinc discs of various sizes placed within the lumen of the urinary bladder. Undetected implant loss occurred in 25–50% of animals implanted with discs greater than 13mm. One hundred percent of retained washers accumulated calculus material. The addition of suture material to the discs increased average disc weight gain from a mean of 0.03–1.9mg/day to 1.5–46mg/day across experiments. Analysis of calculus obtained revealed all stone material to be primarily composed of struvite, amorphous magnesium calcium phosphate or newberyite. This model may serve as the basis for experimental studies in females to provide candidate preventative strategies that can later be validated using clinical trials in large populations of at risk males.Urolithiasis is considered to be the most economically significant urinary tract disease of food and fiber animals, affecting intact and castrated male ruminants, swine and camelids. Urolithiasis is a common disease of animals fed high grain rations with low calcium to phosphorus ratios, with the most common stone compositions in this setting being struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate) and apatite (calcium phosphate). Although medical and surgical treatments may be associated with positive short- and long-term outcomes ( Prevention is an important strategy in managing this disease. One primary approach of preventing stone formation is achieving urinary acidification which reduces the likelihood of crystal formation in the bladder. Several investigators from different laboratories have recently published papers investigating dietary modification as a means of achieving urinary acidification ( The development of a predictable and consistent model of urolithiasis in goats is a critical need in the study of dietary management for prevention this disease. While the pathogenesis of urolithiasis has not been systematically studied in goats, the matrix nucleation theory proposes that the presence of a nidus or matrix provides binding sites for crystalloids ( In rodents, zinc disc implantation has resulted in crystallization around the zinc disc, as well as the production of daughter stones not associated with the disc structure in 4–10 weeks ( The objective of this study was to develop a zinc washer-based model of experimental urolithiasis in female goats to be used to study dietary preventative measures. Our hypothesis was that zinc washers would serve as a nidus to accumulate struvite crystals in goats fed a calculogenic diet. Procedures used in this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Texas A&M University. Ten, 1-year old Boer-cross nonpregnant doelings, determined to be healthy based on physical examination, were utilized in these experiments. Initial body weights ranged from 22.7 to 29.5 The base of the study diet consisted of milo, dry distiller's grains, cottonseed meal and rice bran and was delivered to the goats in pelleted form at a rate of 3% of body weight. No additional forage source was available during the experimental periods and municipal water was available Four experiments were performed in succession using zinc washers of various sizes. Prior to each experimental period, the discs were weighed and labeled with their start weight. For Experiment 1, a Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) #6 (6 Prior to scheduled disc placement, goats were fasted for 12 Varying by experiment, goats underwent transurethral endoscopy of the urinary bladder every 2–4 weeks to determine the presence and appearance of the implant. Discs were removed after endoscopic visualization 28–118 days after placement using 5 After removal, the disc and associated stone material were submitted to the G.V. Ling Urinary Stone Analysis Laboratory in Davis, California, where stones were screened using optical crystallography, followed with infrared spectroscopic confirmation. Throughout the four experiments, no changes were apparent in any study animal with regard to attitude, appetite, or micturition character or behaviors. Both 6 Two of the eight 13 One of the 2 catgut-wrapped discs and one of the 2 discs with 15 throws of polyester suture had been lost at 1 month after placement. At 27 days post-placement, the one remaining catgut-wrapped disc was found to have a large amount of stone material with the formation of daughter stones, requiring removal via cystotomy [see Three goats experienced loss of their implants at either 2 weeks (1 goat) or 4 weeks (2 goats) post-placement. The remaining discs were removed at 4 weeks and gained 1.5–37.2 We successfully developed a model of experimental urolithiasis in female goats, even though the spontaneously-occurring disease usually occurs in males. The short but large diameter female urethra, which allows passage of spontaneously-formed calculi, enabled us to perform transurethral placement. The most likely reason for the low incidence of urolithiasis in female goats is the large diameter of the urethra and the anatomic posturing of the goat during micturition, both of which facilitate the passage of dense particulate matter from the urinary bladder. This hypothesis is supported by the observation of a high rate of spontaneous passage of zinc discs in this study (39% of all disc placements). There is no reported metabolic difference in female goats to suggest that they are less likely to develop cystic calculi, and our study indicates that female goats have the capacity to do so. Therefore, this model could be quite useful to identify candidate preventative strategies that can later be validated using clinical trials in large populations of at risk males. Goats in this study were fed a diet formulated to have characteristics known to facilitate calculi formation. The diet was high in phosphorus with a 1:1.5 calcium:phosphorus ratio, known to be a risk factors for phosphatic urolithiasis ( The rate of implant loss in these experiments was unexpected. By using washers of 13 Calculus material formed in 100% of goats with retained discs. After the first 2 experiments, we sought to determine if the mass of accumulation could be increased by providing a non-metallic matrix. A study by Analysis of stone material determined that it was composed of four compounds: AMCP, struvite, newberyite and oxalate. Each implant had accumulations of one or two of these compounds. Amorphous magnesium calcium phosphate was the most common component, followed by struvite. Grain-based diets have been associated with elevated phosphorus excretion in the urine of small ruminants ( This dietary and implant model has shown to produce struvite and struvite-related urinary calculi in female goats and may serve as the basis for studies into the mineralization process, the effectiveness of dietary preventative measures, and individual metabolism and susceptibility. The authors wish to thank the Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences at Texas A&M University for providing funding for this work and Mrs. Kendra Wade for technical assistance. The authors also wish to thank Drs. Jodi Westropp and Ryoji Shiraki of the Gerald V. Ling Urinary Stone Analysis Laboratory at the University of California-Davis for urolith analysis.