The present work aims at clarifying the carbon formation behavior through an in situ monitoring of carbon deposition on Ni/Al2O3 catalyst during CO2 reforming of methane using the tapered element oscillating microbalance (TEOM). The carbon deposits were also characterized by transmission electron micrograph (TEM) and temperature-programmed oxidation with IR detector (TPO-IR). TEOM results and a kinetic study on carbon formation established that both CO in the products and CH4 in the reactants can be the source of carbon formation during the CO2 reforming reaction. In an equimolar CO2–CH4 reforming condition, CO in the product stream is likely the major source of carbon formation. TEM coupled with TPO-IR and TEOM revealed that carbon formed in CO2 reforming from a feed without containing CO shows more filamentous carbon, which is more difficult to be oxidized, while carbon formed from a feed containing CO mostly encapsulates metal particles in the catalyst and is relatively easy to be oxidized. Replacing some of CO2 with H2O greatly inhibits carbon formation encountered in CO2 reforming. Kinetic studies with TEOM showed that H2 addition to the feed gas can enhance carbon formation from CH4, probably by hydrogenating surface carbon species and clean the surface metal sites active for methane decomposition; addition of CO to the feed gas CH4
                     +CO2 can further enhance carbon formation more than that with H2 addition alone; whereas H2O addition can reduce carbon formation from both CO and CH4, most likely by gasifying carbon species.Carbon dioxide (CO The present study deals with CO One of the major problems in CO CO Steam reforming of methane Partial oxidation of methane Complete oxidation of methane Water gas shift reaction Methane decomposition CO Disproportionation Deoxygenation of CO Wang and Lu By analyzing their measurement conditions, we estimate that their carbon formation rates were measured under differential reaction conditions (space velocity is about 1,440,000 In addition, if methane decomposition is the main route of carbon formation in CO On the other hand, several researchers Through experimental research in our laboratory, we believe that the experimental methods and conditions employed to study carbon formation are critical to correctly understand carbon formation behavior. For example, the method to measure carbon formation, in situ or ex situ, makes a difference. Ex situ techniques may not provide accurate information. For another example, in a fixed-bed flow reactor, when CO In the present work, we have employed a very useful in situ technique, Tapered Element Oscillation Microbalance (TEOM), to monitor the dynamic process of carbon formation in real CO The nickel catalyst used is a commercial NiO/α-Al The TEOM (Rupprecht & Patashnick, Co., Inc.) is a useful instrument capable of monitoring carbon formation in situ at high temperatures (up to 700 The TEOM measures the weight change of a sample in situ by comparing the vibrating frequency of the tapered glass sample cell during the measurement. At the beginning of an analysis, the sample cell vibrates in a set frequency depending on its mass. When there is mass change of the sample, the vibration frequency of the sample cell consequently changes. The frequency change of the sample cell is detected by an optical device and converted into the mass change based on the following equation (Eq. A catalyst sample was loaded into the tip of the tapered glass cell (reactor) and supported and fixed by quartz wool and a metal cap coated with gold. The glass cell was protected by a stainless steel tube. The temperature of the TEOM was controlled by the temperature control unit and software. The pressures in the system and the flows of input gases were controlled by a back pressure regulator (TESCOM) and mass flow controllers (Brooks), respectively. Distilled water was pumped into the system by the ISCO syringe pump (Model 500D). A purge gas (Ar, 100 One of the major advantages of the TEOM compared with conventional gravimetric microbalance systems is that the configuration of the TEOM enables all reactants to pass through the catalyst bed inside the glass sample cell just like in a fixed-bed reactor, avoiding the problems of gas by-pass and buoyancy which are often encountered in a conventional TGA (thermo-gravimetric analysis) measurement. Demicheli et al. The in situ measurement of carbon deposition by the TEOM provides more accurate information on carbon formation behavior than ex situ approaches such as TPH and TPO, especially when the carbon formation rate changes with the time-on-stream. The TEOM experiments in this paper were carried out at 650 In the case where H The amount of carbon deposited on the catalysts after TEOM experiments could be determined using a carbon analyzer (LECO RC-412) as well. 10–20 The morphology of carbon on Ni/Al The morphology of Ni particles on Ni/Al Since both CH CH In practice, CH To demonstrate the effect of thermodynamic properties of carbon on catalysts on the equilibrium of methane decomposition and CO disproportionation, free energy data of carbon on Ni catalysts reported in Dent's paper Based on these observations, it was decided to use the thermodynamic properties of graphite for our thermodynamic analysis in CO  In a CO It can be seen from Carbon formation in the CO From the TEOM measurements (  The TPO results from Wang and Lu The TPO peak temperature of 595  The TPO-IR results in   The TEM images of the filaments with Ni metal remaining at the tip (   An overall observation from the TEOM measurement is that on the catalyst sample subjected to 6 However, based on all the experimental results discussed above, it is not clear whether more filamentous carbon on the sample treated at CH The TEOM results in  When both Based on the above results, it is clear that both CH By a similar kinetic study, the change of carbon formation rates was investigated by replacing part of CO Therefore, addition of H We also examined the effects of H On the other hand, the addition of CO in the feed of CO TEOM results and kinetic study on carbon formation have established that both CH TEOM results also revealed that H Replacing some of CO The present TEOM results further rationalize the demonstrated advantage for eliminating carbon formation in the tri-reforming process recently proposed from our laboratory The authors wish to acknowledge the US Department of Energy National Energy Technology Laboratory for partial financial support of this work. The authors would also like to thank Dr. M.A. Vannice and Dr. S. Eser of PSU for the helpful discussions.