This work aimed to study the application of liquid biphasic flotation (LBF) for the efficient and rapid recovery of astaxanthin from H. pluvialis microalgae. The performance of LBF for the extraction of astaxanthin was studied comprehensively under different operating conditions, including types and concentrations of food-grade alcohol and salt, volume ratio, addition of neutral salt, flotation period, and mass of dried H. pluvialis biomass powder. The maximum recovery, extraction efficiency and partition coefficient of astaxanthin obtained from the optimum LBF system were 95.11 ± 1.35%, 99.84 ± 0.05% and 385.16 ± 3.87, respectively. A scaled-up LBF system was also performed, demonstrating the feasibility of extracting natural astaxanthin from microalgae at a larger scale. This exploration of LBF system opens a promising avenue to the extraction of astaxanthin at lower cost and shorter processing time.Astaxanthin, also known as 3,3′dihydroxyl-β,β′-carotene-4,4′-dione, is a bright red carotenoid. Astaxanthin belongs to xanthophylls groups, which is widely utilized in food, cosmetic, aquaculture, nutraceutical and pharmaceutical industries. The stereoisomers of astaxanthin include all- Astaxanthin can be either derived from natural sources (e.g., microalgae, yeast and fungi) or chemically synthesized (  Liquid biphasic flotation (LBF) is a bubble-assisted separation system combining the working principles of solvent sublation (SS) and liquid biphasic system (LBS). LBF consists of two aqueous phases wherein the target compounds will be extracted from one phase (e.g. salt-rich bottom phase) to the other (e.g., organic-solvent phase) by the selective adsorption of target compounds on air bubbles (e.g., nitrogen or oxygen) ( The application of LBF system in extraction of astaxanthin from Ethanol (≥99.9%), 2-propanol (≥99.9%) ammonium sulphate [(NH The setup of LBF apparatus was adapted from previous work by Two types of food-grade alcohol (i.e., ethanol and 2-propanol) and various types of salts were used in the LBF system for extraction of astaxanthin from the dried The stock solution of astaxanthin standard was first prepared at 10 µg/mL using ethanol or 2-propanol. The absorbance of astaxanthin was determined using a UV–vis spectrophotometer (UV-1800, Shimadzu, Japan) with alcohol as background reference. Based on the screening of absorbance spectrum ranging 300 – 600 nm, the maximum absorbance for astaxanthin was found at OD Partition coefficient ( where Volume ratio ( Extraction efficiency ( Total recovery of astaxanthin ( For the statistical analysis, the data presented was the average of triplicate readings. The values were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. The experiment was conducted three times to further verify the results. The data was subjected to one-way ANOVA using Microsoft Excel to evaluate the significant differences where p ≤ 0.05. Ethanol and 2-propanol were chosen as the candidates of alcohol-based phase component in the LBF system for the extraction of astaxanthin from dried In this study, various salts including (NH The concentrations of alcohol and salt influence the equilibrium of biphasic system as well as the properties of the LBF (interfacial tension, density and viscosity); any change in the concentration of phase-forming components will cause the discordance that affects the solute partitioning ( The concentration of salt was varied in the range of 150 to 350 g/L in 2-propanol/(NH Based on previous experimental results, alcohol/salt-based LBF system comprising 100% (w/w) of 2-propanol and 350 g/L of (NH The optimized 2-propanol/(NH According to Previous studies ( The LBF system was subsequently scaled up to examine the reliability and effectiveness of this extraction system for potential application at pilot scale. For this study, the optimized parameters based on the small-scale LBF system were kept constant. In the scale-up study, the volume for LBF system was increased up to ten folds. A total working volume of 300 mL composed of 100 mg of dried An efficient technology utilizing food-grade alcohol/salt-based LBF offers an alternative route for the recovery of natural astaxanthin from None. This work was supported by the