Data from the regular monitoring of a full-scale biofilter, filled with coconut fibre as packing material at a municipal solid waste treatment facility, were analysed to assess potential operational problems and to evaluate reactor performance in terms of ammonia removal, the target compound at the facility. Performance from year-round data was assessed based on ammonia removal efficiency (RE) and elimination capacity (EC). Reduced efficiencies were related to a low water content in the packed bed of the biofilter. Thus, a pilot-scale biofilter filled with coconut fibre as packing material was investigated for the treatment of ammonia. Biological activity of coconut fibre and biofilter performance were assessed during the operation of the pilot-scale biofilter under steady-state and transient conditions at inlet ammonia concentrations in the range of 45–300ppmv and gas contact times of 36–19s. A maximum EC of 12g [NH3]m–3
                     h–1 at an 80% RE was found for a non-acclimated biofilter under transient conditions. A higher watering of the coconut fibre, as well as an acclimated biomass, allowed an EC of 33.3g [NH3]m–3
                     h–1 at a 100% RE. Under transient and steady-state conditions nitrification inhibition was encountered, mostly affecting the conversion of nitrite to nitrate.Municipal solid waste composting facilities (MSWCFs) are industrial sites for the integral treatment of domestic residues that, ideally, have been selectively collected in specific containers excluding glass, light packaging, paper and cardboard. Since people are not very concerned about selective collection, activities at these facilities must include separation of the organic fraction from the received material. Separation and later composting of this fraction are known as odour-emitting activities. There have been many studies on emission types and concentrations from many municipal solid waste landfills ( In many instances, biological waste air treatment techniques have become an excellent method for the control of low concentrations of odours, volatile organic and inorganic compounds or hazardous air pollutants in large air streams ( Proper packing material selection is a key factor in reactor performance since biomass development and activity depend on the nature and characteristics of a suitable support. The main characteristics to consider in selecting an appropriate packing material are its specific surface area, density, porosity, pH, water holding capacity (WHC), buffering capacity and material composition ( The aim of this research was to assess the performance of coconut fibre as packing material for ammonia removal. Data from a full-scale biofilter packed with coconut fibre and treating 345,000 The MSWCF is located in Barcelona (Spain). As shown in A set of 20 sprinklers per module, placed on the biofilter ceiling, is used for humidification of the packing material. Each sprinkler is designed for supplying a watering diameter of 7.5 Monitoring of the biofilter operation by plant personnel focused on NH Foul airflow rate was periodically measured using a Pitot tube into the inlet duct of the biofilter using 3-D and 2-D traverse methods, and cross-sectional data were corrected by using the log-linear method. Ammonia and H The biofiltration pilot-plant was constructed with special attention to automation ( Air and pure ammonia flow rates were measured and controlled using digital mass flow controllers (Bronkhorst, NL). A humidification column made of PVC filled with tap water ensured inlet humidity values above 90%. Continuously monitored parameters included temperature and relative humidity (Testo, Hygrotest 600 PHT), ammonia gas (Vaisala, AMT102) coupled with a log register of actuations to pumps and valves in the pilot plant. Additionally, a set of electrovalves was used to pass clean air through the sensors to avoid problems of corrosion due to ammonia condensation. A structured control system with a PLC (Siemens, S7-314C-2DP) and commercial SCADA software (Siemens, WinCC v.5.2) were used to automate the pilot plant. The PLC acquired sensor data and executed programmed control actions such as watering, gas sampling at different bed heights and water addition to the humidification column. The SCADA programme offers a real-time visualisation of all plant elements and continuously monitored and stored data from sensors as well as from the PLC by registering all actions taking place in the pilot plant. The packing material used in the pilot plant was withdrawn from the full-scale biofilter. From top to bottom, biofilter modules were packed with 405, 467, 686 and 654 Under transient conditions, an experiment was undertaken in the pilot biofilter 10 days immediately after the start-up. Four step increases were performed to the ammonia inlet concentration (0–45, 45–120, 120–240, 240–180 During the whole period after the transient experiment, the biofilter was kept under steady-state conditions at a steady inlet concentration of 90 A complete characterisation of the packing material withdrawn from the full-scale biofilter was performed prior to setting up the pilot-scale unit. Coconut fibre was characterised for parameters that do not require sample pre-treatment such as water and organic matter content, porosity, specific surface area, WHC, elementary analysis and water retentivity. Characterisation was performed for water-phase parameters such as buffering capacity, COD, pH, conductivity and NH Leachate conductivity and pH were measured using laboratory probes (Crison, microCM 2100 and MicropH 2001) prior to filtering. Leachate COD was measured according to Standard Methods (1995). Cl Biofilter performance is reported herein based on the mass loaded Coconut fibre characterisation results are shown in In particular, a high specific surface area of the coconut fibre, similar to that of peat ( The full-scale biofilter was monitored for more than a year to fully cover seasonal effects such as temperature. In order to do this, three periods were encountered along the monitored period ( Inlet NH It should be noted that measured outlet NH A significant decrease in RE and EC is found in period III even when the volumetric load to the reactor, i.e. EBRT Consequently, three samples of packing material were withdrawn from two zones of module 4 of the full-scale biofilter and analysed for water content and WHC ( Transient conditions as described in Although the full-scale biofilter where the packing was withdrawn was operated at the same gas contact time as the pilot-scale biofilter (36 The results found for the operation of the pilot-scale biofilter could be improved if higher biomass activity was achieved along the biofilter, which would enhance ammonia removal. Coupled to the addition of nutrients that may help in promoting biomass growth, performance enhancement may be achieved by feeding higher loads of pollutant to the biofilter, which may lead to a higher amount of biomass or to a highly acclimated biomass (i.e., a higher mass fraction of nitrifying microorganisms). In any case, care must be taken due to the risk of clogging of the biofilter because of biomass growth and due to inhibition because of the accumulation of by-products, particularly ammonium and nitrite, in the biofilter. Thus, operation of the pilot biofilter in the long run at higher loads than those of the full-scale biofilter was also investigated. Selected data of the long-run performance of the pilot biofilter are shown in Under steady NH Also, some problems in the NH To clearly quantify the inhibition, a 24 As shown in A full characterisation in terms of physical, chemical and biological properties of coconut fibre as packing material in-ammonia removing biofilters was performed. Data showed that coconut fibre has some interesting properties such as high water holding capacity and a balanced C/N/P ratio to its use as a carrier material in biofilters. Improper watering of the packing material results in lower REs and a low buffering capacity to face transient peaks. Experiments performed with the coconut fibre in a fully automated pilot-scale biofilter showed reasonable ammonia ECs of up to 12 The results demonstrated the performance and capabilities of a biofilter in terms of ammonia removal. Full-scale biofilter monitoring revealed that proper watering of the packed bed is essential to preserve biofilter activity; otherwise, reduced efficiencies and ECs are likely to occur. According to the data, the main parameters that influenced ammonia removal were temperature and, especially, watering and water content in the packing material. In consequence, a proper maintenance and functioning of watering systems in biofilters must be warranted to maintain a proper biological activity. This work was supported by the Spanish CICYT Project PPQ2003-02482. J.P. Maestre received a predoctoral fellowship from the M.E.C. (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia).