Interactions between talc and four non-ionic guar gum samples of different molecular weights (from 160,000 to 1.40 million) were evaluated through adsorption, flotation, and stability measurements. It was found that the effect of molecular weight on adsorption was insignificant and all four guar gums produced similar adsorption densities on the talc particles. Turbidity data also showed that all four polymers were strong flocculants of fine talc particles. However, higher molecular weight samples were more powerful than lower molecular weight samples. Higher doses of the polymers led to steric re-dispersion of talc, and lower molecular weight polymers were more efficient in dispersing talc than higher molecular weight polymers. Finally, all four polymers were equally effective as depressants of talc flotation. Most interestingly, it was found that the strongest depression of talc flotation was accompanied by very strong flocculation of the fine talc particles. Implications of these phenomena to the entrainment of fine talc during the froth flotation process were also discussed.Talc is a magnesium phyllosilicate composed of three repeating sandwich-like layers: a brucite-like (Mg(OH) The guar gum macromolecule consists of (1 The basic model of polymer adsorption (  The main objective of the present study is to determine any significant correlations between guar gum adsorption, talc depression, and aggregation/dispersion phenomena in the talc–guar gum system as a function of the molecular weight of the polymer. Talc samples were obtained from Ward's Science (Rochester, NY). The mineral was received as large pieces, approximately 5 An x-ray diffraction analysis (Rietveld refinement) of this sample revealed the presence of 85% of talc, along with approximately equal quantities of other magnesium silicates, such as tremolite (Ca Four guar gum samples were supplied by Rantec Corporation (Ranchester, WY, USA) under the code names KP4000, RX5048, RX5051, and RX5055. According to the manufacturer, the RX5051 and RX5055 were produced by breaking the RX5048 to obtain polymers with shorter chains and consequently with lower molecular weights (MW). For the purpose of further discussion, the samples were renamed with more intuitive acronyms. Thus the KP4000 is HMW1 (High Molecular Weight 1), RX5048 is HMW2, RX5051 is MMW (Medium Molecular Weight) and RX5055 is LMW (Low Molecular Weight). Each sample contained a significant amount of insoluble material. The content of insoluble matter (seed and plant residue from extraction of the polymer) was 13.2% for HMW1, 11.3% for HMW2 and MMW, and 9.0% for LMW, as determined by centrifuging 1 All four samples were non-ionic uncharged guar gums, as confirmed by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy of polymer films prepared at pH The intrinsic viscosities of the samples were determined from dilute solution viscometry at pH The ionic strength in all the tests was maintained using a 0.01 The floatability of talc was studied in the guar gum concentration range from 0 to 500 At the end of each flotation test, a sample of the aqueous phase was taken for measuring the residual concentration of guar gum in the pulp, which could also be used for calculating the amount of guar gum adsorbed on talc under the flotation conditions. The amount of guar gum was assessed through total organic carbon (TOC) analysis, and a TOC correction had to be taken for the presence of residual MIBC as determined from a blank test in the absence of guar gum. Two sets of adsorption measurements were performed. As mentioned in The turbidity of talc suspensions after adsorption tests was studied in order to find a direct relationship between guar gum adsorption and the dispersion of talc particles left in solution. The 30-mL solution extracted at the end of the adsorption test was transferred to a clean standard vial, which was placed in a Hach-2100AN turbidimeter. The measured turbidity values were expressed in nephelometric turbidity units (NTU), representing the level of light scattering as it passes through the suspension. The measuring range of the equipment is from 0 to 10,000 NTU, 0 being the clearest and 10,000 the most turbid solution. Therefore, highly turbid (most dispersed) suspensions required long settling times to bring their turbidity down to the measuring range of the instrument. About 8 Several turbidity measurements were also performed on tailing slurries left in the flotation cell after flotation tests. In addition, a small number of measurements were made on talc slurries prepared in the same way as those in the flotation tests. In this case, no flotation was carried out and a 30-mL sample of the entire feed slurry was taken for turbidity tests. These additional measurements allowed correlations to be made between the effect of guar gum on stability of talc towards aggregation and the depression of talc by guar gum under the flotation conditions. The reduced viscosities of the tested guar gum samples as a function of polymer concentration, and the Huggins (linear) fits to the viscosity data are shown in The obtained intrinsic viscosities were found to be 12.5  It can be seen from  Below an initial guar gum concentration of 200 Polymeric dispersants are expected to have a low average molecular weight, while flocculants can be characterized by a high average molecular weight ( Above the concentration corresponding to the minimum turbidity, all guar gum samples start acting as steric dispersants, but to quite different degrees and with a marked trend particularly at higher polymer concentrations. It should be noted that in this guar gum concentration range turbidity correlates well with the molecular weight of guar gum. Lower MW samples act as more powerful dispersants compared to the higher molecular weight samples. It is noteworthy that strongest flocculation takes place at an initial guar gum concentration (200–300 The flotation response of talc (Talc B) to the different guar gum samples is presented in Since the flotation tests were performed under different hydrodynamic conditions than those of the adsorption tests, it is difficult to draw conclusions about correlations between adsorption, turbidity, and flotation using the data from By analogy to As in Finally, the turbidity of the talc slurries under flotation conditions is shown in It is important to observe that complete talc depression ( Since during flotation some amount of solids was removed from the pulp, the turbidity values were very likely affected not only by dispersion/flocculation of talc but also by the changing solid content in the pulp. As mentioned earlier, in order to assess the significance of that effect, a couple of additional tests were performed on the flotation feed before flotation (For the HMW2 polymer only). As can be seen in Although the effect of guar gum on talc flotation is traditionally analyzed in the literature in terms of changes in the wettability of the mineral, and the amount of contact angle data on the subject is abundant, the presented results indicate that guar gum not only increases the wettability of talc particles by water, but it also affects the state of aggregation and dispersion of talc particles under flotation conditions. The data strongly suggest that an optimum dosage of guar gum exists for depressing talc. This optimum depressant dosage should coincide with the strongest flocculation. Under these conditions, the floatability of talc is completely depressed, while the particles are strongly flocculated. Above this optimum dosage, steric dispersion of talc particles may increase the hydraulic entrainment of the fine dispersed talc particles in the flotation concentrate. On the other hand, larger talc flocs are less likely to be entrained and should more easily sink to the flotation tailings. This line of reasoning is consistent with the results discussed by Since all the tested guar gums showed the same depressing capabilities, a high molecular weight guar gum should actually be a better talc depressant compared to a low molecular weight polymer as such a high MW polymer would enhance the flocculation of talc and minimize the entrainment of fine talc particles. The adsorption density of guar gum onto talc and the resulting depression of talc floatability were found to be independent of the molecular weight of the polymer in the molecular weight range from 160,000 to 1.40 million. All the tested guar gum samples were very effective depressants. Complete depression was achieved by all guar samples at a similar polymer dosage, when the coverage of talc by guar gum was less than 20% of the maximum adsorption density. In the same low concentration range, all guar gum samples also acted as flocculants of fine talc particles. In this case, the flocculating power of guar gum increased with the molecular weight. However, above the maximum flocculation concentration, all samples started acting as steric dispersants, increasing the turbidity of talc suspensions as the guar gum concentration increased. The steric re-dispersion of fine talc particles was also a function of the molecular weight of guar gum, with the strongest dispersion observed for the lowest molecular weight sample. The combined flotation, flocculation, and adsorption results strongly indicated that the depression of talc flotation was accompanied by strong flocculation of the talc particles as the strongest depression and most pronounced flocculation occurred at the same guar gum dosage. This observation also suggested that under optimum depression conditions large talc flocs would not be easily carried/lifted to the froth phase. However, higher dosages of guar gum led to steric redispersion of talc particles and such individual fine particles are more likely to be mechanically and hydraulically entrained in the froth. Therefore, excessive dosages of guar gum for talc depression should be avoided. From this point of view, high molecular weight guar gums of relatively high flocculating power should be better depressants of talc than lower molecular weight homologues exhibiting stronger dispersing capabilities. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. Financial support for this work from the