A series of physical rock flow experiments have been conducted in a chute in the laboratory to simulate the rock flow that occurs in the chamber of a cone crusher. Discrete element modeling (DEM) has been subsequently used to model the granular flow experiments. The DEM models were validated against the velocity profiles obtained from the laboratory experiments performed. To simulate the rock flow, pebbles of different sizes were used in the experiments and simulated using clumps of overlapping spheres in the simulations. It was found that the method of deposition of the pebbles into the chute is important to the DEM simulation of the flow of the non-spherical particles. The validated DEM models were used to investigate the relationship between the chute aggregate clearance times, the chute closed-size setting (CSS) and the bite angle. An analysis of both the experimental and DEM studies concluded that both an increase in the bite angle and a decrease in CSS resulted in an increase in the chute clearance times. Moreover, for a constant bite angle, there are two critical CSS values, which depend on the sizes of particles: one which allows pebbles to flow and the other which results in a minimum clearance time.A cone crusher is a crushing machine which is widely used in the mining, construction and recycling industries. In order to study the flow of irregular material in the chamber of a cone crusher, the authors have conducted a series of flow experiments in a chute without considering breakage. Discrete element modeling (DEM) This study is a continuation of the work of McDowell et al.   The program PFC McDowell et al.  With gravity applied at different angles, this should result in samples with particles at different orientations, and this should have an effect on the simulated flow. Good agreement of clearance time versus bite angle was also obtained as The DEM model has been used to investigate the relationship between clearance time, bite angle and CSS. This cannot be investigated easily in the lab as the maximum CSS of the rig is 50 To investigate the relationship between the particle size and critical CSS values for flow and minimum clearance time, samples with uniform sized clumps, but different size for each sample, have been studied. The flow of rocks in a cone crusher has been studied by a laboratory investigation of the flow of pebbles in a chute. Pebbles of different sizes were used in different flow zones to simulate the crushing process in the real crushing machine. Pebbles of different colors were used for the different sizes and marker pebbles painted so that velocity profiles could be plotted. DEM simulations were used to show that the method of deposition is important, and that velocity profiles for the pebbles in the laboratory can be correctly predicted. The validated model was then used to examine clearance time as a function of bite angle and closed-size setting (CSS) in addition to the particle size. The simulations show that for a given bite angle, there is a minimum value of CSS normalized by particle size below which flow does not occur, and a maximum value beyond which the clearance time does not reduce. For a bite angle of 22°, the pebbles start to flow for a CSS to particle size ratio greater than 2.2, and cannot achieve a faster clearance time beyond a CSS to particle diameter ratio of 4.