Though xanthogen formates have long been used as sulfide mineral collectors, they have been largely ignored by the research community. The flotation of chalcopyrite, chalcocite, covellite, bornite and pyrite with this class of collector has been evaluated using a variety of hydrocarbon constituent groupings, in both the xanthogen and the formate positions. In addition to being stable in acidic circuits, xanthogen formates are shown to be effective copper sulfide collectors over a broad pH range (5.0–10.5). In general, many of the nine especially synthesized xanthogen formates were found to discriminate against the flotation of pyrite. It is possible to tailor make these compounds to enhance or diminish the flotation of pyrite.Xanthogen formates are made by reacting a xanthate with an alkyl chloroformate: The use of xanthogen formate as a collector to float base metal sulfides, especially those of copper, goes back more than 70 years ( In addition to being a strong collector for the base metal sulfides, the xanthogen formates have the advantage of being stable in acid circuit. This is in sharp contrast to the xanthates which are decomposed in acidic solutions. Thus, the use of a xanthogen formate collector can result in a substantial savings in the cost of the lime typically used to achieve pH∼10.5 for the xanthate flotation of a copper ore. As will subsequently be demonstrated in this paper, use of various hydrocarbon groupings can be used to increase the ability of xanthogen formates to reject or recover pyrite during flotation. Initially most of the commercial xanthogen formate was used at the El Teniente copper concentrator in Chile (Minerec A, ethyl xanthogen ethyl formate). Later this collector and other members of this reagent class were used in the US (San Manuel, Anaconda, Inspiration; principally the first named), in Canada and in the Philippines, and over 3 million pounds were used in 1975 ( Though xanthogen formates have long been used industrially, the research literature about them is sparse, though articles by The effect of alkyl substituents on the contact angle and flotation of sulfides with xanthates, thionocarbamates and similar collectors has been studied extensively (see, e.g., A xanthogen formate mostly likely attaches to a base metal sulfide by chelation as advanced by The two hetero atoms in the chelation complex are sulfur and oxygen, with the sulfur being a soft base and the oxygen a hard base ( This study is designed to evaluate the effect of alteration of the two substituent groups on the collector effectiveness of xanthogen formates for the flotation of copper sulfides and pyrite. A variety of alkyl and aryl groupings will be used. The minerals used in this study, chalcopyrite (CuFeS All reagents were synthesized by or under the direction of one of us (G.H.H.) and are listed in The procedure used for the preparation of the xanthogen formates is as follows: An aqueous solution of 50% excess xanthate is combined with the chosen alkyl chloroformate dissolved in pentane. The solution is stirred until the chloroformate peak disappears (24 h) as followed by gas chromatography or infrared spectroscopy. Flotation results were run in the microflotation cell suggested by The xanthogen formates have two substituents; one on the xanthogen side (near the sulfur atom) and one on the formate side (near the carbonyl oxygen) of the molecule (see     Comparison of As the chain length of the formate substituent is altered from ethyl to butyl at constant isopropyl xanthogen chain length, the flotation rates and recoveries decrease as shown in  Use of the phenyl (–C When the benzyl group is used, as compared to the phenyl group, a moderate decrease in the recovery of the copper sulfides is seen along with a sharp drop in the flotation rates. The pyrite flotation rates and recoveries also drop drastically when the formate substituent is changed from phenyl to benzyl. Since the benzyl group lessens the electron density of the carbonyl carbon, the reagent is weaker and, therefore, a decrease in rate and recovery of all these sulfides is to be expected. Good flotation of copper sulfides with concurrent rejection of pyrite is a highly desired goal in copper sulfide flotation.  Reference to Straight chain compounds in the xanthogen position appear to give much better selectivity against pyrite than do their branched chain analogs. As pH increases this difference in ratios becomes almost nil for the butyl compounds while for the propyl compounds there is still a very significant difference in ratios. This indicates that the propyl compound is a much more selective collector than is the isopropyl compound. Introducing a benzyl group into the xanthogen substituent appears to have no great effect upon the pyrite recovery as compared to the comparable butyl xanthogen ethyl formate, as the recovery and rate ratios are not significantly different from each other. An exception to this generalization is the wide disparity in the rate ratios at pH 5.0 with the BeXF compound giving a much higher ratio. This is due largely to the fact that BeXF at pH 5.0 has the lowest pyrite flotation rate of all the xanthogen formates tested. When the formate substituents are changed from an ethyl group to the larger butyl, phenyl and benzyl groups, however, it is seen that the grouping on the carbonyl oxygen controls the selectivity of the reagent towards pyrite. The butyl and phenyl groups increase the electron density of the carbonyl oxygen and there is an associated increase in pyrite recovery. The benzyl group does not increase the electron density of the carbonyl oxygen and so there is an associated increase in the selectivity of the reagent towards pyrite. Therefore, the stronger the electron density of the carbonyl oxygen, the poorer the selectivity of the regent towards pyrite since the regent will be more strongly drawn to the iron. Conversely, the weaker the electron density of the carbonyl oxygen, the better the selectivity of the reagent towards pyrite. If, however, the goal is to float pyrite, Listed below are the conclusions that can be drawn from this study of xanthogen formates as collectors in the flotation of copper sulfides and pyrite in the range pH 5.0–10.5. (1) The xanthogen formates are good to excellent collectors for most copper sulfides and have the advantage over several common thiol collectors (such as the xanthates) in that they are stable in acid circuit. (2) The general sequence of floatability is: (3) Many of the nine xanthogen formates studied were found to discriminate against pyrite during copper sulfide flotation. (4) As the chain length of the xanthogen portion of the molecule increases, both rate and recovery decrease for chalcopyrite, while remaining essentially constant for the other minerals. (5) There is little difference in copper sulfide flotation between a straight and a branched chain xanthogen alkyl group. The effect is not as drastic as that noted with the thionocarbanates (see (6) For pyrite, however, floatability with the branched substituents are almost double those obtained with the straight chain substituents, which would indicate that branching does have some effect on the reactive grouping causing it to be in a more favorable position to make it a stronger collector overall. (7) Both benzyl and butyl xanthogen substituents achieve low pyrite recoveries compared to reagents with a comparable number of carbon atoms in the two alkyl substituents. (8) A benzyl xanthogen substituent is a similar but slightly stronger collector for the copper sulfide minerals than is the butyl xanthogen substituent; however, the benzyl group does not increase the pyrite flotation due to the electron-withdrawing effect of the benzyl group on the reactive grouping. (9) The flotation rates and recoveries generally decrease as the formate substituent changes from ethyl to butyl. (10) Varying the formate group from butyl and phenyl shows an increase in recovery due to the increase in the electron density of the carbonyl oxygen thereby making it a stronger collector and decreasing its selectivity. (11) Use of a benzyl formate substituent lessens the electron density of the carbonyl oxygen thus decreasing the recovery slightly but increasing the selectivity of the reagent. (12) Generally, pyrite flotation recoveries and rates with xanthogen formates at a given pH are very low in comparison to those of the copper sulfides tested. (13) It is possible to tailor make a xanthogen formate by alteration of the alkyl or aralkyl xanthogen or formates. This can be used to enhance copper sulfide flotation, facilitate the rejection of pyrite or to improve the flotation of pyrite. (14) The rejection of pyrite during copper sulfide flotation is favored by the use of: a higher pH, straight chain alkyl compounds instead of the branched chain analogs in the xanthogen position. a compound with a weak electron density on the carbonyl oxygen, compounds showing a high copper sulfide for pyrite flotation recovery and rate ratio. (15) If the goal is to improve pyrite recovery float at a low pH and make use of those xanthogen formates showing low copper sulfide to pyrite flotation recovery and rate ratios. This research originally began as a part of a larger study by Dow Chemical, Newmont Mining, and The Pennsylvania State University. Financial assistance was provided by the National Science Foundation, and in-kind assistance from the Dow Chemical. Acknowledgement is made to Frank Cappuccitti and D.R. Nagaraj of Cytec Industries for help in tracing xanthogen formate production and use.