The present paper deals with a theoretical analysis of the dispersion properties, the dispersion coefficient and the Peclet number, of particulate material in a continuous ball mill. In the analysis, a dispersion zone where the brief dispersion of particles occurs, is postulated in the lower portion of an operated mill called the grinding zone. Consequently, the dispersion coefficient is derived to be a function of the size of the dispersion zone and the mobility of balls in the grinding zone and the Peclet number is a function of the dispersion coefficient, the axial mean velocity of material flowing and the mill length. Results derived from the theory are within reasonable agreement with reported data for dry and wet grinding operations, although minor variations are observed between theory and experiment. Additionally, the mill diameter and length are predicted to affect greatly the Peclet number, implying the importance of designing mill sizes for required product size distributions as the residence time distribution is dominated by the Peclet number. Further, a proportional relationship to predict the Peclet number is derived, which appears to be valid as confirmed with data regardless of the mill sizes tested.Demands are growing to more precise control of the product size distributions when grinding particulate materials. Simultaneously, economical operations are always required as only a few percent of total energy applied to a system is used for pure grinding There have been a number of literatures reported with respect to the residence time distributions in continuous ball mills. Experimentally, for dry grinding, Mori et al. From the theoretical point of view, an axial dispersion model was developed elsewhere based on a one dimensional axial diffusion equation of molecules and solutions of the residence time distribution were derived for sets of initial and boundary conditions In spite of a number of experimental and theoretical findings reported, the dispersion properties have not been fully predictable in relation to operating conditions and mill sizes. Therefore, controlling the residence time distribution relies greatly on experiences or trial and error practices. The present study aims at clarifying the dispersion properties based on a model estimating the degree of dispersion as well as the mill charge model developed previously Postulate a cylindrical mill with a length of Using two dimensionless parameters, Eq. From similarity between a one dimensional random walk and a one dimensional dispersion process, This section explains briefly the mill charge model developed previously As to the mill charge composed of balls and particles in a tumbling ball mill, a model whose cross sections are drawn schematically in To investigate grinding characteristics in previous papers In the last two decades, computer simulations with DEM (Discrete Element Method) have been demonstrated aiming at accurate predictions of the motion and contour of the mill charge in tumbling mills Balls and particles charged in a static mill are described by the ball filling The mill charge, when the mill is in operation, is conventionally divided into three zones, i.e., the grinding zone where balls collide each other to grind particles, the ascending zone where balls move upwards along the mill wall and the falling zone where balls cascade or cataract. The ‘grinding’ zone is named for the area where grinding of particles occurs and the ‘falling’ zone is named for balls falling (regardless of either cataracting or cascading) to release the potential energy. The case of particles under filled in the ball bed void is depicted in Dispersion of particles is assumed to occur only in the grinding zone in which the violent motion of balls disperses particles nearby. Particles in the grinding zone are all exposed to be dispersed. However, all of them are not fully dispersed when particles are overfilled as depicted in Postulate a hypothetical ball bed whose voidage equal to A new parameter denoted as The walking period of a random walker is equivalent to the period of particles in the dispersion zone, which is equal to (Δ The macroscopic motion of particles or the bulk flow of particles in the grinding zone is taken into account rather than the microscopic motion of individual particles. That is, the bulk flow of particles between colliding balls is regarded to correspond to the motion of a random walker and its direction is altered by the balls. The length of one step The velocity of walking For dry grinding, the velocity of balls in the grinding zone is attenuated by the friction of surrounding particles. Then, In the case of wet grinding, the drag force of fluid and the buoyancy force in addition to the friction of particles are taken into account to suppress the ball motion. Then, Substituting Eqs. As the proportional constants in the above equations are not known at present, Eqs.  Mori et al. Two laboratory mills were used by Swaroop et al., an open-end mill (Ф0.127 For dry grinding, the following equation is used to calculate Kelsall et al. For a set of For wet grinding, the following equation is used to calculate  Theoretically, the increase of The decrease of When varying For the trend of  Theoretically, when varying As depicted in Although the data of Mori et al. show a minor increase of Since variations of both Theoretically, a nearly constant trend (only a slight decrease) of The data of Kelsall et al. are shown in The two trends of Theoretically, In On the other hand, slight differences are observed in the case of Kelsall et al. plotted in A typical property of wet grinding is the weight fraction of solids in slurry Theoretically, As shown in Although no data are available, sensitivities of mill sizes to Two cases are studied, one is varying Effect of mill diameter  On the other hand, Effect of mill length Only a slight decrease of  For the data of Some plots are scattered in both figures. In the case of Kelsall et al., the scatter may be caused by an inaccuracy in estimating The correlation for the plots of Further, it is worthwhile to note that the proportional relationship expressed by Eq. The present study has developed a theory on the dispersion coefficient and the Peclet number in a continuous ball mill. Firstly, the dispersion coefficient has been expressed by statistical parameters of a random walk problem. Then, the statistical parameters have been specified by mill operating variables based on a dispersion model postulated in the grinding zone. The derived equations have revealed that the dispersion coefficient is a function of the size of the dispersion zone and the mobility of balls in the grinding zone represented by the mean velocity and the mean free path and the Peclet number is a function of the dispersion coefficient, the axial mean velocity of material flowing and the mill length. Results derived from the theory have been within reasonable agreement with reported data of the dispersion properties for dry and wet grinding conditions although minor variations have been observed between the theory and the data, for which further investigations are required both theoretically and experimentally. Additionally, the theory has predicted significant influences of the mill length Further, a proportional relationship to predict In future, this theory will be tested against more data, e.g., data of relatively large scale mills, to establish a sound basis. Further development will be made to predict the size distributions of product in mills with residence time distributions. This will lead to a methodology which can be adopted to optimize operating conditions and mill sizes satisfying required finenesses with economical performances.  constant defined in Eq. constant defined in Eq. mass fraction of solids in slurry, – mass fraction of solids in slurry of base case, – drag coefficient, number rate of balls ascending in the ascending zone, s constant defined in Eq. mill diameter, m mill diameter of base case, m ball diameter, m ball diameter of base case, m dispersion coefficient of particles, m dispersion coefficient of particles of base case, m mass feed rate, kg/s buoyancy force acting on ball, N drag force of fluid acting on ball, N normal force of particles acting on ball surface, N tangential force of particles acting on ball surface, N fraction of impulse response remaining in a mill at time fraction of impulse response remaining in a mill at time fraction of mill volume occupied by bulk of particles charged, – ratio of angular velocity of mill revolution to critical one, – fraction defined in Eq. acceleration due to gravity, m/s average falling distance of balls, m average falling distance of particles, m vertical distance from departing point along ascending circular arc with radius fraction of mill volume occupied by ball bed, – fraction of mill volume occupied by grinding zone ball bed, – fraction of mill volume occupied by grinding zone ball bed with voidage equal to mixer time constant, s mill length, m mill length of base case, m length of one step of random walker, m mass of a ball, kg mass ratio of particles in dispersion zone to those in grinding zone, – mass holdup of particles, kg number of steps of random walk, – number density of balls in grinding zone, m   radius of inner surface of ball bed in ascending zone, m radius of inner surface of ascending zone, m radial distance from mill center, m time variable, s time period of a ball traveling a distance of mean residence time of balls in ascending zone, s mean residence time of particles in ascending zone, s mean residence time of balls in falling zone, s mean residence time of particles in falling zone, s mean residence time of balls in grinding zone, s mean residence time of particles in grinding zone, s delay time, s period of one step, s fraction of ball void filled by bulk of particles in static mill, – fraction of ball void filled by bulk of particles in grinding zone, – mean axial velocity of material flowing in mill, m/s mean velocity of material flowing in mill of base case, m/s volume of a mill, m volumetric flow rate of balls circulating, m volumetric flow rate of particles circulating, m volume of water added per unit volume of dry particles, – velocity of a ball, m/s mean velocity of balls in grinding zone with no particles, m/s mean velocity of balls in grinding zone, m/s mean velocity of balls in grinding zone of base case, m/s velocity of one step walk, m/s axial distance from mill inlet, m ratio of grinding zone particles to total particles charged to mill, – arccos(− arccos( dimensionless delay time, – voidage of static ball bed, – voidage of ball bed in grinding zone, – voidage of bulk of particles, – fraction of slurry volume occupied by either air or water, – ratio of period of walking to total period or ratio of period of particles in dispersion zone to total period in mill, – ratio of period of particles in dispersion zone to total period in mill of base case, –  angle for surface level of static ball bed, rad angle for surface level of grinding zone, rad angle for surface level of hypothetical ball bed with voidage of average distance between two adjacent balls, m  friction coefficient of bulk of particles, –    density of ball, kg/m density of particle, kg/m bulk density of particles, kg/m density of slurry, kg/m density of water, kg/m effective cross sectional area of a ball for collision, m normal stress acting perpendicularly to ball surface, N/m  shear stress acting tangentially on ball surface, N/m impulse response function of residence time distribution at mill exit ( angle of repose, rad angle defined in angular velocity of mill revolution, rad/s The author would like to thank Dr. T.G. Callcott (Callcott Consulting, N.S.W., Australia) for his kind advice on this publication.  To analyze the fractions of balls and particles in the three zones, the volumetric balances of balls and particles in an operated mill are considered, i.e., This section specifies the first terms on the right hand sides of Eqs. As to  Balls and particles in the grinding zone are assumed to be completely mixed. In other words, the ball bed is enlarged until the overfilled particles are taken in the interstices, i.e., Rearranging the above equation leads to   Equating Eqs. Using Eq. Substituting Eq. ( To estimate Δ Then, the integration appeared in Eqs. Substituting Eqs. ( Firstly, consider the velocity of balls in the grinding zone with no influence of particles nearby. In the ascending zone, balls at the number rate denoted as Under the existence of particulate material, the motion of balls in the grinding zone is affected by the resistance forces exerted by solid particles in dry grinding and by slurry in wet grinding. These forces are taken into account in the derivations of the mean velocities of balls as follows. As depicted in The horizontal components of the normal and shear stresses are − Then, the equation of motion of the ball is given by The mean velocity of the ball denoted as Note that In the case of wet grinding, in addition to the resistance forces of the bulk of particles given by Eqs. Likewise for the dry grinding, substituting Eq. To evaluate Consider a unit volume of dry particles with water to fill the void as schematically depicted in In In the case of the water level above the surface of particles (