This is the last in a series of papers addressing the by-product potential of Light Rare-Earth Elements (LREE, La, Ce, Nd) and rare-metals (Sn, Nb, W) within the St Austell kaolin deposits (UK). Previous results have shown that heavy minerals are pre-concentrated in the micaceous residue which displays relatively high LREE content (around 170ppm) hosted by monazite. A combined gravity/flotation concentration flowsheet, starting with classification of the residue into 3 size fractions (+150μm, 150–53μm and −53μm) was developed. This study presents the results of the clay-rich −53μm size fraction beneficiation by flotation using sodium oleate and hydroxamate as collectors and compares them to results obtained with a Falcon Ultra-Fine (UF) concentrator. The effect of dispersant addition during de-sliming operations on flotation efficiency was also investigated. The LREE grade in the floated product obtained with sodium oleate increased from 3370ppm to 5350ppm and recovery from 30% to 80% with dispersant which is attributed to clay coating. Saturation tests performed on the Falcon UF show a positive effect of desliming on separation performance which produces higher LREE grades and recoveries. Comparison of flotation performance and Falcon UF concentration of monazite to previous results obtained with the Falcon Semi-Batch (SB) gravity concentrator on the un-screened raw residue clearly shows that flotation of the fine residue is more efficient than the Falcon UF and Falcon SB. Indeed the Falcon UF produced high recoveries (87–95%) but with almost no enrichment (1.3–1.4 ratios) whereas the Falcon SB concentration of un-screened residue produced higher grades (up to 0.6% LREE) but with low recoveries (17–22%). This study has shown that LREE can be recovered with simple two-stage operations, suggesting that the micaceous residue stream (and the associated tailings dams) could be considered as a potential resource for these metals.Rare Earth Elements (REE) are defined as the fifteen elements of the lanthanide series plus the scandium and yttrium which have similar physical and chemical properties. In the last decades, the REE supply became a major concern for the Western world, as illustrated by the REE crisis of 2011 which resulted in a significant increase of REE prices ( Flotation of monazite has been investigated with many collectors such as sodium oleate ( The most common gravity concentration technique used for fine particles processing is centrifugal separation, such as with the Knelson and Falcon concentrators ( Previous studies on Falcon concentrators have shown that two main mechanisms are involved in the separation process within the bowl: (1) differential particle settling in the flowing film along the wall of the bowl ( The critical effect of phyllosilicate minerals in mineral processing, and flotation performance in particular, is a well-known fact ( In this paper the results of an investigation on the applicability and relative efficiency of flotation and centrifugal gravity concentration for the recovery of LREE from the fine fraction (−53 All samples used in this work were collected with the support of Imerys Minerals Ltd., UK. A large pulp sample (∼4 The effect of dispersant type and dosage was tested using jar test methodology in 1 Chemical analyses were carried out by Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence spectroscopy (ED-XRF) using a S2 Ranger (Bruker Corporation). Calibration of the XRF used results from Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) for the trace elements analyses performed at the Service d’Analyses des Roches et des Minéraux (SARM-CNRS, Nancy, France). Electrophoretic mobility measurements were carried out by timed image analysis with a Zetaphoremeter IV (CAD Instrumentation, France). The ζ-potentials were calculated using the Helmholtz–Smoluchowski and Hückel equations modified by Henry (  The Falcon concentrator used in this work is a Falcon L40 laboratory model (Sepro Mineral Systems, Canada) with a solid capacity inferior at 300 Sedimentation curves of the selected dispersing agents for the 3 selected dosages are presented in Based on these results, Antiprex was selected for the dispersion of the −53 The detailed material balances of all the flotation experiments are presented in  Replicate tests, with the same operating conditions as the previous flotation experiments, were carried out on a de-slimed material with dispersant addition prior to hydrocycloning. Given the low LREE grades and recoveries in the scavenging step, the comparison of flotation performance with and without dispersion focused on the cleaned floated product (F1) only. The overall superiority of sodium oleate observed in this study for the recovery of monazite, is mainly due to its higher selectivity in comparison with hydroxamate. Indeed, despite the low LREE grades of the floated products when hydroxamate was used as a reagent, the LREE recoveries were relatively high due to the yield of the flotation concentrate (between 19 and 29 The high contrast between flotation performance of sodium oleate with and without dispersion suggests that slimes coating is in part responsible for the low performance of sodium oleate observed in  Saturation tests were conducted using raw and deslimed (with dispersant) micaceous residue with the double objective of testing the influence of desliming on the saturation of the Falcon bowl and assessing the maximum sample mass for Falcon testing.  However, in terms of yield the results are quite similar for both materials as the aforementioned maximum concentrate masses correspond to yields of around 60% in each case. Previous observations allow defining the critical feed mass for each material, defined as the feed mass above which the bowl is saturated. The percentage of critical mass can be estimated separately for each material by dividing the feed mass by the corresponding critical mass therefore reflecting the saturation rate of the Falcon bowl. The influence of the Falcon UF bowl saturation rate on the separation performance is shown in Regarding the overall performance of Falcon UF separation, the benefit of desliming appears to be significant. Indeed the maximum LREE grade obtained with deslimed material is about 700 This may appear consistent as desliming prior to gravity concentration is a well-proven technique for devices operating in normal gravitational field condition (1G). In addition, the presence of slimes is known to increase the pulp viscosity ( The effect of bowl rotation speed on Falcon UF performance has been tested on −53 The low LREE grades (maximum 850 Apart from the classical graphical grade-recovery curve, the best known definition of efficiency is that proposed by Hancock and Luyken who defined the ratio between the “amount separated” and the “amount separable” (   The results are promising even if the overall LREE concentrate grades remains low for direct leaching via classical leaching route. However recent advances in leaching techniques raising from the need of recycling from lamp phosphors, magnet scrap or phosphoric acid industry have led to the development of new leaching technologies for material with REE grades as low as 0.1–1% ( With around 24 t LREE and 20 t Sn lost in the micaceous residue every year from biotite granite higher grade material only ( Recovery of monazite from kaolin micaceous residue using Falcon centrifugal separation and froth flotation, as well as the effect of dispersion on separation efficiency, has been investigated. Results show that an effective dispersion of clay minerals is obtained with very low dosage (20 Saturation tests performed on the Falcon UF show a positive effect of desliming on separation performance which produces higher LREE grades and recoveries. Comparison of the performance of flotation and Falcon UF concentration of monazite to previous results obtained with the Falcon SB on the un-screened raw residue clearly shows that flotation of the fine residue is more efficient than the Falcon UF and Falcon SB concentration. Direct treatment of the un-screened material by Falcon SB gave very high enrichment ratios ( This work has been financially supported by the European FP7 project “