Inkjet printing is increasingly used to decorate ceramic tiles, with pigmented inks in most cases. These inks are manufactured by micronizing conventional ceramic pigments down to median diameters of 0.2–0.6µm. Although such a size reduction theoretically offers significant advantages in terms of the optical and fluid mechanical properties of the pigment particles, still unanswered questions concern color strength and the efficiency of the milling process. The present study aimed to elucidate how micronizing influences the pigments’ particle size and shape, and the specific surface area. For this purpose, industrial pigments were selected to represent crystal structures of different density, hardness, cleavage and fracture toughness, i.e. rutile, spinel and zircon. The pigments were micronized in a pilot plant, controlling carrier, solid load, dispersant type and concentration, rotation speed, amount and size of grinding media, temperature and milling time. The pigments were characterized by particle size distribution (laser diffraction and dynamic light scattering) and morphology (SEM). The results revealed a different behavior of the pigments during micronization, with changes in particle size and shape partially consistent with the literature. The pigments’ grindability differed: zircon>rutile≥spinel.Drop on Demand Ink-Jet Printing (DOD-IJP) is increasingly used worldwide to decorate ceramic tiles. The method’s rapid and widespread diffusion stems from several advantages of digital technology, e.g. non-contact decoration, rational ink management, the opportunity to print textured surfaces, high-quality images, a more efficient management of the decoration department, greater control over the production line, space savings and lower costs (shorter time to market, no need for screens, less wastage of inks and additives, etc.) The inks used in DOD-IJP generally contain ceramic pigments as colorants, together with carriers and additives to improve their performance and stability over time Ceramic inks are currently prepared by means of a high-energy ball milling process to reduce the size of the particles of pigment from micrometric (a typical jet mill output reaches diameters in the range of 5–10 Despite a thorough understanding of the properties of inks for DOD-IJP (viscosity, surface tension, fluid mechanics numbers) that govern their behavior during jetting, spreading and storage There is a large body of literature on mechanochemical synthesis/alloying by means of high-energy ball milling, including some extensive reviews The aim of the present work was to follow what happens to pigments during micronization, and its effect on subsequent steps in the ceramic tile-making process. The study is divided into two parts: the first deals with particle size distribution and grindability under high-energy ball milling; the second concerns phase composition, and the optical and technological properties of micronized pigments. Three crystal structures were considered as representative of the ceramic pigments used for DOD-IJP: zircon, spinel and rutile. Industrial processing (high-energy ball milling, applying glaze, and firing) was simulated on a laboratory scale, and the pigments were accurately characterized at each processing step. Industrial pigments were selected to represent crystal structures with different physical properties relevant during comminution, as density, hardness, cleavage, elastic moduli and fracture toughness ( The micronization process was simulated in a pilot plant (Netzsch Labstar LS1) keeping carrier (distilled water), solid load (30 Particle size and distribution of the pigments were characterized by laser diffraction (Malvern Mastersizer 2000). Specific surface area measurements were carried out by the BET method (Quantachrome Autosorb 1C) after degassing at 300 Micronization involves the breakdown of pigment crystals from their initial size to the minimum dimension achievable under a given set of milling conditions (  Milling curves for all the pigments exhibit a rapid drop in median particle diameter until a critical dimension is reached, probably relating to the size of the grinding media Our experiments demonstrate that milling efficiency depends largely on the processing conditions, even though the slope of the median particle diameter as a function of the milling rounds is approximately the same in the early stages. What significantly changes is the critical particle size that – leaving all other variables constant – becomes smaller for higher turning speeds (and the same number of rounds) and when a dispersant is used (at the same rotation speed). These results were fairly predictable, since milling energy does not increase linearly with turning speed and the dispersant improves the efficiency of the process by reducing the ink’s viscosity Going into more detail, there was a different evolution in terms of particle size selection, As expected, pigment milling creates new surfaces, and adding a dispersant facilitates the particles’ efficient separation during the grinding process. The specific surface area increases near linearly with the number of milling rounds, with no appreciable differences between pigments milled with and without a dispersant ( An insight into the mechanisms of particle fracture and the formation of new surfaces can be gained by comparing specific surface area with median particle size. In the graph in A pigment’s micronizing efficiency (or grindability) can be calculated from its specific surface area according to Rittinger’s principle, which is believed to fit milling behavior better in the submicronic field This ranking does not correspond to the mechanical properties expected to govern particle fracture phenomena, such as Mohs hardness and fracture toughness. Even the Bond work index, conventionally used to estimate the work needed for comminution in the mining sector Microstructural observations confirmed the course of the pigments’ dimensional changes during micronization identified by granulometric analyses, including a bimodal particle size distribution. Microstructural analysis also showed that the milling process induced a marked variation in the shapes of the crystals. These findings substantially applied to all the pigments, though each crystal structure had its own fracture behavior. In the case of zircon, the starting powder consisted mainly of prismatic shapes that changed, with milling, into irregular fragments with a variety of shapes, and ultimately into mostly isodiametric grains with no cleavage faces ( As for the black pigment, the baseline powder comprised equiaxed crystals, often with octahedral shapes typical of spinel ( The rutile powders initially consisted of mainly prismatic crystals, which were often elongated and characterized by a distinct dipyramidal termination ( A common feature of the micronized pigments was that they consisted mainly of angular fragments with many sharp edges; rounded grains were scarce. This morphology is likely to affect the rheological behavior of ceramic inks, especially at very high inkjet printing regimes From the SEM micrographs, it is clear that a faster turning speed gives rise to more uniform particle sizes and shapes for the same number of rounds. A dispersant can be very effective in improving grinding, even achieving the same result with half the number of rounds at the same turning speed. High-energy ball milling of inks for use in digital decorations can effectively reduce the particles in the pigments to submicronic sizes, but it may induce significant differences in the ink’s properties that depend on the processing conditions, and particularly turning speed and the use of a dispersant. Micronization proceeds through a probabilistic breakdown of pigment crystals with a rapid comminution rate in the early stages and a very slow rate beyond a critical point that probably relates to the size of the grinding media. The process gives rise a bimodal particle size distribution with a tail of coarser grains in the case of more intensive milling conditions, probably due to agglomeration phenomena. The new surface area created by comminution increases linearly with milling time, but different trends in the increase in specific surface area were seen as a function of median particle size, indicative of complex changes in particle size and shape (as confirmed by the pigments’ microstructure). The grindability of the pigments considered ranked as follows: spinel≤rutile<zircon. We would like to thank the