In this paper, dynamic analysis of non-homogenous concrete block resting on soil foundation subjected to blast load is presented experimentally and theoretically. The non-homogenous concrete block is made from two concrete blocks filled by barite. The concrete blocks are reinforced by SiO2 nanoparticles where the Mori-Tanaka model is used for calculating the effective material properties of the structure. The soil medium is simulated by spring constant of Winkler medium. Based on Mindlin theory, energy method and Hamilton's principle, the motion equations are derived. The transferred weighting differential quadrature method (TW-DQM) is used for solution of the theoretical model. In addition, the experimental tests are done for obtaining the maximum velocity of the structure in vertical, radial and tangential directions. Comparison of experimental tests and theoretical model are close to each other which show the accuracy of the mathematical modeling. The effects of different parameters such as volume percent of SiO2 nanoparticles, agglomeration of SiO2 nanoparticles, soil medium, length and width of the structure, discontinues distance and the slope discontinuity are shown on the maximum velocity of the structure. The results show that increasing the discontinues distance higher than 40 cm, the vertical maximum velocity dose not any significant changes. It can be concluded that the slope discontinuity of 45 degree is an optimum value. With comparing the result of Geophone 1 (before discontinuity) and Geophone 3 (after discontinuity), it can be concluded that the wave speed will be reduced about 230% which can improve the safety of the structure.The resistance strengthening of concrete structures across the blast load is one of the important subjects for geomechanic and aerospace industries. For example, for keep up the weapons and military bases from the waves induced by blasts, the concrete structure is used. In this paper, a new idea is introduced for improving the quality and resistance strengthening of concrete protective structures. This idea is using from a non-homogeneous concrete structure with applying a filling material between two concrete blocks. In addition, we consider the effect of nanoparticles with mixing the concrete blocks with SiO In the field of concrete structures subjected to blast and impact loads, different studies have been reported. Nam et al. However, to date, no report has been found in the literature on blast response of the non-homogeneous concrete blocks considering the effect of thickness, type of filling material and the slope discontinuity. Motivated by these considerations, in order to improve optimum design of concrete blocks subjected to blast load, we aim to present a theoretical model for the non-homogeneous concrete blocks reinforced by SiO  In order to mathematical model of the structure, a quadrilateral plate model with the Mindlin theory is used. Based on this theory, the displacement fields can be written as The stress-strain relations can be written as Furthermore, The potential energy of the structure can be written as Substituting Eqs. The kinetic energy of the structure is The force done by the blast load can be expressed as The external work due to soil medium can be written as The motion equations can be derived based on Hamilton's principle as follows Considering transverse displacement and rotations and substituting the energies into Eq. The continuity boundary conditions between layers are The general free boundary conditions are The base of DQ method is changing the differential equations into a first order algebraic equation using weighting coefficients. For this purpose, the points of quadrilateral plates from x-y domain should be changed to computational domain Hence, the first- and second-order derivatives from x and y coordinate to After employing the above transformation rules to the motion equations and the related boundary conditions, the DQ rules can be used to discretize the derivatives in the computational domain As shown in The concrete block is built in the University of Kashan. For this purpose, at the first, the 15 * 15 cm concrete samples ( The barite elastic modules is As mentioned in Section      The discontinues distance (  The effect of soil medium on the vertical maximum velocity of the structure is shown in  Experimental and theoretical analysis of non-homogenous concrete blocks resting on soil medium subjected to blast load was presented in this paper. The non-homogenous concrete blocks mixed by SiO With comparing the theoretical and experimental results, it can be concluded that the results of theoretical model are close to the experimental datas which shows the accuracy of presented model. It can be seen that with increasing the volume percent of SiO Considering agglomeration of SiO Increasing the discontinues distance higher than 40 cm, the vertical maximum velocity dose not any significant changes. However, it can be concluded that the discontinues distance between 40 cm and 50 cm is an optimum value. With enhancing the concrete length and width, the vertical maximum velocity increases which is due to reduction in the stiffness of the structure. It can be concluded that the vertical maximum velocity of the concrete block resting on concrete foundation is higher than loose sand and clayey soil mediums. It can be concluded that the slope discontinuity of 45 degree is an optimum value. For sure the manuscript is an original work that has not been previously published, is not currently submitted for review to any other journal, and will not be submitted elsewhere before one decision is made.