Batch milling tests performed on one-size-fraction samples are commonly used to characterise the breakage response of ore. These types of tests are claimed in some spheres to be the most accurate; yet their accuracy is seldom quantified and reported.
                  In this article, batch testing was carefully performed on the copper ore from the Miduk mine in Iran. The systematic test-work was done to obtain estimates of the variability of the breakage parameters.
                  Uncertainties between 7.8% and 17.8% at 95% confidence significance were found for the breakage function parameters while the selection function parameters scored deviations between 21.7% and 34.1%. This information may provide a benchmark against which the uncertainty associated with other testing techniques can be measured.Milling is amongst the most energy-inefficient and costly operations of the minerals industry ( One research front has been the quest for better linkage between laboratory testing and industrial milling performance. Prominent scale-up techniques are by In terms of prediction ability, Austin’s scale-up model relies on the accurate measurement of the selection function and breakage function parameters ( The ore is from the Miduk copper mine located 900 km South-East of Tehran, the capital city of Iran. The mine exploits a copper porphyry deposit consisting of malachite, azurite, and chalcocite ( A large sample was cut across the product stream of the semi-autogenous mill. The lot was wet-screened through a series of screens between 8000 μm and 25 μm. Mono-sized feeds were prepared from the fractions retained on all the sieves between 1400 μm and 45 μm. Note that wire-mesh sieves of type BSS 1796 were used for particle size analysis and mono-sized feed preparation. The batch milling information is as follows: no lifters inside the mill, mill diameter Batch tests were performed following the one-size-fraction method after The analysis started off with the coarsest feed of size In the case of the breakage function, the B-II method was applied to the batch milling data. Upon obtaining the The breakage parameters were estimated at 95% confidence level by nonlinear regression implemented in the Curve Fitting Toolbox of Matlab®. A weighting by observed variability (   Batch milling tests were performed on the Miduk copper ore over a range of feed sizes. This was to ascertain how precise the direct one-size-fraction testing scheme can be. Findings suggested that breakage function parameters are on average twice as precise as the selection function parameters. Their relative errors are between 7.8% and 17.8% compared to between 21.7% and 34.1% for selection function. This case study should serve as an incentive for reporting uncertainties on breakage parameters as the errors reported here surpass the 10% used by This work is a collaborative effort between the The authors are particularly indebted to the Miduk Copper Mine for accommodating the industrial survey, encouraging and stimulating discussions.