  The management of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures should be centralized in experienced and high-volume centers. Surgeons treating calcaneal fractures should be able to implement more than 1 technique. Anatomic reduction is associated with improved outcome in displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures, and the sinus tarsi approach is becoming the new gold standard. If anatomic reduction cannot be obtained, in selected cases, a primary arthrodesis is a valid option. Primary arthrodesis should be performed only in combination with restoration of overall anatomy of the calcaneus. Since one of the earliest descriptions of calcaneal fractures by Hippocrates (about 400 Since the 1990s, the gold standard in treating displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures (DIACFs) has become the extended lateral approach (ELA). Especially in the last decade, the sinus tarsi approach (STA) has regained interest in the treatment of DIACFs. A review published in 2011 on the STA contained data from 8 series published between 2000 and 2010. Even though numerous percutaneous techniques were among the first operative strategies and are still in practice, the author believes they should be reserved for less complex fractures, in the case of arthroscopically assisted surgery or for patients who are at increased risk for significant wound complications in open approaches. Therefore, the percutaneous procedures are left out of the current review. Besides the open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) via the ELA or STA following reconstruction of the calcaneus, a different treatment approach can be offered, the primary arthrodesis following ORIF. The main goals of treatment of displaced calcaneal fractures are as follows: A tailor-made plan: choose the correct treatment strategy for the right patient and fracture type. Allow for an early return to previous levels of activity, including sports, or as close as possible. In the case of surgical management, obtain a (near) anatomic reduction of the overall anatomy (height, width, axis) and to restore the congruency of the joint surfaces (subtalar and calcaneocuboid). Reach the previous goals at the lowest rate of complications (early and late). The only way to assure achieving all the above-named goals is an adequate surgeon caseload. Sanders and colleagues Whether a DIACF should be treated operatively depends on several factors. First, patient characteristics regarding significant comorbidities (eg, uncontrolled diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, systemic immune suppressive agents, heavy smoking, substance abuse), low physical demands, or personality issues compromising compliance may warrant nonoperative management. If the patient is fit for surgery, the soft tissues are adequately recovered from the initial trauma, and the expertise of the team is adequate, one could opt for surgical treatment in DIACFs. Loss of height with a Böhler angle less than 15°, posterior subtalar joint incongruence of 2 mm or more, widening of 5 mm or more, varus of more than 5°, or valgus of more than 10° are accepted indications for surgical intervention. To understand how the primary arthrodesis came to be, it is worthwhile to take a short trip through the long history of this procedure. A technique adopted because many were unhappy with the results of the (surgical) management of their time, primary arthrodesis has been around for more than a century. The dogma of that time was that an anatomic reduction of the calcaneal fracture was impossible, and without anatomic reduction, the outcome would always be poor. In this time period, surgical treatment strategies like those by Cotton (reduction with a mallet), Conn (traction), Böhler (closed reduction and traction device), and Westhues (percutaneous reduction) dominated the realm of calcaneal fracture treatment. However, Conn Different techniques have been described to perform the subtalar fusion, but the one used most frequently in the 1940s and 1950s was the one described by Gallie A paper that received much attention was that by Lindsay and Dewar. None of the studies use a clear definition of primary or early, and there is currently still no unambiguous terminology. A suggested definition could be that A primary arthrodesis is a fusion without previous treatment within 4 weeks before the healing of fracture fragments. An early arthrodesis (<3 months) is a staged procedure with a subtalar fusion following previous attempts at reduction but still well before one develops complaints of the initial treatment. A delayed primary fusion (>3–6 months), for example, because of poor soft tissues, delay referral/diagnosis. A secondary subtalar fusion is used for the treatment of complaints of malunion and/or arthritis after a significantly longer period of follow-up (>1 year) with or without primary surgical treatment. Most of the PSFs were accompanied by remodeling of the calcaneus (either during the same time or in a separate procedure before the fusion). However, some reported that no reduction was attempted at all. The combined results of the case series on primary arthrodesis published between 1990 and 2010 are reported in a systematic review from 2012. After 2010, the total number of publications specifically dealing with the primary arthrodesis in calcaneal fractures is limited. For most cases, the decision making regarding the primary fusion takes place before the surgery. Depending on the severity of the injury and certain patient characteristics, the patient is counseled on the different treatment options. Anatomically reducing the subtalar joint in highly comminuted fractures is less likely. Sanders and colleagues Buckley and colleagues Open fractures and locked fracture dislocations are also linked to less favorable outcomes and more likely to get a fusion at some point. Regarding the ELA and the STA, many excellent papers exist that explain the surgical techniques in detail: Suggested reading for the surgical technique of the ELA: Refs. Suggested reading for the surgical technique of the STA: Refs. The surgical technique for primary arthrodesis has been described less often. It follows many of the steps for ORIF via either the ELA ( The following is the preferred technique of the author: The patient is positioned in a lateral decubitus position on a beanbag on the contralateral side ( A tourniquet is placed 1 hand-width below the knee joint, to assure the common peroneal nerve is not injured, and is only inflated (to 100 mm Hg above the systolic blood pressure with a maximum level of 250 mm Hg) during the reconstruction and fixation of the joint part of the procedure if deemed necessary. The image intensifier is located at the opposite side of the table. With the foot slightly elevated in the horizontal plane, a lateral image can be obtained; when lifting the forefoot 45° and extending or flexing the ankle, a series of Brodén views can be made. If the leg is extended and externally rotated at the hip while pointing the toes to the ceiling and in addition tilting the C-arm, an axial view is provided. The STA is made from 5 mm below the tip of the distal fibula toward the base of the fourth metatarsal. It is usually between 3 and 4 cm in length. In the case of calcaneocuboid joint involvement, the incision can be lengthened more distally. The peroneal tendons sheet is preserved as much as possible, and tendons are held plantar-ward. The sural nerve is not routinely explored, but if encountered, it is freed up and protected. Following debridement, the subtalar joint and the crucial angle of Gissane are visualized. A subperiosteal flap is created using a broad periosteal elevator and a small blade. At this stage, a decision is made whether joint reconstruction is feasible, for example, if large fragments of loose cartilage are identified. In severely comminuted fractures, or in cases whereby 2 or more of the criteria listed in Any removed joint fragments are now reinserted and aligned anatomically. Reduction is checked fluoroscopically, and anatomic reduction of height is met when Böhler angle and Gissane angle are restored. Fragments are held in place using 2 K-wires just underneath the joint toward the sustentaculum. Subsequently, two or three 3.0 K-wires for the cannulated screws (7.3 to 7.5 mm) are added for the subtalar fusion. Inserting the guidewires at this stage ensures that the screws that are inserted hereafter from lateral to medial are not interfering with the cannulated screws. Before inserting the cannulated screws for the subtalar joint fusion, screws of a small plate are placed to stabilize the reduction, and to prevent pushing the joint fragments apart while inserting the 7.3- to 7.5-mm cannulated screws ( There are currently more systematic reviews and metaanalyses than RCT in calcaneal fracture treatment. More recently, the STA is becoming more and more popular. Obtaining a similar quality of reduction at a significantly lower complication rate is the main incentive. Studies comparing ELA versus STA show at least similar outcome and similar reduction at significantly lower complication rates in favor of the STA. Unfortunately, not many studies comparing ORIF versus ORIF + PSF are currently available. The study by Buckley and colleagues These outcome scores were confirmed by Holm and colleagues Calcaneal fracture remains a complex injury. There is not 1 single treatment option to manage all different fractures. The current review focuses on ORIF with or without PSF. Anatomic reduction is associated with improved outcome in DIACFs, and in light of the similar reduction rates and significantly lower rates of wound complications, the STA is likely the new gold standard. If anatomic reduction cannot be obtained following ORIF, a primary arthrodesis is a valid option. In addition, there are several factors associated with poorer outcome, which may be indications for primary arthrodesis as well. However, the primary arthrodesis should be performed only when preceded by restoration of overall anatomy of the calcaneus. The evidence displayed in the current review is mainly level 3 and level 4. Future directions regarding the primary arthrodesis in DIACFs should be aimed at strengthening the available evidence for primary fusion. Fusion criteria, as shown in In conclusion, the ORIF of DIACFs, in the right hands, yields the best results if anatomic reduction is obtained and wound complications are avoided. In cases with severe comminution or when anatomic reduction cannot be obtained, a primary subtalar arthrodesis is a valuable option, if the overall anatomy of the calcaneus is corrected first.  Open reduction and internal fixation via the sinus tarsi approach yields similar results at a significant lower complication rate compared with the extended lateral approach. The primary arthrodesis following ORIF is a valuable addition in the treatment of comminuted displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures and in specific cases. The author has nothing to disclose.