This paper presents the effect of surface tension of solution used as medium for the oil agglomeration of minerals. Naturally occurring hydrophobic and hydrophilic minerals are used in this study. It was determined that the oil agglomeration recoveries of these minerals decreased with decreasing solution surface tension and the oil agglomeration process of the mineral did not occur below a particular value of solution surface tension. The solution surface tension value at which oil agglomeration does not take place was defined as ‘the critical solution surface tension for oil agglomeration, γ
                     c−a'. These critical solution surface tension values obtained for those hydrophobic minerals were close to their critical surface tension of wetting (γ
                     c) values. On the other hand, the γ
                     c−a values obtained for the hydrophilic minerals treated with surfactants were slightly higher than their γ
                     c values. For a successful oil agglomeration of a mineral, the solution surface tension value must be higher than the critical surface tension of oil agglomeration (γ
                     c−a).Disperse systems in general are characterized by a large free energy that is given by a product of interfacial area and interfacial tension. Since the interfacial area in this system is large, the dispersed system tends to reduce it by particle aggregation, which may be either coagulation or flocculation. When oil is dispersed into fine droplets in aqueous suspension of hydrophobic solid particles, the hydrophobic particles are aggregated by oil droplets since oil will preferentially wet the hydrophobic particles. Solid particles, therefore, can be bridged by the second liquid which is immiscible with the medium in which the process takes place. This size enlargement operation is defined as oil agglomeration ( Comminution is required to liberate the valuable constituents, and separation results strongly depend on the degree of liberation. However, fine particles produced during the grinding process in mineral processing operations decrease the efficiency of the concentration processes ( In colloidal methods, separation of minerals can be achieved by selective aggregation methods such as coagulation, flocculation and agglomeration. The aggregates can then be separated from dispersed material by sedimentation, sieving or other techniques. Generally, water-insoluble oils are utilized in mineral processing to improve the attachment of hydrophobic particles to bubbles (emulsion flotation), to improve the flotation of very fine particles by increasing their size (agglomerate flotation), or to increase the size of fine particles allowing for separation of the agglomerates by sieving (oil agglomeration) ( Similar to the flotation and shear flocculation processes, the oil agglomeration technique also utilizes differences in wettability of minerals. Wettability characteristics of mineral surfaces can be defined in terms of their values of critical surface tension of wetting ( The wettability of solid or mineral particles is known to be an important parameter which affects many technological processes such as froth flotation, shear flocculation, oil agglomeration, solid–liquid separation and dust abatement ( In the Zisman contact angle method ( The flotation method ( The shear flocculation method to determine the critical surface tension of wetting of minerals treated with surfactants was devised recently by Sulfur, coal (as hydrophobic solids), calcite and barite (as hydrophilic solids) were used in this study. The samples of coal, calcite and barite were dry ground and sieved to −212-μm particle size fraction. The sulfur sample has the −106 μm of received particle size. The chemical compositions of these samples are given in Methanol–water solutions of different concentrations (w/w%) were prepared and employed in order to obtain wettability data for the construction of the oil agglomeration recovery (AR%) versus The oil agglomeration experiments were carried out in a 300-cm The critical surface tension of wetting ( The critical surface tension of wetting (  The effect of solution surface tension for the oil agglomeration of calcite and barite suspensions is shown in The effect of solution surface tension on the shear flocculation of the same calcite and barite minerals treated with the same surfactants was investigated recently by As mentioned above, the The oil agglomeration of a mineral suspension decreased in tandem with the decrease of the surface tension of the liquids used. Eventually, the oil agglomeration process did not occur below a particular value of solution surface tension. That is, the particle surfaces were wetted mostly by the solution below this surface tension value of solution. Therefore, the kerosene used as bridging liquid did not attach sufficiently to the particle surfaces and the oil agglomeration of the mineral did not occur. The solution surface tension value at which oil agglomeration does not take place can be defined as ‘the critical solution surface tension for oil agglomeration,