In Sanders’ classification of calcaneus fractures, the medial fracture line (subtype C) is close to the tarsal canal, which contains an artery for the talus and calcaneus. We hypothesized that because of this brittle vascular localization, patients with C line fracture patterns might describe radiologic subtalar arthritis more often and have more complaints. The purpose of the present study was to compare the results of C line fracture patterns with other types of calcaneus fractures. A total of 25 surgically treated feet were involved. Regarding Sanders’ classification, group 1 included fractures involving the C line (11 feet), and group 2 included fractures not involving the C line (14 feet). Patient age at admission, trauma date, and interval until surgery were obtained from the patients’ medical records. The Bohler angles were determined from the radiographs. At the last follow-up visit, the radiologist graded subtalar arthritis using computed tomography. For clinical follow-up, the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society and Maryland scores were assessed. No significant differences were found in mean age, follow-up period, delay to surgery, or postoperative Bohler angle between the 2 groups. The mean preoperative Bohler angle was significantly low for group 1. Although not significantly different, the mean American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society and Maryland scores were lower for group 1 (81.9 and 84.3) than group 2 (87.8 and 92.0), and the median subtalar arthritis grade was greater for group 1 (score 2) than for group 2 (score 1.5). The worse results with C line fracture patterns despite satisfactory reduction might result from sinus tarsi artery damage. Angiographic investigations could clarify this theory in the future. Consequently, surgeons must inform and should hesitate to operate on patients with these highly comminuted C line calcaneus fractures.Calcaneus fractures have consistently been described as being associated with poor outcomes Sanders et al The tarsal canal is formed by the sulcus of the talus and the sulcus of the os calcis The purpose of the present retrospective case series study was to compare the clinical and radiologic results of C line calcaneus fracture patterns with the other types of calcaneus fractures regarding the Sanders CT scan classification. This was a retrospective case-control study. A total of 40 feet (36 patients) with calcaneus fractures were operated on by 1 of us (T.O.) using a lateral approach from January 1, 2003 to January 1 2008. Range of motion exercises were started in postoperative day 2 and weight bearing was allowed at the end of the third month for all patients. The exclusion criteria consisted of pathologic fractures, patients with less than 1 year of postoperative follow-up data, and those who were not able to come. Thus, 25 feet (23 patients) were involved in the present study. This was a retrospective case series study and was approved by the Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty Ethics Committee. All patients provided informed consent. The patients’ preoperative CT scans were used to group the patients according to the fracture lines using the Sanders CT scan classification. Group 1 included fractures involving the C line, and group 2 included fractures without C line involvement. The preoperative and postoperative Bohler angles were determined using standing lateral foot radiographs. Patient age at admission, trauma date, and interval until surgery were obtained from the patients’ computerized data, hospital charts, and folders. At the last follow-up visit, the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle score and the Maryland score were assessed. To evaluate subtalar arthritis, ankle multislice CT scanning was done. The radiologist (F.K.), who was unaware of the preoperative classification to prevent bias, evaluated the follow-up CT scans for subtalar arthritis. He graded the subtalar arthritis according to the CT findings ( The unpaired Student's A total of 25 feet of 23 patients were included in the present retrospective case-control study. Of the 25 feet, 11 had C line fractures (group 1) and 14 had no involvement of the C line (group 2; In the Sanders classification of calcaneus fractures, the medial fracture line (subtype C) is close to the tarsal canal, which contains an artery for the talus and calcaneus. We hypothesized that because of this brittle vascular localization, patients with C line fracture patterns might describe radiologic subtalar arthritis more often and have more complaints. The purpose of the present study was to compare the results of C line fracture patterns with the results of other types of calcaneus fractures. The present retrospective case-control study included 25 feet separated into 2 groups according to the presence of a C line fracture pattern (11 feet with a C line fracture as group 1 and 14 feet without C line involvement as group 2). The retrospective nature and the considerably small number of patients were the major limitations of our study. However, as a pleasing sign for the standardization of the groups, with the numbers available, no significant difference was detected in the mean age, follow-up period, or interval until surgery that might have affected the outcome. The ideal management of displaced calcaneus fractures is still controversial We searched the published data for reports on the subtypes of Sanders’ classification to determine whether we could simplify the controversy regarding the ideal management. In a recent study, the medial fracture line (subtype C) was associated with a more severe fracture pattern, with more comminution, and with greater involvement of the surrounding joint surfaces CT provides us with the ability to evaluate intra-articular calcaneal fractures, especially those of the subtalar joints. After the advent of CT, fractures of the calcaneus have been widely studied. Multislice CT has added advantages for musculoskeletal trauma imaging, including volume imaging, the ability to acquire multiplanar reconstructions with near isotropic viewing, 3-dimensional imaging, and thick slice multiplanar reconstructions that mimic conventional radiographs. All these are achieved with a single data acquisition without the need for gantry angulation The Bohler angle normally ranges from 25° to 40°, and its decrease in intra-articular calcaneus fractures reflects the degree of joint depression The question remains of why the outcome is poor with a significantly depressed preoperative Bohler angle even with restoration of the angle after surgery. There are 2 overlapping theories. Sanders In a prospective, randomized, controlled multicenter trial comparing operative and nonoperative treatment of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures, type IV fractures were reported to demonstrate no difference in the results with respect to treatment type The worse results with the C line fracture pattern, despite satisfactory reduction, might be due to sinus tarsi artery damage. Angiographic investigations could clarify this theory in the future. In conclusion, surgeons must inform patients and should hesitate to surgically treat these patients with highly comminuted C line calcaneus fracture. Owing to the small number of cases in our study, this conclusion lacks significance. However, at the least, our results give a clue about and indicate the need for a prospective, randomized, controlled multicenter trial to compare the operative and nonoperative treatment of calcaneus fractures involving the C line.