Twenty-nine consecutive cases of distal tibial intra-articular fractures treated by trans-articular or extra-articular external fixation techniques have been reviewed. Eleven cases were treated initially with a trans-articular dynamic axial fixator. Of these seven were converted to an extra-articular SHF, for a combination of poor ankle motion and delayed healing of the metaphyseo-diaphyseal dissociation (MDD). Three of these cases (two patients) required bone grafting for delayed healing of the diaphyseal component of the fracture. Apart from one refracture through the MDD, no major complications were seen. No deep infections and no angular malalignments were noted. There were 11 pin track infections. Subjective assessment using short form-36 (SF-36) questionnaires, however, revealed significant differences compared to a normal population particularly in physical function and pain at a mean follow-up of 21 months. Using Bone’s criteria for assessment of range of motion there were 62% excellent and good results, which dropped to 53% when fractures with a metaphyseo-diaphyseal extension were included.
                  The use of minimally invasive techniques of internal fixation and stabilisation with a Sheffield hybrid frame in the management of distal tibial intra-articular fractures has minimal complications. Trans-articular external fixation is a good primary treatment for badly comminuted articular fractures with poor soft tissue condition. Conversion to extra-articular external fixation is recommended for slower healing fractures allowing ankle movement and early weight-bearing. The presence of a MDD dissociation lengthens the treatment time significantly, adds to the morbidity and affects final outcome.The ‘traditional’ approach to the treatment of severe distal tibial intra-articular fractures including pilon fractures using open reduction and internal fixation techniques has gradually fallen out of favour in the last decade The use of minimally invasive external fixation techniques has gained considerable support more recently, with fewer complications We reviewed retrospectively 31 consecutive cases of distal tibial intra-articular fractures treated by the Sheffield Adult Limb Reconstruction Service in the period from January 1995 to September 1998. Of these, one had delayed primary trans-tibial amputation for an associated Gustillo and Anderson type III-C open fracture of the tibial shaft. Another had a primary arthrodesis using a trans-articular SHF, for a Ruedi and co-workers Nineteen patients (65.5%) had high-energy injuries, of which nine had axial loading injuries as a result of a fall from height. The rest were either indirect low energy twisting injuries or simple falls. Five were multiply injured and eight (28%) had open fractures. Twenty-six patients had a full set of initial pre-operative X-rays and CT scans. Using the Ruedi and co-workers classification Eleven cases were treated initially with a trans-articular dynamic axial fixator (Orthofix Srl, Verona), with an articulated ankle distraction unit, allowing early motion in nine of these. Of these, seven were converted to an extra-articular SHF. In five of these, this was due to delayed healing of the associated metaphyseo-diaphyseal dissociation (MDD). In one case, it was due to poor ankle motion with the articulated unit. One 68-year-old lady was unable to comply with partial weight-bearing and had repeated falls which eventually lead to re-displacement of the MDD. There were four late referrals for treatment. In these cases surgery was performed 2–10 weeks from injury. The rest of the patients had their surgery at a mean of 3.6 days from injury (range: 0–9 days). The delay in surgery was mainly due to poor skin condition and in one case due to lack of allocated theatre time. Two patients did not attend for follow-up. One was transferred to a special unit with severe brain damage as a result of associated head injury. The second patient who had sustained her injury from a suicide attempt by jumping from a height, was in a special psychiatric unit. This left 27 cases in 25 patients who were followed-up for a mean of 21 months (14–36 months). At final follow-up, the patients were assessed subjectively using the short form-36 (SF-36) questionnaire. Results were compared to a normal Sheffield population in an age matched fashion. The paired samples Preoperative AP, lateral (and mortise views where available) were reviewed and classified according to Ruedi and co-workers Of the 18 fibular fractures, only 4 of the earlier cases in this series required internal fixation. Three patients had plating of their fibular fracture. The fourth patient had percutaneous insertion of an intramedullary Bundle nail. In one case, open reduction was needed to assist with reduction of the fibular fracture and no internal fixation was applied. Intra-articular elements of the fracture were attended to first. Joint distraction was applied either manually or using a trans-articular fixator. The individual joint fragments were then reduced percutaneously under image intensifier control and internal fixation performed using cannulated screws or fragment fixation screws (Orthofix Srl, Verona). However, in nine cases, open reduction was performed through limited incisions planned over fracture windows, through which the articular fragments were reduced under direct vision. These cases were either too comminuted and deemed unsuitable for percutaneous reduction or an attempt at percutaneous reduction had failed and, therefore, the surgeon immediately proceeded to ORIF. In one delayed case in which previous internal fixation, performed elsewhere, had to be revised at 7 weeks form injury, a formal open reduction was performed through a long conventional antero-medial exposure. Primary bone grafting of a metaphyseal defect was performed in two cases. If a trans-articular fixator was used then this was utilised to reduce the reconstructed articular block to the metaphysis and locked in position. If a SHF was applied, 3–4 2 At final follow-up the patients were asked to fill out an SF-36 questionnaire The SF-36 results were compared to scores obtained from a normal population who had filled out similar questionnaires. The patients were divided into six categories according to age. Significant differences ( Twenty patients marked their pain levels on a VAS. The mean of the VAS score recorded was 2.55, with a (range: 0–7.2). Four patients had no pain at final follow-up. Two patients had an equinus deformity. One required a percutaneous lengthening of his Tendo Achilles. Overall patients had a mean dorsiflexion of 5° (range: −5–15°), a mean plantar flexion of 33° (range 15–60°). Using Bone et al. criteria All fractures went on to eventual union. However, three cases in two patients required bone grafting of the MDD before progressing to full union in 14, 18 and 21 months, respectively. Overall treatment time, calculated as time to removal of fixator and unprotected weight-bearing, ranged from 3.5 to 21.5 months (mean 9.4 months). However, fractures without diaphyseal elements were found to have a mean treatment time of 4.5 months ( One case with a grade II open fracture, sustained a compartment syndrome which was treated by fasciotomy. This patient recovered but had residual grade IV weakness of her extensor hallucis longus. Apart from this and the two equinus deformities referred to above, one patient had a refracture through his MDD, while playing cricket 6 months after full healing ( In one case, a poor anatomical reduction of the articular surface was noted. There was one case with early OA changes on follow-up X-ray with narrowing of the joint space. No cases of angular malalignment of more than 5° in either plane were noted in this series. There were 11 cases of pin-site infection, which were treated with simple pin-site care or oral antibiotics. One case required exploration and washout of a pin-site following removal of the fixator. She recovered fully with no clinical or radiological evidence of residual deep infection. Early results of internal fixation for tibial pilon fractures were disappointing. It was not until Ruedi and co-worker published their first studies in 1969 and 1973 A number of studies have reported good results using trans-articular techniques of external fixation Trans-articular techniques have several advantages particularly in the more comminuted RA III cases. They can be applied in a relatively short period and are, therefore, useful for the multiply injured patient. They also facilitate articular reconstruction by ligamentotaxis. Most importantly they provide a good primary treatment, with good stability, especially for patients with poor skin condition, allowing time for proper assessment of the patient and fracture, including planning for articular reconstruction. They can always be converted to an extra-articular circular fixator later if necessary. Trans-articular fixators are perfectly suited for severely comminuted articular fractures with no metaphyseal or diaphyseal extension. However, when there is an associated MDD element, we have demonstrated in this study that the fracture is much slower in healing. As loosening of the distal talar screws in trans-articular fixation is common after 4 months The other major contribution made by Ruedi and co-workers On analysis of the SF-36 questionnaires, Sands et al. Limitation of motion is a predictable problem with intra-articular fractures of the distal tibia and is proportionate to the severity of damage to the articular surface. In this series, however, it seems that due to aggressive rehabilitation, including immediate movement, whether using a trans-articular fixator with an articulated ankle unit or an extra-articular SHF, our results in terms of range of motion compare favourably with the literature. Griffiths et al. Thus, cases with fractures mainly affecting the metaphysis and having less intra-articular comminution faired worse in terms of range of motion despite equally aggressive early post-operative motion. We attribute this to the lengthy treatment times associated with these cases. Barbieri et al. Despite limitation of motion and persistent pain in a significant number of cases, there were only two major complications. One compartment syndrome was treated surgically with minimal residual dysfunction. The only other major complication was a refracture through the MDD 6 months following the end of treatment. Barbieri et al. Also in this study, apart from one poor anatomical reduction of the articular element, there were no cases of axial malalignment. This again compares favourably with the literature, where cases of malunion were reported in up to 25% of cases Not only is the quality of the articular reconstruction important, but also accurate reduction of the MDD and restoration of overall alignment.