The GeTe-based system has long been considered as a promising candidate system for various functional applications; many of which are directly related to the polymorphic phase transformation in their crystalline forms. Consequently, the microstructure underlying their intriguing phase transition has been the subject of numerous studies. Here we provide real-time observation of the microstructural changes associated with the reversible pseudo-cubic (or rhombohedral) to cubic GeTe phase transition using high-voltage transmission electron microscopy (HV-TEM) operating at 1,250 kV and complementary high-temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD). As a result of the phase transition, the pseudo-cubic GeTe domain's configuration significantly changes from its original band-like to a spike-like morphology with a different orientation after a heating/cooling cycle. The coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) properties as a function of temperature are also explored in relation to the GeTe phase transition.The germanium telluride (GeTe) based system has long been considered as a promising candidate system for various functional applications owing to their fascinating properties such as ferroelectricity [ Since the early work of Snykers et al. [ The phase transition temperature in GeTe is strongly dependent on the sample's stoichiometry and carrier concentration [ For the above reasons, it is imperative to gain a better understanding of the nature of the polymorphic phase transformation in GeTe, especially from the microstructural perspective. In the current study, we utilise high-voltage transmission electron microscopy (HV-TEM) with complimentary high temperature XRD in order to provide direct evidence of the local microstructural changes associated with the reversible phase transition in GeTe. Further insight on related changes in the thermal expansion properties of the low- and high-temperature polymorph GeTe phases has also been included in order to better understand the systems’ structural stability subjected to thermal cyclic conditions. Pristine GeTe was prepared from the high-purity grade elemental Ge and Te (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) via a melting-annealing-spark plasma sintering (SPS) route. In particular, pure elements were first sealed inside a quartz tube, and followed by a sequence of gradual heating up to 950 °C in 12 h, isothermal holding for 6 h before rapid quenching in ice water. Subsequent annealing was performed at 650 °C for 3 days. Ball milling was then applied to obtain fine powders for SPS sintering at 550 °C under 55 MPa (SPS-211Lx, Fuji Electronic Co., Ltd, Japan). The resultant sintered pellet's density was approximately 98% based on the Archimedes measurement. Detailed fabrication procedure can also be found in a previous publication elsewhere [ A lamella GeTe sample (∼100 nm in thickness) was first prepared from the bulk pellet GeTe using a Focused Ion Beam instrument (FEI Scios Dualbeam, USA). Room temperature characterisation was carried out using a Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope STEM-ARM 200F (JEOL, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. In-situ heating TEM observation of the FIB sample was performed using a high-voltage TEM JEM-1300NEF (JEOL, Japan) at an acceleration voltage of 1250 kV (10 In situ heating XRD was carried out using a Rigaku SmartLab system equipped with a 9 kW Cu rotating anode source on a pellet GeTe sample. The temperatures were ramped at a rate of 25 LeBail analysis was performed using TOPAS 4.1 (Bruker-AXS, Germany) to obtain the temperature-dependent lattice parameters and d-spacing values of hkl planes. Here we use the rhombohedral setting (  Unless otherwise stated, the low-temperature GeTe polymorph will be referred as a pseudo-cubic structure for convenience of discussion in the remaining parts of the article. In general, the d-spacing values for a set of plane (hkl) can be expressed as a function of temperature (T) using a second-order polynomial function as follows The corresponding coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) corresponding to a (hkl) plane is defined as The CTE values are usually computed for the principle axes and volume of the unit cell. However, this approach may inadequately describe the true nature of the thermal expansion behaviour of non-isotropic structures, which could be largely orientation-dependent. Therefore, it is necessary to introduce the mathematical tensors associated with the thermal expansion for the crystal structures under investigation as follows [ Where Based on the d-spacing values obtained from the XRD spectra, the thermal expansion properties of the associated phases including the pseudo-cubic and cubic GeTe can then be analysed using a custom software package Coefficient of Thermal Expansion Analysis Suite (CTEAS) (University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, USA) [   In In addition to the bright-field imaging, corresponding Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) patterns were also obtained. Interestingly, the direction of spot splitting (as indicated by arrows) was rotated by about 111.8° from the (31–1) to (0–22) direction before and after heating, respectively (  Further detailed analysis on the change of various unit cell parameters as a function of temperature including the lattice parameter (a), the distortion angle (Δα = 90 – α), the unit cell's volume and the (111) d-spacing is presented in Based on the measured data in This investigation has utilised in-situ TEM in combination with XRD results to directly observe the crystalline phase transition associated with the concomitant morphological change in GeTe as a function of temperature. The transformation is of a second-order type as evidenced by the continuous change of the lattice parameters between the two polymorphs up to the Curie temperature T Similar formation of such spiky modulated structure observed in the GeTe upon cooling as shown in For bulk samples subjected to multiple heating/cooling cycles, the effect of the GeTe phase transition may not be as significant due the averaging effect of numerous grains in the samples. However, we anticipate a much greater impact is applicable for low-dimensional materials such as thin films or nano-particles where much fewer crystal grains are present; importantly, this could potentially affect the relevant functional properties of these GeTe materials such as ferroelectricity, thermoelectricity, etc. That is to say, different domain's orientations give rise to the different polarisation vectors in ferroelectric materials. In a limited number of studies, nanoscale ferroelectricity has been explored [ In summary, we have performed direct observation of the microstructural changes related to the reversible polymorphic phase transition in GeTe using high-voltage TEM combined with high-temperature XRD. In contrast to the band-like morphology found in the original microstructure, the subsequent domains appear in a spiky form with different orientations after a heating/cooling cycle. This is believed to significantly affect the functional properties of GeTe materials, especially in low-dimensional thin films or nano-particles. In addition, the effects of temperature and phase transition on the thermal expansion properties for pseudo-cubic (rhombohedral) and cubic GeTe have also been explored. In the low-temperature pseudo-cubic polymorph, the GeTe adopts an anisotropic behaviour with significant contraction along the (111) plane as the temperature increases. Above the transition temperature, it reverts into an isotropic thermal expansion response corresponding with a cubic nature. The results presented and discussed in this article further the understanding of local microstructural changes as well as structural stability associated with the phase transition that occurs in these materials when subjected to multiple heating/cooling cycles during service. This research was conducted as part of the Progress 100 Project between the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at