Inner ear fibrosis and osteogenesis are common features of human autoimmune disease, although the cellular mechanisms are unknown. The Palmerston North (PN) autoimmune strain mouse has been shown to develop modiolar sclerotic lesions with progression of its systemic disease. Therefore, lesion development was studied in the cochleas of PN mice to gain insight into potential autoimmune osteogenic processes in the human ear. Cochleas from PN mice were examined with electron microscopy to characterize the cellular and extracellular matrix changes that lead to abnormal mineralization. Initially, activated fibroblasts produced extracellular matrix fibers, ranging in size from fine fibrils to larger collagen-like fibers. These proliferating fibers appeared to ‘seed’ the mineralizing lesions by serving as the framework for mineral deposition. As mineralization continued, the foci grew in size and fused to form large sclerotic masses within the connective tissue. However, the lesions never invaded nor degraded the normal modiolar bone. These observations of abnormal mineralization of cochlear connective tissue fibers show some parallels with human cochlear autoimmune osteogenesis, suggesting similar molecular processes may be involved.Numerous studies have reported fibrosis and new bone formation within the inner ear of individuals with systemic autoimmune diseases ( This laboratory has studied the relationship of systemic autoimmune disease, hearing loss, and otic capsule sclerosis in the Palmerston North (PN) mouse, a model for systemic lupus erythematosus. Early studies of this strain revealed significant auditory threshold elevations and cochlear pathology, establishing it as a model for autoimmune sensorineural hearing loss ( Preliminary ultrastructural studies of the PN mouse lesions revealed large sclerotic foci confined within the extracellular matrix, suggesting cellular and matrix abnormalities underlie their development ( Therefore, to better understand the potential disease processes of autoimmune temporal bone fibrosis in humans, an ultrastructural investigation of the PN autoimmune mouse cochlear lesions was conducted to identify and characterize the early matrix abnormalities that lead to their formation. A better understanding of fibrotic lesion development in these autoimmune mice could offer insight into the abnormal cellular processes underlying extracellular matrix fibrosis and osteogenesis in patients with autoimmune disorders. Twenty Palmerston North mice between 17 and 21 months of age were killed and their inner ears removed, fixed overnight with phosphate buffered 3% glutaraldehyde-1.5% paraformaldehyde, decalcified in EDTA, postfixed in osmium, and embedded in plastic for ultrastructural analysis. Thick sections in the longitudinal plane were cut until the modiolus was reached or sclerotic lesions seen. Thin sections were collected, stained with lead citrate and uranyl acetate, and viewed in a Phillips EM300 transmission electron microscope. The areas of abnormal connective tissue and sclerotic lesions were evaluated for activated cellular elements, proliferation of extracellular matrix material, early stages of lesion formation, and matrix abnormalities immediately adjacent to fully formed lesions. All procedures for animals were approved by the OHSU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee to assure that NIH guidelines were properly met (Protocol A149). All photomicrographs were prepared from scanned and digitized negatives that were printed on a dye-sublimation printer. Identifying the precise cellular and extracellular matrix precursors to the lesions was somewhat empirical because one could not simultaneously observe the sclerotic lesion and all the matrix abnormalities causing it. The lesions occurred in virtually all mice, but the developmental timing, size, and degree of connective tissue involvement varied considerably. Therefore, it was impossible to preselect mice at certain ages to predict stage of lesion formation. However, it was possible to identify matrix abnormalities immediately surrounding the lesions and observe comparable matrix features in ears without lesions to draw some conclusions regarding the anatomical changes leading to mineralization. Aiding in this characterization of early matrix changes was the fact that lesions always occurred adjacent to dilated modiolar blood vessels and were coincident with activated fibroblasts and extracellular fiber proliferation. The only modiolar cellular elements besides blood vessels and fibroblasts are auditory nerve fibers and Schwann cells, both of which appeared normal throughout all ears studied. Therefore, because of the limited cell types within the confined modiolar space and the consistent changes in specific cell types, the connective tissue alterations preceding lesion formation were easily identified. The lesions generally occurred between the bony modiolus and the fibers of the auditory nerve ( The sclerotic lesions went through two major stages of development. The first was a period of extracellular matrix proliferation in which hypertrophied fibroblasts produced large amounts of collagen and other small fibers. The second stage was matrix mineralization, presumably due to calcification of the fibers within this abnormal extracellular matrix. As mineralization proceeded, the small foci gradually grew and merged together to form the large mass that was visible at the light microscopic level. The early activity within the connective tissue was characterized by cells that appeared to be hypertrophied fibroblasts because of their large rounded nucleus and increased cytoplasm ( Extensive fibrillar material was seen immediately adjacent to the activated fibroblasts, implying extracellular fiber assembly upon release of precursor components from the cells ( The early stages of fiber mineralization appeared to first involve the thicker collagen fibers. Electron dense condensations or deposits occurred on these fibers as if they were seeding or initiating the mineralization process ( The increase in size of the sclerotic center also involved small fibers to some extent ( The sclerotic foci began as a series of small lesions that enlarged as mineralization continued. As they increased in size, they encroached upon others to fuse and form larger lesions, although each often still demonstrated the collagen fiber core ( A consistent feature of the sclerotic lesions was that they never invaded the normal bone around the modiolus, or expanded into the perilymphatic spaces, such as the scala tympani. The enlarging masses also did not appear to impinge upon auditory nerve fibers within the modiolus or osseous spiral lamina. However, this may be a factor of time since the mice only live to approximately 1.5 years. If the sclerification process was allowed to continue for several years, more extensive invasion of existing structures may be seen. The results of the present study provide a possible mechanism for the cochlear fibrosis and osteogenesis consistently reported in human autoimmune disease. The stages of lesion development appeared to be a progression of fibroblast activation, proliferation of extracellular matrix fibers, and mineralization of these fibers to form the amorphous sclerotic mass. Previous studies have shown these lesions stain positively for calcium and fibrinoid ( Similar cellular and extracellular matrix alterations have been suggested for human otosclerosis ( The underlying cause of abnormal matrix fiber synthesis in the ear is not known, although autoimmunity to collagen is still being debated ( Studies of normal ossifying tissue are beginning to offer some insight into the mechanisms of abnormal matrix mineralization ( The fibrosis and subsequent mineralization of fibers in autoimmune diseases presumably is under the control of some promoter, such as basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). Both the fibroblast and osteoblast are derived from a common progenitor cell and both are stimulated by bFGF to produce matrix fibers ( The present study has shown some parallels to the abnormal modiolar fibrosis and osteoneogenesis that is prevalent in human autoimmune diseases. The PN autoimmune mouse may have some value in efforts to understand the matrix cellular changes that underlie the reported temporal bone pathology. Future studies to identify common cellular and extracellular processes shared by the ear and other connective tissues may also identify their common pathologies in autoimmune disease. The numerous archived temporal bones within the National Registry should provide valuable material to detail the molecular and/or genetic predisposition to these abnormal cellular processes. This research was supported in part by The Research Fund of the American Otological Society, Inc., and the Head and Neck Oncology Fund of the OHSU Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery.