In this study, the effects of the process control agent (toluene) usage on the product size, morphology and conversion level of precursor powders to magnesium diborate (MgB2) was investigated. The boron and magnesium powders were first milled in Spex mill and then subjected to sintering in tube furnace. It was found that the usage of toluene at milling stage remarkably affect the final product properties. The powder size of the milled sample treated with toluene decreased to the finer sizes, especially for increasing ball to powder weight ratio and milling times. However, lower conversion values calculated for treated samples indicated the increasing contamination.Mechanical alloying (MA) is a solid-state powder processing technique involving repeated welding, fracturing, and re-welding of powder particles in a high-energy ball mill. It was originally developed to produce oxide-dispersion strengthened (ODS) nickel- and iron-base superalloys for applications in the aerospace industry The superconductor MgB In the Mg–B system, there are also other intermetallic compounds with the same components, but a higher B: Mg ratios. A recent report released by Prikhna In the literature, several phase diagrams has been proposed to analyze the behavior of these compounds under different temperature, composition, pressure and/or atmosphere The recent study performed by Wu et al., with using SPEX mill showed that a bulk form of MgB In MA, rather than the type of mill, process variables such as size of the balls and BPR, are also strongly determine the final properties of the product as an experienced in our previous study In this study, the effects of the process control agent (toluene) usage on the product size, morphology and conversion level of precursor powders to MgB The MgB The morphological analyses of the samples were performed by SEM-ZEISS SUPRA VP 50. Rietveld refinement method was used for the calculation of conversion level of MgB The XRD pattern of the samples milled and sintered in tube furnace at 630 The observed MgB The particle size distribution of milled samples with or without of toluene usage according to used ball size are given in The calculated conversion level drops observed for toluene usage can be attributed to increasing impurity content of mixture powder and oxidation of boron during milling stage. Boron can react with oxygen to form B The SEM images of the sintered samples according to applied process variables are given in According to analyses results, it was found that the usage of PCA in milling stage has a remarkable affect on the particle size and size distribution of the mixed powder. Although, occurrence of finer size alloyed particles with more homogenous size distribution could be realized as a benefit of toluene usage, the decreased MgB We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This study financially supported by