This study aimed to investigate the roles of ethanol and water in the water/ethanol mixed solvent in liquefaction of lignocellulose biomass. To this end, an organosolv lignin, cellulose, cellulose/lignin (50:50, w/w) mixture and an acetone extracted white birch bark (EWBB) were comparatively liquefied in pure water, water/ethanol mixture (50:50, v/v) and pure ethanol at fixed condition (300 °C and 15 min). It was demonstrated that biomass liquefaction efficiency in three reaction media with respect to the bi-crude yield followed the order of water/ethanol mixed solvent » pure water > pure ethanol regardless of the feedstocks. Cellulose derived bio-crudes mainly contained esters, furfurals and furfurals derivatives, and carboxylic acid substantially existed in the bio-crude from cellulose liquefaction in water, while lignin derived bio-crude mainly contained aromatics, as expected. It was found that hot-compress water accelerated biomass depolymerization by hydrolyzing cellulose/hemi-cellulose, while on the other hand ethanol promoted lignin degradation by dissolving the de-polymerized lignin products and hence prevented the repolymerization of the reaction intermediates. In addition, the mixed ethanol-water solvent increased the permeation of the solvent into the lignocellulose biomass structure, and increased the solubility of liquefaction intermediates, hence contributing to a higher bio-crude yield in liquefaction of lignocellulose biomass.Direct liquefaction of biomass at mild temperatures has been widely reported since 1970s and is considered as a promising pathway for thermochemical conversion of lignocellulosic biomass into bio-chemicals and liquid bio-fuels. Liquefaction media have an important impact on products (gas, oil and char) distribution and chemical composition of the liquid products, and hence the final applications of the liquid products [ Hot compressed organic solvents such as monohydric alcohols are also applied for biomass liquefaction. Solvents, temperature and residence time exert great effects on the bio-crude/bio-oil yield [ In addition to alcohol, water has been widely applied in biomass liquefaction. To use water instead of organic solvents as the liquefaction reagent is advantageous from the environmental and economic points [ Currently, most of the published works are mainly on process optimization and products distribution analysis as well as bio-crude characterizations, including a previous work by the authors [ White birch bark was provided by a local sawmill in Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada. The obtained bark was firstly air-dried, then ground into particles of 20 mesh. According to our previous results [ Liquefaction of various feedstocks was carried out in a 100 mL Parr 4590 Micro Bench-top reactor. In a typical liquefaction run, ∼5.0 g feedstock (cellulose, cellulose/lignin (50:50, w/w) designed as C/L, lignin, or EWBB) and ∼50.0 mL liquefaction reagent (pure water, water/ethanol (50:50, v/v) mixture, or pure ethanol) were charged into the reactor. Residual air in the reactor was removed through alternate vacuuming-N After the reactor was cooled down to room temperature, gas in the reactor was collected into a 1.0 L gas bag for GC-TCD (Agilent Micro-GC 3000) analysis using 100 mL atmospheric air as the internal standard. The reactor was then opened and rinsed with acetone, the slurry and rinsing acetone were collected and filtered, solid residue (SR) was rinsed with acetone till the falling filtrate became colourless. The SR was then oven-dried together with filter paper at 105 °C to constant weight. Acetone, ethanol and water in the filtrate was respectively removed at 45 °C, 60 °C and 75 °C through rotary evaporation under reduced pressure, the left black viscous product was weighed and designated as bio-crude. Liquefaction of each feedstock under identical condition was repeated for at least three times to demonstrate acceptable reproducibility. Products from liquefaction here are grouped into three lumped fractions: Gas + water + volatiles (GWV), bio-crude and SR. Biomass liquefaction has been known to yield water through dehydration or condensation. Also, low boiling point chemicals are produced. Both water and low boiling point chemicals are removed during recovery of bio-crude through rotary evaporation under reduced pressure. Thus, water, low boiling point chemicals are lumped into GWV with gas. Yields of SR, bio-crude and GWV were calculated as the following equations: Chemical components of bio-crudes were qualitatively analyzed by Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS). As bio-crude was recovered through rotary evaporation of acetone, ethanol and water, some low boiling point chemicals (volatiles) would be lost. Thus, samples for GC/MS test were collected before the rotary evaporation: right after filtration, the filtrate was transferred into a 500 mL volumetric flask and the liquid level was adjusted to 500 mL by adding acetone, and the volumetric flask was shaken in a water shaker at room temperature for 10 min. Then ∼0.2 g diluted filtrate was collected into a GC/MS vial, further diluted with ∼1.0 mL acetone. The diluted sample was tested by GC/MS (Agilent 7890B GC, 5977AMSD) using a silicon column with temperature programming from 40 °C to 300 °C at the heating rate of 60 °C/min with 2 min initial and final time, respectively. Elemental analysis was conducted on the bio-crudes with a CEC (SCP) 240-XA elemental analyzer. Elemental analysis was also conducted on SRs. In addition, to characterize the chemical structure of cellulose, lignin, and EWBB and the associated SRs, all the feedstocks and SRs were scanned by a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) spectrometer (Frontier FTIR, Perkin Elmer) at the wavelength range of 4000-550 cm  Similar to organosolv lignin and cellulose, EWBB liquefaction is also dependent on the liquefaction media in terms of the product distribution. EWBB liquefaction in ethanol yields 47.1 wt% bio-crude and 23.6 wt% SR. While for EWBB liquefaction in water, yields of bio-crude and SR are 39.2 wt% and 32.4 wt%, respectively. Furthermore, EWBB liquefaction in water/ethanol (50:50, v/v) mixture leads to a high bio-crude yield of 58.8 wt%, but a low SR yield of 14.6 wt%. This result again demonstrates the high efficiency of water/ethanol (50:50, v/v) mixture in the liquefaction of typical lignocellulosic biomass, and the reasons for the high efficient liquefaction of biomass in water/ethanol mixture will be further clarified in this research. Yields and components of gaseous products after liquefaction are displayed in Even though GC/MC is limited in characterizing bio-crude because of the abundance of chemicals with high boiling point, it still gives essential information on the volatile composition in the bio-crude products. As summarized in Lignin derived bio-crudes are rich in phenolics, as illustrated by The GC/MS detectable components in the bio-crude from EWBB liquefaction are displayed in   As illustrated by   This study compared the liquefaction characteristics of cellulose, lignin, cellulose/lignin mixture and an acetone extracted white birch bark (EWBB) in pure water, water/ethanol mixed solvent (50:50, v/v) and pure ethanol, aiming to investigate the role of alcohol in lignocellulose biomass liquefaction. In terms of bio-crude yields, the liquefaction efficiency of the three liquefaction media dropped in the following sequence: water/ethanol mixed solvent (50:50, v/v) » pure water > pure ethanol, regardless of the feedstock. The high efficiency of water/ethanol mixed solvent (50:50, v/v) for lignocellulose biomass liquefaction could be attributed to could be attributed to the following two roles. On one hand, hot-compress water accelerated biomass depolymerization by hydrolyzing cellulose/hemi-cellulose, while on the other hand ethanol promoted lignin degradation by dissolving the de-polymerized lignin products and hence prevented the repolymerization of the reaction intermediates. In addition, the SEM analysis confirmed that the ethanol-water mixture increased the solvent permeation into the biomass structure and thus increased the biomass conversion during liquefaction. Cellulose derived bio-crudes mainly contained esters, furfurals and their derivatives, while lignin derived bio-crudes mainly contained aromatics. Furfural content in the bio-crudefrom cellulose liquefaction in water/ethanol mixture was much higher than that from cellulose liquefaction in pure water or ethanol. The authors are grateful for the financial support from the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at