Material comminution is one of the typical processes present during the injection abrasive water jet generation inside the mixing chamber and the focussing tube of the abrasive water jet cutting head. The determination of an extent of changes in the size of particles induced in the cutting head is the main objective of this contribution. Knowledge of the particle size at the exit from the cutting head is necessary for studying of the subsequent processes, e.g. the impingement of water jet with industrial mineral particles on a solid-state target or collision of such water jet with liquid barrier or opposite flowing jet of the same type.angle between the inlet direction of the sucked material and water jet axis...[–] the compressibility of water at the pressure the symbol substituting for the bracket ( the discharge coefficient of the water nozzle...[–] the density of material intended for grinding...[kg the density of water under the standard conditions...[kg the mean size of the original material particles...[m] the mean size of the particles produced in the course of a mixing process...[m] the velocity of sound in a material of the sucked particles...[m the velocity of sound in water...[m the drag coefficient of a material particle in the flowing water...[–] the diameter of the water nozzle...[m] the specific energy needed for the formation of a unit free surface in material of the sucked particles − the specific surface (fracture) energy of the sucked material...[J the pressure of water before the nozzle, i.e. in the pumping system...[Pa] the new surface produced by disintegration of particles into smaller ones...[m the velocity of the sucked material...[m the velocity of water jet without admixtures at the exit from the water nozzle...[m Previous research works have revealed that generation of the abrasive water jet in the entrainment system inherently includes not only acceleration or focussing of abrasive particles ( Two configurations (marked A and B) of mixing chambers were tested (see The tests were performed with the identical sucked materials of the identical particle mean size and the identical water jet and outlet mixed water jet parameters: the water pressure, the water orifice diameter, the focussing tube diameter and the focusing tube length. Thus, the only differing parameter was the internal shape of the mixing chamber. Parameters constant in experiments were as follows: Water pressure 380 Water orifice diameter 0.25 Focusing tube inner diameter 0.51 Focusing tube length 51 Disintegrated material Australian garnet 80 The experimental work was performed with the non-porous almandine powder with commercial mark “Australian garnet”. This is an abrasive mineral with declared hardness 8.5 on the Mohs scale (unverified by self tests), with mineralogical purity of 97%, chemical composition Fe Basic shift of particle sizes from the input state to the outlet one is evident from the graph presented in The interactions can be examined on the basis of several physical approaches. The attention is focused on a collision process between the jet and the material particle. Physical studies indicate that at these collisions, a sharp increase in the stress in the material particle takes place and thus the particle may be damaged or broken ( Considering the physical simplification that both the original and the newly formed particles are approximated as cubes, the mean size of the newly formed particles can be calculated from this equation Eq. Since the relationship of the particle size calculated from Eq. The higher values determined experimentally for particle sizes in the range from about 0.5 The results presented in this article show that the inlet particle suction perpendicular to the water jet axis causes larger damage of particles and produces smaller average particle size. This phenomenon can be used for intentional disintegration of brittle materials, especially minerals. The elementary theoretical set of equations can be used for partial analysis of the product flowing out of the mixing process — the average particle size can be determined quite well. The distribution of the particles and its variation caused by internal particle damage or some other phenomena cannot be determined from this theoretical base and need further deeper investigation. Nevertheless, the mixing process inside the cutting head of the entrained water jet constitutes a good base for utilization of the water jet as the tool for intentional particle softening in subsequent processes. The authors thank the