Coarse mineral particles exhibit poor conventional flotation efficiency because of many factors, including the low carrying capacity of bubbles, bubble/particle adhesion problems due to cell turbulence, and low degrees of liberation (low hydrophobicity). Many attempts to improve the recovery of coarse fractions have been explored, such as floto-elutriation operating at a high solid content while dispersed in a fluidized (or expanded) bed formed with a continuous injection of compressed air and an uprising water flow. This work analyzed the comparative performances of floto-elutriation (FE) and conventional flotation (CF) on a classified copper sulfide mineral feed as an example of a difficult-to-liberate low-grade ore. Contrary to expectations, CF and FE (Hydrofloat) displayed similar particle recovery rates with feed size distributions for P80s of 130, 240 and 280μm. However, metallurgical recoveries from classified fractions of −297+210μm were 25% higher in FE than in CF and as expected, coarse (+297μm) particles were not recovered in the CF, but in the FE. The recovery of fine fractions in the FE process was due to high hydraulic entrainment and surprisingly the recovery of intermediate and liberated fractions (+74−149μm) was very low, due to its low air hold-up. However, the enhancement of the holdup in FE increased the recovery of these mid-sized fractions. Because of the hydraulic carryover caused by the bubbles and water elutriation, the metallurgical grades obtained in all cases were very low compared to conventional bench flotation. It is believed that this FE equipment works better with coarse, narrowly classified particles and high-grade feeds and that performance decreases for low-grade ores requiring high liberation. Certain features of these findings are visualized.The low flotation recovery of coarse particles is known to be caused by a high mass (which reduces the load carried by air bubbles), a low degree of liberation, a low collector adsorption (low hydrophobicity) compared to fine particles, and a low degree of dispersion in the pulp, thus allowing insufficient time for the capture by bubbles ( Some cited alternatives for recovering these fractions in rougher flotation units include i. feed splitting into coarse and fine fractions to treat them separately ( A Hydrofloat (a floto-elutriator) is a separator that combines both flotation and gravity separation. Because it employs fluidization, coarse particles are better dispersed than in turbulent mechanical flotation machines where centrifugal force pulls the coarse particles away. As a result, the equipment allows for a better capture of coarser fractions by the bubbles, it can decrease the probability of bubble/particle detachment, thus enhancing the recovery of difficult-to-treat larger particles. In recent years, this technology has been applied to industrial minerals, with several full-scale units installed to recover particles up to and exceeding 3 Many recent papers have shown examples of the applications, advantages and future trends of floto-elutriation cells and their similarities with elutriation columns or columns with negative bias.  This work measures the efficiency of a Hydrofloat on typical copper sulfide ore, where only intense grinding permits the liberation of valuables. A comparison with conventional flotation is conducted and some operating parameters are studied. The copper ore used in the study corresponded to a sample composed primarily of chalcopyrite (45%) and bornite (55%). Feed grade varied between 0.9% and 1.1% Cu. The sample was ground and wet-sieved at different size fractions and composites of different P80s (80% passing product in a given mesh) were prepared as described in Particle size analyses of the feed and products of lab conventional flotation (CF) and floto-elutriation (FE) were performed by wet screening (duplicates) at 297 A copper chemical analysis was performed after acid sample digestion and analysis in a flame atomic absorption spectroscope (Varian, model AA110). Holdup (air % by volume) measurements were performed for a two-phase system (air/liquid) with different superficial air (0.2, 0.27, and 0.33 Tests were performed in a 1.5 The floto-elutriation (FE) experiments were performed in a 5 The pulp was then fed by gravity to the Hydrofloat filled with the frother solution and dosed with a peristaltic pump (50 Studies in the Hydrofloat with the injection of MSB were carried out following the floto-elutriation bench procedure with the addition of an MSB generation system ( The generation of bubbles with median sizes between 60 and 600 The particle size (P80) of the copper ore samples fed to the floto-elutriation systems with and without the MSB injection was comparatively evaluated. The method employed was based on quantitative image analysis. An MLA (Mineral Liberation Analyzer) was used with backscattered electron images to define and categorize the particles. Their composition was then measured by an EDS detector. The characterization analysis was carried out by the CETEM-Center for Mineral Technology-MST at Rio de Janeiro with a scanning electron microscope equipped with the MLA system developed by JKMRC (   Due to the high degree of entrainment in the FE process caused by water elutriation and very large bubbles (>1  The recovery of intermediate-sized fractions (not locked) by floto-elutriation appears to require a higher air holdup because the flotation of these particles is enabled by bubble capture (collision   The Hydrofloat can recover coarse particles (>0.2 Hydrofloat performance primarily depends on aspects of the mineral/ore system such as high feed grades, particle density, and degree of liberation versus particle size distribution. Recovery rates will be higher for high liberation of coarse sizes; the particles will exhibit high acceleration (on settling) in an expanded bed and thus facilitate the capture of coarse particles without reaching their terminal velocity. Performance increases as the pulp reaches the optimal boundary conditions for an expanded dense bed and a feed composed of a narrow distribution of coarse particles, which requires a quiescent system for minimizing detachment. Under these optimal conditions, the maximum floatable particle size can increase to several millimeters when conditions are quiescent ( If the liberation process is complex, as in metal sulfides, the particle size distribution will be wider and the presence of mid-size (locked or not) of approximately 149 A Hydrofloat was found to behave as a non-selective elutriator for fine copper sulfide mineral particles and as a flotation unit for coarse particles (>250 The authors would like to thank all the Brazilian Institutes supporting this research, namely CNPq, Fapergs and UFRGS. Thanks are due to