Due to health and environmental factors involved with standard float-sink analytical methods, a water-only fractionation procedure was investigated. A laboratory scale 105×105mm reflux classifier was built and used to fractionate fine coal into a number of density classes. The procedure was tested against standard float and sink methods. The reflux classifier was found to be an effective fractionation method, especially if the fractioned samples were to be used in further chemical or reactivity investigations that could be affected by the dense medium adhering to the coal particle surfaces. The procedure was easier, safer and less tedious to perform in the laboratory. Higher density cuts could be achieved, and any number of density intervals could be prepared. It was also confirmed that the separation in the reflux classifier was not totally independent of particle size but it operated well for narrow size distributions above 355μm. Tracer tests were also done, and it was shown that tracer partition results were a poor predictor of the reflux classifier performance because of hindered settling effects.In cases where minerals and ores, such as coal, are beneficiated on the basis of density, it is essential to determine the washability (or the density distribution) characteristics of the material to predict or assess plant performance. This involves separating the sample into density classes and determining the relative amounts in such classes. The material in these classes may be further analysed for other properties; in the case of coal, the densimetric- and ash curves are generated by float and sink analyses. Furthermore, it is often required in laboratory studies on reactivity, for example, to fractionate a coal sample into sub-samples of a narrow density range before use. This is done to isolate samples with certain required properties, like mineral content, maceral distribution or calorific value.  Earlier work demonstrated the principle that particles of different size could be successfully separated by density using a high-density suspension at low fluidization rates. This was however still only applicable to a narrow particle size ranges ( The reflux classifier was shown to be an innovative technology for density separation that combined a conventional fluidized bed and inclined parallel lamella plates. It achieved much higher throughputs and sharper separations ( While separation by reflux classification was identified as an applicable method for washability analysis ( A 0.105 For this project the equipment was run in batch mode by introducing a feed sample into the fluidised section before operating the reflux classifier. Two series of tests were done: batch fractionation and batch separation. For batch fractionation, the classifier was operated at a fixed fluidizing water flow rate while collecting the overflow material until a clear overflow containing no solids was obtained. The flow rate was then increased to displace additional material to the overflow, forming another overflow sample with a higher density. The process was repeated until a final high-density sample was left in the fluidized section. All the overflow samples produced at each flow rate, plus the remaining underflow was collected, dewatered and dried, and analysed for mass, size, ash and density. In batch separation mode, the water flow rate was set at a single predetermined flow rate, and the material separated into two fractions: an overflow and underflow fraction. The coal used in this study was an unwashed spiral feed from a colliery in the Waterberg coalfield in Limpopo Province, South Africa. It is known to be a highly laminated coal, alternating in bands of bright and dull coal as well as mineral matter which vary significantly in density ( The density and particle size determinations were done using a Quantachrome SPY-4 helium stereo pycnometer and a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 laser diffraction particle size analyser respectively. Float-sink analysis was done according to the SANS 7936:2010 standard ( Magnetic density tracers, supplied by Tenova Mining and Minerals South Africa (Pty) Ltd., of size 1 The relationship of the fluidizing water flow rate through the reflux classifier on the density cut point was first calibrated using density tracers. About 20 tracers per density class were added as a feed. A water flow rate of 45 To determine the density cut point ( The parameters were obtained by minimizing the sum of squared errors between the experimental and predicted data. The To explore the effect of a dense fluidizing bed, tracers were mixed with coal and fed to the reflux classifier. It was fractionated at fluidizing water flow rate settings ranging from 30 The question arose whether the partition characteristics for the tracers and the coal in the coal–tracer mixture were the same. The To illustrate whether the average overflow fractional density, rather than the cut point density could be used to characterise the partition performance of the reflux classifier, the responses of the tracer partitioning in the tracer only runs, and the coal–tracer runs are compared in Standard zinc chloride float-sink separation was performed on a sized sample (−1400 The corresponding product ash curves for the two separation methods were compared in To further validate the results, and to provide some method to predict the flow rate required for a specific density cut point, Eq. Since traditional float and sink tests are independent of particle size, the effect of particle size on the accuracy of separation of the reflux classifier had to be tested to complete the investigation. One of the claims made by proponents of the reflux classifier, is that the separation is much less sensitive to size compared to other gravity methods ( To investigate this, a coal sample was split into four size fractions (−1180 This size dependency is a disadvantage and should be avoided by preparing the feed into narrow size classes, preferably larger than 355 From the results shown above it is possible to conclude that water only fractionation of fine coal using a laboratory scale reflux classifier is possible. The washability and ash distribution data produced by the reflux classifier matched the data from the traditional method closely. Contamination of the produced fractions was eliminated, which is important in preparing samples for combustion and/or gasification test work. Adhering heavy liquids like TBE will contribute to the calorific value and volatile matter of the coal, while inorganics such as ZnCl The reflux classifier is much cheaper to operate because of the cost of replenishing heavy liquids. In addition, the reflux classifier doesn’t require any preparation like making up the heavy liquid to set densities. The reflux classifier can fractionate into narrower density classes, and can reach higher density values with greater ease. Some sample preparation is required to ensure a particle size larger than about 355 The authors would like to acknowledge the