A novel magnetic field sensor is presented in this paper. It combines the classical Fluxgate principle with the anisotropic magneto-resistance (AMR) effect exhibited by barber-pole biased AMR film-resistors. It is shown that such film-resistors can be used as Fluxgate magnetic cores, because they exhibit one high-resistivity state and one low-resistivity state depending on the film magnetization polarity. Periodical alteration of the magnetization polarity, forced by an excitation field, makes the film-resistivity become a rectangular function of time, whose duty-cycle is proportional to the measured ambient field intensity. The proposed design helps with the suppression of repeatability and time-drift errors that are common in AMR sensors; the excitation field enhances the spin-alignment along the easy-axis of the film-resistor. The design also provides excellent temperature stability. Moreover, it is shown how a single AMR film-resistor can be employed for simultaneous sensing of two field components (i.e. on a x–y plane); the first component modulates the duty-cycle of the rectangular function (Fluxgate principle) and the latter its amplitude (conventional AMR effect). A complete mathematical modeling of the proposed sensor is presented in this work. The theoretical results have been verified by the use of a Honeywell HMC1021 single-chip sensor. The calibration data fairly agrees with the theory.Some of the major advantages of anisotropic magneto-resistance (AMR) sensors are: (a) their ability to be miniaturized by the use of standard VLSI processes An alternative AMR sensor design is presented in this work, according to which a periodical field-waveform, called hereafter the excitation field is applied along the easy-axis of a The presented sensor exhibits all advantages of a Fluxgate macro-system although it is a micro-system. These advantages, namely: (a) high sensitivity, (b) small repeatability and hysteresis errors, (c) temperature stability, (d) mechanical robustness, (e) low noise, and (f) good linearity occur, thanks to the fact that its response does not depend directly on the domain structure of its magnetic core (the film-resistor). The same is true in the case of classical Fluxgates A technique known as An alternative AMR sensor design is considered that employs four AMR film-resistors connected properly in a Wheatstone bridge. Planar coils or planar conductors manufactured below the film-resistors produce an excitation field that is capable of changing periodically the sign of The The time-derivative ∂ In Instead of convoluting The The The results of the second experiment are presented in The results of the third experiment are presented in The results of the fourth experiment are presented in In the theoretical part, it is mentioned that the presented design makes it possible to sense simultaneously two perpendicular field components Another mechanism is responsible for the reduction of the accuracy at which the A novel AMR sensor design is proposed in this work. The sensor is based on conventional The proposed sensor design enables simultaneous measurement of two perpendicular field components, with one-single AMR film-resistor and it provides with all advantages that a conventional second-order-harmonic Fluxgate can offer. The sensor response exhibits excellent time and temperature stability and negligible repeatability and hysteresis errors. The latter errors are smaller than the rms-amplitude of high-frequency noise. To verify the theoretical results a system has been constructed based on the The rect(