Platinum and palladium were efficiently recovered from HCl solutions (at concentrations as high as 1–2 M) using a vinylbenzyl chloride-divinylbenzene resin reacted with the sodium salt of diethylmalonate followed by reaction with 3-aminopropyl imidazol. Both palladium and platinum exhibit sorption capacities as high as 1 mmol metal g−1 in 2 M HCl solutions (1.4–1.5 mmol metal g−1 in 1 M HCl and 1.6–1.7 mmol metal g−1 in 0.1 M HCl). The sorbent has a greater affinity for Pd at low HCl concentration, while Pt is preferred at higher HCl concentration, as shown by sorption performances in binary solutions. The sorption capacity is influenced by chloride concentration, while the presence of competitor ions (such as base metals) has little influence on binding performances: zinc shows the highest inhibiting effect (compared to copper and nickel). The sorption kinetics show that the agitation speed has a limited impact on sorption rate, while the kinetic rate decreases linearly with increasing metal concentration. Metals loaded on the resin can be recovered using 0.1 M thiourea solution as the eluent, with desorption efficiency exceeding 95% under selected experimental conditions. The recycling of the resin was effective for at least five sorption/desorption cycles.The development of catalytic systems (for the oil industry, fine chemistry, automotive catalysts ...) has led an increasing demand of industry for precious metals (such as those of the platinum group, referred to as PGMs). For some of these PGMs demand is not balanced by supply, due to limited resources. For these reasons, a series of metallurgical processes has been investigated during recent decades for recovering precious and strategic metals from low-grade ores and more specifically from industrial waste (spent catalysts, electronic devices, etc.) ( Several steps should be taken into account for the optimal design of a sorption process: (a) equilibrium parameters (sorption isotherms) in function of the composition of the solution (pH, presence of competitor metals, counter ions, etc.); (b) kinetic data (influence of diffusion mechanisms on the control of equilibrium time); (c) concentration factors (including the desorption of the metals in a selected elution medium); and (d) recycling (sorption/desorption cycles). A fifth criterion is especially important in the case of PGM recovery from waste catalysts: the separation of PGMs from BMs is an important issue, together with the possible separation of PGMs from multi-component solutions. This scheme will be followed in the present study for the recovery of Pd and Pt from synthetic solutions using an imidazol-bearing resin. Imidazol groups are known to be very reactive for metal ions and more specifically for precious and noble metals ( The synthesis of this imidazol-based resin has previously been described by The sample of dry polymer was then heated at 150 °C for 20 h. After that time, the polymer was washed with water, 1 M HCl, water, 1 M NaOH, water, 1 M HCl and finally with a large excess of distilled water. The water content of the swollen polymer was measured using a centrifugation method. Approximately 1 g of the swollen resin was placed in a fritted column and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min, weighted and dried for 17 h at 100 °C. After cooling in a dessicator, the column was weighed again, with and without the resin. The water content of the swollen resin was calculated from the ratio of resin's weight after drying and centrifugation. The chlorine content was measured by burning a ca. 25 mg sample in an oxygen-filled flask containing 15 mL of 3% hydrogen peroxide solution. After 30 min, which was needed for the absorption of the burning products in solution, the flask walls were washed with distilled water and the flask content was titrated for chloride content using the Volhardt method. The nitrogen content was determined using the standard Kiejdhal procedure. Two batches were prepared: the first resin sample was used for equilibrium experiments, while the second sample was tested for dynamic studies (batch kinetics and column systems). The first sample was characterized by a solid content of 75.5%, a nitrogen content of 9.4 mmol N g On the FTIR spectrum of the resin (not shown) a series of peaks showed the presence of substituted imidazole groups. On the original VBC/DVB resin a band at 1265 cm The Pd(II) and Pt(IV) bulk standard solutions were prepared by dissolving metal salts in concentrated solutions under heating. Chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate salt (H Standard conditions for sorption isotherms consisted of a minimum of 5 days contact under agitation of 30 mL solution (at given metal concentrations in the range: 10–300 mg L For kinetics, 250 mL of metal solution was agitated using a jar-test agitator at a rotation speed of 250 rpm. Samples were collected at fixed contact times, filtered using 1.2 µm filter membranes, before being analyzed by ICP-AES. Desorption was performed overnight using a reciprocal shaker by mixing saturated resins with HCl (8 M), thiourea (0.1 M or 0.3 M in water and 0.1 or 0.3 M in 0.1 M HCl). Samples were filtered and the residual concentration was determined by ICP-AES. The recycling of the resin was tested by successive sorption and desorption of Pd and Pt under standard experimental conditions (same volume of solutions for sorption steps, i.e. 30 mL for 20 mg of sorbent; and desorption steps, i.e. 10 mL for the same amount of loaded resin). The amounts of Pd and Pt removed and recovered were compared at each step. In the present work all experiments were only performed in batch system since the objective of this study was to evaluate the ability of these materials to recover Pd(II) and Pt(IV) from HCl solutions and to evaluate their selective separation from base metals. Column systems would be more appropriate for simulating the transfer of the process to industrial systems. Pd and Pt are generally leached from exhausted catalysts and waste materials in very acidic solutions (mainly HCl solutions). The influence of acid concentration is a key parameter in the design of Pd/Pt sorption systems for metal recovery from acidic leachates. It is also interesting to observe that the sorption capacity for Pd decreased continuously with increasing HCl concentration, while for Pt the sorption capacity increased slightly from 0.1 M to 0.25 M HCl concentration before decreasing above 0.25 M HCl. These differences in sorption behavior may be correlated to the speciation of Pd and Pt in HCl solutions. Indeed, in the case of Pd, in the 0.1–5 M HCl range, Pd was present in the form of PdCl The distribution coefficient ( In order to evaluate the relative contributions of chloride ions and protons on the reduction of sorption capacities, a series of experiments was carried out with the HCl concentration set at 0.1 M, adding increasing amounts of NaCl salt to reach Cl It is interesting to compare The distribution coefficients (not shown) followed the same trends with varying chloride ion concentrations as with HCl concentrations. In the case of Pd, a linear plot of distribution coefficients versus chloride ion concentration was obtained (in log–log units), with a lower slope (− Since the concentration of HCl had different impacts on Pd and Pt sorption, the isotherms were plotted for three different acid concentrations, i.e. 0.1, 1 and 2 M. The sorption isotherms are presented in Langmuir equation:  Maximum sorption capacities of Pd and Pt were very close for the 0.1 M and 1 M HCl solutions: around 1.6 mmol metal g Based on the N content in the resin (i.e. 9.4 mmol N g In order to evaluate the selectivity of the resin for Pd and Pt, bi-component solutions were prepared with different initial molar ratios between Pd and Pt and with different HCl concentrations (i.e. 0.1 M, 1 M and 2 M). By analogy with liquid/liquid extraction, the separation factor was defined as: The separation factor was strongly influenced by HCl concentration (not shown). At low HCl concentration (i.e. 0.1 M), Pd was preferentially sorbed by the resin, though considerable variations in the separation factor were observed with increasing initial molar (Pd)/(Pt) ratio. In 1 M HCl solutions, the separation factor varied between 0.7 and 1.1; the average value for S at 1 M HCl concentration over the 6 tests was 0.82. The imidazol resin was not effective for separating the metals: the metals were equally distributed in both the solid and liquid phases. When the concentration of HCl was increased to 2 M, the selectivity coefficient decreased to around 0.3 (ranging between 0.24 and 0.38), almost independent of the initial molar Pd/Pt ratio. At high acid concentration, the resin showed a marked preference for Pt binding over Pd. The influence of HCl concentration on the differential affinity of a synthetic resin Oasis MAX for Pd and Pt was studied by Control of the HCl concentration enables sorption to be oriented toward the preferential binding of Pd (low concentration, i.e. 0.1 M) or Pt (high concentration, i.e. 2 M). These results are also indicative of the effect of acidic conditions on the potential desorption of metals: a decreased affinity of the resin for a given metal with HCl concentration may contribute to the selection of appropriate acidic conditions for metal recovery from loaded resin. Platinum group metals are frequently found in the presence of base metals (for example Cu, Ni and Zn) in the acidic leachates of spent catalysts or other waste materials ( The impact of competitor base metals on the sorption of Pt was also limited, though not negligible. The addition of increasing concentrations of Cu, Ni and Zn had a very limited effect on sorption capacity, which decreased from 120 mg Pt g The equilibrium experiments were performed with a first batch of resin synthesized at the Wroclaw University of Technology. For the investigation of kinetic parameters, a second batch was used with a lower degree of substitution: the nitrogen content was reduced from 9.4 mmol –N g Most of the equilibrium experiments were performed with dried resins in order to facilitate the reproducibility of the experiments (avoiding changes in the water content of resin samples for the weighing of sorbent mass). It was important to evaluate the impact of drying on both sorption performance at equilibrium and mass transfer. To check this parameter, experiments were performed to compare the kinetic profiles for wet and dried resin beads in 1 M HCl solutions. The beads tested for kinetic experiments were produced from the second resin batch. Unfavorable experimental conditions were selected (i.e. low sorbent dosage) in order to highlight the limitation of sorption kinetics by diffusion mechanisms.  The concentration of Pd and Pt was varied (over low concentration ranges) and the kinetic profiles determined. In the case of Pt, the kinetic profiles of the 20 and 30 mg Pt L The kinetic coefficient, In order to check the influence of the resistance to film diffusion the agitation speed was reduced to 150 rpm (compared to the standard value, i.e. 350 rpm). The kinetic profiles overlapped (not shown). The opposite effects of agitation speed and metal concentrations, suggesting that intraparticle diffusion and film diffusion (respectively) are the controlling steps, indicate that the sorption of Pd and Pt by imidazol resin is at least partly controlled by both film and intraparticle diffusion. The desorption step (and the recycling of the resin) is the key to the implementation of the ion-exchange system. Several systems were tested for the recovery of the metals loaded on the sorbent, including several acids at different concentrations. Since the sorption was performed at high HCl concentrations (i.e. up to 2 M) with appreciable sorption capacities it was expected that acidic solutions would not be appropriate for the recovery of the metals from the solid. Preliminary tests confirmed this hypothesis. Even with 5 M HCl solutions, metal desorption, though not negligible, was not high enough (lower than 50–60%) to justify complete investigation (acid concentration, liquid/solid ratio – L/S – or reaction time). Thiourea is a ligand that is well known for its affinity for precious metals due to the presence of both amine and sulfur groups, that contribute to bind gold by chelation/complexation ( The recycling of the sorbent was successfully tested over 5 cycles using 0.1 M thiourea as the eluent, comparing metal sorption and metal sorption at each step ( The imidazol-bearing resin proved very efficient for Pd and Pt recovery from dilute acidic solutions. Sorption capacities reached up to 1 mmol metal g