Quartz, the second most abundant mineral in the earth’s crust, is a gangue mineral in practically every flotation process. Coarse quartz flotation has been a long standing problem in various mineral processing plants to reduce milling cost and increase valuable mineral recovery. Based on this, the effects of nanobubbles (NBs) and hydrodynamic parameters on coarse quartz particle flotation were systematically investigated. Mechanical flotation experiments were carried out using the 7 cm and 9 cm diameter impellers in order to produce different hydrodynamic conditions. 900–1300 rpm impeller speeds were used for the 7 cm diameter impeller and 554–786 rpm for the 9 cm diameter impeller. The results show that the presence of NBs increased the flotation recovery of −425 + 106 μm quartz by up to 21%. For the 7 cm diameter impeller, the maximum flotation recoveries of 86.4% and 98% were obtained in the absence and presence of NBs at Reynolds number (Re) of 81,000 and 66,000, respectively. For the 9 cm diameter impeller, the maximum recoveries of 86.3% and 97.5% were obtained in the absence and presence of NBs at Re of 90,000 and 75,000, respectively. NBs increased the flotation rate constant up to 36%.Flotation is a physico-chemical separation process which has high performance for particles with size of 50–600 μm for coal and 10–100 μm for minerals. Flotation efficiency for particles out of this range decreases sharply To overcome the high detachment of coarse particles from bubbles and provide favorable conditions for coarse particles flotation in mechanical flotation cells, NBs flotation was developed. NBs which are mostly smaller than 1 μm, can be characterized by an inherently high ability of attachment, and a low probability of detachment due to their tiny size, low ascending velocity and rebound velocity from the particle surface Recent studies have shown that the flotation process efficiency can be significantly enhanced using NBs Maoming et al. prepared NBs generation system and applied it to evaluate the effects of NBs on flotation of coarse phosphate, and coal The hydrodynamic parameters of flotation machines play a major role in the flotation process and are related directly to many sub-processes of the flotation such as suspension of particles in the pulp, dispersion of the air into bubbles and the probability of bubble-particle collision, attachment and transport The superficial gas velocity is the volumetric gas flow rate (cm Bubble surface area flux ( The In this research, flotation of coarse quartz particles in the presence and absence of NBs was studied in mechanical flotation cell. Hydrodynamics parameters were measured by changing the impeller speed, air flow rate and impeller diameter, which have important effects on the hydrodynamic index of the pulp. Reynolds number was used to explain the turbulence of the pulp in flotation process. The effect of particle size on the flotation recovery and A high purity representative quartz sample (purity over 99.9%) in three size fractions (−212 + 106 μm, −300 + 212 μm, −425 + 300 μm) was used for flotation experiments. Dodecyl amine with concentration of 50 g/t was used as collector. The flotation experiments were carried out by MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbonyl) frother with concentration of 22.4 mg/L at the natural pH of 8.5 using local tap water. The NBs generation system is shown in Flotation experiments were carried out in a Denver laboratory flotation machine with a 2-liter cell, the feed with 10% solid and at different hydrodynamic variables to assess the impact of NBs on the flotation response of coarse particles. Three different size fractions of −212 + 106 μm, −300 + 212 μm and −425 + 300 μm were combined together before flotation and were used in the experiments in a squared section cell with length and height of 14.2 cm and 19.8 cm. 7 cm and 9 cm diameter impellers were used for pulp agitation. Impeller speeds were 900 rpm, 1000 rpm, 1100 rpm, 1200 rpm and 1300 rpm for the 7 cm diameter impeller and 554 rpm, 604 rpm, 665 rpm, 725 rpm and 786 rpm for the 9 cm diameter impeller. Also, air flow rate was 30 L/h, 60 L/h and 90 L/h. At first, parameters of the air flow rate, impeller speed and impeller diameter were adjusted and then the collector with 2 min conditioning time and frother with 1 min conditioning time, were added into the flotation cell in the presence and absence of NBs. During the experiments with NBs, a portion of NBs was pumped into the flotation cell. The NBs attached on the hydrophobic particles surface and enhanced the flotation recovery. Two methods of frother addition were as following: When NBs is absent, 2 min after collector addition, all the frother dosage was directly added via direction When NBs is present, 2 min after collector addition, 23% of frother dosage was directly added via direction Flotation was started with the opening of the air inlet valve into the flotation cell. The froth was collected after 0.25 min, 0.5 min, 1 min, 1.5 min and 2.5 min. After each experiment, the concentrate and tailings were collected, filtered, dried, and weighted and then the recovery was determined as a function of time. Also, flotation rate constant was calculated. According to In the absence of NBs ( Also, increasing the particle size leads to decrease the ability of air bubbles for carrying the particles. So, coarse quartz particles have shown upper recovery for particle size of −212 + 106 μm and flotation recovery decreased for particle sizes of −300 + 212 μm and −425 + 300 μm, respectively. The result showed that the recovery of NBs flotation ( If NBs are used alone, the ability to collision between particles and NBs increases due to the high surface area of bubbles and coarse particles sizes, but the ability of attachment between particles and bubbles decreases and causes detachment of the particles from the bubbles. But the use of NBs and common air bubbles together causes successful collisions and attachments between particles and bubbles. In other words, NBs with a high surface area collide to coarse bubbles, cover the surface of the coarse particles, act like a secondary collector, cause attachment to coarse bubbles and ultimately increase recovery in all the three fractions.  In the absence of NBs ( In the presence of NBs ( In other words, with the increasing air flow rate from 30 L/h to 90 L/h, The results showed that the recovery of −425 + 106 μm at According to In the absence of NBs ( In the presence of NBs ( In the absence of NBs, when impeller diameter was 9 cm, Also, the For impeller diameter of 9 cm, when the air flow rate increased from 30 L/h to 90 L/h, Results indicate that the recovery of coarse particles in the presence of NBs for the impeller diameters of 9 cm was up to 20% more than in the absence of NBs. The maximum recovery in the absence and presence of NBs were obtained 86.3% and 97.5% for The effect of hydrodynamic parameters on the flotation of coarse quartz particles in the presence and absence of NBs in the laboratory mechanical flotation cell was investigated. The following conclusions were obtained: It was observed that the presence of NBs has the major role on the coarse quartz particles flotation. Experimental evidence In the absence of NBs, the maximum recoveries were obtained 86.4% and 86.3% for In the presence of NBs, the maximum recovery was obtained 98% and 97.5% for In the absence and presence of NBs, with the increasing air flow rate from 30 L/h to 90 L/h,