Cassava foam, another form in which cassava may potentially be used as food, was produced from the pulp of yellow-flesh and white-flesh cassava varieties by whipping with foaming agent (20 %w/w glycerol monostearate colloid, GMS) and stabilizer (sodium carboxymethyl cellulose, NaCMC). Cassava foaming was optimized for concentration of foaming agent, stabilizer and whipping time. Using Box-Behnken experimental design, two responses were measured: foam expansion (FE, %) and foam density (FD, g/mL). White-flesh cassava pulp required 14.97% GMS, 0.51% NaCMC and 2.07 min to give a foam of 52.63% expansion and density of 0.75 g/mL. Yellow-flesh cassava pulp required 14.29% GMS, 0.6% NaCMC and 2 min to yield a foam of 48.25% expansion and density of 0.76 g/mL. Predicted optimal FE and FD were 54.9% and 0.73 g/mL for white-flesh cassava foam, and 49.86% and 0.73 g/mL for yellow-flesh cassava foam, respectively, and are close to validated values. The optimal foams were quite stable after 4 h at 25 ± 2 °C, with low volume collapse of 1.79% and 1.26% for white and yellow cassava foams, respectively. The optimal cassava foams were dried into foam powder. There was significant difference in color values (L*, a*, b*, C*, E*, H*, % W, 
                        
                           Δ
                           
                              
                                 E
                              
                              
                                 y
                                 e
                                 l
                                 l
                                 o
                                 w
                                 −
                                 w
                                 h
                                 i
                                 t
                                 e
                              
                              
                                 ∗
                              
                           
                        
                     ) and total carotenoids content of pulp, optimal foam, and powder of both varieties. Microstructure analysis of the optimal foams revealed round air bubbles and positive skewed distribution of bubble sizes. Foaming and drying significantly reduced total cyanogenic potential in cassava, and may be considered as processing operations capable of reducing cyanogenic potential in cassava considerably.Cassava root is susceptible to rapid post-harvest physiological deterioration. Hence, reducing its postharvest loss and expanding its utilization would be in harmony with the evolving policies to expand its food and non-food uses in some developing countries, such as Nigeria and Ghana. Cassava foam is another form in which cassava can be utilized in food, apart from the traditional food and feed uses of cassava in the form of flour, starch, granules, chips or pellets. In literature, roots, tubers or starchy crops, such as yacon ( Food foams are two-phase systems involving homogeneously dispersed gas in continuous liquid phase ( Recently, yellow-flesh varieties of cassava were bred and disseminated to farmers by research institutes of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) to combat vitamin A deficiency in developing countries of Africa, Latin America and Asia. The yellow cassava variety has been found to have significantly higher total carotenoids content but lower starch content and dry matter than the more conventional white cassava ( To the best of our knowledge, information is not readily available on cassava foaming, using food-grade foaming agent and stabilizer, into foam or powder potentially intended for edible food use or as food ingredient, and not as a packaging material. Optimization of the foaming process and characteristics of cassava foam and foam powder is not yet considered in most literature, especially for the yellow-flesh cassava varieties. In addition, the possible influence of foaming and drying on reduction of cyanogenic glucosides in cassava has not been considered in most research. The objectives of this work was to develop cassava foam, optimize the process variables for foaming and validation of the optimal foaming variables by response surface method. The effects of foaming and drying on color, total carotenoids content, microstructure and cyanogenic glucosides potential of cassava pulp, foam and foam powder will also be investigated. Waxed white-flesh cassava from Costa Rica was purchased from a supermarket in Stuttgart, Germany. Fresh yellow-flesh cassava (TMS-IBA 011368) was harvested from cassava breeding unit of the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, IITA, Ibadan, Nigeria. They were waxed and transported to the University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, in rigid paperboard boxes with several holes for aeration. Both were stored briefly at 3 °C. The foaming agent used was a 20% w/w glycerol monostearate, GMS (MRS Scientific Ltd., Essex, UK) colloid which was prepared fresh as described in literature ( The cassava roots were peeled into potassium metabisulphite (K Foaming experiment was conducted according to a Box-Behnken experiment design with three independent variables: concentration of GMS (5, 10, 15%), concentration of NaCMC (0.2, 0.4, 0.6%) and whipping time (2, 4, 6 min). Two responses were considered: FE and FD. Main and interaction effects of independent variables on responses, and 3-dimension response surfaces were developed using Design expert Optimal foam was collected and spread uniformly to be dried in pans (dimension 250 mm × 155 mm x 10 mm) at 55 °C in a thermostatically-controlled air oven (Heraeus, Thermo Scientific, Germany) for about 24 h, when the weight change was no longer apparent. Drying at a mild temperature (55 °C) was to relatively preserve the starch granules from complete gelatinization, to considerably retain total carotenoids (for yellow cassava) and reserve some activity of linamarase for detoxification during drying. Cassava starch has been found to gelatinize at onset of 60.11 °C ( Color was determined using a colorimeter (Chromameter CR 410 Konica Minolta, Sensing Inc., Japan) having optical sensor lens at 2° observer, illuminated by D65 light and calibrated with a standard white tile (Y = 93.0, x = 0.3167, y = 0.3338). Eighteen measurements of L Total carotenoids content (μg/g) of cassava pulp, foam and powder was determined by method described by ( Microstructure of freshly prepared cassava pulp and optimal cassava foam was captured using a microscope (Carl Zeiss Primovert, Carl Zeiss Microimaging GMBH, Germany) with integrated digital camera (ProgRes CT3). A dedicated software (ProgRes Capture Pro 2.8., JENOPTIC optical systems, Germany) was used to analyze air bubbles size. Multiple measurements (80) were recorded per sample. Microstructure of cassava foam powder was captured using a remission scanning electron microscope (JSM-IT 100, JEOL GmbH, Freising, Germany) after gluing the powder to carbon discs on the end of gold-plated cylinder, and placed on the sample platform. The system was evacuated, and electrons were beamed at accelerating voltage of about 2.5 kV and a probe current of 17 mA. Images were displayed and captured digitally on an interface of a dedicated software (In Touch Scope, version 1.090, JEOL Technics Ltd., Freising, Germany). Cyanogenic glucosides are toxic compounds found in cassava which renders it unsafe to consume without proper processing. An insight into the effect of foaming and drying on reduction of cyanogenic potential of cassava was investigated. A slightly modified picrate paper kit method described by Data were presented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analyses was conducted to separate means by Duncan ad hoc test using SPSS 16.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA). Optimization, effects of variables, and response surface was developed using Design expert 6.0.6. Quality of response surface model was statistically assessed by high values of coefficient of determination (R The total soluble solids of white and yellow cassava pulp was similar (1.5 ± 0.3 The quadratic models generated were significant (P = 0.0025–0.0072) and had non-significant lack of fit (P = 0.1608). The models had high fit quality (R For color, white cassava pulp, optimal foam and foam powder had significantly higher L As expected, white cassava pulp, optimal foam, and powder had significantly lower TCC than those of yellow cassava. White cassava pulp, optimal foam, and powder had no significant difference in TCC between each other, but TCC of yellow cassava pulp was significantly higher than for its optimal foam and TCC of the optimal foam was also considerably higher than for the powder. Average air bubble size ( Total cyanogenic potential ( Foaming of cassava pulp into cassava foam significantly reduced density due to air entrapment. Low density of foams is an important requirement for stability in food-use and production of food powders by drying. The response surface model equations satisfactorily predicted foam properties and is instrumental in selecting optimized conditions required for foaming. Foam collapse (FC) was not considered as one of the dependent variables because some had values of zero (0), which when optimised by the response surface method (RSM) regression alongside FE and FD, yielded negative optimum prediction values which is not reasonable within the range of factors considered. Increasing GMS concentration generally led to significant increase in FE and insignificant reduction in FD of yellow cassava foams. For instance, increasing GMS concentration from 5% to 15% at fixed NaCMC concentration of 0.4% and fixed time of 4 min, resulted in increased expansion of yellow cassava foam from 25.1% to 41.9%, with corresponding reduction in FD from 0.812 g/mL to 0.79 g/mL. However, increasing GMS concentration from 5% to 15% under similar conditions, resulted in increased expansion of white cassava foam from 30.1% to 38.2%, and increased density from 0.799 g/mL to 0.826 g/mL respectively. Similar reports have been made for concentrated yacon juice ( Color perception is important in consumer preference for most foods. White cassava pulp, optimal foam, and foam powder were significantly light in color than the pulp, optimal foam and foam powder from yellow cassava. Generally, irrespective of variety, the foam powders were significantly light in color than optimal foams, which are in turn, light in color than pulps. This could be due to whitening resulting from whipping with the cream-white GMS colloid or moisture loss. As expected, the yellowness of the pulp, foam, and powder from yellow-flesh cassava was significantly higher than for white-flesh cassava. The reduction of intensity of yellowness of yellow-flesh cassava variety during processing from pulp to foam, and then to powder, could have resulted from progressive loss in TCC during the whipping and drying stages ( Cassava pulp consisted mostly of starch granules and apparently had few or no air bubble entrapped until whipped with GMS and NaCMC. For stable foam formation, addition of foaming agent and stabilizer is required ( The morphology of cassava foam powder is shown in The cyanogenic potential of cassava and its products is important in its safe consumption as food. The reduction in total cyanogens after foaming and drying may have been due to release of endogenous linamarase from tissue matrices to hydrolyse linamarine during pulping and whipping before drying. Hence, foaming of cassava could be a useful detoxification operation prior to drying. However, further processing may be considered for the pulp before foaming and drying in attaining more reduction in cyanogenic potential to safe limits (<10 μg/g) set by In finding other pathways for utilizing cassava, foam powders were produced from two varieties of the crop by optimizing the foaming process conditions, such as the concentrations of foaming agent and stabilizer, and the whipping time. Response surface models adequately estimated foam properties, allowing the prediction of optimal conditions for making foams from cassava pulp. The optimal foams were stable, due to low tendency to collapse, therefore, making them possible to be dried into powder. Foams from white and yellow cassava varieties differ in terms of microstructure, total carotenoids content, color and cyanogenic toxicity. Cassava foam powder may be useful in foam- or cream-based foods as ingredient to functionally substitute animal-based ingredients in vegetarian diets if varieties with low total cyanogenic glucosides are used or suitable additional processing is conducted to reduce the total cyanogenic glucosides to acceptable limits. Studies on rheological properties, functional properties, drying kinetics and actual food use of cassava foam or foam powder are recommended. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was funded under the