The extraction of copper from black shales associated with fine-grained and complex base metal ore mineralization traditionally using pyrometallurgy becomes increasingly uneconomic, because one of the most significant cost factors is the high energy consumption. Thus, energy-saving alternative mineral processing methods are to be considered to improve the metal recovery route economically and environmentally. In this study, a milled, organic carbon-rich black shale ore from the Sangerhausen mining district in central Germany has been pre-treated by ethanol prior to the froth flotation tests to gain a copper concentrate marked by an increased copper content and more efficient copper recovery. The flotation product (15.3% Cu) was used for biohydrometallurgically batch tests to extract copper and associated trace metals. SEM-based automated particle analyses on the comminuted black shale ore, flotation product as well as tailings, bioleaching residues and abiotic leaching residues were used to trace the recovery performance particularly of copper sulfides. The black shale ore is characterized by high contents of bornite (2.8 wt%) and chalcopyrite (1.3 wt%) associated with a high grade of pyrite (5.8 wt%). Considerable enrichments were achieved in the flotation product for bornite (20.7 wt%) and chalcopyrite (10.3 wt%) as well as for galena and sphalerite, while pyrite was successfully depressed in the tailings. Compared to abiotic chemical leaching, the bioleaching test of the bornite- and chalcopyrite-rich copper concentrate was particular efficient in the recovery of bornite and chalcocite. However, chalcopyrite was leached insufficiently in both, abiotic and microbial leaching tests, and presents a common component in the residues.The recovery of copper from black shale-hosted ore was extensively practised pyrometallurgically in the former Kupferschiefer mining district of Central Germany and still represents the main copper winning technology of recently mined Polish Kupferschiefer-type ore. Volatile price developments on the metal markets and increasing production cost at currently decreasing copper content in the ore ( However, the flotability of black shale ore is a challenge due to its fine-grained intergrowth of valuable minerals and special carbonaceous and argillaceous composition. With regard to achieve improvements in the recovery of copper by froth flotation, numerous tests were carried out in recent decades. In 1932, As conventional copper extraction via smelting has been extremely energy-consuming, (bio)-hydrometallurgy in combination with electrowinning represents a low-cost and environmental-friendly and energy-saving extractive method to win copper products. Studies on the processing of low-grade Kupferschiefer ore and dump material by bioleaching started in the 1970 s in laboratory and pilot scale percolator experiments to simulate heap bioleaching and has been relaunched recently ( The Permian black shale that represents the base unit of the Central European Zechstein basin is one of the world’s largest sediment-hosted copper deposit ( The black shale from the Sangerhausen mining district used as feed ore in this study is extremely rich in kerogen-type organic matter and marked by a total organic carbon content of 14.2%. It shows a typical layering and is dark anthracite due to the high portion of organic matter. Besides the layered rock fabric, the black shale ore is partly characterized by crosscutting barite and calcite veins containing sulfides as pyrite and chalcopyrite. The main part of the ore mineralization occurs as fine disseminated sulfide particles within the layered rock fabric, which often consists of intimately intergrowths of several sulfides or sulfides with gangue minerals ( A black shale bulk sample from central Germany of about 200 kg was provided by an underground drilling campaign in a ventilation tunnel of the “Roehrig” shaft, part of the Thomas Muentzer Mine in the former Sangerhausen mining district, Germany. 17 drill cores with 10-cm diameter and more than 1 m length of fresh, not oxidized sample material were extracted bedding-parallel and along the lower black shale base from a 15 m wide area of the tunnel. The whole sample material was crushed <3.15 mm and a representative split of 100 kg was milled. The mean Cu-content of the ball mill product is 2.38% (95% CI: 2.34–2.41%) and was analysed on seven subsamples. The comminution was carried out with a primary jaw crusher, cone crushers and finally a screening ball mill, which delivered a comminution product with a final grain size of <100 µm. The milled ore was used to perform flotation tests and generate a copper-rich concentrate. The copper concentrate in turn was utilized for bioleaching batch tests. Black shale ore, flotation product and tailings as well as residues from bioleaching and sterile control tests were investigated in this study. The flotation was carried out with a lab-scale DENVER flotation machine (1.2-liter-cell) with a solid content in the flotation feed of about 30%. The pH value 10 was adjusted with sodium hydroxide, as dispersing agent 150 g/t polyacrylate was added. Dextrin (1500 g/t) was applied to diminish the organic carbon content in the flotation concentrate. The depressing mechanism of dextrin is described by 300 g/t of Xanthate was added as sulfide mineral collector. The applied frother is similar to the one used in commercial copper shale ore flotation. A mixture of alcohol and polyethylene glycol ether (150 g/t) acted as the frother. The duration of each flotation test was five minutes. The flotation tests were carried out once with a pre-treatment with 30% ethanol and once without the pre-treatment stage in advance to the flotation conditioning. The grade-recovery diagram depicted in After the flotation tests the products were filtered, dried at 120 °C and weighed. For the chemical analysis, the samples were ground in a vibrating disc mill for analytical fineness, then a representative split of the samples was subject to aqua regia dissolution and Cu-analysis via ICP-OES and TOC analysis. Bioleaching experiments were conducted in 2L stirred batch bioreactors at 42 °C with 10% (w/v) solids load using a consortium of acidophilic, autotrophic mineral-oxidizing bacteria kept in basal salt medium ( Representative aliquots of the black shale ore, flotation products and tailings as well as residues from bioleaching and sterile control tests were prepared as polished grain mounts. For investigations carried out on a scanning electron microscope (SEM) the grain mounts were carbon-coated. Images to depict mineralogic relationships and grain properties were taken in back scattered electron (BSE) as well as secondary electron (SE) mode. The determination of the mineral distribution in the samples was conducted with the “Feature”-tool, which is part of the “Esprit 2” microanalysis software of the Bruker Quantax EDS System. Suitable areas for the particle analysis were first captured in the BSE-mode and detected particles were grouped into binarization classes according to their grey values in order to separate individual minerals associated with intergrowths. Image filters were used to improve the particle detection. At least 5000 accepted particles with a perimeter of at least 4 µm were measured automatically using an energy-dispersive X-ray detector (Bruker X-Flash 5010, 123 eV) at 20 kV. Particle EDS-spectra were assigned to a specific mineral database adapted to the sample type. Output data were recalculated to weight percent (wt.%) and corrected regarding the total organic carbon (TOC) content. Some minerals in particular gangue-type minerals were grouped according to their chemical similarity, in particular carbonate minerals as well as feldspar and clays. Geochemical data of samples investigated in this study were used to validate the analysed mineral content, in particular for copper sulfides. Therefore, the elemental copper content was recalculated by the stoichiometric portion in related mineral phases and their content as detected by automated mineral distribution analysis. Mineral identification by automated particle analysis was performed by using semi-quantitative EDS-analysis, which is in general an error-prone method. To reduce incorrect particle identifications, definitions of element contents in the specified mineral database were widely defined, which in some analysis might be lead to overlapping definitions. Here, the software helped by weighing minerals in order of their position within the database, so that more probable minerals were preferentially matched with a chemical analysis. However, for example a clear distinction between alkali feldspar and the illite group clay minerals was not feasible and thus, the content of alkali feldspar was largely overemphasized in the analyses. In the EDS-based particle analysis the common interaction volume of the electron beam was 1–5 µm. For sample material which was predominantly fine-grained, EDS-measurements were influenced by several disturbing effects, such as the electron beam interaction of particle rim and resin or simultaneous analysis of minute particles (<5 µm) in the immediate proximity. The black shale ore and its processing products investigated in this study consisted mainly of very fine particles that had either a monomineral composition or complex intergrowths consisting of several minute minerals, reflecting a typical ore texture in Kupferschiefer-type black shales. Thus, EDS-measurements of fine particles could characterize a single mineral phase or a mixture of minerals. To avoid a false classification of minute intergrowths, especially of sulfides and gangue minerals, the matching mineral database needed to be adapted and the particle spectra should be verified. Further, a portion of particles remained unclassified, because of missing assignment of the EDS-spectra to the database. In both cases, a manually input of the user to improve the accuracy of the analysis is indispensable, which represents a time-consuming procedure. Particle analyses carried out on black shale-hosted ore and related flotation product and tailings required a minimum on user input for the above-mentioned analytical issues. Regarding the automated particle analysis of bioleaching as well as abiotic leaching residues, an intervention of the user was an absolute necessity. Especially in bioleaching products of black shale hosted ores, large amounts of particles showed grain sizes of <10 µm. The increased probability that the electron beam hit particle edges resulted in EDS measurements marked by weak detection counts, which lead to incorrect determination of minerals in comparison with the database. Moreover, the fine-grained intergrowth of ore and gangue minerals resulted in a mixed spectrum, which could not clearly be associated with one distinct mineral phase in the database and caused erroneous content of minerals in the sample. The definition of mixed mineral classes in the database could reduce this incorrect assignment. Additionally, mineral identification was also affected by the kind of treatment/processing of samples to be analysed. Especially the usage of acids (hydrochloric acid and/or sulfuric acid) in flotation and bioleaching processes lead to additional chlorine and/or sulfur input that seemed to be adsorbed onto particles and thus interfered with EDS-spectra of particularly very fine particles. Generally, particle EDS-data from bioleaching residues should be revised, because non-reviewed data often contain a strongly overemphasized number of mixed spectra of pyrite and gangue minerals and gypsum and/or anhydrite. The comminution product was analysed in order to determine the distribution of sulfides and gangue-type minerals. Gangue-type minerals comprised mainly feldspar and clay minerals (38.8%), but the black shale ore also consisted of significant portions of carbonates (7.2%) and quartz (21.4%). Besides these rock-forming minerals the black shale was rich in organic matter as indicated by 13.9% of total organic carbon. The copper content that resulted from the distribution of copper sulfides in the black shale ore based on stoichiometrical calculations was 2.4% and equal to the copper content based on the geochemical analysis. The black shale ore was used as feed for froth flotation tests. A particularly strong enrichment in the flotation concentrate was achieved for bornite (20.6%) and chalcopyrite (10.7%), while the content of galena (8.6%), sphalerite (3.2%) and chalcocite (1.7%) showed also a good recovery, but the enrichment of pyrite (7.9%) was comparably low. It is obvious from the distribution of sulfides in the flotation tailings that especially pyrite (12.8%) was depressed by the flotation tests and thus, was accumulated in the tailings. Regarding the distribution of gangue minerals, the tailings contained generally higher concentrations of quartz, carbonates and feldspar-clay minerals, whereas the depression of gangue minerals into the tailings was most efficient for feldspars and clay minerals. SEM-based observations of intergrowths of sulfide minerals showed that the pre-treatment stage evoked a higher liberation of sulfides. In comparison, sulfides in sample material without the pre-treatment were found to be covered by clay minerals. Additionally, an entire separation of the initially high content of organic matter in the black shale ore was achieved by flotation, in which the organic matter was depressed completely in the tailings. The copper content in the geochemical analysis of the concentrate yielded 15.3%, which was lower than calculated based on the distribution of copper sulfides (17.7%). A better agreement between the copper content based on geochemistry (2.1% Cu) and the one calculated from modal mineralogy (2.1% Cu) was observed for the automated mineral distribution analysis of the tailings. The bioleaching experiments were carried out with the copper concentrate produced from Sangerhausen black shale ore. Bornite, chalcopyrite and galena were significantly enriched in the copper concentrate. The copper content of the bioleaching residue based on geochemical analysis was 1.9%, in comparison, the calculated copper content based on modal mineralogy was 2.4%. The residue of the sterile control leaching tests contained 6.8% Cu based on geochemistry and 7.2% Cu based on the mineral distribution. The milled black shale contained particles generally comminuted to a grain size <100 µm. This final grain size was chosen to ensure data comparability to other samples, which were investigated in the frame of a previous project dealing with black shale low-grade ore from the central German Mansfeld mining district ( SEM-observations carried out on the flotation product of the black shale ore indicated that particles were not subjected to alteration caused by chemicals used in the flotation process. The copper concentrate contained sulfide particles predominantly liberated, but also partially locked particles composed of intergrowths of sulfides and gangue minerals ( As depicted in The microcrystalline, porous accretions of lead sulfate around galena particles was a common feature as well in bioleaching as in the sterile control leaching residues ( Chalcopyrite particles remaining in the bioleaching residue showed on the one hand very little indications of alteration, they were partially sharp edged and exhibited smooth surfaces, on the other hand chalcopyrite particles were marked by strong dissolution textures and showed intensely corroded, highly roughened particle surfaces ( In this study, an alternative recovery of copper from a black shale with a complex ore mineralogy was experimentally simulated and characterized using EDS-based automated mineralogy. The comminution product of a black shale ore from the Sangerhausen mining district in central Germany was subjected to an ethanol pre-treatment prior processing via flotation. The pre-treatment of the black shale ore amplified the copper content as well as the copper recovery in the flotation product. Thus, a copper concentrate with 15.3% Cu was produced, in which especially bornite and chalcopyrite were enriched successfully and pyrite was depressed in the tailings. This copper concentrate was utilized as suitable feed for bioleaching tests. The residues of bio- and abiotic chemical leaching showed that chalcocite was completely dissolved in both kinds of leaching tests. Bornite as well as chalcocite were nearly completely dissolved by bioleaching, but not in the residue of the sterile control leaching. Chalcopyrite in the flotation product was hardly dissolved, neither by bioleaching nor chemically. Mineralogical observations revealed the substantial formation of anglesite in the bio- and abiotic leaching tests, but more pronounced in the bioleaching experiments. Further improvement of the bioleaching protocol is required especially for a complete chalcopyrite dissolution as recently reported ( This study was supported by the