Purpose
                  Compare postoperative opioid usage following hemiarthroplasty (HA) and reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) for proximal humerus fracture (PHFx).
               
                  Methods
                  Humana insurance data was reviewed for patients undergoing RTSA or HA for PHFx from 2007 through the first quarter of 2017. The incidence of postoperative opioid usage within 1 year following surgery was collected in 1-month intervals and compared between HA and RTSA patients. Baseline opioid use was also characterized. Logistic regression analysis was utilized to assess risk factors for prolonged postoperative narcotic usage.
               
                  Results
                  Nine hundred fourty-seven HA and 2147 RTSA were performed for PHFx. There was no difference in preoperative opioid use between both groups (RTSA: 12.4%, HA: 11.5%; P = .5). At each monthly postoperative interval, a higher proportion of patients undergoing HA utilized opioids in comparison to RTSA (P < .003 for all comparisons). The rate of postoperative opioid usage declined in both groups with 8.7% and 13.3% of RTSA and HA patients continuing to fill opioid prescriptions at 1-year postoperatively (P < .001). There was a lower proportion of patients using opioids following RTSA compared to baseline (8.7% vs. 12.4%; P< .001); however, there was no difference in narcotic usage at final follow-up in patients treated with HA (13.3% vs. 11.5%; P= .2). HA was a risk factor for prolonged opioid usage following treatment of PHFx (odds ratio = 1.65 [1.39-1.96]; P < .001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Patients undergoing HA for PHFx have a higher incidence of opioid usage up to 1-year postoperatively compared to patients undergoing RTSA for the same diagnosis.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IIIAlthough some proximal humerus fractures (PHFx) may be treated nonoperatively, hemiarthroplasty (HA) has traditionally been used in patients with fractures not amenable to open reduction and internal fixation. However, HA for PHFx is associated with less than optimal functional outcomes, particularly if the tuberosities do not heal. [ The United States is currently in the midst of an opioid crisis as it consumes a significant proportion of global supply of opioids. Opioid dependence imposes a significant financial strain on society; thus, physicians may eventually be held accountable for complications that may arise secondary to opioid abuse. This was a retrospective review of the Humana private payer patient data within the PearlDiver Patient Records Database (Pearl Diver Inc., Fort Wayne, IN, USA) from 2007 through the first quarter of 2017 (2017q1). This database represents more than 20 million patients in the United States, containing data regarding patient demographics, hospitalization details, diagnoses, procedures, and reimbursement. All data can be accessed with Two distinct patient groups were queried: patients who underwent HA (CPT 23470) or RTSA (CPT 23472) for a diagnosis of a PHFx (ICD-9s 812.00, 812.01, 812.02, 812.03, 812.09, 812.10, 812.11, 812.12, 812.13, 812.19, 812.2, 812.3, and ICD-10 S42.2). Those included in this study with the CPT code of 23472 were assumed to undergo RTSA for PHFx instead of total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA) because RTSA is commonly performed for this indication vs. TSA. Patients with a CPT code of 23616 were not included in this investigation as these patients likely underwent concomitant open reduction internal fixation with the arthroplasty. These patients were omitted from this investigation because these patients likely had comminuted fractures that necessitated additional fixation and the type of arthroplasty that was performed could not be elucidated. Patients who underwent RTSA or HA without a diagnosis code for PHFx or for another indication were excluded from this investigation. Those who underwent revision cases were not included in this investigation. Only patients with active records in the database a minimum of 6 months prior to and following surgery were included in this investigation. Patient demographics and relevant co-morbidities for the RTSA and HA groups are provided in Preoperative narcotic usage was defined as the average number of individuals filling at least one narcotic prescription between 4-5 months, 5-6 months, and 6-7 months prior to the date of HA or RTSA. This was chosen to establish an average baseline of the percentage of preoperative narcotic users well prior to surgery. The incidence of postoperative opioid usage as evidenced by new filled opioid prescriptions within one year following operative management was calculated in one-month intervals for each cohort. Statistical analysis was conducted using Microsoft Excel (Microsoft, Seattle, WA, USA). Frequencies and percentages were used to report discrete variables. Chi-square analysis was used to compare pre- and postoperative opioid usage as well as baseline demographics and co-morbidities between RTSA and HA. A binomial logistic regression analysis was used to evaluate whether treatment modality (HA vs. RTSA) was a risk factor for prolonged opioid usage following treatment for PHFx, controlling for demographic and co-morbidity variables. Odds ratios and 95% confidence interval were reported and all tests for statistical significance were performed using 2-tailed hypothesis testing with statistical significance set at A total of 3094 patients (HA: 947, 30.6%; RTSA: 2,147, 59.4%) underwent shoulder arthroplasty for PHFx during the study period. There was no difference in the incidence of preoperative opioid use between both groups (RTSA: 12.2%, HA: 13.1%; When controlling for demographics and co-morbidities, binomial logistic regression analysis demonstrated that HA compared to RTSA was a risk factor for prolonged opioid usage for a diagnosis of PHFx (odds ratio = 1.65 [1.39-1.96]; In the present investigation, patients who underwent HA for PHFx were found to have a higher rate of narcotic usage postoperatively compared to patients who underwent RTSA for the same diagnosis. The 2 groups had a similar demographic profile and had similar rates of baseline narcotic usage. Additionally, HA was found to be a risk factor for prolonged opioid usage following arthroplasty for treatment of PHFx in multivariate analysis. With an increased emphasis on shared decision making, Following shoulder arthroplasty for fracture, preoperative opioid use, age less than 60 years, multiple opioid prescriptions, mood disorders, and chronic pain disorders were identified as risk factors for chronic postoperative opioid use.[ It has previously been described that total hip arthroplasty portends a lower risk of reoperation and higher hip function than HA due to femoral neck fracture. Since the use of shoulder arthroplasty to treat PHFx in lieu of open reduction internal fixation has increased, [ The results of this investigation must be interpreted within the context of the study's limitations. The quality of the data relies on appropriate coding of procedures and prescriptions by physicians and their staff. Therefore, any miscoding or noncoding are a potential source of error. This investigation queried data from a private-payer database; however, this may not be representative of the total population. Prolonged postoperative opioid usage is influenced by a multitude of factors that are unable to be assessed from the database, such as cultural patterns, addictive behaviors, mental health, and physician prescribing patterns. Additionally, the authors queried the database using the CPT code 23472, which codes for RTSA and total shoulder arthroplasty. The authors assumed that patients included in this investigation underwent RTSA. This represents a limitation as patients who underwent total shoulder arthroplasty would have been included in this investigation. Analysis comparing opioid usage in open vs. closed injuries was not performed. This may be an interesting comparison and additional research may be targeted to comparing opioid usage in patients with significant soft tissue injury. Furthermore, concomitant osteoarthritis or rotator cuff arthropathy were not investigated as risk factors for continued postoperative opioid usage. Although there was no difference in baseline opioid usage and treatment likely addressed other concomitant pathology, it is possible that additional pathologies may contribute to prolonged opioid usage. The chronicity of the injury was also not determined, which may influence opioid dependence postoperatively. Therefore, patients who were failed initial nonoperative treatment and later underwent operative management were included in this investigation. However, patients who received revision procedures were excluded from this analysis. The PearlDiver database records the prescriptions that were filled by the patient; however, he exact dose and number of pills in each filled prescription was unable to be identified. Morphine-equivalent dose was unable to be calculated; thus, patients with a small morphine equivalent dose were treated equally to those with larger morphine requirements. Furthermore, it was unable to be confirmed that patients consumed the medications that were prescribed. Lastly, information regarding the prescriber or the reason for the prescription was unable to be identified. Other databases, such as the SPARCS database, could be used to assess the impact of prescriber variables in opioid dependence following shoulder arthroplasty. Patients undergoing HA for PHFx have a higher incidence of opioid usage up to 1-year postoperatively compared to patients undergoing RTSA for the same diagnosis. HA as a treatment for PHFx was identified as a risk factor for prolonged opioid use postoperatively compared to RTSA. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.