Aiming at a novel application of biomass, coupled biomass gasification and iron ore reduction was investigated and demonstrated in this work through pyrolysis/gasification of iron ore–lignin pellets (ILP) at 1093–1333 K. The solid, liquid and gaseous products were analyzed by XRD, SEM, chemical analysis, GC-MS, GC and TG-FTIR. Direct reduction iron (DRI) and gaseous products (CO, H2 and CH4) were produced in the process. The metallization degree of the iron ore and CO content of the gaseous products increased with increasing the reaction temperature, as expected. The gas yield from the experiments with ILP was much higher than that from the tests with lignin pellets (LP) at 1173–1333 K, owing mainly to the iron ore reduction producing a larger amount of CO. Whereas, the yields of oil and char in the ILP reduction process were found to be much lower than those from the tests with lignin alone, due to the conversion of oil and char products into gaseous products catalyzed by the iron oxide and metallic iron. Thus, in pyrolysis/gasification of ILP the presence of lignin provided reducing agents for reduction of iron oxide, whereas the presence of iron oxide/metallic iron provided an oxidant/catalyst for biomass gasification.Biomass is one of the most important energy sources in near future amongst the renewable energies. Biomass can be converted into various energy and solid, liquid and gaseous fuel products via three main processes, i.e., physical conversion, chemical or thermochemical conversion, and biochemical conversion On the other hand, with increased concerns over greenhouse gas emissions and depletion of fossil energy, seeking alternative energy sources is an efficacious way to address these problems fundamentally for iron and steel industry At present, the gasification agents for biomass gasification are oxygen (air, oxygen-enriched air and pure oxygen) The biomass materials used in the experiments were organosolv lignin, supplied by a company in British Columbia, Canada, and derived from mixture of softwood and hardwood. Iron ore powder was provided by an iron ore plant in Hebei province, China. The chemical compositions of the lignin and iron ore are given in In this work, iron ore–lignin pellets (ILP) were made using a cold press with mixtures of organosolv lignin powder and iron oxide powder under a uniaxial pressure of 20 MPa in a tablet mold (20 mm inner diameter and 50 mm high). In this work, the mass ratio between organosolv lignin powder and iron oxide powder in ILP was maintained at 1:2 (wt/wt), unless specified otherwise. Lignin pellets (LP) with lignin powder only were also prepared by the same method as that for making ILP. In all tests with either ILP or LP, the amount of lignin used was ensured the same. The pyrolysis/gasification experiments of ILP and LP were carried on the experimental apparatus schematically shown in After the test, the solid residue was taken out of the basket, and the oil product formed by pyrolysis/gasification of the lignin, condensing on the inner wall of the reactor outlet and gas sampling lines, was washed using acetone, and kept for further analysis. To ensure reproducibility of the test results, each test was repeated for three times, and the relative errors for the product yields were controlled to be within 10%. If the relative errors were bigger than 10%, one more repetition test would be conducted. For LP, the yield ( Similarly for ILP, the yield ( The metallization and reduction degrees of iron ore were determined by chemical analysis in accordance to the ISO 11258 standard following the procedure given in Ref. The residue solid samples obtained from the ILP after reduction was characterized by XRD on a Mac M21X powder diffractometer, and the microstructure characterization of the residue solid samples was done on an EVO18 Special Edition (Carl Zeiss, Germany) Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) operating at 25 kV. The energy spectra (EDS) for some points in the ILP samples were collected during the SEM analysis to reveal the atomic compositions of the samples. The composition of the obtained crude bio-oil was analyzed by gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (GC-MS) (Agilent Technologies, 5977A MSD with a SHRXI-5MS column: 30 m × 250 mm × 0.25 μm). Helium was used as the carrier gas and the GC oven temperature program was set as follows: hold at 85 °C for 2 min, heated to 280 °C at a heating rate of 20 °C/min, then hold for 5 min. The compounds in the crude bio-oil were identified with the NIST library (updated in 2011). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out on a Perkin Elmer (Pyris 1 TGA) instrument coupled with a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FT-IR). The lignin or lignin-iron ore mixture (1:2 wt/wt) with particles size <0.425 mm (20 mesh) was heated at a heating rate of 50 K/min from 293 K to 1373 K under nitrogen atmosphere (20 mL/min). FT-IR was performed online to qualitatively determine the composition of the gas emitted from the TGA process in the wave number range of 4000–500 cm The yields of gaseous product (Gas), char and liquid product (Oil including water) from the reactions with ILP and LP samples are shown in With LP, the yields of three products did not vary too much with the increases of temperature, because the operating temperatures in this work are already much higher than common pyrolysis temperatures (673–973 K) The compositions of the gas products from the experiments with ILP and LP are shown in The GC-MS chromatograms of the oils obtained from the experiments with ILP and LP are comparatively illustrated in  To better understand the morphology of metallic iron and lignin after the reduction, the ILP and LP samples after reduction at 1423 K and 1093 K were studied by SEM and EDS analyses. It should be noted that one special experiment was carried on 1423 K with ILP aiming to prepare reduced ILP sample only for SEM measurement. With the ILP sample at 1333 K, however, many powder falling off from the polishing surface of ILP sample, making the surface not conducive to SEM observation. Thus, to facilitate observation, the ILP sample after reduction at 1423 K was prepared and used for SEM analyses. The morphology of lignin-derived char residue is shown in To reveal the degree of reduction of iron ore by lignin, solid residues of ILP after reaction at different temperatures were analyzed by chemical titration, and the results are shown in As shown in In order to investigate the roles of lignin in the reduction of iron oxide, lignin alone and lignin-iron ore mixture were studied by TGA experiments. A same amount of lignin was used in these experiments. The TGA and DTG (derivative thermogravimetric analysis) curves of these samples are shown in The evolved gas from the TGA experiments were online analyzed by FTIR, and the FTIR spectra of the gases at various temperatures are displayed in The relative amounts of CO In our previous studies on reduction of iron ore by hydrogen, the reduction started at around 600 K and the maximum reaction rate was observed at about 830 K Zhao et al. The positive results from this study show great promise of application of lignin in iron and steel making industry as a reducing agent for DRI production. Apart from lignin, other kinds of biomass have also been investigated and demonstrated promise to be as reducing agents for iron ores in our previous work In the proposed CBGIOR process, the presence of biomass (lignin) supplies carbon and hydrogen-containing reducing agents by pyrolysis/gasification for iron ore reduction, whereas the iron oxide could provide oxidant and reduced iron as a catalyst to promote biomass gasification, via the following reactions: The overall reaction: Firstly, H Compared with conventional biomass gasification processes and ironmaking processes, the CIORBG process has several advantages, e.g., (1) it integrates biomass pyrolysis/gasification and iron ore reduction in a synergistic way, co-generating syngas of a high calorific value (containing CO, H Coupled biomass gasification and iron ore reduction was investigated and demonstrated in this work through pyrolysis/gasification of ILP at 1093–1333 K. The solid (char), oil and gas products were analyzed by XRD, SEM, chemical analysis, GC-MS, Micro-GC and TG-FTIR. Direct reduction iron (DRI) was produced in the process. The reduction and metallization degrees of iron ore increased with increasing the reaction temperature as expected, reaching the maximum values (86.3% and 91.3%, respectively) at 1333 K. The gas yields in the experiments with ILP were much higher than those with LP at 1173–1333 K, owing to the much greater amount of CO formed in reduction of iron ore by lignin (carbon). Whereas, the bio-oil yields in pyrolysis/gasification of LP were much higher than those in pyrolysis/gasification of ILP, suggesting that the presence of iron ore or metallic iron could catalyze gasification of the oil into gaseous products. It was found that in the pyrolysis/gasification of ILP, the iron ore could be reduced by lignin-derived hydrogen first, then by CO and carbon. Meanwhile, during the pyrolysis/gasification of ILP, the iron ore or metallic iron could act as an oxidant/catalyst to promote biomass gasification. Based on the positive results from this study, a novel conceptual process, i.e., coupled biomass gasification and iron ore reduction (CBGIOR) process was proposed. The authors would like to acknowledge the funding from BioFuelNet Canada, a Network of Centres of Excellence, NSERC through the Discovery Grants, the NSERC/FPInnovations Industrial Research Chair in Forest Biorefinery and