Since, cobalt, zinc, mercury and lead ions are high toxic heavy metals; this work aims to investigate the efficiency of eggshell as a low cost sorbent for their ions from aqueous solution. Adsorption of heavy metals on surfaces of eggshell obeyed second order kinetics. Adsorption isotherm belonged to Freundlich model and displayed multilayer adsorption. The maximum adsorption capacity was estimated as 204, 153, 121 and 98 mg/g for Co3+, Zn2+, Hg2+ and Pb2+ respectively. The values of free energy of adsorption evidenced the physical adsorption occurrence. It is demonstrated that eggshell, as an industrial waste, was efficiently used as an adsorbent for wastewater treatment. Eggshells powder removed efficiently heavy metal ions from a tannery wastewater and removal efficiency reached up to 99%.Water pollution, resulted from increasing elevated inhabitants and industry, is a widespread confront to governments. It poses a risk to plants, animals, humans and consequently health. Tannery, plating, painting, fertilizer, batteries, and pesticides are the major water pollution sources The sorption system is utilized extensively to dispose of heavy metals from simulated wastewater. Active charcoal is conventionally applied as adsorbent. Although, it is industrial widespread in treating wastewater, it remained as high-priced sorbent This work aims to investigate the efficiency of eggshells, an industrial waste material, as an adsorbent for wastewater treatment. The eggshell possesses many advantages such as low price and its application without special preparation except pulverization. The Eggshells (EG) sample of 1 kg was supplied by Bakery and confectionery factory. It is ground to very fine size using an agate ball mill to 100% less than 20 µm. Reducing size aimed to provide a high surface area and a uniform powder. Four toxic metal ions (Co The percent removal of metal ions is estimated as follows The pH holds a serious function in the efficiency of ions removal. It has influenced the charged surface of the absorber, the behavior effective locations at the adsorbent surface and the chemistry of adsorbed ions in the aqueous medium. It affects the distribution of the surface charge of adsorbent that can change Ions removal increases with time and attains saturation after 120 min, The kinetic mechanisms were analyzed using the following kinetic: Pseudo-1st-order eqn. Pseudo-2nd-order eqn. Plotting of log ( High regression coefficient values (R This model states that adsorption occurs through the transfer of ions from an aqueous solution to a solid’s surface. It is assumed that the step of rate limiting may be chemical adsorption, which may be occurred through electron sharing between ions and adsorbent. It is stated that, adsorption is proportional to t Where; Initial ions concentration, in aqueous solutions, holds an outstanding impact on the process of adsorption. It shows that increasing initial concentration led to increasing ions loading of adsorption, They could be defined as an equilibrium relationship between concentrations of different adsorbed metal ions. Langmuir and Freundlich models were utilized for investigating adsorption equilibrium between ions in solution and eggshell. Langmuir model needs mono layer coverage on the adsorbent surface for its applicability The equation of Langmuir isotherm could be stated as follows: The Freundlich isotherm is stated as following Where, q On comparing the experimental isotherms with the theoretical isotherm models, Increasing temperature improved adsorption process, At high temperatures, the energy of the system makes the attachment of metal ions on the surface of Egg shell powder easier, The Van’t Hoff equation is used to calculate the changes of enthalpy (ΔH°), entropy (ΔS°) and free energy (ΔG°) for adsorption process: Where; K k From linear fitting of ln K The ΔH° values are positive, so it proposes an endothermic reaction with values lower than (40 kJ/mol) which indicates a physically controlled process. Positive ΔS° values display an enhancement of randomness, within adsorption, at a solid–liquid interface. This suggested that high temperatures are more favorable for adsorption, Values of ΔG° are negative at all temperature degrees, The maximum adsorption capacity was estimated as 204, 153, 121 and 98 mg/g for Co A real wastewater from a tannery workshop is employed for application. Treatment is accomplished with the addition of eggshells powder to wastewater after adjusting pH at 6 and 60 °C for 1 hr. Investigation of metal ions adsorption by eggshell displayed that maximum removal efficiency is achieved at pH 6. The order of adsorption is Co The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.