Mechanical activation of inorganic materials leads to specific changes of their chemical and physical properties. Grinding, as one way of mechanical activation, is a widely used method for obtaining highly dispersed systems, and it could be performed in various types of mills (planetary, centrifugal, vibro-mill, etc.). The development of advanced materials is, therefore, dependent not only on the investigated material, but on characteristics of a device as well. Polycrystalline zinc stannate spinel, Zn2SnO4, is a material used for combustible gases and humidity detection, photoelectrochemical applications, coatings, etc. The subject of this work is the influence of mechanical activation on solid state chemical reaction, e.g. the formation of porous zinc stannate ceramics during different thermal treatments of compacts obtained from ZnO and SnO2 powder mixtures mechanically activated in a high energy vibro-mill. X-ray diffraction analysis, scanning electron microscopy and non-isothermal dilatometric measurements were performed in order to investigate spinel formation.Zinc oxide (ZnO) and tin oxide (SnO Only a small number of investigations have been performed on this subject so far. Hashemi Mechanical activation by grinding, as a method for modifying the physico-chemical properties of dispersed materials, is often used in powder technology. Reaction sintering is a process between two or more phases (active powders) that results in the formation of a new phase by a solid state reaction. Mixtures of ZnO and SnO Previous investigations of the mechanical activation effects on the sintering process showed an intensification of both the sintering process and solid state reaction with prolonged grinding time. To provide informations about the influence of activation on solid state reaction, XRD analysis was performed in order to analyse changes of phase composition. Analysis of dilatometric measurements provided more important informations about the sintering process and, in this case, also about solid state reactions. The influence of activation time on relative shrinkage of ZnO–SnO The structure of a ceramic-based sensor material should be porous. Sensor sensitivity and response time are determined by the material itself (composition, structure), preparation method and sintering conditions. Since the control of microstructure plays a significant role in the stability and reliability of sensor-based materials, The evolution of microstructure during sintering with respect to the time of activation is presented in Based on the analysis presented in this work, porous zinc stannate spinel formation could be performed through the following stages: mechanical activation ( The synthesis of polycrystalline zinc stannate by a solid state reaction and the influence of mechanical activation on its formation were studied in this work. It was established that zinc stannate reaction rate could be enhanced by prolonged grinding, i.e. time of activation. It was shown that the increase of the activation time significantly modifies the sintering behavior of the examined ZnO–SnO This work was financially supported by the Republic of Serbia Science Foundation through the project “Prognosis of materials properties from the viewpoint of the synthesis–structure-properties relationship”. The authors would like to thank Professor Dr. Ljiljana Živković for performing scanning electron microscopy analysis.