The kinetics of the oxidation of iron(II) in 4M sodium chloride solutions has been studied in order to resolve differences in the rates and rate equations from previously published studies. It has been confirmed that the rate is second order in iron(II) and first order in dissolved oxygen. The presence of trace concentrations of copper in the iron(II) solutions and catalysis by platinum metal used to monitor the solution potentials in previous studies have been experimentally identified as points of difference. The rates of oxidation of iron(II) and copper(I) by peroxide under similar conditions have been studied and the rate equations shown to be first order in both metal ion and peroxide. It is shown that peroxide is not a detectable intermediate in the reduction of oxygen by iron(II). Comparison with published data for the oxidation of copper(I) and that of iron(II) by oxygen in the presence of strongly complexing anions for iron(III) suggests that both outer-sphere and inner-sphere mechanisms are involved in the oxidation of iron(II) depending on the equilibrium for the transfer of the first electron to oxygen. This interpretation is supported by thermodynamic calculations and published kinetic data for the oxidation of iron(II) and copper(I) by the perhydroxyl radical.The kinetics of the reaction between iron(II) and dissolved oxygen in acidic chloride solutions have previously been studied by several authors ( There are also significant differences in the observed rates of the reaction The rate of the oxidation of iron(II) by dissolved oxygen (DO) was measured using a YSI model 5301 biological oxygen probe to measure the dissolved oxygen concentration. 5 Electrochemical measurements were used to monitor the rate of oxidation of iron(II) by peroxide and also to investigate catalysis by platinum of the oxidation of iron(II) by oxygen. The experiments were carried out using a thermostatted standard three-electrode system with rotating working platinum electrodes. Potentials and currents were measured and controlled by a Solartron potentiostat operated with corrosion measurement software. The silver/silver chloride (3 The rate of oxidation of iron(II) and copper(I) by peroxide was studied by monitoring the limiting current due to oxidation of iron(II) or copper(I) at a rotating (1500 Electrochemical measurements on the oxidation of iron(II) by oxygen were carried out using the following procedure. 50  The pseudo-first-order rate constants (k It is obvious that the rate is not 1st-order in iron(II) and a plot of k Two experiments were conducted with an initial iron(II) concentration of 0.05 Thus, one can write for the oxidation of iron(II) under these conditions Several additional experiments were conducted in which small amounts of copper(II) ions were initially added. The rate was found to increase even at low concentrations as shown in Given that the reagents used (particularly the iron(II) chloride) contained traces of copper, the value of 0.193 with the relatively rapid reduction of oxygen by copper(I). Thus, one source of variability in the rates of oxidation of iron(II) observed in the various studies is the variable (and unknown) concentrations of copper ions in the reagents used. A single long-term experiment over several months was conducted in which the iron(II) concentration (initially 0.05 It is not possible to directly compare published rate constants because of the different assumed reaction orders for iron(II). However, the overall 2nd order rate constant (k) for those publications that assumed 1st order in iron(II) can be compared with the product [Fe(II)]k The rate constants and reaction order for iron(II) obtained by Colborn compare favourably with those obtained in the present study. However, the rate constants obtained by Boubakis at low iron(II) concentrations are significantly greater (50 times) than those calculated using the rate constant obtained in the present study. At the higher iron(II) concentration of 250 As suggested above, a possible reason for the difference in the reaction order with respect to iron(II) and the higher rates measured at low concentrations of iron(II) in studies that used the potential of a platinum electrode as a means of following the extent of reaction is catalysis of the reaction by the platinum surface. Such catalysis has been observed in many redox reactions ( Thus, the equilibrium potential of the iron(II)/iron(III) couple in the absence of dissolved oxygen of 0.50 The above estimated rate of 4 These electrochemical experiments have served to confirm that catalysis of the oxidation of iron(II) by oxygen occurs on a platinum surface. Such catalysis for this reaction has been observed on other conducting surfaces such as activated carbon ( The formation of peroxide as an intermediate in the reduction of oxygen by various metal ions is well known and the kinetics of the oxidation of copper(I) ions by peroxide has been previously studied in dilute chloride solutions below 1 Plots of ln(i The constant values for k It is apparent that the effect of increasing chloride concentration on the rate is relatively small and approximately linear in the range studied. Previous work has shown that at lower chloride concentrations, the rate increases substantially with increasing chloride concentration. The highlighted entry in Addition of copper(II) ions to the reaction of iron(II) did not result in increased rates unlike oxidation by oxygen for which copper catalysis has been observed ( The following simple rate equation can be used to describe the kinetics of the oxidation of copper(I) at chloride concentrations above 1 with k In the case of iron(II) the equation is Note that these equations have been written using the chloride concentration although the effect observed may be due to ionic strength effects. These results are very similar to those obtained for the oxidation of iron(II) in perchlorate solutions ( The similarity between the results for copper(I) and iron(II) is remarkable with both systems showing the same dependence on chloride concentration and the rate of the oxidation of iron(II) only about 10% lower than that for copper(I). A comparison of the rates of oxidation of copper(I) (in the presence of copper(II)) and iron(II) by both oxygen and peroxide is shown in The rate of oxidation of iron(II) has been shown by previous studies to be 2nd-order in iron(II) and can therefore be compared directly with that for the rate of oxidation of copper(I) under conditions of high [Cu(II)]/[Cu(I)] ratio. The following points should be noted The rate of oxidation of copper(I) by oxygen even in the presence of excess copper(II) is almost 500 times that of iron(II) whereas the corresponding rates of oxidation by peroxide are very similar. The rate of oxidation of iron(II) is not affected by the iron(III) concentration (although this has not been investigated in any detail) whereas that of copper(I) shows an inverse dependence on the copper(II) concentration. The rate of oxidation of iron(II) by oxygen increases strongly with increasing chloride concentration ( The thermodynamics of the iron(III)/iron(II)/oxygen/peroxide system are relevant in any discussion of the mechanisms and rate-determining steps involved in the auto-oxidation of iron(II) in chloride solutions. Thus, As the oxidation of iron(II) and copper(I) both involve one-electron processes, it is likely that reduction of oxygen will occur in a number of single electron steps. This follows from the theory for electron transfer that suggests that complimentary reactions involving single-electron steps are generally more rapid than those involving multiple electron transfers in the rate-determining step. The successive single electron transfer reactions can be summarized as follows for possible outer-sphere reactions of iron(II) (with comparable reactions for copper(I)). Thus, although the overall equilibrium involved in the oxidation of iron(II) by dissolved oxygen is very favourable (potential for the O The transfer of the second electron has favourable thermodynamics as the line for HO In the reduction of peroxide to water (reactions Assuming that reaction The experimental observation that the rate of oxidation of iron(II) by oxygen is second-order in the concentration of iron(II) requires that the second term in the denominator is small compared to the first i.e. at low iron(II) concentrations. Under these conditions, the rate would be inversely proportional to the iron(III) concentration. The second term in Eq. Published data ( In the case of copper(I) oxidation, the comparable value of K An alternative mechanism involving inner-sphere reactions In this case, the following rate equation can be derived after applying the steady-state approximation to the intermediate iron(II)-oxygen adduct and neglecting the term for the reduction of peroxide. For k For k The observed decrease in the rate constant for the second successive run in the same solution during oxidation of both copper(I) and iron(II) by peroxide (Sections In summary, the results of this comparative study have shed some light on the reasons for differences in published reaction orders and rates for the oxidation of iron(II) by oxygen in concentrated chloride solutions. The presence of trace concentrations of copper in the iron(II) solutions and catalysis by platinum metal used to monitor the solution potentials have been identified as points of difference. Comparison with published data for the oxidation of copper(I) and that of iron(II) in the presence of strongly complexing anions for iron(III) suggests that both outer-sphere and inner-sphere mechanisms are involved in the oxidation of iron(II) depending on the equilibrium for the transfer of the first electron to oxygen. This interpretation is supported by thermodynamic calculations and published kinetic data for the oxidation of iron(II) and copper(I) by the perhydroxyl radical.