Up to now, contaminated mineral residues—especially in the particle size range <100 μm—cannot be cleaned effectively by mechanical treatment. Therefore, a new process has been developed by modifying well-known comminution techniques in stirrer mills. Various lab-scale tests have been carried out using mineral oil-contaminated quartz sand fractions as testing material. The cleaning efficiency, which could be obtained using the high-performance attrition process, was considered much better as compared to conventional attrition technologies in every case.
                  The attrition process, now in industrial scale, has been tested by combining grinding attrition, classification and dosing processes, with an integrated dedicated measurement and control system. The resulting high-performance attrition process ensures a constant solids-concentration, which is essential for high-attrition efficiency.The attrition of particle suspensions for the cleaning of particles whose surfaces are contaminated by adsorbed pollutants can be considered as state-of-the-art technology. Applications range from the processing of mineral materials to the cleaning of contaminated residues ( Therefore, it seems to be reasonable to look for a more intensive attrition effect, with higher fines production, based on the existing attrition method with regard to an improved cleaning effect. The attrition process has now been improved and expanded to microparticles by adding small grinding media to the suspension, leading to the new process of grinding-attrition. This process is carried out in agitation mills which are generally known using the comminution technique. This paper summarises experimental results with grinding-attrition on lab-scale and on industrial scale. Within the process of grinding-attrition, abrasion of the particle surfaces is caused by intensive shear and friction stresses between the agitated grinding balls. As seen in A bench-scale grinding attrition apparatus has been developed and constructed. It consists of a special stirrer with control unit and sampling device. The control unit and the sampling device enable evaluation of specific power input (by torque measurement) and of particle size distribution during the attrition process. Speed and torque receptors are connected to the control unit which sends the data to a PC for measurement evaluation. In addition, samples are periodically taken for a particle size analysis. In the case of grinding attrition of contaminated material, in addition, a classification and a chemical analysis were performed. For basic research, quartz sand fractions with diameters 50–150 μm and steel or quartz grinding media of 200–400 μm in diameter were used. Process parameters during grinding attrition were adjusted according to The microscopic photographs in The particle size distribution shown in Power input measurements and particle size analysis of samples taken during grinding-attrition show a correlation between the power input and the amount of generated fine particles (see  Within the field of soil remediation or treatment of fine contaminated mineral residues, this effect can now be used for cleaning particles in the range of > 20 μm by attracting the adsorbed contamination. In order to verify the advantages of the grinding-attrition process in fine soil remediation, lab-scale experiments were carried out with several mineral oil-contaminated sand fractions using both grinding-attrition and common attrition in a 5-l attritor. As can be seen in In order to investigate the efficiency of grinding-attrition in fine soil remediation, further experiments were carried out with an artificially contaminated sand fraction of 63–150 μm. As shown in the right columns of  In attrition, the solids concentration of the suspension can be considered a decisive process parameter. However, the required solids concentrations are hardly reached in practical operation or are subject to a great deal of variation. Having this in mind, high-performance attrition has been developed in such a way that the required solids content can be permanently maintained throughout the entire process phase by continuously monitoring and regulating the consistency of the suspension using dedicated measuring and control equipment. In high-performance attrition, the suspension state is constantly recorded by special torque sensors. The idea behind this was that the actual torque of the drive shaft of the motor could be used as an online indicator for slurry consistency. If the measured signal deviates from the set point, which corresponds to the required solids concentration, additional gravel material is added from a storage tank. A fines-separation stage downstream of the attrition and gravel separation units separates the contaminated micrograin from the gravel fraction, which can be discharged as clean material. The realized technical layout and the cleaning results now are described according to an example for cleaning mineral oil contaminated sand. The corresponding flowsheet for the used high-performance attrition process is shown in The contaminated sand suspension is fed directly (1) from the upstream processing installations into the attrition cell (2), where additional reagents (8) can be added if required. The torque sensor mounted to the attrition cell's drive shaft motor determines the actual suspension consistency and transmits this value to the central control system. If the torque value markedly falls below the programmed set value, coarse material is added from the storage tank (4). The material for additional dosage is obtained by screening attrited-material at 0.5 mm which is recycled and kept in an intermediate storage until required. Depending on the filler level in the storage container, a controlled partition of the coarse material flow is performed. The main part can be discharged directly as cleaned material fraction. The recycling and dosage of the additional gravel material is controlled by a SPC which receives its actual values from the torque sensors at the attrition cell drives. In a hydrocyclone (5), the extremely fine fraction formed during attrition is separated from the <0.5 mm fraction. Depending on the specified processing aims and the cleaning values required, a cut-point between 20 and 80 μm can be necessary. The extremely fine fraction (6), which contains the contaminants in concentrated form, is sent to the process water or sludge preparation, where flocculation and sedimentation are employed to produce a product suitable for dumping. From the underflow (7) of the hydrocyclone, the cleaned sand fraction flows back on the screen (3) and acts there as an additional filter bed. Using this specific technology, it could be shown that high-performance attrition ensures an intensified attrition process which can be reliably controlled. Thus, it was possible to clean mineral oil-contaminated sand with a grain size of −2 mm to +63 μm from an initial contaminant concentration of 1845 mg of mineral oil/kg of dry solids to 300 mg/kg using high-performance attrition. In contrast, conventional attrition resulted in a residual concentration of 840 mg/kg. As for high-performance attrition, in order to achieve this residual contaminant concentration, which corresponds to a degree of decontamination of 84%, only 9.5% by weight had to be discharged as highly contaminated microfraction. A partial stream of the fraction >1 mm was used as recycled gravel fraction which was added to the feed material at a ratio of 50% (mass ratio 1:1). In addition to the improved cleaning effect, the following advantages of high-performance attrition over conventional attrition can be mentioned: the attrition process as such takes place in conventional units; the approved technology of individual units is used; retrofitting of existing attrition plants is possible; and a controlled attrition process ensures the required product quality. Furthermore, the measurement and control devices used for tests have proven to be a reliable system leading to a constant slurry concentration and therefore ensuring a high-grade cleaning result throughout the whole testing period. Grinding-attrition can successfully be used for abrading contaminated particle surfaces in the size range of <150 μm, without producing any particle fragments. Under defined process conditions, about 10–20% of fines is generated in the particle size range of 0.5 to 5 μm. This process, for example, can be effectively used now for decontamination of fine material residues contaminated with hydrocarbons or adsorbed heavy metals. Depending on the base material, the attrition cleaning of mineral residual and raw materials can provide good results with high-performance attrition. This method works based on a systematic intensification of the usually known attrition processes. Hereby, high-performance attrition offers the advantage of retrofitting to existing plants and a reliable and well-tested process technology. The cleaning results show that attrition processes are able to provide cleaning efficiencies, which are adequate in many applications. Moreover, costs can be kept low due to the relatively simple process equipment required.