A two-year study was conducted to explore summer development of macroalgae and their total phosphorus and nitrogen content at three stations in a broad and clear French carbonate river. Water discharge, temperature and insolation, each with a different time lag, as well as substrates and nutrients were examined in order to explain macroalgal biomass variability. Twenty-four macroalgae genera were recorded with Spirogyra, Cladophora, Vaucheria and Oedogonium as abundant. Through redundancy analysis the macroalgal community composition exhibited significant differences, between the sampling sites and also from one year to the next. Water discharge (time-lag=5 days) and temperature (time-lag=20 days) both significantly explained macroalgal biomass variability, highlighting differences in the time lag of the macroalgal community's ecological response to environmental changes. Spatial segregation was observed within the wide riverbed due to habitat variability, allowing co-occurrence in the development of ecologically different taxa within each sampling site. The high nitrate concentrations as compared with the particular low phosphorus concentrations led to especially high DIN/SRP ratios (248±103, n
                     =18). The N/P ratios in algal tissues were high (25±16, n
                     =26) and indicated P-limitation. The differences in DIN/SRP and N/P ratios suggest additional nutrient sources than open water such as groundwater inputs.Among the ecological assessments of river system health in current environmental policy, benthic macroalgal blooms as a cause of environmental degradation remain poorly understood ( The Lower Ain River (France) suffered intensive grayling ( The Ain River is a large tributary of the Rhône about 200 In April 2008, the morphological facies of the 53 Due to the high variability in macroalgae spatial development within sampling sites, and because identification in the field was not possible for some genera, a stratified protocol was developed using algal recovery intensity (%) according to the guide from the Macrophyte Biological Index for Rivers ( For each sampling point, current velocity, depth and substrate type were reported. To compare genera-specific affinities toward depth and current velocities, and so as to overcome the effect of both sampling site specificities (e.g. current depth) and hydrology effects, the sampling of depth and current velocity were normalized via the maximal depth or current velocity depth within each sampling site. Water samples were collected before 8 a.m. to prevent nutrient uptake by macroalgae. Possible diel variations in nutrient concentrations due to discharge pulses from Allement Dam were assessed during a night-time pulse (August 6–7, 2009) where the discharge temporally increased up to 100 Both spatial and temporal variability of the algal biomass were assessed by redundancy analysis (RDA) in which sampling sites and years were considered as category variables. Another RDA was performed to assess environmental effects on algal biomass variability. The environmental data set used was composed of: mean water temperature with a time lag of 5, 10 and 20 days from Electricité de France (EDF) temperature loggers located in the proximity of the sampling sites (i.e. ∼200 mean insolation with a time lag of 5, 10 and 20 days from the Météo France station at Chateau Gaillard (Lon: 5.304, Lat: 45.973), mean discharge with a time lag of 5, 10 and 20 days from the Agence de l’Eau RMC gauging station at Pont d’Ain (station code: V2712010), proportion of gravel at each sampling site, nitrate concentration. The maximal time lag (20 days) was assigned by considering the frequency of the discharge pulses from Allement Dam and the time needed for macroalgae to reach luxuriant development before sloughing interference. The five- and ten-day classes were used to integrate the possible short, middle and long term responses of macroalgae. SRP concentration was not integrated as an explanatory variable in the RDA because a large proportion of SRP concentration (i.e. 44%) was below the limit of quantification of 0.11 Chi-square tests were used to assess the effect of river current velocity and sampling depth on macroalgal genera occurrence. Kruskal-Wallis tests were performed to seek differences among sampling sites and between sampling years for nutrient concentrations in the water, in macroalgal tissues as well as in DIN/SRP and N/P ratios. Kruskall-Wallis tests were also used to find biomass differences between genera. Statistical analysis and graphical displays were performed with R.2.13.1 ( This two-year study included five sampling sessions in 2008 and seven in 2009 for a total of nearly 700 samples analyzed. Twenty-four macroalgae genera were recorded belonging to 9 algal groups that included Chlorophyceae (8 genera), Bacillariophyceae (2 genera), Xanthophyceae (1 genus), Bangiophyceae (1 genus), Klebsormidiophyceae (1 genus), Florideophyceae (3 genera), Zygnematophyceae (3 genera), Ulvophyceae (2 genera) and Cyanobacteria (3 genera) ( The RDA fairly transcribes this high spatial and temporal variability in the macroalgae community as it shows that algal biomass differs significantly between sampling sites (permutation test, Variable selection from the environmental dataset, based on VIF scores (VIF scores Macroalgal habitats in the Lower Ain River vary widely, leading to spatial segregation in the riverbed. Among the current and depth classes compared, all taxa differ significantly (Chi tests, Nitrate concentration varied both among sampling sites and between years (Kruskal-Wallis tests, No differences in total phosphorus concentration in the macroalgal tissues ( DIN/SRP ratios in the open water did not differ between years (Kruskal-Wallis tests, Over the entire study period, algal community composition and standing stocks significantly varied both spatially and temporally. Most of the taxa among the 24 genera were always recorded at a low biomass with, however, four genera dominating, namely We found that temperature and water discharge significantly structure the macroalgal community. Similar results were reported concerning one of these variables ( Discharge and hydrology have ecological effects with a time lag of 5 days. This shorter time lag likely refers to the short-term control of discharge that can widely and unpredictably vary over a short period. During 2008, discharge stability was less than a week, which may explain the limited growth of lentic taxa. Indeed, low hydrological instability has been shown to limit algal growth intensity ( Three macroalgal groups were distinguished according to their affinities for current velocity, with Nutrient concentrations recorded in this study were consistent with those reported over the past decade ( Intra-cellular concentrations of TP and TN were both very similar to those reported by Nitrate enrichment in the study area was likely to be a consequence of agricultural practices and more precisely maize monoculture. Indeed, maize monoculture was the dominant feature of the agriculture practices that dominate the anthropogenic activities in the study area. High maize standing stocks (12–13 The fact that nitrate were close to being orthogonal, with both discharge (time lag Our study reveals that the massive macrolagal blooms occurring in the Lower Ain River were highly dynamic (high turn-over rate), both spatially and temporally. The river's great width, associated with high habitat variability, promote blooms of The authors thank the Syndicat de la Basse Vallée de l’Ain that initiated this study as well as the