Mingsai is a newly discovered Au deposit located in the eastern part of the Tethys Himalayan Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt. The stratiform and lenticular orebodies are hosted within Middle Jurassic metamorphic tuff and quartz-sericite veins and controlled by an interlayer-gliding fracture zone with extensive hydrothermal alteration. In this study, at least three alteration/mineralization stages of the deposit were recognized as follows: (1) pre-ore stage (Stage Ⅰ), forming mainly ore-barren fine quartz veins without sulfides; (2) main ore stage (Stage Ⅱ), forming mainly thick quartz veins with abundant coarse-grained or fine-grained euhedraland subhedral Au-bearing pyrite, arsenopyrite and sericite; and (3) post-ore stage (Stage III), which is characterized by formation of thick barren quartz–calcite veins with few sulfides. Three types of fluid inclusions were identified as follows: (1) pure carbonic (V-type) inclusions, (2) aqueous-carbonic (C-type, including three-phase C1-type and two-phase C2-type) inclusions and (3) aqueous (L-type) inclusions. Fluid inclusions during the pre-ore stage are mainly C1-type, C2-type and V-type. The main ore stage contains mainly C1-type, C2-type, L-type and limited V-type, whereas the post-ore stage contains mainly L-type (with limited C2-type) fluid inclusions. From stages Ⅰ to III, microthermometric data show homogenization temperatures of 292–362 °C (mean = 309 °C), 247–320 °C (mean = 285 °C), and 206–272 °C (mean = 244 °C), respectively, and fluids with salinities of 0.2–8.3 (mean = 2.8) wt% NaCl equiv., 0.2–13.1 (mean = 5.8) wt% NaCl equiv., and 0.8–15.2 (mean = 8.3) wt% NaCl equiv., respectively. The δD values of the fluids from stages I to III range from −129.1‰ to −131.8‰, −137.5‰ to −137.4‰, and −143.6‰ to −138.6‰, respectively. The δ18OH2O values of the fluids from stages Ⅰ to III range from 13.3‰ to 13.6‰, 13.0‰ to 13.2‰, and 11.0‰ to 11.9‰, respectively. The δD and δ18OH2O values may reflect meteoric water involvement in ore-forming fluidssourced from either crustal metamorphism or mantle devolatilization. Fluid mixing is the crucial mechanism that controlled the deposition of the Au-bearing sulfides. In situ δ34S values of the Au-bearing pyrite range from 1.06‰ to 2.41‰, whereas δ34S values of the barren pyrite from the slate range from 8.19‰ to 15.86‰, indicating that sulfur of the Au-bearing pyrite has a deep source. The 40Ar–39Ar plateau age of hydrothermal ore-bearing sericite from the main ore stage is 16.03 ± 0.31 Ma, indicating that the mineralization time of the deposit is Miocene, which is different from other major gold deposits (Eocene) in the Tethys Himalayan Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt. Consequently, taking the data together, it is suggested that the Mingsai is an orogenic-type Au deposit in the Tethys Himalayan Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt.The term “orogenic gold deposit” was defined by The Tethys Himalayan Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt is located to the south of the Indus-Yarlung Zangbo suture in the Himalayan orogeny ( Previous studies proposed that most of the Au-Sb deposits in the Tethys Himalayan Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt formed from the Late Paleocene to Eocene (59–42 Ma; e.g., Mayoumu, Bangbu, Guqiong, and Nianzha; Mingsai is a newly discovered Au deposit located in the eastern part of the Tethys Himalayan Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt ( The Himalayan orogenic belt consists of four parallel parallel E–W-striking tectonic units, including the Sub-Himalayan Sequence (SH), Lesser Himalayan Sequence (LH), Greater Himalayan Crystalline Sequence (GH), and Tethys Himalayan Sequence (TH), separated by the Main Boundary Thrust (MBT), Main Central Thrust (MCT), and South Tibetan detachment system (STDS), respectively ( The Tethys Himalayan (TH) zone extends E–W for more than 1300 km and is the largest Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt in Tibet, which is located to the south of the Indus-Yarlung Zangbo suture (IYZS) ( Igneous rocks in the Tethys Himalayan zone include Palaeozoic (530–470 Ma) granitic gneiss ( The Tethys Himalayan Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt is the primary constituent of the global giant metallogenic belt ( The Zhaxikang Pb–Zn–Ag–Au–Sb ore district is located to the east of the Tethys Himalayan Au–Sb polymetallic metallogenic belt ( The exposed sedimentary rocks associated with the deposit are dominantly Middle Jurassic–Early Cretaceous strata that can be subdivided into four different units: the Middle Jurassic Lure Formation, Middle Jurassic Zhela Formation, Middle–Late Jurassic Weimei Formation and Early Cretaceous Sangxiu Formation ( Two Au orebodies (Au I and Au II) hosted in the metamorphic tuff and quartz–sericite veins are identified in the Mingsai deposit. These are controlled by the interlayer-gliding fracture zone between the slate and metamorphic tuff. Orebody Au II occurs as stratiform with fine continuity and dips 1–6° to the north. Its thickness ranges from 0.9 to 12.6 m and it is 400 m in width and 1000 m in length ( The ore minerals are dominantly native gold, pyrite, arsenopyrite, and minor sphalerite and freibergite ( Based on mineral assemblage, ore texture, wall-rock alteration and crosscutting relationship studies, three stages were recognized ( The sample (sericite) used for Ar-Ar dating was collected from the Au-bearing quartz-sericite veins of Orebody AuⅡ ( The sericite separated for analysis were purified using a magnetic separator and then cleaned by ultrasonic treatment under ethanol. Purity of the final separate wasgreater than 99%. Ar-Ar dating was conducted at Analytical Laboratory Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology using a mass spectrometer MM5400 with a Faraday cup and an electron multiplier. The detailed analytical methodology was described by To further constrain the hydrothermal fluids of the Mingsai Au deposit, the fluid inclusions from the ore-barren fine quartz veins, ore-bearing thick quartz-sericite veins, and ore-barren quartz-calcite veins representing different hydrothermal stages, were selected for laser Raman spectroscopic analysis and microthermometric measurement at the fluid inclusion laboratory of the Chengdu Center, China Geological Survey, Chengdu, China. Cooling and heating experiments of fluid inclusions therein were carried out by a Leica DM4500 petrographic microscope equipped with a Linkam THMSG600 heating-freezing stage (temperatures from −196 to +600 °C). The heating rate was reduced to 0.1 °C/min when phase transitions were approached. The precision of the temperature measurement was within 0.1 °C during freezing and 2 °C during heating. Salinities were calculated using the final ice melting temperatures of aqueous two-phase fluid inclusions ( Samples for H–O isotopic analyses were collected from the quartz veins of different mineralization stages. The H–O isotopic analyses were conducted at Analytical Laboratory Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology. The hydrogen and oxygen isotopic compositions were measured using a Finnigan-MAT 253 mass spectrometer, following the methods of Ore-barren and ore-bearing pyrite samples for A standard-sample bracketing method (SSB) was employed to correct for instrumental mass fractionation. To avoid the matrix effect, a pyrite standard PPP-1, a chalcopyrite standard GBW07268 (a pressed pellet) and a synthetic Ag Abundant fluid inclusions (FIs) trapped in different mineralization stages were observed. Based on the phases present at room temperature (25 °C) and the phase transformations that occurred during heating, three types of primary FIs were distinguished as follows: pure carbonic (V-type) inclusions, aqueous-carbonic (C-type, including three-phase C1-type and two-phase C2-type) inclusions and aqueous (L-type) inclusions. The FIs types distinguished in this study are presented in V-type FIs: These FIs typically consist of monophase liquid CO C-type FIs: These FIs are widespread in barren quartz veins and Au-bearing quartz-sulfide veins of stages Ⅰ and Ⅱ and are also locally distributed in barren quartz-calcite veins of stage III. C-type FIs consist of C1-type (vapor CO L-type FIs: These FIs are two-phase, 3–18 μm in length, and consist of a vapor bubble (vapor H The microthermometric data for FIs from the three stages are summarized in Pre-ore stage (Stage Ⅰ): V-type and C-type FIs were identified in ore-barren quartz ( Main ore stage (Stage Ⅱ): minor V-type, abundant C-type and L-type FIs were identified in Au-bearing quartz-sulfide veins ( Post-ore stage (Stage III): minor C2-type and abundant L-type FIs were identified in barren quartz–calcite veins ( Representative FIs from stages Ⅰ and Ⅱ of the Mingsai deposit were selected for laser Raman spectroscopy analyses to constrain their compositions. We are able to identify the laser Raman spectroscopic peaks in scans of gas and liquid phase components. The results are shown in We estimated the trapping pressures of the C1-type FIs from the pre-ore stage and main ore stage using the Flincor program ( An ore-bearing sericite sample from the thick quartz veins with fine-grained Au-bearing pyrite and sericite of orebody Au Ⅱ yielded an  The δ The H–O isotopic compositions are listed in Two quartz samples from Stage Ⅰ have δ Microthermometric data show that temperatures of the main ore stage sulfide mineralization in the Mingsai deposit are mostly <320 °C, which is lower than the closure temperature of sericite argon diffusion (350 °C; Ore-bearing sericite was found at the main ore stage coexisting with Au-bearing sulfides in the Mingsai deposit ( Previous studies have documented that several potential sulfur sources, including mantle sulfur, marine sulfate and biogenic sulfur, may possibly be involved in hydrothermal ore deposits ( The δ The O and H isotopic compositions of selected minerals from different ore stages are generally used to trace the source and evolutionary process of hydrothermal fluids ( The petrography, microthermometry and laser Raman microspectroscopy data of the FIs from different mineralization stages can provide insight into the characteristics of the ore-forming fluid system for the Mingsai deposit ( During the pre-ore stage (Stage Ⅰ), V-type and C-type FIs were identified in ore-barren quartz. Ore-forming fluids sourced from either crustal metamorphism or mantle devolatilization were characterized by high-temperature (292–362 °C), low-salinity (0.2–8.3 wt% NaCl equiv, mean = 2.1), CO There are several mechanisms for the deposition of minerals, such as decreasing fluid temperatures and pressures, fluid mixing, and fluid immiscibility or boiling ( It is well documented that the tectonic evolution of the Tibetan orogen has a complicated history, which is divided into (1)  The The δ The types of fluid inclusions in the Mingsai deposit include V-type, C-type and L-type. Microthermometric data of the extensive coexistence of the C-type and L-type FIs in the Au-bearing quartz-sulfide veins (Stage Ⅱ) indicate that two types of fluids may have mixed during the main ore stage. Fluid mixing is the crucial mechanism that controlled the deposition of sulfides and gold. The geological characteristics of the Mingsai deposit indicate that the Mingsai is an orogenic-type Au deposit. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the