The adsorption and action of various polymers on talc has been investigated. Two families of polymers (starch-based polysaccharides and synthetic polyacrylamides) with specific molecular weights and functional group chemistry were studied. Adsorption isotherms, acoustophoresis, and contact angle studies enabled polymer adsorption behaviour, adsorbed layer thickness, and the hydrophilicity of the polymer-treated talc surface to be determined. Flotation testing on the treated talc revealed a hierarchy of effectiveness within the group of polymers studied. The observed trends in flotation performance are discussed with reference to the measured polymer layer properties. A 3D correlation plot of adsorbed layer thickness and contact angle against flotation recovery indicates that it may be feasible to predict an order of effectiveness for polymeric depressants based solely on measurements of the adsorbed layer properties, without recourse to flotation testing. This approach would be desirable when screening large numbers of potential depressants.Talc is a common gangue mineral encountered in complex sulphide ores and in the ores of platinum group metals. Being naturally hydrophobic, talc easily reports to flotation concentrates, thus reducing concentrate grade. In addition, since talc is a magnesium silicate mineral, large quantities of talc in flotation concentrates can cause problems during smelting, often resulting in the imposition of smelter penalties for mineral processing companies. The depression of talc has therefore been the focus of a great deal of research. Polymers are most often used to depress talc in flotation. The accepted view of depressant action for polymers involves adsorption onto the gangue mineral phase through a variety of possible binding mechanisms ( Historically, the choice of a polymer to depress a particular gangue mineral in flotation has been based on empirical testing. The trend in recent times has been to specifically design polymers for this purpose as well as for other areas of mineral processing ( The characteristics of the bulk polymer will obviously affect the ability of that polymer to perform a particular function. However, the properties that will have the most impact on the interaction forces between a particle and a bubble are those of the adsorbed layer. Understanding the properties of the adsorbed layer that affect bubble–particle attachment (and thus flotation) is crucial if one is to effectively select or design polymers for depression. This approach has also been recently mooted in the selection and performance of dispersants and flocculants for altering particle–particle interactions ( The talc sample was supplied by Merck, Germany (> Two polyacrylamide samples (supplied by Cytec) were used in this study. The first was an unsubstituted polyacrylamide (Polymer-N), and the second sample was a polyacrylamide with substituted hydroxyl groups (Polymer-H). Three polysaccharide samples (supplied by Penford Australia) were also used in this study: Dextrin WY, HP-Dextrin, and HP-Starch. The molecular weights and polydispersity of all five polymers were determined by size exclusion chromatography (SEC). SEC was carried out using a Waters “Ultrahydrogel Linear” aqueous SEC column (300 High-quality Milli-Q water was supplied by a Millipore water system. pH adjustment was made by the addition of small quantities of HNO Dextrin WY, HP-Dextrin, Polymer-N and Polymer-H stock solutions of 1000 mg L Adsorption studies were performed using the batch method. A 5 wt.% sample suspension was prepared and a known volume of this was placed in individual vials. The required volume of pre-adjusted Milli-Q water and stock polymer solution was added into each vial in order to prepare samples consisting of different initial polymer concentrations. The resulting suspensions were then placed on a rotary suspension mixer for 2 h, centrifuged and analysed to determine the concentration of polymer left in solution, using a UV–VIS complexation method ( For polymers exhibiting high affinity isotherms, the data can be fitted using the Langmuir expression for adsorption at the solid–water interface ( The knowledge of the plateau adsorbed amount allows one to use the following expression to calculate the area per polymer chain from the following equation: All parameters derived from the Langmuir analysis are quoted with errors determined from the linear regression error analysis (which takes into account errors in the individual data points from the uncertainties in the solution concentration determination) and propagation of errors ( Zeta potential measurements were performed by the electroacoustic method using the Acoustosizer II instrument (Colloidal Dynamics, Australia) ( The following relationship has been derived to link the zeta potential of the bare surface to the zeta potential of the same surface in the presence of a non-ionic polymer layer ( The advancing contact angle for a non-wetting liquid, Batch flotation experiments were carried out in a 300-ml cell using a Gliwice flotation machine (Instytut Metali Niezelaznych, Poland). Talc suspensions (5 wt.% solids, pH 9) were conditioned for 10 min prior to polymer addition and then 30 min after the addition of polymer. The suspensions were transferred to the flotation cell and conditioned for a further 2 min before the commencement of flotation. MIBC was used as the frother (200 g/t added prior to the start of flotation and 200 g/t added before collection of third concentrate). Flotation concentrates were collected after 1, 3, 5 and 8 min of flotation. The concentrates were then filtered, dried and weighed to calculate the recovery of talc. Baseline flotation tests were repeated to give an indication of the error associated with the flotation recovery values for the experiments in the presence of polymer; this is estimated to be ± The measured adsorption isotherms for the five polymers are shown in The observation of Langmuir adsorption behaviour allows one to infer that either the polymers only adsorb on one of the two surfaces of the talc particles (most likely the hydrophobic face, based on the high adsorbed amounts and the small available surface area of the talc edge), or that there is a similar affinity between the polymers and both surface types. Any disparity in the interaction between the polymers and the two different talc surfaces would result in the isotherms not accurately fitting the Langmuir expression and being better modelled using the Freundlich isotherm for adsorption onto heterogeneous surfaces ( The data in Zeta potential experiments and adsorption isotherms were conducted under the same experimental conditions, i.e. on talc suspensions with 5 wt.% solids in 10 The zeta potential–pH sweep for talc in the absence of polymer gives values of the zeta potential which are slightly lower than those reported by In the presence of Dextrin WY as a function of concentration, the zeta potential decreases as the shear plane is shifted away from the surface of the talc due to the presence of an uncharged adsorbed polymer layer. As more polymer is added to solution (resulting in higher adsorbed amount of polymer on the surface) the zeta potential continues to decrease. The pH sweep indicates that the presence of the polymer causes the zeta potential of talc to be shifted to lower zeta potentials over the The changes in the zeta potential of talc in the presence of Polymer-H were expected to be analogous to those of the other uncharged polymers. At pH 9, Polymer-H does reduce the zeta potential. However, the changes of the zeta potential in the presence Polymer-H at different pH are characteristic of the adsorption of a charged polymer, with the polymer-covered talc sample having a higher zeta potential than the bare talc at pH values lower than 9. It is possible that the sample of Polymer-H has undergone some hydrolysis during storage, with conversion of some of the acrylamide groups to carboxyl groups. Therefore, the polymer will show some characteristics of polyacrylic acid, a negatively charged polymer.  The exact values of the calculated thicknesses should not be taken as absolute. Zeta potential determination of layer thickness is subject to certain assumptions that may or may not be valid (such as the adsorbed polymer having no effect on the distribution of counterions in the double layer) (  The five polymers decrease the contact angle of the talc to different extents. The two dextrin polymers are comparable in behaviour, in contrast to HP-Starch which has a much higher ability to reduce the contact angle. Given the similar chemistry between these three polymers, the difference in the contact angle measured is most likely due to adsorbed amount differences between the two low molecular weight polysaccharides and the high molecular weight polysaccharide. The two polyacrylamide-based polymers display different abilities to reduce the contact angle of the treated talc. Both adsorbed amount and the inclusion of hydrophilic functional groups would appear to contribute to the effectiveness of Polymer-H over Polymer-N in reducing the contact angle of the particles. In summary, HP-Starch changes the contact angle of talc the greatest, followed by Polymer-H, HP-Dextrin Flotation experiments were conducted to correlate the adsorption behaviour of the polymers to their ability to depress the talc particles. Flotation experiments were performed at concentrations that corresponded to low (50 mg L Comparisons can be made between the five polymers if the recovery data are plotted as total talc recovery versus polymer concentration. These data are shown in The flotation recovery data as a function of time were fitted to the standard rate equation ( The fits allow one to determine values for the maximum recovery at infinite time ( Polymer-N can be seen to have almost no effect on the flotation kinetic behaviour. However, Polymer-H can be seen to have a marked effect on the rate constant The high molecular weight polymer, HP Starch, significantly reduces the value of It should be noted that clear differences were observed between the froth phase in the flotation of the talc in the absence and presence of polymer. In the absence of polymer, huge froths laden with clearly hydrophobic talc particles were observed. With the addition of polymer, the number of talc particles reporting to the froth by ‘true’ flotation, i.e. attachment to the air bubbles, was significantly reduced. This was particularly evident in the flotation of talc in the presence of HP-Starch, even at low concentrations. The results of this study provide a detailed picture of the adsorption of the polymers onto talc and the degree to which they change the surface properties of talc. The major information from the experiments is summarised in To understand which parameters are the most important from the point of view of depression in flotation, it is logical to consider the physical process of bubble–particle attachment. Three things need to occur for a mineral particle to attach to a bubble ( The ability of polymers to stabilise wetting films through steric interactions has been observed previously ( The data shown in It would appear that the approach of measuring adsorbed layer properties is effective for the prediction of depressant action. However, the work presented here should be taken in context. First, the technique used for layer thickness determination cannot be used for charged polymers (as seen in the case of Polymer-H), which rules out the analysis of a number of depressants currently used in practice (such as carboxymethyl cellulose). Second, the measurements on the gangue mineral tell us nothing about the selectivity of the polymer. However, neither of these caveats really limits the usefulness of the above approach. Other techniques, such as ellipsometry ( In terms of addressing selectivity, it is inevitable that even for the most selective polymers, at least some adsorption will take place on the surface of the valuable minerals in the pulp due to the multitude of binding mechanisms that can lead to adsorption ( The adsorption parameters and adsorbed layer properties of a selection of polymers have been determined for talc, a common gangue mineral. The effectiveness of the polymers as depressants correlates closely with the adsorbed layer thickness and the polymer-treated talc contact angle. The measurement of these two parameters allows for polymer depressants with widely different chemistries, molecular weights, and functional group modifications to be compared. This approach is a valuable step in developing a predictive model for depressant action. The authors would like to thank the Australian Research Council and the AMIRA International for funding of this work. The authors would also like to thank Russell Schumann of Levay and Co. Environmental Services for assistance with SEC measurements. Daniel Fornasiero is also thanked for useful discussions.