In this study, the hydrogen feed from both Ru-catalyzed and organic acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of NaBH4 was studied in terms of hydrogen generation rate and integrated PEMFC performance. Hydrogen feed generated from the conventional Ru-catalyzed hydrolysis of NaBH4 caused a drastic loss of PEMFC performance. It was found that the presence of sodium ion in hydrogen feed was a main factor that increased the interfacial resistance of fuel cell and, consequently, reduced the performance. Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis with powder form of NaBH4 was adopted in order to minimize the detrimental effect of sodium ion. The hydrogen feed from acid-catalyzed hydrolysis was quite dry so that even water vapor, the carrier of sodium ion, was not detected after condensation of hydrogen feed. It was confirmed by the several experiments that the hydrogen release rate can be controlled by varying the injection rate and concentration of aqueous acid. Various organic acids were employed in the production of hydrogen and found that acidity, acid type and chemical structure are also important factors on hydrolysis of NaBH4. The performance from the integrated acid-catalyzed hydrogen generation system with PEMFC was quite stable and no significant loss was observed contrary to that from the integrated Ru-catalyzed hydrogen generation system–PEMFC test. This result also clarified that the detrimental effect of sodium ion could be removed by minimizing the water vapor in this manner. Based on the experiment of acid-catalyzed hydrolysis, a small-scale hydrogen-generating device was designed and fabricated, from which hydrogen release was controlled by the acid concentration and injection rate of aqueous acid solution.Recent worldwide events have increased public anxiety about the cost of gasoline and heating fuels, and the security of these resources has become an issue. Emphasis on these problems has brought much needed attention to hydrogen as the secondary energy carrier. The major advantage of hydrogen, particularly with hydrogen fuel cells, is that it simultaneously addresses many issues associated with current petroleum-based energy technologies, including (1) reduced greenhouse gas emissions, (2) reduced pollutant emissions, (3) diversification of fuel feedstocks, (4) energy independence, and (5) on-board fuel efficiency Borohydride complexes with suitable alkali or alkaline earth metals are a promising class of compounds for hydrogen storage. The hydrolysis of sodium borohydride (NaBH The spontaneous hydrolysis of borohydrides in aqueous solution is in general inhibited by the addition of NaOH, and these solutions can effectively liberate hydrogen in the presence of catalysts such as Ru or Ni In this study, we found that the hydrogen generated from NaBH A titanium mesh was employed as a catalyst support due to its high stability to alkaline NaBH For Ru-catalyzed hydrolysis of NaBH  The hydrogen generation system was integrated with the PEMFC system to investigate the effect of produced hydrogen on PEMFC performance. The PEMFC used in this study was a small-scale laboratory cell with an external electrode area of 1 Since the hydrolysis of NaBH Impedance analysis was carried out in the frequency range from 0.01 Since several problems related to sodium ion contents in hydrogen feed from Ru-catalyzed hydrolysis of NaBH Formic and malic acids were tested in producing hydrogen from hydrogenation generation system with NaBH Formic acid shows higher hydrogen release rate than malic acid. The maximum release rate of hydrogen was 186 Several biologically compatible organic acid solutions were also tested and compared. Although the same concentration (0.5 Furthermore, oxalic acid, which has the strongest acidity (p  The hydrogen generation system was integrated with PEMFC, where malic acid was employed for acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of NaBH Based on the experimental hydrogen generation system, the prototype of hydrogen generator was developed as shown in Hydrogen generated by the hydrolysis of NaBH In order to minimize the presence of sodium ion in the hydrogen feed, an aqueous acid-catalyzed hydrolysis was employed in producing hydrogen. Since acid-catalyzed hydrolysis does not need NaOH and excessive water, the hydrogen feed was dry enough to minimize not only sodium ion content but also water, the carrier of sodium ions. The hydrogen release rate was controlled by varying the injection rate and concentration of aqueous acid. Various organic acids were tested for the production of hydrogen and found that not only acidity but also acid type and chemical structure are important factor on hydrolysis of NaBH HJK is especially grateful to MYK of DKU for helpful assistance and discussion.