Introduction
                  Osteoporotic tibial plateau fractures (TPFs) are difficult to treat with either open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) or acute total knee arthroplasty (TKA). They have high complication rates, poor outcomes and often fail in the short- to mid-term. We investigated the use of impaction bone grafting (IBG) as an adjunct to stabilise the fracture in a cohort of osteoporotic TPFs.
               
                  Methods
                  Nine consecutive osteoporotic TPFs were surgically stabilised with ORIF augmented with IBG or with IBG alone (one pure depression fracture) using on average allograft from 2 femoral heads/case (range 1–4 heads or 25–100cm3). The median bone mineral density T-score of the patients was −2.9 (−2.5 to −4.5). All patients were mobilised weight-bearing as tolerated immediately after surgery and had regular follow-up to a minimum of 2 years where functional scores were taken and gait was assessed. Fracture reduction was assessed on plain radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scans; maintenance of fracture reduction was monitored using plain radiographs, CT and radiostereometric analysis (RSA). Bone graft remodelling was assessed by comparison of immediate post-operative CT scans with scans at a minimum of 1 year.
               
                  Results
                  All surgeries were uneventful. All patients progressed to full weight bearing within 6 weeks of surgery and regained a normal gait by 3 months. Seven fractures healed with a cranio-caudal migration of less than 3mm (range 0–2.6mm using RSA and 0–2mm using CT). Two fractures had an isolated posterolateral fragment depression of 13.5mm and 9mm, respectively, which did not affect the overall joint alignment or clinical outcomes at short-term follow-up. At latest CT follow-up, on average 51% of the graft area (range 36–70%) had remodelled into new host bone.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Impaction bone grafting shows promising results as an adjunct to the surgical stabilisation of osteoporotic TPFs. In this case series the technique provided enough fracture stability for patients to mobilise weight-bearing as tolerated immediately after surgery and achieve full weight-bearing by the sixth postoperative week. There was no failure of fixation and 7 of the 9 cases healed with minimal fracture displacement.Open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) is the treatment of choice for tibial plateau fractures (TPFs) In cases of TPF failure, a total knee arthroplasty (TKA) may be required Previously, because internal fixation was expected to fail, in our institution osteoporotic TPFs were treated non-operatively with the view that a TKA could be performed at a later stage. Unsatisfactory results and a progressive increase in the prevalence of these fractures led us to look for alternative treatment options. Impaction bone grafting (IBG) has previously been used to reconstruct bone stock at revision hip replacement surgery The aim of this study was to assess the feasibility of IBG to augment internal fixation of osteoporotic TPF by investigating whether IBG prevents failure of fixation in osteoporotic TPFs in a consecutive patient series. To do this we measured the fracture migration during healing in these patients. In addition, we investigated the functional recovery of these patients and the remodelling of the allograft used for IBG. This study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the Royal Adelaide Hospital. Osteoporosis was defined as a BMD Since 2008, of the 115 TPFs treated by the senior author, 14 were proven to be osteoporotic and underwent augmentation with IBG. All patients who had sustained an osteoporotic TPF agreed to participate in the study. Of this continuous cohort, nine fractures in nine patients have undergone follow-up for a minimum of 2 years and were included in this paper. Patient demographics, co-morbidities, fracture characteristics and treatment characteristics are presented in One patient sustained a pure depression fracture with an intact proximal tibial cortex and was treated with IBG, through a window in the anterolateral tibia, without fixation. All other cases had ORIF and IBG ( Grafting was performed through small windows in the proximal tibia, at split fracture sites, using coarsely milled irradiated (25 All patients were mobilised weight-bearing as tolerated using walking aids for balance and support, as soon as they regained leg control. Patients were reviewed at 2, 6, 12, and 26 weeks, and at 1 year, and 2 years postoperatively. To date, 5 patients were further reviewed at 3 years and 3 patients at 5 years postoperatively. Complications and clinical outcome scores were recorded, including patient reported Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) All patients had AP and lateral knee radiographs preoperatively, postoperatively and at each follow-up. Fracture reduction and maintenance of reduction were assessed using the Rasmussen score All patients had tantalum beads inserted at the time of surgery All patients underwent a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan to plan surgery, a postoperative scan to assess reduction and fixation, and an additional scan at ≥1 year follow-up to assess graft incorporation according to the technique of de Waal Malefijt and colleagues Fracture migration was defined as being satisfactory if the articular surface subsided ≤3 All nine patients were females with a median age of 64 years (range 55–78) and a BMD At surgery peripheral meniscal tears were identified and repaired through an outside-in technique in the 3 patients with the most depressed lateral condyle fractures. There was no loss to follow-up and no patient died. The median follow-up was 40 months (range 24–80). One patient, Patient 4, resides remotely and was unable to attend any further appointments after her 6-month follow-up, but continued her follow-up by telephone interviews, mailed questionnaires, and radiographs and CT scans undertaken locally. Patient 1 developed a temporary postoperative deep peroneal nerve palsy that fully recovered after 6 months. All other, unrelated, complications are detailed in Postoperatively, all patients were mobilised weight-bearing as tolerated on crutches or walking frame and discharged home at a median of 5 days (range 3–11). At 6-week follow-up, all patients were fully weight-bearing and were able to ambulate without support, although three patients reported using a stick and one a frame, for balance during longer walks. Excluding the patient who sustained the peroneal nerve palsy, all patients regained a normal gait on a flat surface by 3 months after surgery (Videos 1 and 2 and Knee range of motion, stability, alignment, pain levels and functional scores are reported in In all cases, there was no loss of fixation. Overall, seven fractures healed with <3 Plain radiographs indicated near anatomical reduction (within 2 Adequate radiographic visualisation of the tantalum beads allowed measurement of fracture migration using RSA in seven patients, whereas metalwork obscured the tantalum beads in two patients, a limitation previously highlighted by Valstar et al. Postoperative CT scans confirmed that near anatomical reduction was obtained in all cases. The latest CT scans showed the fractures healed with median cranio-caudal migration of 1.5 Some un-remodelled graft was visible on all latest CT scans. At minimum 1-year follow-up a median of 55% (range 37–70%) of the impacted graft area had remodelled into trabecular bone with a normal appearance, 37% (range 8–64%) was still visible as a dense sclerotic area and 8% (range 0–43%) had been either resorbed or had disintegrated. Graft resorption occurred only in areas of uncontained graft ( The results of this study suggest that IBG is an effective adjunct to ORIF of osteoporotic TPFs. Although the study involved only a small cohort of patients, which is acknowledged as a limitation of the study, it nevertheless demonstrated that in osteoporotic TPFs, failure of fracture fixation can be prevented by IBG. In addition, seven of the nine cases healed with minimal fracture displacement and only patients with posterior comminution of the lateral tibial condyle, which was not contained by the laterally placed lateral condyle fixation, had any collapse of the fracture segment over time. The postoperative CT scans in these patients showed that the fracture segments that displaced were not supported by internal fixation. The results of this study clearly contrast favourably with previously reported failure rates of 100% in osteoporotic TPFs Other limitations of this study include the possibility that our selection criteria might have excluded some osteoporotic fractures, that it was not restricted to a single fracture pattern and that it was not a comparative study, although this latter point was felt to be justified by the very poor results reported for ORIF of osteoporotic TPFs to date Other studies have suggested that IBG was able to provide the stability required in segmental bone defects to sustain unrestricted weight-bearing In the current study, two fractures with posterolateral comminution and disruption of the posterolateral cortex of the proximal tibia had partial fracture collapse. Both these fractures were treated using a posterolateral approach. Despite good initial reduction, as demonstrated on CT scans, the lateral buttress plate used for fixation did not stabilise nor buttress the posterior comminution of the lateral tibial condyle. In retrospect, these cases could potentially have been better stabilised by a posteriorly placed plate. Although clinically all patients had a satisfactory knee function recovery, the self-reported functional outcome showed that some patients did not return to pre-injury function. This is partly explained by patients’ co-morbidities ( The most accurate method to measure fracture migration during TPF healing is RSA This study has provided insight into the radiographic remodelling of large volumes of allograft in osteoporotic bone. Although the centre of the grafted area remained as a dense mass, the periphery was restructured into trabecular bone in all cases. The IBG is intended to offer structural support, prevent articular subsidence and allow better fixation by better screw purchase. Alternatives to IBG allograft in TPF are the use of autograft or various bone substitutes such as injectable calcium-phosphate In conclusion, IBG shows promising results in the treatment of osteoporotic TPFs. As a result of this investigation, we are continuing to treat these fractures with ORIF and IBG. Further studies involving larger cohorts are nevertheless required to establish its role in the treatment of these fractures and to improve the technique for specific fracture patterns. Such investigations would at best involve a randomised controlled trial, in which IBG is compared with alternative grafting options (autograft or bone graft substitutes). No funding was received by any of the authors for or in relation to this manuscript. None of the authors has any conflict of interest in relation to this study. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: