Background context
                  The classification scheme of odontoid fractures described by Anderson and D'Alonzo is the one most commonly used. However, uncertainty exists in the distinction between Type II and “shallow” Type III fractures. Moreover, fractures at the base of the odontoid (Anderson and D'Alonzo Type II) include a spectrum of injury patterns.
               
                  Purpose
                  To modify the Anderson and D'Alonzo classification of odontoid fractures based on current clinical treatment options.
               
                  Study design
                  Proposal of a modified classification system for odontoid fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A more precise distinction between Type II and III fractures based on the presence/absence of C1–C2 facet involvement is proposed. A modified classification of Type II fractures based on fracture line obliquity, displacement and comminution is then proposed, because these are factors deemed to influence management. To evaluate the reproducibility of this classification, 52 odontoid fractures were reviewed and classified by four attending spine surgeons and three spine fellows.
               
                  Results
                  There was substantial agreement (at least five of seven respondents) in 70% of cases. The overall kappa value for the modified classification system was 0.48, indicating moderate agreement, and there were no differences in kappa values between attending spine surgeons and fellows.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The reproducibility of this system was demonstrated by the moderate agreement observed when applied to odontoid fractures at our institution. The proposed utility of this system is its ability to guide clinical decision making in the treatment of odontoid fractures. Prospective application of this modified classification system and suggested treatment options is now required.In the adult population, odontoid fractures account for 9% to 15% of cervical spine injuries The classification of odontoid fractures has evolved over the last three decades. Schatzker et al. Type II fractures are the most common and unstable type of odontoid fracture. Increased patient age, extent and direction of fracture displacement, delay in diagnosis and fracture comminution have all been shown to negatively influence union rates Sometimes it can be difficult to precisely define when a Type II fracture extends inferior enough to be considered a Type III fracture. Many authors refer to such intermediate fractures as “shallow” or “high” Type III fractures. These injuries fall into a grey zone between Type II and Type III fractures for which some authors suggest fixation Overall, there are two clear limitations of the Anderson and D'Alonzo classification system of odontoid fractures. First, there is not a sufficiently precise distinction between Type II and III fractures. This is borne out in the literature by ambiguous distinctions between these injuries, as well as the authors' experience in discussing and reporting fracture patterns. Second, Type II fractures represent a broad anatomic spectrum of injuries, which can managed differently depending on such factors as the fracture line obliquity, displacement and comminution. This is highlighted by the different types of fracture fixation now advocated for different subpopulations of such injuries. To address the limitations of the Anderson and D'Alonzo odontoid fracture classification system, we propose a modified, treatment-oriented classification scheme. The proposed scheme includes Type I, II and III fractures and thus maintains the general architecture of the Anderson and D'Alonzo system with which most physicians are familiar. First, Type II fractures are more precisely defined to distinguish them more clearly from Type III fractures. In the proposed system, Type II fractures are those that are located between the inferior aspect of the anterior C1 ring and do not extend into the superior articular facets of C2 ( Using the above definitions, Type I fractures (without evidence of occipital-cervical instability) and Type III fractures (that include enough of the C2 body to involve the superior C2 facets) are considered to be those that have been treated successfully in the past with collar immobilization. Type II fractures, however, are managed differently depending on the specifics of the fracture anatomy. As such, we propose a stratification of Type II fractures into three subtypes as described in Subtype A: transverse fractures without comminution and with less than 1 mm displacement. One mm or less was chosen to attempt to define fractures that had minimal or no displacement because preliminary reviews of films had revealed that there was not good agreement when such fractures were defined as no displacement at all. Although rare, this fracture type has been shown to have predictably good results with external immobilization Subtype B: fractures that pass from anterior superior to posterior inferior or displaced transverse fractures (greater than 1 mm). These fractures have been shown to have good results when treated with anterior screw fixation after fracture reduction, assuming adequate bone density. Although complications and loss of fixation have been reported Subtype C: fractures that pass from anterior inferior to posterior superior or fractures with significant comminution. These are not appropriate for anterior screw fixation. Posterior atlantoaxial stabilization has been shown to yield good, long-term results with these fracture patterns To evaluate the reproducibility of applying this proposed classification system, a series of odontoid fractures clinically managed at our institution were reviewed. The Division of Human Subjects Protection (institutional review board) of our institution reviewed and approved the following protocol. The consult logs of our spine service were reviewed, and patients with odontoid fractures who presented to our institution between 1995 and 2001 were identified. Inclusion criteria for the cases were a minimum of an open mouth and lateral radiograph, a computed tomography scan or tomogram and age greater than 18 years. Fifty-two cases that met these criteria were identified. Example cases are shown in Seven surgeons (four fellowship-trained, attending spine surgeons and three spine fellows) were educated to this modified classification system before analyzing the radiographs. Each surgeon then independently reviewed the films and graded each case as Type I, IIA, IIB, IIC or III ( Statistical analyses were performed using the SAS 8.0 computer software package. The first set of analyses sought to describe the overall level of consistency between respondents. Percent agreement was computed to provide an overall picture of the amount of concordance between respondents. Then, kappa statistics were computed to determine concordance between respondents, controlling for chance agreement. The second set of analyses aimed to determine whether differences in agreement existed for individual physicians or for attending physicians versus fellows using average kappa values at the individual and group level. Although kappa values typically can measure agreement only between two sources of information, a SAS macro was used that computes estimates and tests of agreement among multiple raters based on methodology presented by Fleiss Between 1995 and 2001, 218 patients presented to our center with odontoid fractures. This accounted for 4% of all emergency spine visits and 11% of all cervical spine fractures. Of the individuals identified, 52 patients met the inclusion criteria for the study. The other patients were excluded because of age (three were younger than 18 years) and/or lack of adequate imaging studies. Of those included in the study, 25 were female (48%) and 27 were male (52%). Ages ranged from 18 to 100 years, with a mean of 62 years. Ten patients (19%) were injured from a fall from a height, 18 patients (35%) were injured from a fall from a standing position, and 24 patients (46%) were injured from a motor accident. The total number of times each classification category within the revised classification system was assigned by the respondents is presented in Next, kappa statistics were used to estimate agreement between respondents controlling for chance agreement. In the first set of analyses, kappa values and test statistics were computed based on responses from all seven respondents. The overall kappa value for the system and kappa values for each of the four possible categories (Type IIA, IIB, IIC, III) are presented in The next set of analyses sought to determine whether any one respondent appeared to be making classifications differently than other respondents, and whether differences existed in agreement between attending surgeon and fellow respondents. To address differences at the individual level, we computed kappa values for agreement between each respondent with the other six respondents. Respondents who had difficulty using the classification system should have lower average kappa values than the other respondents. Results from these analyses are presented in Odontoid fractures are common injuries, yet their treatment remains controversial and variable. We hypothesized that a reproducible, treatment-oriented classification system would facilitate the evaluation and management of these injuries. We thus proposed a modified classification system with suggested treatment recommendations for each fracture type ( At least five of seven surgeons agreed on the classification of 70% of the odontoid fractures using this revised system. The overall kappa value we observed in this study was 0.48, consistent with moderate agreement. Established standards for interpreting the magnitude of kappa values suggest kappa values between 0.2 and 0.4 indicate fair agreement, kappa values between 0.4 and 0.6 indicate moderate agreement, and kappa values above 0.6 indicate substantial agreement It is worth noting that the overall kappa value of 0.48 for the proposed odontoid injury classification is comparable to other classifications systems currently used to describe orthopedic pathology. For example, in radiographic analyses of the Neer classification of proximal humerus fractures, kappa values of 0.43 and 0.52 have been reported In the current study, agreement was strongest for fractures categorized as Type IIB or Type III. The weakest agreement was found for Type IIA and Type IIC fractures. We believe that this was because fracture line anatomy and angulation are easily determined, whereas fracture displacement and comminution may be more difficult to quantify. The advantage of our proposed classification system is the potential for fracture type to be closely associated with treatment recommendations. To this end, we offer this paper to propose the described modifications to the currently accepted Anderson and D'Alonzo system and to suggest potential associations with treatment options based on our current clinical practice. The disadvantage of this classification is that there are other factors that might influence the treatment of fractures but are not considered in this classification. For example, poor bone quality may exclude the possibility of anterior odontoid osteosythesis. An increased anterior-posterior diameter of the thoracic cavity may make it technically impossible to achieve the trajectory needed for anterior odontoid screw placement. Concomitant cervical fractures may also exist and need to be considered in the decision of how to treat the odontoid injury (eg, a long posterior internal fixation construct to manage both an odontoid and subaxial cervical injury). Nevertheless, the proposed classification and treatment algorithm is suggested only to help guide treatment. And, as with any classifications system, clinical judgment is required for its application. As techniques for the fixation of odontoid fractures have evolved, so have the factors that must be incorporated into a classification system used to describe them. We believe that the currently proposed classification system represents an evolution of the Anderson and D'Alonzo classification system of odontoid fractures because it takes such variables into account. Clearly, the proposal of such classification modifications is only the first step. Prospective application of this system in both the classification and treatment of odontoid fractures will be required to validate its utility. The authors would like to thank Stephanie Milan, PhD, for assistance with statistical analysis.