A microbial consortium of mesophilic and acidophilic bacteria and archaea was applied in shake flasks as well as in 2 L stirred tank reactors (STR) to bioleach cobalt, copper, and other valuable metals from sulfidic mine tailings (Rammelsberg polymetallic massive sulfide deposit, Harz Mountains, Germany). After succession from low to high pulp density, the microbial consortium was well adapted to 10% pulp density and showed high bioleaching efficiency. Microbial activity and abundance were measured by microcalorimetry, microscopy, and quantitative, real-time PCR. The adapted mesophilic microbial consortium consisted mainly of Acidithiobacillus (At.) ferrooxidans and At. thiooxidans which achieved 91% cobalt and 57% copper extraction from the bulk tailings (Co 0.02%; Cu 0.12%) after 13 days in STR. Bioleaching tests with a tailings flotation concentrate (Co 0.06%; Cu 0.57%) showed a recovery of 66% cobalt and 33% copper. In addition, mineralogical analysis showed that cobalt occurred on the surface of framboidal pyrite and was mainly leached by microbial attack. Attached cells were microscopically observed on the surface of solid particles of the bulk tailings and tailings flotation concentrate. The amount of sulfides (mainly pyrite) in the tailings was sufficient to sustain microbial growth and thus no additional substrate was required for tailings bioprocessing. Bioleaching is considered to be an important processing step in the concept for reprocessing of the Rammelsberg mine tailings, and for many sulfidic mine tailings worldwide.Billions of tons of mining wastes and residues have been stockpiled or dumped as tailings worldwide. Mine tailings are among the largest mining wastes on Earth and can occupy large areas. Mine tailings result from the flotation process of sulfide mineral ores. Exposed to water and oxygen these very likely produce acid rock drainage (ARD), causing ground and surface water contamination ( Bioleaching refers to biological solubilisation of metals from minerals and wastes. Biomining uses microorganisms to enhance the extraction and recovery of metals from minerals and wastes (i.e. both leaching and recovery). Engineering applications for bioleaching (and hence also biomining which also includes bioleaching) include e.g. bioreactors, vats, heaps and in situ leaching ( The abandoned Rammelsberg mine is located in the historic Harz Mountains mining district in central Germany. The Rammelsberg ore deposit was mined until 1988 ( In this study, we tested a mesophilic and acidophilic microbial consortium to bioleach copper, cobalt and other valuable metals from the bulk Rammelsberg mine tailings and a sulfidic tailings flotation concentrate. Results of the metal dissolution and microbiological analysis during bioleaching are presented. Microbial community composition in bioreactors under different operational conditions was evaluated. In addition, the interaction of microorganisms with the tailings particles was investigated. Tailings samples from Rammelsberg mine (Goslar, Harz Mountains, Germany) were obtained from various tailings depths after coring (BMBF project r4 REWITA). A mixed sample from 15 to 26 m tailings depths was assigned as the bulk tailings. Tailings concentrate samples were obtained after flotation processing of the bulk tailings ( The main elemental composition of the two tailings samples and bioleaching residues was determined by peroxide fusion ICP-MS (FUS-MS-Na Total sulfur and organic carbon contents were analyzed using a LECO CS 230 carbon-sulfur analyzer. For the latter, the samples were first treated with 10% HCl at 80 °C to remove the carbonaceous carbon (inorganic carbon). Treated ssamples were then combusted in a high frequency oven at about 2000 °C with an oxygen stream. The resulting carbon dioxide was analyzed by infrared detection, carbon monoxide was catalytically oxidized to carbon dioxide before detection. The sulfide content of the samples was determined by using chromium-reducible sulfur distillation as previously described ( A microbial consortium of acidophilic bacteria and archaea of the BGR (Bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften und Rohstoffe) strain collection ( Different assays were performed to comparatively study the efficiency of metal bioleaching to select the optimal bioleaching conditions. These included 1) inoculated assay: addition of the microbial consortium mentioned above, 2) not inoculated assay: no microorganisms were added (only indigenous bacteria from the mine tailings were present), and 3) abiotic control: 0.5 mM formic acid was added to the assay to inhibit bioleaching bacteria ( The pH values and oxidation/reduction potentials (ORP) were intermittently measured with digital pH−/redox meters (Mettler Toledo and WTW) with semi-micro pH electrodes (Blue Line pH 16, SI Analytics), and an ORP electrode (Ag/AgCl reference, PCE Instruments), respectively. The amount of acid consumed during leaching was recorded for comparison. Liquid samples were withdrawn each day or each second day till the leaching experiments were finished. Cells were counted directly by using a light microscope and after SYBR Green staining by using a fluorescence microscope and/or quantified by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) using copy numbers of bacterial 16S rRNA genes ( Cells were visualized by using nucleic acid stain Syto 9 or protein stain Sypro orange. Samples were neutralized with filter-sterilized tap water and incubated with fluorescently labelled stains for 20 min at room temperature. Afterwards, stained samples were washed three times with filter-sterilized tap water in order to remove the unbound stains. Samples were directly observed using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) without any further treatment. Stained samples were examined using a Leica TCS SP5X instrument, controlled by the LASAF 2.4.1 build 6384 (Leica, Heidelberg, Germany). The system was equipped with an upright microscope and a super continuum light source (470–670 nm) as well as a 405 nm diode laser. Images were collected with a 63× water immersion lens with a numerical aperture (NA) of 1.2 and a 63× water-immersible lens with an NA of 0.9. Fluorescence image analysis and surface coverage calculation were done by using an extended version of the software ImageJ (v1.50i). Maximum intensity projection (MIP) was produced with the software IMARIS version 8.1.2 (Bitplane AG, Zurich, Switzerland). Results of elemental analyses of the tailings samples are shown in Bioleaching was tested at 2%, 5% and 10% pulp density at different initial pH values after 16 days After adaptation of the mixed microbial consortium at 2% and 5% SL, a robust growth of the mixed culture at 10% SL in the STR was obtained. An improved iron leaching of the bulk tailings from 58% to 85% was measured after succession on SL from 2% to 10% SL (not shown). The mixed consortium containing mainly In the bioleaching reactors, redox potential increased rapidly from 389 mV to 573 mV within 4 days. This corresponded to a rapid decrease of the iron(II) concentration from 53 mM to 1.6 mM. After 4 days, the redox potential remained around 573 mV and iron(II) concentration at 2–3 mM. The pH values kept decreasing from 2.0 to 1.5 and total iron concentration increased to 182 mM (~10.2 g/L) after 13 days. This indicates that due to bacterial activity, the iron(II) was constantly converted to iron(III), causing metal sulfide dissolution. The redox potential was kept between 550 and 600 mV. The observed microbial activities in the bioreactor with flotation concentrate (Supplementary Fig. S3) indicate that potentially remaining flotation reagents had no obvious influence on the bacterial activities ( In the abiotic control reactor, no obvious iron oxidation was detected, indicated by only slight increase of redox potential (up to 426 mV) and almost constant iron(II) concentration ( As shown in As and Co bioleaching ( The comparison of STR bioleaching of bulk tailings and tailings concentrate revealed an increase of Co extraction from 17 mg/L to 36.5 mg/L after 13 days, and a Cu concentration increase from 68 mg/L to 189 mg/L ( Active pyrite dissolution occurs at a redox potential >645 mV ( Attached cells were microscopically observed on surfaces of solid particles of both, the bulk tailings and tailings concentrate ( Microbial community analysis by T-RFLP indicated that the mixed consortium contained mainly  Additional sulfur or iron substrates are recommended for bioleaching of tailings materials, since these materials often contain only low amounts of sulfides or sulfur ( This study determined and discussed the dissolution dynamics of metals from tailings and tailings concentrate in laboratory scale stirred tank reactor bioleaching experiments. STR bioleaching using a mesophilic and acidophilic consortium mainly consisting of Conceptualization: R.Z., D.G. and A.S.; Data curation: R.Z., S.H. and A.S.; Formal analysis: R.Z., S.H. and A.S.; Funding acquisition: D.G. and A.S.; Investigation: R.Z., S.H. and F.R.; Methodology: S.H., F.R. and A.S.; Project administration: A.S.; Resources: D.G. and A.S.; Supervision: D.G. and A.S.; Validation: D.G. and A.S.; Visualization: R.Z. and F.R.; Writing - original draft: R.Z.; Writing – review & editing: R.Z., S.H. and A.S. All authors read and confirmed the revised manuscript. None to declare. We thank Dr. Thomas Neu and Ute Kuhlicke (Department of River Ecology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH – UFZ) for CLSM analysis. We thank several colleagues in BGR for chemical and mineralogical analyses, and especially Laurin Rösler for excellent technical assistance. This work was supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at