Categorizing quarry blocks as exploitable and non-exploitable for facing and building stones needs to apply multivariate geostatistical methods such as cokriging or to generate factors which are spatially independent and consequently run kriging estimation. There are various methods for generating spatially independent factors such as principal component analysis. But this method cannot produce factors which are totally independent, so in this study an orthogonalization method, independent component analysis, is introduced as a novel tool in multivariate geostatistics and is used to find spatially independent factors. The theory of a new estimating method, independent component kriging is presented and applied to an andesite quarry located in Ankara, Turkey. One level of the quarry is chosen to be a test area from which 108 rock samples are taken at 20m regular intervals. The rock samples are tested for some of the mechanical properties of andesite that control the economy of the extraction process. Then the application area is divided into 1544 square blocks and the newly developed estimation method is used for estimating unknown values of variables at unsampled locations. Finally, the blocks are classified as exploitable and non-exploitable regarding TS 10835 standards.For selective production of stone in quarry deposits and optimization of the extraction process, it is important to classify them into various categories regarding their physical and mechanical properties such as uniaxial compression strength, unit volume weight, water absorption by mass and tensile strength etc. At the planning stage, actual block values are not known and they must be estimated from the available data. As a consequence, the classification can only be made on the basis of estimated values. Some researchers have attempted to investigate the quality of natural stones and their distribution in the quarry ore deposits or other fields of rock mechanics. Taboada et al. For this purpose, Independent Component Analysis (ICA) was used to produce spatially uncorrelated factors in this study. In the following firstly the principal of independent component kriging (ICK) and its algorithm is introduced. Then the efficiency of independent component analysis is tested using simulated data and the performance of the method is compared to principal component analysis. Lastly a case study is presented using independent component kriging to classify andesite stone in the working area, which is suitable for facing and building stone, according to TS 10835 standards Assume that there are The variogram matrix of these variables can be given by Where the off-diagonal elements of the variogram matrix are not zero it can be said that there is spatial cross correlation among variables, so the estimation process of an unknown value at an unsampled location should be done, considering the values of other variables by applying cokriging. But cokriging can face with negative definit matrices which cannot be solved. Also in case where the number of variables is more than three it is so time consuming to model variograms and cross variograms. For solving these problems caused by cokriging algorithms there is an easy alternative way in which the spatially correlated variables should be transformed to independent factors. Thus each factor can be estimated independently regarding the values of that using kriging For finding spatially uncorrelated factors One of the algorithms that have been used widely for finding rotation matrix and generating such factors is principal component analysis (PCA), but it cannot remove spatial cross-correlation completely. The Independent Component Analysis (ICA) gives better results than PCA in generating independent factors For performing ICA at first the principal components should be found by carrying out a spectral decomposition of the covariance-variance matrix The PCA factors are then defined as With This section is based largely on Now the problem is to solve this system of Eq. It is known that independent factors have the largest possible negentropy values. By attention to the negentropy formula, methods that try to minimize or maximize a cost function For the unconstrained problem of minimizing a multivariate function, the most classic approach is steepest descent or gradient descent algorithm. Let us consider the case when the solution is a vector Now consider that the purpose is to maximize approximate negentropy (negentropy is complicated so its approximation will be used): To avoid the problems encountered with the preceding approximations of negentropy, in general the following approximation is being used: Iteration mentioned above does not have good convergence properties so it has to be modified. This is possible by adding By finding the appropriate coefficient To derive the approximate Newton method, first note that the minimum of the approximation of each By solving this equation with the Newton method, which is equivalent to finding the optima of the Lagrangian by Newton′s method the following approximation of Newton iteration is found: By finding all transformation vectors the transformation matrix So the total transformation matrix is Then the kriging estimation of orthogonalized factors In Finally the estimated factors should be back-transformed to original In Now this question should be answered, which algorithm estimates most accurate factors when a known transformation matrix is applied to independent variables to find spatially dependent factors? This question is obviously meaningful only if the decomposition is unique The covariance-variance matrix for the four correlated factors was calculated at By applying two algorithms, transformation matrices were found. These matrices are shown below: In the case of a perfect separation, this should be a permutation and scaling matrix, so that only one element per row and per column should be non-zero. Note that this element represents the scale factor affecting the related reconstructed source. Each row and column will only have a dominant element. The root-mean-square value (RMS) of the nondominant elements, each divided by the dominant element of its column, will be used as a quality index for the estimates Another way to compare the efficiency of reconstruction is to check the auto-variograms of generated factors and original variables at the same lag distances. This comparison is done in The study area is an andesite quarry located in the western side of Menekse Hill, 3 The area for examination in the andesite marble quarry was divided into 108 regular (20 Omnidirectional cross variograms of variables are shown in Thus it can be said that there are strong spatial cross correlations among the variables Before transforming data to independent factors, each variable is transformed into a standardized variable with zero mean and unit variance. Then Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Independent Component Analysis (ICA) were applied to the data. For doing PCA the correlation matrix at | By decomposing the correlation matrix using spectral decomposing methods and applying Experimental variograms of each component together with the fitted models are shown in In the andesite quarry the blocks are produced as 5 As the physical and mechanical properties examined in this study are unit volume weight, water absorption capacity by mass, uniaxial compression strength, and tensile strength, Los500 and porosity, the standards regarding these properties will be described here. The classifications on the standards regarding the current natural building stones were made based only on these properties. In order to use andesites as facing and building stones it is required that their unit volume weight be greater than 2.55 Back-transformed estimation results together with standards of andesite used for facing and building stones were considered to decide whether a block can be exploited or not. The exploitable and non-exploitable blocks are shown in As can be seen from In this study, it is aimed to determine to develop a new geostatistical estimation method and use it for categorizing quarry blocks as exploitable and non-exploitable. The main conclusions drawn from this study are given below: (a) Independent component analysis is more effective than principal component analysis to re-generate simulated independent factors. (b) Cross-variograms of factors obtained by independent component analysis are so close to zero at all lag distances. So, it can be said that these factors are spatially un-correlated. (c) Independent component analysis can effectively determine the regions suitable for facing and natural building stone in the marble quarry. (d) The blocks indicated by blue color in In future studies, because of lack of a distance parameter in the algorithm of indepedent component analysis, developing other methods that consider distance parameter is suggested.