The telluride minerals, moncheite ((Pt,Pd)(Bi,Te)2 and PtTe2) and merenskyite ((Pd,Pt)(Bi,Te)2 and PdTe2), contribute between 20% and 45% of the PGMs present in the Platreef ore which is located in the northern limb of the Bushveld Complex of South Africa. There is evidence of these minerals reporting to the tailings and the present investigation was aimed at determining their flotation behaviour and to relate this to their surface characteristics.
                  Microflotation, zeta potential determinations, ToF-SIMS analyses (time of flight-secondary ion mass spectrometry) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were used to characterise the flotation and surface behaviour of the synthesised samples. Copper activation of both moncheite and merenskyite samples reduced the flotation response compared with xanthate on its own. When xanthate is added on its own, it is adsorbed on the mineral surfaces at a higher concentration compared to the copper activated minerals.
                  Oxidation of the PGE telluride minerals negatively affects the flotation performance of the Pt and Pd bismuth telluride samples respectively but not the Pt and Pd telluride samples. Grinding finer reduced recoveries and increasing the calcium ion concentration from 80ppm to 500ppm in the synthetic water did not negatively affect the flotation response of the PdTe2 mineral.18.94% Bi 41.32% Te 0.14% Pd 39.60% Pt Bright phase: 39.6% Bi, 22.2% Te, 1.2% Pd, 37% Pt Intermediate phase: 36.7% Bi, 24.1% Te, 0% Pd, 39.2% Pt Dark phase: 6.4% Bi, 52.5% Te, 0% Pd, 41.2% Pt 11.92% Bi 58.50% Te 25.51% Pd 4.07% Pt Bright phase: 11.3% Bi, 59.2% Te, 23.6% Pd, 6% Pt Intermediate phase: 8.9% Bi, 63.5% Te, 24.2% Pd, 3.4% Pt Dark phase: 11.7% Bi, 57.9% Te, 24.3% Pd, 6.1% Pt Platinum group mineral (PGM) flotation research has mainly focused on the flotation of base metal sulphides due to their known association with the PGMs. The Platreef, which is located in the northern limb of the famous Bushveld Complex of South Africa, is known to have a very high concentration of platinum group elements (PGE) associated with telluride minerals (20–45%). Notwithstanding this fact there is only a limited amount of published information on the flotation of such minerals. Despite the fact that these minerals are of significant economic importance, very little research has been carried out to date on their recovery. The composition of the PGE telluride minerals varies considerably and they typically occur in association with bismuth ( It is well known that the surface products resulting from excessive oxidation may profoundly alter a mineral surface which in turn has an effect on the flotation of such minerals. The Pd–Bi–Te system is no exception. This paper presents results of an investigation of the surface related behaviour, such as collector adsorption, ionic activation, and the distribution of ions on the mineral surfaces and the flotation behaviour of synthetic moncheite [(Pt,Pd)(Bi,Te) The platinum and palladium sponge was obtained from Anglo Platinum Precious Metal Refinery at a purity of 99.95%. The bismuth and tellurium was supplied by Alfa Aesar. The particle size and purity of the bismuth and tellurium powder was −100 mesh at 99.5% and −200 mesh at 99.9%, respectively. A 60 A second sample of moncheite [PtTe A 60 A second sample of merenskyite [PdTe  The surface area of the +38–106 Purified sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) which was used as the collector in the microflotation studies was provided by SENMIN. The collector dosage was 5.00E−5M. Other chemicals were of analytical grade quality and the gases were of instrument grade. Sodium carbonate (0.1 The aim of the XRD investigation was to identify the phases present in the samples and to analyse the X-ray diffractograms by means of the Rietveld method to obtain further crystallographic information. Quantitative phase analysis (Rietveld Quantification) is a powerful method for determining the relative quantities of crystalline and amorphous components in multiphase mixtures. The amorphous component is calculated by difference. X-ray diffraction data were collected utilising a PANalytical X’Pert Pro diffractometer with X’Cellerator detector having the diffractometer settings shown in A search-match routine based on peak and profile data and utilising the PDF2 database was used to identify the best-fitting phases in the database. The search was limited so that only phases containing the expected elements were displayed. The elements H, O and Si were added to the list of possible elements so as to include phases that were formed by oxidation, hydration or contamination from the vessel. The SemiQuant values, which are reported with the identification, are based on the RIR (Relative Intensity Ratio) values from the database and only give a rough indication of the amounts of each phase present in the sample. Also note that the SemiQuant values are normalised to 100%. Hence the sample contains an amorphous component; this quantification method will lead to overestimated values. The crystal structure data related to the best-fitting phases were retrieved from the ICSD database (Inorganic Crystal Structure Database) and imported into the PANalytical HighScore Plus software. In certain cases, where substitutions of elements were known to exist, atoms were added to the structure. The Rietveld parameters were subsequently refined to a point where agreement between the calculated pattern and the observed pattern was as good as possible. Note that the Rietveld method is not the best method to employ when the aim is to calculate site occupation factors (sof’s). It would be well advised to use full-quantitative electron microprobe data of the different phases to calculate the sof’s. These values can then be fixed in the refinement, which in turn will lead to better accuracy for the other parameters. Zeta potential determinations were carried out on dilute dispersions of the individual minerals studied using a Malvern Zetasizer 4. The instrument gives the electrophoretic mobility from which the zeta potential was calculated using the Smoluchowski equation ( The zeta potential determinations were carried out at pH 6, 8 and 10 at 25 Surface analysis of minerals was carried out using a PHI TRIFT II ToF-SIMS instrument operating in the static SIMS regime. A pulsed primary ion beam bombards the sample surface, causing the emission of atomic and molecular secondary ions. A small percentage of the secondary ions are charged and can therefore be extracted by an electric field into a mass spectrometer. The mass spectra are recorded by measuring the time difference between pulsing the primary ion gun and the arrival of secondary ions on a fast dual microchannelplate detector at the spectrometer, by means of a multistop time-to-digital converter. ToF-SIMS analysis was carried out on stirred trial products (samples [+38–106 Surface analysis by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out using a Kratos Axis – Ultra instrument. The technique involves irradiating a solid The samples were prepared according to the following sequence where a new ground sample (+38–106 Sample 1 – Conditioned for 1 Sample 2 – Conditioned for 1 Sample 3 – Conditioned for 1 Sample 4 – Conditioned for 1 Immediately after preparation of each sample, the solution was degassed (oxygen) with argon bubbling, capped, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored frozen until the XPS analysis was done. Immediately after thawing each sample, a spatula end was used to place concentrated slurry from the bottom of the tube onto conductive sticky tape on an XPS stub. A tissue edge was used to remove excess solution by capillary action still leaving the mineral surfaces covered without exposure to air. This sample was placed in the XPS fore-vacuum within 3 A microflotation cell was used to determine the flotation response of selected minerals. These so-called microflotation experiments essentially measure the hydrophobicity response of the minerals after various treatments. The cell consists of a conical tapered cylindrical tube with air introduced through a needle at the base of the cell. Mineral loaded bubbles rise through the cell and are deflected off the cone at the top of the cell, after which they burst, resulting in minerals dropping into the concentrate launder ( A 2 The aim of the XRD investigation was to identify the phases present in the samples and to analyse the X-ray diffractograms by means of the Rietveld method to obtain further crystallographic information. Quantitative phase analysis (Rietveld Quantification) is a powerful method for determining the quantities of crystalline and amorphous components in multiphase mixtures. The amorphous phase is calculated by difference. In all cases, the phase that was expected to be present in the sample could positively be identified although none of the samples were pure. The purest sample was MER1, which is composed of 97% merenskyite. The Rietveld refinement procedure for moncheite (MON1 and MON2) and merenskyite (MER1 and MER2) resulted in a reasonably good agreement between the measured and the calculated profiles. Zeta potential studies were carried out with the aim of investigating the effect of copper sulphate, xanthate and combinations of these reagents on the surface charge of the mineral samples so as to relate the surface behaviour to the flotation behaviour. The standard deviation in the zeta potential studies is 0.39 for pH 6, 0.43 for pH 8 and 0.60 for pH 10. The results for moncheite sample MON2 ( The merenskyite samples also showed differences in behaviour ( ToF-SIMS analysis is a well-established technique for determining the occurrence of atomic/molecular species on the surface of mineral samples ( The relative percent copper and xanthate ion surface coverage for both moncheite samples are shown in Further testwork was conducted with the addition of a complexing agent, ethylenediamine (EDA), after the CuSO The effect of oxidation was examined on both moncheite samples. The oxidising conditions involved heating the minerals at 100 The relative percent copper and xanthate ion surface coverage for both merenskyite samples are shown in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a quantitative spectroscopic technique that measures the empirical formula, chemical state and electronic state of the elements that exist within a material. Given that copper is clearly shown to be adsorbing on the surface it was decided to determine as far as possible the ionic state of the copper. XPS analyses were only carried out on the moncheite samples (MON1 and MON2) and the results are shown in The microflotation data shows that both moncheite samples have a low to moderate natural floatability, MON1 and MON2 showing recoveries of 18% and 49%, respectively ( The effect of oxidation was examined on both moncheite samples and the recovery-time curves are shown in Microflotation trials were conducted on both moncheite samples in the −10 The microflotation data showed that both merenskyite samples have a reasonably high natural floatability with MER1 and MER2 showing recoveries of 75% and 63%, respectively ( Due to the good floatability obtained for both synthetic merenskyite samples in the presence of xanthate, testwork was conducted with the aim of evaluating conditions which could possibly cause a reduction in the flotation response of the synthetic minerals examined given that one of the motivations for this research was to investigate whether these minerals were responsible for losses in platinum recovery in the flotation process. It is proposed that the ion species e.g. Ca ions, present in the pulp affect mineral surfaces which impacts on the floatability of the Pt and Pd mineral species thereby passivating the mineral surfaces. It is known that calcium ions can have a negative effect on the flotation behaviour of minerals ( The data obtained for merenskyite, MER2, when varying the calcium ion concentration in the synthetic water showed that increasing the calcium concentration from 80 The objective of this study was to investigate the floatability of Pt and Pd telluride minerals and to attempt to explain these observations by reference to the surface characteristics of the minerals. The XRD analyses have shown that none of the synthesised samples was pure and that MON1, MON2, MER1 and MER2 contained around 87% moncheite (PtPd(BiTe) The observations made in the surface analysis experiments; zeta potentials, ToF-SIMS and XPS measurements and their relationship to the flotation behaviour of the samples is of particular interest in this study. In the first instance the role of the xanthate collector and its combination with copper sulphate is interesting. With respect to the addition of pure SIBX, it was observed in the present study, as had been previously observed in a study of arsenides ( The effect of adding copper sulphate was interesting and in some respects counter-intuitive. It is well known that in the case of sulphide minerals copper sulphate is widely used as an activator and there is considerable literature on this (e.g. The xanthate concentrations on the surface in the absence or presence of copper are not significantly different and hence the mere presence of xanthate species on the surface is not an indicator of floatability. It can therefore only be concluded that it is the chemical nature of the xanthate and not the mere presence of a xanthate species on the surface which is crucial to promoting flotation. When copper is absent it can be postulated that the xanthate is readily converted to dixanthogen resulting in the high recoveries observed ( It is interesting to speculate on the role of the bismuth. Although it has been shown that Bi seems to inhibit the formation of Cu(I) species there is little difference between the flotation behaviour of the samples with or without bismuth. Tests were conducted in which a complexing agent, ethylenediamine (EDA), was added after CuSO Further testwork was conducted with the aim of investigating the effects of oxidation, varying size fractions and calcium ion concentration on the flotation response of moncheite and merenskyite. Again the role which bismuth plays in the flotation of the PGE telluride minerals is of interest. It has been shown that oxidation does not affect the recovery of PtTe Further grinding of the ore samples can have a twofold effect, both to reduce particle size and to improve liberation. In the present study there is no gangue present and so the samples are essentially fully liberated. However, it was speculated that exposing fresh sites in the matrix of the mineral after further grinding could possibly improve recoveries. As shown in Calcium ions found in process water can have a major impact on flotation of certain minerals ( The present study has examined the floatability of synthetic moncheite and merenskyite mineral samples with a view to relating these results to their surface properties as measured by zeta potential, ToF-SIMS and XPS. It has been shown firstly that these minerals float readily when treated with SIBX. As opposed to what is observed in the case of base metal sulphides, the addition of copper sulphate as an activator resulted in a decrease in both the rate of flotation and, especially in the case of moncheite, in the final recoveries. There were no clear correlations between the observations made of the surface charges of the minerals and their flotation behaviour. Copper sulphate addition had the expected effect on zeta potential values but this did not correlate with the floatability of the minerals. XPS and ToF-SIMS results showed that xanthate was present on the surfaces of the minerals although in lesser concentrations after copper sulphate addition. There were indications that Cu(I)X was formed but this was associated with a lowering in flotation recovery. It is inferred from the results that the active species for flotation was dixanthogen. Copper species such as Cu(OH) The authors thank Spectrau (University of Johannesburg) for the XRD analyses and ACeSSS (Division of Information, Engineering & Environment, University of South Australia) for the XPS analyses and Professor R. Smart for his valuable advice. The authors would also like to thank Anglo Platinum for support during the study and for permission to publish these results.