High-efficiency flocculation and settling is required for solid–liquid separation in cemented paste backfill, which is one of the best approaches for tailings management and green mining. The optimization of flocculation and settling parameters of tailings slurry was carried out by response surface methodology (RSM) with Box–Behnken design. The solid fraction, flocculant dosage, flocculant concentration, and shear rate were selected as the factor. Likewise, the maximum square-weighted mean chord length of tailings floc, initial settling rate of the suspension-supernate interface, and turbidity of supernate were selected to characterize the flocculation and settling process. For individual response, a quadratic polynomial regression model was proposed and optimal parameters were achieved by RSM. Multiple response optimization by the overall desirability function approach was applied successfully to estimate the optimal parameters, i.e., solid fraction of 10.29%, flocculant dosage of 25%, flocculant concentration of 0.15%, and shear rate of 51.60 s−1. The validation experiments demonstrated that the Box–Behnken design in RSM is an appropriate and powerful approach for the optimization of flocculation and settling parameters of Nickel tailings slurry. More importantly, the optimal parameters achieved provide valuable information for the flocculation settling process of unclassified Nickel tailings slurry in Jinchuan Nickel Deposit, which will contribute to tailings management and water recycling, avoiding air pollution, water pollution, and soil pollution in mine.Millions of tons of mineral tailings are produced annually, which leads to safety and environmental issues, including air pollution, water pollution, and soil pollution ( High settling rate, low-turbidity overflow, and high-concentration underflow are the main requirements for efficient dewatering in a thickener or clarifier ( Inspired by the above works, we investigated the influence of solid fraction, flocculant dosage and concentration, and shear rate on floc size, initial settling rate of suspension-supernate interface, and the turbidity of supernate by response surface methodology (RSM). The flocculation process and settling process were studied separately. The optimal parameters of flocculation and settling were obtained, which will provide a reference for improving the flocculation settling process of unclassified Nickel tailings slurry in the CPB in Jinchuan Nickel Deposit, a world-renowned multi-metal-associated sulfide deposit The tailings were sampled from the Jinchuan Nickel Deposit located in the northwest of China. The specific gravity (density) of copper tailings measured by the water pycnometer test method is 2.785 g cm Based on the previous study ( A flocculation test was performed on a Flocculator (MY3000-6 M, Wuhan Meiyu, China) which enables shear rate and flocculation time to be preset ( The results of the FBRM data are the chord length distribution (CLD) of the tailings flocs and the operating principle was introduced in the relevant literature ( After a flocculation of 4 min, the flocculated tailings slurry was transferred into a graduated cylinder with a volume of 1000 ml for the settlement test. The suspension-supernate interface height at different time was recorded, and the turbidity of supernate after 5 min of settling was measured by HACH 2100N Turbidimeter. RSM is widely used to design a flocculation optimization experiment, reduce the number of planned experiments and evaluate the relationship between input factors and responses ( About 29 experimental runs were simulated by the BBD. The time for flocculation and settling in each experimental run are 4 min and 10 min, respectively. A second-order model in the form of a quadratic polynomial equation shown in Eq. Because of three responses, i.e., SWMCL Then the The dynamic variation of SWMCL and suspension-supernate interface height with time are shown in From Based on the experimental results and Eq. Fisher’s ‘ The Student ‘ From The behavior of SWMCL From Eq. As shown in  From Eq. From The considerable curvature in each contour plot in From Eq. Multiple response optimization in this research is to obtain the maximum SWMCL Then the The optimal coded factors estimated were −0.529, 1, 1, and −1, then the corresponding optimal actual parameters were SF = 10.29%, FD = 25%, FC = 0.15%, and G = 51.60 s Validation experiments were performed under the optimal conditions for individual response and multiple responses, and the results are summarized in In this work, the optimization of flocculation and settling parameters of tailings slurry was carried out. Response surface methodology (RSM) with Box–Behnken design (BBD) was employed to investigate the influences of solid fraction (SF), flocculant dosage (FD), flocculant concentration (FC), and shear rate (G) on the maximum square-weighted mean chord length (SWMCL In this paper, the influence of the transfer of flocculated tailing from Flocculator into the graduated cylinder on floc size was ignored. So we will improve the experimental equipment at first in the future to avoid the influence, and then try to use the BBD in RSM to investigate the flocculation settling process of other tailings, such as copper tailings, iron tailings. Moreover, these parameters optimized in this paper could be used for numerical simulation of the settling of flocculated suspensions (  A. W., Z. R., S. Y. and J. W. acknowledge financial support by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: