The solvent extraction of zinc, cadmium and chromium contained in 5.5 mol/L phosphoric acid solutions (30% P2O5) was investigated using 7-(4-ethyl-1-methyloctyl)-8-hydroxyquinoline-Kelex 100® as extractant and treated kerosene as diluent. At organic-to-aqueous phase ratio (1/1) and at room temperature, 58% of zinc, 34% of chromium and 15% of cadmium were recovered in 240 min. In order to improve the kinetics of extraction, a modifier reagent was added to the organic phase. The addition of n-decanol (10 vol.%) increased the rate metals extraction by reducing the equilibrium time from 240 min to 30 min, along with 60% recovery of metals. Extraction of metal ions increased with increasing aqueous phase pH. The pH0.5 values difference of 0.1 M with Kelex 100® indicates the possible separation of cadmium, zinc and chromium. Increasing the concentration of Kelex 100® increased the percentage extraction of metal ions. The loading capacity values were found to be 83%, 80% and 71% for zinc, chromium and cadmium, respectively, at 0.4 M Kelex 100® concentration, indicating that the extractant is highly selective for the metal ions considered.The composition of Kelex 100® has been previously described by various authors ( The nature of the alkyl radical The seven substituted 8-hydroxyquinolines (Kelex 100®) are used in hydrometallurgy for liquid–liquid extraction of gallium and germanium from Bayer solutions and concentrated zinc solutions, respectively ( Due to the high complexing ability of phosphoric acid, there are limited reports in this field on the extraction of heavy metals from H Kelex 100® was supplied by Sherex Chemicals, USA. This extractant (as received) was dissolved in kerosene (1% aromatics). The kerosene, used as diluent in this study, was a commercial JET A1 type product from Algiers Petroleum Refinery. It was washed with concentrated sulphuric acid solution, neutralised with 5% Na Extraction experiments were carried out in mechanically agitated and thermostatic beakers containing 0.45 The extraction of zinc, chromium and cadmium from 5.5 mol/L H  After addition of The effect of Kelex 100® concentration in kerosene diluent with The following operating conditions were used: organic phase/aqueous phase It was observed that the percentage metal extraction increased with increase of the Kelex 100® concentration ( This solvent extraction study of zinc, cadmium and chromium has been carried out from 5.5 mol/L phosphoric acid solutions using 7-(4-ethyl-1-methyloctyl)-8-hydroxyquinoline-Kelex 100® as extractant and treated kerosene as diluent. The addition of