The purpose of this study is to determine the variations within a certain area in the values of unit volume weight, water absorption capacity by mass, uniaxial compression strength, and bohme surface abrasion resistance, which are among the physical and mechanical properties of andesite existing in the andesitic marble quarry in the Çubuk district in the city of Ankara, Turkey. In line with this purpose, the working area was divided into grids at equal intervals and tests were done by taking andesite samples from each grid point. The data obtained aims to determine the regions of andesite in the working area that are suitable and unsuitable for being facing and building stone, according to the TSE standards. Hence, unnecessary production will be avoided by ensuring that production occurs in this andesite quarry only in the areas which are suitable for facing and building stone.According to the 2009 data, natural stone exporting value, which is the source of the potential industrial raw material of Turkey, exceeds 1200 It is very important to know the properties of natural building stones and their distribution in the quarry before production planning because of the difficulties and expenses in producing them in the quarry or processing them in the plant. This helps to put forth selective production ( Some researchers have attempted to investigate the quality of natural stones and their distribution in the quarry or deposits. As can be seen from the literature review, there are only a few studies about the quality of natural stones and their distribution in the quarry or mining deposits, and all of them include theoretical work. However, so far no study has been carried out regarding the determination of the regions used for facing and building stone in a quarry according to some standards by using computer software. To this end, this study focuses on the determination of spatial variations in the values of unit volume weight, water absorption capacity by mass, uniaxial compression strength, and bohme surface abrasion resistance, which are among the physical and mechanical properties of natural stone in the andesitic marble quarry in the Çubuk district in the city of Ankara, Turkey. In line with this purpose, the working area was divided into grid points at equal intervals and tests were performed on the andesite samples collected from each grid point. The data obtained aims to classify andesite stone in the working area which is suitable for facing and building stone, according to TS 10835 standards ( The term “natural building stones” refers to commercial natural stones that are used in structures and environmental arrangements without polishing or roughening the surface, and cut with diamond discs or shaped with hand tools or dragged. The increasing environmental sensitivity and movements in the 1980s led to the increasing use of natural stone in the world. A similar trend was also observed in Turkey. Natural stones have been widely used both in buildings and open/close public areas, particularly in touristic places. Foundations and walls of constructions, external coverings, garden walls, park and garden arrangements, pavements, roads and pedestrian lane paving, the restoration of historical buildings, mosques, and minaret or landscape architecture are typical examples ( Andesite, which is the subject of this study, is mostly used in the arrangement of exterior surfaces and public areas. Andesitic rocks with a volcanic origin are used in historical buildings and architectural designs for various purposes and the suitable types in terms of colour, texture and hardness can be used as paving stone, flagstone and facing stone. Andesite contains a small amount of absorbed water and does not dissolve in water. It is red in colour and has a dense texture. Andesite appears to have smooth surfaces when broken or cut with disc cutters. Andesite production increased considerably in Turkey (especially in the cities of Ankara, Çankırı and Afyon) in 2009, reaching up to 1.9 As the physical and mechanical properties examined in this study are unit volume weight, water absorption capacity by mass, uniaxial compression strength, and abrasion strength due to friction (bohme surface abrasion resistance), the standards regarding these properties will be described here. The classifications on the standards regarding the current natural building stones were made based only on these properties. In order to use andesites as facing and building stones, TS 10835 standards ( The study area is an andesite quarry located in the western side of Menekse Hill, 3 As can be seen from Generally, they show current layering in decimetric thicknesses. These are defined by the grain size of minerals and the slight changes in colour. The position of the lava flow varies between N30–35E and 26–45SE in the centre of the deposit and on the northern part. In the southern part, a significant difference is observed. The strike is between E–W and N63W. The dip is between 37° and 55°, towards north and northeast. Andesite has a compact structure and a microscopic reddish brown colour from light to dark because of the variation of the minerals amount and chemical composition in the matrix. Due to plagioclase crystals, ferric minerals (FeO, Fe The methodology followed within the scope of this study is shown in As seen in In the study, the maps were developed for unit volume weight, water absorption by mass, uniaxial compression strength and bohme surface abrasion resistance of andesite by using SURFER 6.04 software. They indicate the spatial variations in the values of these physical and mechanical properties. Then, the regions of andesite that can be used for facing and natural building stone were determined. The effective porosity and water absorption by mass of rock samples were determined using the saturation technique, as recommended by TSE ( The uniaxial compression strength was determined following the TSE ( The abrasion tests measure the deterioration through friction suffered on the surface of the material subject to the movement of objects. To determine the abrasion behaviour of stones used for flooring applications, standard test procedures such as the American standard ASTM C-241 ( Tests were carried out using the bohme abrasion test machine simulating the sliding three-body abrasion condition in accordance with the Turkish standard ( The statistical results obtained from all the tests are given briefly in As can be seen in All of the test results (for 108 points) were analysed using SURFER 6.04 computer software and the regions of andesite that can be used for facing and natural building stones, according to TS 10835 standards ( When The maps belonging to unit volume weight, water absorption capacity by mass, uniaxial compression strength, and bohme surface abrasion resistance were consolidated on a single map and the regions of andesite that can be used as a building stone according to TSE standards were found ( This study aimed to determine the regions suitable for facing and natural building stone in a marble quarry. For this reason, some laboratory studies have been performed on natural stone samples. The main conclusions drawn from this study are given below: The unexploitable areas are mainly concentrated in the NW of the study area. For an economic and efficient production, working within the exploitable area, determined as compliant to the TSE standards, will always prevent unnecessary production and time loss for the quarry owner and avoiding losing money. As a result, it is recommended that this study should be carried out for all other marble quarries in order to reach a fast, economic, and conscious state of production.