The process of reactive liquid/liquid extraction is well established in the field of hydrometallurgy but not yet for waste water treatment. The simultaneous separation of several heavy metals, even at metal concentrations in the range of some mg/L, is a new target in the application of this method. Using Kelex 100速 as commercial chelating extractant the results of heavy metal isolation from different model waste waters are presented. After separation of the two phases the water is nearly free of heavy metals as they have passed over into the organic liquid. The complexing agent is regenerated by a mineral acid corresponding to the addition of protons. In this step the metal ions are released into the acid solution with an enrichment factor in the range of 100 to 1,000 compared with the initial concentrations in the aqueous phase. From this acid solution, which is free of In the experiments mentioned below the complexing agent with cation exchange capacity belongs to the group of quinolines. The general structure of the substance used in the experiments reported is given in Kelex 100速 has found widespread application as a chelating extractant for gallium(III), germanium(IV), copper(I), iron(III), palladium(II), and rare earth elements. So far, liquid/liquid extraction of metals has been extensively studied with extractants containing oxygen and/or nitrogen as donor atoms. On a technical scale, up to now the principle of liquid/liquid extraction has been mainly employed in the field of hydrometallurgy where the separation of one metal from a multi-element solution is to be achieved at concentrations in the range of some grams per litre. In waste water treatment quite different conditions are under discussion. All the heavy metals present in the aqueous effluent are to be extracted simultaneously in one step. Moreover, the element concentrations are some orders of magnitude lower than in hydrometallurgy. Under these circumstances the simultaneous extraction of cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, nickel, mercury and zinc has not yet been investigated.  Kelex 100速 (Schering Ind. Chem.) were used without further purification. Kerosene (Esso), decane, 1-decanol, Hepes-buffer (purum, Fluka), NaOH, H Synthetic aqueous metal solutions were prepared by dissolving certain amounts of metal chlorides or nitrates in deionized water. Initial concentrations of metals in aqueous phases of synthetic waste water were adjusted to 10, 100, or 1000 Equal volumes (10 Aqueous and organic phases were mixed and separated in a two-step counter-current mixer-settler. The flux of the two intensively mixed liquids was 1  Several Kelex 100速 concentrations were tested and 3 The results show that all metal ions are extracted almost quantitatively in the organic phase during the batch and continuous experiments at pH 