The purpose of this study was to evaluate the bioleaching of copper from a chalcopyrite-bearing molybdenite flotation concentrate using a shake flask technique and mesophilic and thermophilic microorganisms. The premise of the study was that Cu-bearing phases may be selectively solubilized through bioleaching from the bulk molybdenite for subsequent recovery from the leach solution. The composition of mineral salts in bioleach solutions was evaluated, but it did not have significant effects on the bioleaching. The addition of pyrite or a combination of sulfur and ferrous sulfate increased the redox potential and acid formation but did not have a major effect on the bioleaching of Cu. Statistical analysis indicated no significant differences in the bioleaching of copper between eight different mineral salt formulations amended with sulfur and ferrous iron. Silver at 69mg/l (added as Ag2SO4) enhanced the dissolution of chalcopyrite. The bioleaching of the molybdenite concentrate at 3% (w/v) pulp density yielded 97% dissolution of Cu in the presence and 55% in the absence of added Ag. Bioleaching at thermophilic temperatures (70°C) yielded up to 75% Cu dissolution from the concentrate at 6% (w/v) pulp density, whereas the yields were about 27% at mesophilic temperatures. On a mass basis, molybdenum dissolution exceeded copper leaching but the relative yields were <9%. If the molybdenite concentrate is upgraded by removing Cu through bioleaching, molybdenum loss into solution may be offset by recovering it from leach solutions.Molybdenite (MoS For upgrading molybdenite concentrates for further processing, it may be feasible to minimize the Cu content of molybdenite through bioleaching. For the present study, the feasibility of the bioleaching of copper was assessed with a molybdenite flotation concentrate which contained chalcopyrite as well as pyrite (FeS The MoS Three mixed cultures (mesophilic, moderately thermophilic, and thermophilic) of acidophilic microorganisms were used in this study. The mesophilic (32 The cultures were originally grown with a chalcopyrite concentrate as an energy source in shake flasks (150 The experiments were designed to address the amenability of the Cu-bearing molybdenite to the bioleaching to minimize the Cu-content of the molybdenite concentrate. Specific formulations of nutrient solutions, silver catalytic effect, and the use of thermophiles at elevated temperatures were tested in the study. Two different leaching experiments were carried out. In the first experiment, 13 leach solution formulations ( At intervals, redox potential and pH were measured directly in the culture flasks and the suspensions were sampled for microscopic cell counts after ~ Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDAX) analyses (Philips XL 30 SEM) were conducted on solid residues from the leaching experiments. The samples were air dried followed by mounting on stubs and Au coating before examination. Semiquantitative X-ray diffraction was used to analyze the mineralogical composition of the molybdenite concentrate sample. Powder diffraction patterns were obtained with a Siemens D-500 diffractometer with Ni-filtered CuKα radiation and a goniometer speed of 1° 2θ/min. The diffraction profiles with a 0.01 precision of The data were examined with regression analysis to assess the association between mineral salt medium composition and Cu dissolution on days 11 and 30 of the time course. The first time interval was chosen to discern if a specific medium supported the highest initial dissolution, and the 30 Analysis of the mineralogical composition by X-ray diffraction showed that molybdenite was the major phase, with chalcopyrite (CuFeS A total of 13 leach solution formulations, listed in The dissolution of Cu over time reached 40–55% in most cultures. The yield of Cu leaching was 12% in the formaldehyde-treated control. The addition of silver sulfate (69 The Cu dissolution results (i.e., response variables) on days 11 and 30 were subjected to stepwise regression analysis. When tested with all 13 tests, silver addition stood out as having the most positive effect on Cu dissolution, accounting for 67% of the variance. The formaldehyde control (test 11) affected the Cu dissolution negatively, also evident from the corresponding time course curves. The addition of silver (test 13) and formaldehyde (test 11) accounted for 94% of the total variance. There were no significant differences in Cu dissolution between the different mineral salt solutions (tests 1–8) which all contained similar additions of elemental S and ferrous sulfate. The relative yield of molybdenite dissolution reached 8.9% in the mesophilic bioleaching. Because of the high Mo content the concentrations of molybdenum in the solution were higher than those of dissolved Cu. The maximum extent of molybdenum dissolution was 1.43 For regression analysis of molybdenum dissolution, the results were clustered in Group 1: tests 1–8 and Group 2: tests 9–13. The means calculated for the two groups were significantly different (P Culture solutions gradually decreased to pH Redox potential values initially increased in all cultures except in the case of formaldehyde treatment ( Microscopic cell counts revealed differences within one order of magnitude between the test cultures. The initial cell density after 15% (v/v) inoculation was 0.8 The time courses of total Fe The bioleaching of Cu in 6% (w/v) molybdenite concentrate pulp was tested at three temperatures ( At 32 The corresponding leaching yields of Mo from molybdenite concentrate were also determined. The yields were < As shown in The catalytic effect of silver on the bioleaching of chalcopyrite has previously been demonstrated in shake flask, bioreactor and column experiments (e.g., Electrochemical techniques with cyclic and linear voltamperometry have confirmed acanthite formation on chalcopyrite surface during silver-catalyzed bioleaching ( Different mineral salt formulations tested in this study showed no significant differences in the bioleaching of copper. In light of these data, mineral salts were in excess and could be optimized if used in large-scale bioleaching tests. Previous studies suggest that Mo is relatively toxic to bioleaching bacteria (e.g., The results demonstrate that the bioleaching of the Cu-containing molybdenite concentrate leads to the dissolution of the chalcopyrite phase, with variable Cu yields depending on experimental conditions. Molybdenum was also dissolved, more than copper on a mass basis. Molybdenum dissolved more at the mesophilic temperature range where the redox potential exceeded 600 The yield of Cu dissolution reached 47% with mesophiles, 59% with moderate thermophiles, and 90% with extreme thermophiles after 4 This work was supported by the