A study on the recovery of copper, cobalt, and zinc from copper smelter and converter slags by roasting with sulfuric acid has been conducted. Acid roasting of slags followed by hot water leaching was carried out to bring the metal values into solution. In the leaching experiments, the effects of roasting time, acid/slag ratio, roasting temperature, and application of thermal decomposition prior to leaching on the metals dissolution extents were investigated. A total of 88% of copper, 87% of cobalt, 93% of zinc, and 83% of iron were extracted in 2 h of roasting at 150 °C and 3:1 acid/slag ratio. Increasing acid roasting temperature and time did not have increasing effect on the Co and Zn dissolution extents, while significant improvements were observed in Cu dissolution. Application of thermal decomposition prior to leaching gave small decreases in metal extractions, but since there was no iron dissolution, it was favoured from the viewpoint of metal recoveries from the leachates due to the elimination of an iron removal step.The flash smelting process has been used in copper industry for a number of years and has replaced most of the reverberatory applications, known as “conventional” copper smelting processes. In this process, due to high copper lockup in the slag, a separate processing system consisting of electric furnace slag cleaning, converter for copper matte blowing and fire refining is required In some plants, flash smelting furnace slag (1.6–2% Cu) and converter slag (5–7% Cu) are cleaned in an electric arc furnace, where coke is used as reductant and copper content of waste slag decreases to 0.5–0.8% The flotation process plays an important role in the evaluation of slags and is utilized in some copper smelting processes There are also some hydrometallurgical methods given in the literature for the treatment of slags, such as leaching in nitrate, perchloride, chlorate, and sulfuric acids with and without pressure, ferric chloride, cyanide, ferric sulfate, and ammonia solutions Smelter slag and sulfur dioxide are the waste products of nonferrous pyrometallurgical processes. Dissolution behavior of Co, Cu, Fe, Ni, and Zn from smelter slag in aqueous sulfur dioxide has also been studied Studies on the recovery of Cu, Co, Ni, and Zn from copper converter slags by roasting with ferric sulfate, pyrite, ammonium sulfate, and sulfuric acid followed by leaching have been reported In the Black Sea Copper Works (Samsun, Turkey) about 35,000 tons of blister copper is produced annually along with approximately 100,000 tons of slag, which is disposed to a slag area and left there for 24 h for cooling Flash furnace and converter slags, usually fayalitic based, contain Cu, Co, and Zn in the form of silicates and ferrites, as determined from the X-ray diffraction patterns Usually, the standard free energies of reactions between silicates (and ferrites) and H As seen from In standard conditions, Δ  A mixture of flash smelter and converter slags subjected to this experimental study was taken from the feed to the flotation unit in the Black Sea Copper Works, Turkey. Chemical analysis of the slag sample is: 2.64% Cu, 0.095% Co, 0.67% Zn, 47.2% Fe, 0.13% Pb, 0.004% Cd, 0.065% Ni, 8.5% Si, and 1.3% S. By examining the smelter and converter slag samples with optical microscopy and by X-ray diffraction analysis, it was found that copper exists as bornite and ferrites, and also in metallic form, though in small quantities, where zinc, cobalt, and nickel were in the form of silicates and ferrites, while iron formed as a fayalite-type matrix. Samples were first crushed and ground before the tests so that 80% of them would pass below 0.1 mm. In the acid roasting experiments, a Heraeus Roka type tube furnace was used. A sample of 5 g was mixed with varying amounts of acid and placed into a quartz boat (10 cm length×1.5 cm width), which was then inserted into the tube furnace with a known temperature profile. Air was blown at a rate of 2.5 L min The effects of roasting time, acid/slag ratio, and roasting temperature on the dissolution extents of metals were investigated in the leaching experiments. Increasing acid/slag ratio shifted metal dissolution extent–roasting time curves to higher values except copper. A 3:1 acid/slag ratio was to be the optimum  Copper flash smelting and converter slags contain considerable amounts of iron in the forms of silicate, magnetite, and metal oxy-ferrites as observed in the case of acid roasting experiments, and they were able to be transformed into the soluble compounds by sulfatizing as a result of roasting with concentrated acid. However, the main purpose of this study was to dissolve Cu, Co, and Zn while keeping Fe in the solid residue as an undissolved compound. Thus, the following experiments aimed at producing insoluble iron oxides by thermally decomposing iron sulfates, formed during acid roasting stage, at a temperature at which not all other metal sulfates are affected. For this purpose, slag sample roasted at 250 °C and 3:1 acid/slag ratio was subjected to the thermal decomposition at 600, 650, and 700 °C for 0.5–4 h and by blowing 2.5 L/min air to the furnace and then dissolving in hot water followed by filtration. As seen from   As a result of thermal decomposition experiments, although there are small decreases in metal dissolutions compared to the ones observed in the case of acid roasting followed by water leaching, it was found that the iron dissolution was almost negligible, which is favored in the next step, recovery of metals from sulfate solutions. In order to increase the metal ion contents of the leachates, solutions could be recycled in the leach circuit until they reach the desirable metal contents. After filtration, copper and zinc could be recovered by H It was found that roasting the mixture of smelter and converter slags with sulfuric acid caused the sulfation of slag constituents, which is in agreement with theoretical considerations. Results obtained from roasting the slag with H Authors would like to dedicate this paper to the memory of their beloved teacher and adviser, Prof. Dr. Fuat Yavuz BOR.