The conventional deterministic approach based (DAB) methods are simple and widely used to determine an adequate chain pillar size in coal mines where geological settings, coal characterizations and mining methods have been explored. It is evident that such deterministic methods have some intrinsic limitations in handling uncertainties in material properties, non-regular geometries and different mining operations. In the deterministic stability analysis of a chain pillar, the safety factors as well as all input parameters are deterministic. Although, these parameters generally exhibit uncertainty and should lead to a probabilistic expression for the safety factor. The probabilistic analysis provides a confidence interval to express the reliability of chain pillars stability.
                  In this paper, safety factor is defined as a probabilistic function and the failure probability of designed chain pillar of Tabas coal mine is then evaluated using the First Order Second Moment (FOSM) and the Advanced Second Moment (ASM) methods. The results of the probabilistic stability analysis show that the confidence interval for designed pillars with both mentioned methods applied are similar and their values vary from 84% to 88%. The results of such analyses can be used as a basis for decision-making about the size of chain pillars and reduce the risk of pillars stability as well as the uncertainties. However, a trade-off between cost is essential for making the final decision.Pillars can be defined as the in situ rock between two or more underground openings ( In longwall mining, a system of individual pillars named chain pillars are designed to protect panel entries from the influence of panel extraction so that entry functions such as transportation and ventilation can be safely maintained. Therefore, chain pillars must be designed to assure intact entries during the panel development. During retreating longwall mining, the pillars must protect and support the head-entry so that it will provide a usable tail-entry for the next longwall panel ( The three approaches on the design of longwall chain pillars from stress distribution and abutment pressure determination perspectives are briefly explained below. Analytical methods were developed by some assumptions. Therefore, the application of these methods is limited. Wilson has presented one of these analytical methods for the chain pillars design. This method provides an analytical solution to the stress distribution due to the abutment loading considering pillar strength. It simply assumes that the in situ coal strength is equal to one-fifth of the laboratory strength and also the horizontal and the vertical in situ stress values are equal ( The Carr and Wilson method, as an alternative analytical method, utilizes Wilson’s confined core model to estimate pillar strength. Therefore, the methodology is generally an analytical model utilizing a modified Mohr–Coulomb constitutive law. An important limitation of apply this method is that it assumes that the pre-mining stress field is uniform. Generally speaking, the model is an attempt to explain the relationship between the pillar strength and pillar width, and it forms the basis for pillar mechanics for the US ( Based upon the results of the pillar stability studies in different geological and loading conditions, several empirical methods have been developed. The exiting literature review reveals that the ALPS and the Choi and McCain methods are the most popular empirical methods in use. The ALPS method that has been developed by Mark and Bieniawski providing estimates of the abutment loads based on field measurements, for three phases of longwall mining: development, headgate loading, and tailgate loading ( The Choi and McCain method is developed using a 2-D subsidence model for pillar loading and the Holland–Gaddy empirical formula for pillar strength. The method assumes that the pillar load in side abutment loading is the weight of trapezoidal shape above the entry ( The Hsiung–Peng method is based on finite element modeling method of abutment loading ( However, such conventional deterministic approach based methods (DAB) are simple and widely used in mines. Sometimes, these methods are to be questioned due to the failure of pillars which were considered stable, i.e. safety factor greater than one. Such failure cases show that improvements are needed in mine pillar design ( In mining applications, material is not usually accounted but empirical formulas have been developed to make adjustments to the factor of safety ( The advantages of probabilistic analysis are twofold. Firstly, it is able to handle the uncertainties in a rational way for designing purposes and, in particular, it can determine the sensitivity of uncertainties in various design variables. Secondly, while decisions are seldom clear and never perfect, this approach provides a more rational decision-making basis than the scope of a purely deterministic analysis ( Peytel applied reliability methods to design square pillars ( In this paper, a probabilistic analysis for the designed chain pillars of the Mine-field #1 in Tabas coal mines (Iran) is presented. Based on the presented analysis, the reliability of stability for the designed chain pillars is determined by using the First Order Second Moment (FOSM) and Advanced Second Moment (ASM) methods. Reliability or probabilistic analyses have been proposed in order to consider the uncertainties of both analytical parameters and models, as an alternative to deterministic methods ( The following function has been developed to determine the failure probability value: One fundamental problem encountered in structural reliability theory concerns the computation of the mentioned multi-fold probability integral. The difficulty in computing this probability has led to the development of various approximation methods. Some of these methods have been applied to rock slope problems and the structural safety, such as the first order reliability method (FORM), the second order reliability method (SORM), the point estimate method (PEM) and the response surface method (RSM). The FORM that it is, in this paper, applied for probabilistic modeling, is considered to be one of the most reliable computational methods in geotechnical engineering and structural reliability ( The first order approximated mean, The reliability index defines the risk level and can be expressed as a function of the first two moments, as follows: Furthermore, the resulting performance function distribution can be reasonably considered as a normal distribution according to the central limit theorem ( It is clear when In order to overcome the above-mentioned shortcomings in FOSM, the Advanced Second Moment (ASM) method was proposed ( According to ASM, the reliability index, The relationship between failure probability and In the deterministic stability analysis of chain pillars, safety factors, as well as all input parameters, are deterministic. However, these parameters generally exhibit uncertainty and should lead to a probabilistic expression of the safety factor. The probabilistic analysis provides a confidence interval to express the reliability of chain pillars stability. To perform the reliability analysis of a chain pillar design, failure criteria should be identified by means of the performance function The pillar strength is depended upon three factors ( In this research, the Madden’s formula is used to evaluate chain pillar strength. This formula was particularly developed to be used under especial conditions in which the width to height ratio of the pillar is greater than 5 ( Now, the mean and the standard deviation of each variable in the performance function should be determined. There are eight parameters assumed as variables with normal distribution functions. Considering the performance function and calculated values of eight variables, it is possible to determine the reliability index using both FOSM and ASM methods. Tabas coal mine is located in 75 In this mine, a three-entry system is used to serve the 220 In this paper, the first set of chain pillars located between the two first panels is studied. The depth of these chain pillars is 200 Regarding the values of the geometrical parameters, the mean and the standard deviations of all eight parameters in performance function (Eq. In order to determine the reliability index of the chain pillars by FOSM method, in the first step, it is necessary to evaluate the mean and the variance of the performance function. In this research, it is assumed that all parameters in the performance function are uncommitted variables and consequently the covariance should be equal to zero. The failure probability was calculated using Eq. The mean values as well as the standard deviation, the reliability index and the failure probability values are shown in There are some limitations to evaluate reliability index due to the non-linearity of the performance function. In this case, the ASM reflects results indicating more accuracy than the FOSM. In this paper, the Rackwitz–Fiessler’s algorithm was implemented to evaluate the reliability index of the chain pillars applying the ASM method. Based on the mentioned algorithm, the reliability index in ASM method is processed in six iterative steps, as follows: Assume initial values for Compute the directional cosines of variables. For example,  Form expressions for Substitute these expressions into Calculate, using this value of Repeat steps 2–5 until the process converges to a unique solution for In case of applying the ASM, the mean of input variables in the design point is shown in Considering the obtained results, the reliability index and the failure probability for chain pillars were calculated while the standard safety factor was considered 1 and 1.5. The calculated reliability index and failure probability are shown in The value of directional cosine ( Regarding the results of the probabilistic analysis, it is possible to evaluate the failure probability for each given safety factor. The conventional deterministic methods are widely used to determine an adequate chain pillars size for coal mines. In these cases, the safety factors as well as all input parameters are deterministic. Evidently that these parameters which have probability characteristics, should be analyzed by using the probabilistic methods. The result of the probabilistic stability analysis for the chain pillars in C The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Mr. S. F. Forohandeh, academic member of the mathematical department, Shahrood University of Technology, Iran.