Identification of possible relationship between the elements, in mineralization and geochemical modeling is very important. The Full Cubic Model (FCM) with 90 Predictors including the main effects, quadratic terms, and interaction effects of Ag, As, Cu, Hg, Mn, Nb, P, Pb, Sn, Sr, Zn and U elements was used to create an Optimal and Reduced Cubic Model (ORCM) at vein-style Au (Ag)-polymetallic mineralization of Glojeh. It was generated with multiple regression and variance analysis and enhanced by Backward Elimination Procedure (BEP) for insignificant predictors through 15 steps. All the predictors contributed in ORCM by lowest p-value of 0.07 at degree of freedom (DF) equaled to 36. F ratio and R2 (pred.) criteria showed increasing trend from 0% to 77.80% and 6.12–262.51, respectively in model optimization. The main and interacted elements at ORCM are Sn, U, Pb, Cu and Ag × Sn, As × Mn, As × Zn, Hg × P, P × Sn, Sn2, P2, respectively based on related t-values. Interaction occurred when a pair of elements produces no similar trend on the response at different levels (associated to populations) of another element. Therefore, interaction of two elements on Au concentration was considered, simultaneously. By investigation, a disordinal interaction effect occurs on deposit for Au-As–Mn, Au-Ag-As and Au-Hg-Mn when the third element changes across the background level to vein values. Whereas, ordinal effects was observed at both population for Au-Ag-Hg and Au-As-Hg, since the lines were parallel. It implies that As has similar trend on Au for each value of Hg. The Au-Ag line explains the general downward shift by increasing Hg concentrations from vein to background. It revealed that Hg is more concentrated in background area. The accuracy and precision of this approach have been studied extensively for sample analysis, parameter identification, and modeling to ensure about BEP.Some deposits described as epithermal formed at temperatures <300 °C and crustal levels typically <1 km ( The aim of the study was to determine the high-precision statistical model based on detailed data processing. The accuracy and precision of this approach have extensively improved by sample analysis and new parameter identification on modeling. New parameters have been investigated based on main effects (X), containing quadratic terms (X Tarom-Hashtjin Metallogenic Province (THMP; western Alborz) is located at northwest of Iran ( The Glojeh mineralization district is a part of THMP. Igneous rocks in Glojeh district include intrusive rocks (granodiorite, granite and quartz-monzonite), and volcanic and sub-volcanic rocks (rhyodacite, rhyolite, andesitic basalt, andesitic, tachyandesite, trachydacite, basalt, tuff and rhyolitic tuff; Exploration works in area are done in two phases of activation. Six evaluation trenches (work phase 1. Tr1-Tr6) were excavated at selected locations, after that at 2nd phase. Trenches,TR1-2 to TR5-6, were excavated between them. The total number of 11 drill holes was designed and follow the original dip (45°) and the azimuthal direction (180° same as trenches) established at the area. Each borehole intersects one or both A and B veins and somewhere small veinlets are reported ( In the initial stages of any scientific study, a conceptual scheme of an acceptable approach for sampling is considered ( The accuracy of any geochemical interpretations should be assessed to optimize the use of the results ( Duplicates are defined as samples collected respectively from the same source at the same time in the laboratory. Duplicates provide information on both the heterogeneity of the sampling material (can be used to identify nugget effects) as well as the analytical precision ( The BEP has been described as a sequential process for fitting the least squares model ( The FCM included all variables and removing the least predictors is essential to produce an optimal model. The process of eliminating the least useful variables at different level of BEP was done by partial F ratio and R An equation (ORCM) that generated by regression analysis describes the statistical relationship between 36 predictors (54 predictors were eliminated from FCM) and the response variable of Au to predict new observations. Graphical comparison of predicted (ORCM fits by interaction of 11 elements) and actual gold values (Au) versus arbitrary sample number is illustrated in We assessed the quality of samples by examining correlation of 18 independent samples according Duplicate-main samples and Replicate-main samples, a high precision and accuracy in data are introduced across many labs of Au/Ag to those in duplicate, replicate and reference dataset. Precision was estimated by duplicate analysis and this procedure was evaluated by replicate analyses. Finally, a good precision and accuracy are obtained for samples analysis. A step by step process of removing insignificant predictors is generated with multiple regression and variance analysis and enhanced by BEP for insignificant predictors at 15 steps. The FCM is constructed for 90 (equals the df for regression) predictors. After 15 steps and by gradually elimination of insignificant terms, the df is reduced to 36 in ORCM. Insignificant predictors at each step were distinguished by related t-values. Besides, the precision of modeling is determined by R After development of a predictive model for Au concentration as a function of particular first and second order terms, the relationship of Au concentration with other elements was investigated. The presence of combination terms such as Ag × As and Ag × Cu makes it difficult to ascertain the correct relationship between Ag and Au concentrations, for example. Therefore, interaction of 3 elements (Au vs. two other elements) was described in a graphical analysis based on ORCM. For this aim, the other elements replaced with average concentration (average of all 138 normal values), whereas, the average value of normalized data equal to 0. Interestingly, all the data are transformed to positive interval (0.390–5.610) to simplify a detection of variation for each element. Therefore, the average concentration of other elements loses no significant variation on Au concentration. Four elements of Ag, As, Hg, and Mn in the simulated model were used to illustrate effects of their contribution (interactions) on Au. The advantage of this method not only illustrates the main effect of Ag, As, Hg and Mn concentration on Au concentration but also it demonstrates the effects of Ag-As, Ag-Hg, Ag-Mn, As–Hg, As-Mn, and Hg-Mn pairs on Au concentration. The ordinal effect of As–Hg pair on Au concentration is shown in equation Minimum, maximum, and also average value of Hg showed no significant differences in the background and anomaly populations, whereas other elements such as Sn-Sr-U-Mn-P and Cu-Ag-As-Pb-Zn showed large and huge differences between two populations, respectively ( Similarly, Hg-Mn, Ag-As, and Ag-Mn pairs show interaction effect on Au ( The present study shows a statistical modeling approach to predict the concentration of Au (as a target element), from known concentrations of Ag, As, Cu, Hg, Mn, Nb, P, Pb, Sn, Sr and U pathfinders. By defining interaction effects of elements in FCM, more than 90 terms have been created. Since BEP which is based on removal insignificant predictors considers a certain confidence level for each step, it is more helpful and effective strategies in high-precision modeling. Interaction processes (as described in the paper) occurs in the several phase of metal transportation and the formation of magmatic-hydrothermal ore deposits. It directly or indirectly is related to first-(X, Y, Z) and second-order (Z Multiple regression and variance analysis gave rise to perform a model and it was enhanced by BEP at 15 steps. The predictors were reduced from 90 predictors to 36 significant predictors. R A study on interaction effects may also be useful when we have a good reason for believing that the models for vein and background groups are substantially different. This study revealed a strong interaction effect between As-Mn, Hg-Mn and lower Ag-As on Au. This interaction terms indicated the ordinal and disordinal difference between vein and background populations. When As–Mn and Hg-Mn have an interaction effect on Au, It implies that As has similar trend on Au for each value of Hg (non-interaction effect of Au-As-Hg). In other words, there is a meaningful relationship between Au-As-Hg for different populations. It also revealed that Hg is more concentrated in background area, whereas Au-As pairs showed positive correlation coefficient with threshold value much lower than vein and brecciated zone in Glojeh deposit. The BEP considering first and second order of variation could be applied for high-precision modeling whereas, there are many predictors and could be optimized gradually. This method has been used well in polymetallic mineralization at Glojeh deposit. It may be generalized to other types of mineral deposits. Also Au modeling as well as studying interaction effects is more efficient in dealing with different populations. The author would like to thank Iranian Mines & Mining Industries Development & Renovation, IMIDRO. It is a major state-owned holding company in the mining sector in Iran.