Orthogonal linear regression is a standard statistical method which is used to fit a line to a scatter plot of data points 
                        (
                        
                           
                              x
                           
                           
                              i
                           
                        
                        ,
                        
                           
                              y
                           
                           
                              i
                           
                        
                        )
                      in situations where both variables have errors. Until now the US American R.J. Adcock has been considered to be the first who published this method, which is based on the method of least squares. We show that Julius Weisbach, professor of mathematics and engineering at Bergakademie Freiberg in Saxony (Germany) had already published in 1840 a paper in which the method is fully described and applied to an interesting problem.
                  We discuss the context of his discovery in order to understand the type of problems mining surveyors faced in that time and why the use of this method was found to be relevant in geodesy. Weisbach's method of solution is then explained in all detail. We show that he implicitly used the method of least squares, but presented the solution in terms of geometrical arguments adapted to the readership of the journal in which he published.A standard problem of applied statistics is the fit of a line Today, the standard method for solving this problem is the method of least squares that was developed independently by Legendre and Gauss at the beginning of the 19th century. An important example of a geodetic problem in which an approximating line had to be determined appeared already in the 18th century in the field of mine surveying, i.e. geodesy applied in mining. This is discussed in detail in ( In the present article we show that Weisbach indeed used orthogonal regression and obtained correct and elegant results. He was the first to publish these formulas and even an application of his method. More importantly, the genesis of this important statistical method is thus embedded in the context of early 19th century mining engineering, although it had been until now attributed to R.J. Adcock in ( The first section of this paper is a short exposition of orthogonal linear regression as it is used today. We then turn to the context of Weisbach's work, introducing both the mathematician and the peculiar context of Saxon mines in which he was working. The third section analyzes his 1840's paper, underlining his calculation method and the importance of his result. The formulas that are currently used for the parameters In modern notation the equations The line with Until now in the mathematical-historical literature, R.J. Adcock has been considered the first who published a paper on the determination of a line by means of orthogonal regression. The fact that Adcock did not give a clear motivation for his work and did not refer to any earlier paper makes his historical significance difficult to assess. Julius Ludwig Weisbach (1806–1871) (see Weisbach was born in Mittelschmiedeberg, a village near Annaberg in the Ore Mountains of Saxony, a state at the vanguard of the German industrialization ( After his studies he worked first as a teacher of Mathematics at the Freiberger Weisbach can be considered as the father of modern mine surveying, and his book As a professor active during the Industrial Revolution, in particular with respect to the use of the steam engine in mining, Weisbach systematically applied methods of mathematics, mechanics and hydraulics in mechanical engineering. Weisbach was honored for his scientific work in various ways, in 1859 by a doctorate h.c. of the University of Leipzig, and in 1860 by the first honorary membership of the Verein Deutscher Ingenieure (VDI, Association of German Engineers). He died in 1871. In the context of mine surveying, the problem was posed in the 18th century to determine the main strike direction of a ore vein or deposit. In 1781 the Freiberg mathematician Johann Friedrich Lempe published a paper on the main direction problem ( Some decades later, Lempe's approach was refined by another professor of the mining academy, Carl Friedrich Naumann (1797–1873). Naumann, who remained in the frame of Lambert's approach, noticed that it was a complex problem “whose solution presents an interest in legal, technical and geological respects” ( He underlined the importance of considering the lengths of the segments connecting the data points and therefore used some weighting for the different points. The style of Weisbach's writing is highly adapted to the readership of the journal “Archiv für Mineralogie, Geognosie, Bergbau und Hüttenkunde” (“Archives for Mineralogy, Geology, Mining and Metallurgy”), Weisbach realistically assumes that his readers are not familiar with the method of least squares, but, in contrast, assumes good knowledge of planar trigonometry and angular functions. He says clearly that he knows well the method of least squares and its results for the problem attacked and says that his geometrical approach yields “exactly the same results”, and that he hopes that his way of exposition will give “more publicity to this important problem” ( Weisbach derives the formula for the slope In the following, modern notation as in Section In the first step, he uses a geometrical argument, which he does not prove but presents as based on the results of the method of least squares: The line to be determined has a property which can be formulated as: Weisbach's geometrical approach, which replaces for his readers the least squares approach, can be justified as follows. In the least squares approach the term The terms The total sum of all doubled triangle areas is For the general case of This is a very elegant formula for the angle In a latter part of his paper, Weisbach states once again explicitly that his formula and its conditions are based on the method of least squares: This article has brought to light new information about the early history of statistics and the application of the method of least squares in the 19th century. We have shown that the orthogonal linear regression had indeed been devised by Julius Weisbach before its (presumably independent) rediscovery by R.J. Adcock in ( Moreover, the first pages of Weisbach's text refer to an lively geodesic tradition, dealing with the issue of finding the main strike of an ore vein. The orthogonal linear regression therefore finds its origin in applied geodesy. This context of discovery is meaningful, for it is precisely because both coordinates recorded by underground surveyors are subject to measurement errors that the orthogonal least squares turns out to be particularly efficient. The main strike problem, which had been tackled by several mathematicians since the end of the 18th century, found with Weisbach's new approach a satisfactory solution. The authors thank Angela Kugler-Kiessling from the University Library of TU Bergakademie Freiberg for her support in search of ancient literature, Dr. Karl-Heinz Löbel for help with terms from mine survey, Prof. Udo Hebisch and Prof. Elias Wegert for information on Weisbach's work, Prof. Stephen Stigler and Prof. Richard William Farebrother for information on Adcock's work and, last but not least, Helga Stoyan for support in the analysis of Weisbach's calculations. Finally, they are grateful to the anonymous referees who greatly improved the paper by constructive remarks.