A new capillary electrophoresis method was developed for the quantification of diisobutyldithiophosphate (DTP), diisobutyldithiophosphinate (DTPI) and ethyl and isobutyl xanthates (EX, IBX) all of which are used as thiol collectors in froth flotation. This method uses pressure assisted field amplified sample injection (PA-FASI) to concentrate the analytes at the capillary inlet. The background electrolyte in electrophoretic separation was 60millimolar (mM) from 3-(cyclohexylamino)propane-1-sulfonic acid (CAPS) in 40mM NaOH solution. The similar CAPS electrolyte solution has earlier been used for screening for diuretics that contained sulphonamide and/or carboxylic groups. In this study, the functional groups are xanthate, phosphate and phosphinate. The method was developed using actual flotation process waters. The results showed that the water delivered from the plant did not contain significant amount of collectors; therefore, method development was accomplished by spiking analytes in these waters. Separation of analytes was achieved in 15min. The range of quantification was 0.27–66.6mg/L (R
                     2 0.9991–0.9999) for all analytes other than ethyl xanthate, for which the range was 0.09–66.6mg/L (R
                     2 0.9999). LOD (S/N=3) and LOQ (S/N=10) values for DTP, DTPI, IBX and EX were 0.05, 0.07, 0.06 and 0.01mg/L and 0.16, 0.25, 0.21 and 0.04mg/L, respectively. No interference from the matrices was observed, when the method was tested at a gold concentrator plant.Froth flotation is a process for separating valuable minerals from ore. First, the ore is crushed, ground and mixed with water. Secondly, the resulting slurry is treated with flotation chemicals, and air bubbles generated by a flotation machine, to remove minerals from slurry for further processing. Surface active collector chemicals play a key role in the flotation process, as they are required for isolating minerals and metal species from multicomponent process mixtures. In the flotation process, their role is to bind specific minerals to air bubbles and to move them into the froth phase Generally, mixtures of collectors result in an effective process performance for metal complex formation. In particular, thiol collector mixtures are commonly used in the flotation of metal sulphides and platinum-bearing ores. The collector chemicals most utilized in the flotation of sulfide minerals and gold are xanthates, dialkyl dithiophosphinates and dialkyl dithiophosphates Adsorption mechanisms of thiol collectors are based on coupled electrochemical and chemical reactions (EC-mechanism, In manufacturing processes, water should be circulated not only to minimize water waste, but also to reduce water purification costs. During production, collectors, their complexes or decomposition species may accumulate to such concentrations that they start to decrease the recovery of metals in the process. Furthermore, in a flotation process, in which different minerals are floated in succession, they are exposed repetitively to collectors. In this case, the collectors that have decomposed on the surfaces may affect the minerals’ floatability There are a number of different methods for analyzing xanthates and other thiol collectors. Studies have been conducted by means of ultraviolet–visible (UV–vis) spectrophotometry One of the main issues with UV–vis spectrophotometry in analyzing industrial samples is interferences from the matrices. Even when only xanthates are present, UV–vis spectrophotometry merely provides the combined absorbance of all xanthates Leppinen and Vahtila Regardless of a few drawbacks, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is still one of the most used and studied chromatographic methods for separation of xanthates that may be determined either without complex formation or with metal complexes. However, in the monitoring of processes, capillary electrophoresis (CE) has several advantages over HPLC. The ionization of compounds is high enough for separation by CE, rendering unnecessary the use of counter ions in the separation solutions, as would be necessary in HPLC. In particular, the possibility of real-time monitoring with high-throughput determination may be a process scale set-up at mills In this work, a capillary electrophoresis method was developed for the monitoring of process waters containing metal collectors. CE provides higher separation efficiency and lower eluent consumption; therefore, the technique is suitable and economical enough for routine and high-throughput analyses of anions in the process waters. In the paper, we introduce a new electrolyte system for studying collectors in flotation process waters of high ionic strength. Industrial grade collector chemicals were used for the preparation of the standards and sample mixtures. Potassium ethyl xanthate (PEX, 160.30 g/mol) and sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX, 158.2 The separation and quantification method was developed using a Beckman Coulter P/ACE MDQ capillary electrophoresis instrument with a photodiode array detector (PDA) (Fullerton, CA, USA). Fused silica capillaries used in separation were obtained from Polymicro Technologies (Phoenix, AZ, USA). The dimensions of the capillary were 50 The background electrolyte (BGE) was made of 60 Process water samples from two process streams at a gold concentrator plant were collected in one-liter plastic bottles. One sample was taken from the thickener overflow, and the other from the process water (raw water mixed with circulation water from the tailings ponds) tank. Both samples were sampled on March 26, 2012. They were used in the method development over the time period of April 4, 2012 to August 22, 2012. Samples were stored in a freezer (at −4 Inorganic content in water samples was analyzed with inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). The study was done using Iris intrepid II XDL (Thermo Electron Corporation, Franklin, MA, USA) ICP-AES equipment with ASX-520 Autosampler (Cetac, Omaha, NE, USA). Calibration samples were prepared in 0.1 The optimized method was calibrated for samples in the process water matrix. Ten point calibration was prepared in the range of 0.03–200 A similar electrolyte solution has previously been used in the separation of diuretics Of the collectors used in this study, ethyl xanthate was in its potassium salt form, and all others were as their sodium salts. These salts are readily dissolved in water and, during analysis at pH 10.7, all of the collectors are mono anions. In separation using normal polarity, they move against the EOF, but are carried by it to the detection window. The detection wavelengths for each compound were taken from their UV absorption maxima Separation of the compounds were studied under 20–30 kV fields. As expected, the high voltage provided faster migrations for all compounds than in lower fields. Thus, because of the process sample applications the resolution between the compounds needed to be extremely good. Therefore, the study was done under applied electric field produced with 20 After optimization of the separation, the injection method was ameliorated to obtain low enough detection limits. Pressure injection was used during the optimization of the separation. A given sample was injected into the capillary for 5 Field amplified sample injection (FASI) was tested by varying injection time and voltage. Voltages tested were 10, 20 and 28 Pressure was added to the injection to counter the flow caused by the EOF. During optimization of the pressure assisted field amplified sample injection (PA-FASI) voltages of 10, 15, 20 and 25 The effect of the injection method optimization can be seen well in In their study, Hissner et al. With the PA-FASI technique, the sample is not pumped into the capillary as in stacking. Here, the sample is concentrated into the capillary end by voltage, and pressure is applied to stop the EOF from pumping the analytes away from the capillary. In stacking, the sample causes a discontinuity to the electrolyte solution and has an effect on the field strength in the capillary. This is why samples of different ionic strengths are pumped out at slightly different speeds. In PA-FASI, the capillary is filled with the background electrolyte, and just a small sample plug is injected into the capillary end. This plug does not change the field strength as much, and thus the EOF can be stopped using counter pressure, all the while keeping the system quite stable. The separation works in both pure water and process water matrices, but when the optimized method was tested on samples prepared in pure water, the results were not good. From this, it can be concluded that it is the injection method that causes the problems with the pure water matrix. From the ICP-AES analysis of the process waters, we know that the main alkali metal in the process waters was Na (53.9 The peaks of the EOF are considerably smaller for pure water samples than for the process water matrix. From this it can be conducted that less of the matrix is being injected to the capillary. It would seem that under these conditions some of the analyte ions are able to migrate away from the capillary. A more major problem in the injection was that repeated injections gave significantly different results. The migration times stayed roughly the same, but the peak areas got bigger on consecutive injections from the same vial, while in electrokinetic injection the peaks should get smaller as the sample depletes. It is possible that some of the BGE flows to the sample vials during injection and alters the samples conductivity, thus enabling the next injection to work better. It was also noticed that samples in pure water matrix can be injected by using parameters of 2 The applicability of the method was tested at the Daragon Mining Oy gold concentrator in Sastamala, Finland. The capillary electrophoresis instrument was set up at the plant and the samples were taken from the different process steps. Prior to analysis, the samples were gathered from process streams using samplers and then filtrated. No other sample pretreatment was necessary. The results are presented in The aim of these measurements was to test the method using samples from multiple different points along the process. Eventhough the method was developed by using real process waters, we wanted to test the method with fresh samples from various stages of the process. It can be expected that the sample matrix varies between the process steps, and the change in sample matrix could have an effect on the methods function. In addition we were anticipating some unknown peaks from possible xanthate and dithiophosphate degradation species or complexes, and we wanted to see that these peaks are separated from our analyte peaks. Thus, no calibration samples were run during the tests, and no concentrations were calculated for the samples at the gold concentrator. The peaks were detected according to their electrophoretic mobilities and by comparing peak profiles at different detection wavelengths. At the time of analysis, the plant was using DTP and IBX collectors. Both collectors were found from the process samples, as seen in This study demonstrates a capillary electrophoresis method for the analysis of collector chemicals from flotation process waters. The newly developed method is fast, has low enough detection limits to be used in process monitoring. It has been proven to work on real process samples straight from the flotation process with only removal of the solids as a pretreatment. This method can possibly be utilized for different collectors with similar structures and for different flotation processes. The authors would like to thank Outotec for financing this study. Dragon Mining Ltd. is gratefully acknowledged for providing the opportunity to test the method at their Gold Concentrator in Vammala and for sending their process waters for use in method development. We thank Jussi Kemppinen for doing the measurements at the plant.