Properties of coal gangue feed, especially its particle size distribution (PSD) and variable hardness, result in considerable impacts on both the efficiencies of the circulating fluidized bed (CFB) boiler and wastage of crushers. These two aspects are addressed in this study. First, the Aspen Plus software was used to optimize the coal gangue crushing system for the CFB boiler; it facilitated in predicting the PSD in with excellent accuracy, and optimized the PSD of the crushing system for the CFB. The optimized PSD for the CFB was approximately 80% within 2.3–7.5 mm. The applied PSD of coal feeding in the CFB improved the combustion efficiency of the CFB significantly. Furthermore, the two-toothed roll crusher was found to be the most vulnerable part in the optimized crushing system. Next, the two-toothed roll crusher was optimized based on the framework proposed by the Whiten model. The reasonable rolls gap and teeth length should be 75 mm and 23 mm, respectively. Further, a physical model of a two-toothed roll crusher was established to obtain the optimized roll diameter; it was later found to be >660 mm. The results were applied in optimizing an industrial-scale crushing system and two-toothed roll crusher of a coal gangue-fired power plant. Investigations demonstrated that the PSD can improve the combustion efficiencies of the CFB significantly by 3%, as well as a 3× extension of the original service life of the two-toothed roll crusher.Coal gangue is a major industrial residue in China that is discharged during the producing and processing of coal, constituting approximately 10–15% by weight [ Owing to the wide adaptability of fuels in circulating fluidized bed (CFB) combustion technology, it has been applied rapidly in coal gangue-fired power plants [ The optimization of the crushing circuit operation according to the properties of specific treated materials, especially coal gangue, is insufficient thus far, demanding for much improvement in the current system depending on the crushing circuits' studies. Previous studies indicated that comminution processes might not always be operated at a steady state [ The current study is to establish a Aspen Plus model to optimize the coal gangue crushing circuit in terms of the combustion performances of the CFB boiler. Subsequently, simulations are performed to explore the vulnerable part of the system and its optimization. Typically, a double-roll crusher is the suitable size reduction unit in the crushing process of coal gangue. It was found to be the most vulnerable part in the whole crushing system. Theoretically, the Whiten model was initially used and further modified to predict the PSD of coal gangue in a double-roller crusher [ The Aspen Plus software was used to simulate the crusher system (based on its available inset model unit). The crushers in the software were assumed as homogeneous. The calculation of the PSD in the outlet solid stream was based on an empirical parameter that depends on the type of crusher and the PSD of feed. The outlet flow rate of the crushed product in the k-th size interval is calculated by Eq. B X A Whiten model was used for the double-geared roller crusher. The crushing process was assumed as a repetitive cycle involving breakage and classification. In the breakage process, the particles' subsequent appearance in the load as smaller particles can be described by the lower triangular matrix A. Additionally, some particles that are sufficiently small to escape without further breakage involved the classification of particles related to the diagonal matrix C. The vectors f, p, and x provide the flow rates in each size fraction of feed, product, and amounts in the crusher, respectively. The mass balances at the nodes in Eliminating x yields Eq. Because f is known and p is the desired output, the problem resolves itself into obtaining estimates of C (the classification function) and A (the appearance function) for a particular machine and feed material. These values can subsequently be manipulated by simulations to explore the effects of varying machine parameters, material characteristics, or operating conditions upon the product size distribution. In the crushing process, some particles are sufficiently small to escape without further breakage, while others remain and are broken further. Hence, the crusher is both a breakage and a classification device. The classification behavior is described by the classification function C. K The breakage tests of several single particles of coal gangue were conducted to obtain the appearance function A. A number of marker points, called t-values, can describe the resulting size distribution of the products. These t-values, typically t A simulation was performed for two sets of crushing systems under the same conditions of solid stream, as shown in To explore and understand the broken manner of the double roll crusher-extrusion crushing, a controlled compression-testing machine ( The coal gangue properties tests were performed using samples from a coal gangue power station in China. Samples in three sizes were chosen, as shown in The experimental PSD obtained from the plant and that simulated before and after retrofitting with the model are plotted for comparison in  In the coal gangue power plant, owing to the complex composition of coal gangue, significant differences occur in the hardness, thus resulting in a high failure rate of equipment. Moreover, considering the constant operating parameters of the devices in practical operations, the crushers did not adjust the operating parameters according to the feedstock property, thereby causing damages in the crushers. As described above, the two-toothed roll crusher presented the highest energy consumption and sensibility to the change in feedstock properties as compared to the other crushers. Thus, it was often the most vulnerable part, which was also demonstrated in plant practice. Thus, an optimization of the two-toothed roll crusher based on the OSYS of coal gangue was further conducted in this study. Breakage tests on three single coal gangue particles were conducted to obtain the cumulative size distribution. Three selected coal gangue feed were 2.3 mm × 2.3 mm (#1), 4.2 mm × 4.2 mm (#2), 7.3 mm × 8.5 mm (#3). The breakage results are shown in The established model can be used to optimize the roll gap and teeth length, starting with the appearance function A of the coal gangue. This model could predict the PSD with reasonable accuracy, with variations in both the roll gap and teeth length. First, the effects of roll gap on the cumulative size distribution were calculated at a roll teeth of zero, as shown in The roll gap and teeth length both affected the PSD significantly. At a fixed teeth length, a bigger roll gap produces a coarse product. A greater minimum distance between the two rolls resulted in a less fine generation because more particles escaped without collision. This implied that a larger gap setting led to a less fine generation. Meanwhile, a smaller roll gap resulted in a larger extrusion force, eventually resulting in greater wear and damage of rolls. Therefore, a gap of 75 mm was likely a reasonable roll gap, which can guarantee a D As shown in To obtain an optimized roll diameter, a physical model of the two-toothed roll crusher was established by ignoring the effects of roll teeth considering the small length versus the roll diameter. As shown in To satisfy Eqs. The maximum equivalent feed particle size, d Combining Eq. As previously mentioned, the feed particle size was generally smaller than 200 mm. This study assumed the maximum equivalent feed particle size d The configuration and parameters of the optimized crushing system and two-toothed roll crusher were finally applied to a selected coal gangue-fired power plant, as shown in This modification was further verified by the evaluation of the CFB performance, as shown in The Aspen Plus model was established to simulate the crusher system. The model predicted the PSD parameter of coal gangue with excellent accuracy. For a conventional system CSYS, >20% of the product by weight was >10 mm and approximately 30% was <2.3 mm, implying a large portion of oversized particles and the over breaking of particles. The optimization predicted that approximately 80% of particles within 2.3–7.5 mm could improve the crusher. The main reason for the performance improvement was the rearrangement of the crushing system and the addition of a hammer crusher-b, which achieved the hardness grading of coal gangue. Two-toothed roll crusher was the most sensitive to the change in feedstock properties compared to other crushers, thereby demonstrating its vulnerability. The two-toothed roll crusher was optimized based on the framework proposed by Whiten model, with the modified appearance function to describe the breakage property of coal gangue in this study. The proposed model also helped in predicting the PSD of an industrial two-toothed roll crusher, and further determined the desired gap setting and teeth length. It was concluded that a reasonable roll gap and teeth length should be 75 mm and 23 mm, respectively. A physical model of a two-toothed roll crusher was established to obtain an optimized roll diameter and was found to be >660 mm. The optimized crushing system and the two-toothed roll crusher were finally applied to a coal gangue-fired power plant. This indicated that the PSD can be predicted and further satisfied the CFB in terms of the improvement in combustion efficiency by 3% and extension of service life of the two-toothed roll crusher by 3×. The improved combustion efficiency was due to more suitable PSD of coal gangue, resulting in its more complete combustion. The extension of service life of the two-toothed roll crusher was due to the inclusion of a hammer crusher, leading the load reduction of the single crusher in the modified whole crushing system. This work was financially supported by the