Unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts were prepared from ammonium tetrathiomolybdate (ATTM) and nickel nitrate by using a hydrothermal synthesis method involving water, organic solvent and hydrogen. The activity of these catalysts in the simultaneous hydrodesulfurization (HDS) of dibenzothiophene (DBT) and 4,6-dimethyldibenzothiophene (4,6-DMDBT) was much higher than that of the commercial NiMo/Al2O3 sulfide catalysts. Interestingly, the unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts showed higher activity for hydrogenation (HYD) pathway than the direct desulfurization (DDS) pathway in the HDS of DBT. The same trends were observed for the HDS of 4,6-DMDBT. Morphology, surface area, pore volume and the HDS activity of unsupported NiMo sulfide catalyst depended on the catalyst preparation conditions. Higher temperature and higher H2 pressure and addition of an organic solvent were found to increase the HDS activity of unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts for both DBT and 4,6-DMDBT HDS. Higher preparation temperature increased HYD selectivity but decreased DDS selectivity. High-resolution TEM images revealed that unsupported NiMo sulfide prepared at 375°C shows lower number of layers in the stacks of catalyst with more curvature and shorter length of slabs compared to that prepared at 300°C. On the other hand, higher preparation pressure increased DDS selectivity but decreased HYD selectivity for HDS of 4,6-DMDBT. HRTEM images showed higher number of layers in the stack for the NiMo sulfide prepared under an initial H2 pressure of 3.4MPa compared to that under 2.1MPa. The optimal Ni/(Mo+Ni) ratio for the NiMo sulfide catalyst was 0.5, higher than that for the conventional Al2O3-supported NiMo sulfide catalysts. This was attributed to the high dispersion of the active species and more active NiMoS generated. The present study also provides new insight for controlling the catalyst selectivity as well as activity by tailoring the hydrothermal preparation conditions.The challenge of fulfilling the world's growing transportation energy needs is no longer a simple issue of producing enough liquid hydrocarbon fuels. This challenge is accentuated by a complex interplay of environmental and operational issues. Environmental issues include societal demands that liquid hydrocarbon fuels are clean and least polluting. The emergence of new refining processes and the increasing use of new forms of energy production, e.g. fuel cells, exemplify operational issues. Together, these trends are driving the need for deep desulfurization catalysts. Such a demand for more active hydrodesulfurization (HDS) catalysts has triggered a significant increase in research activity on HDS catalyst development Conventional catalysts used in the hydrotreating process include mainly Ni or Co promoted Mo- or W-based catalysts supported by γ-Al It is well established that Mo-based catalysts used for HDS reactions are promoted by the addition of cobalt or nickel in much more than trace amounts. The synergetic effects of promoter on the catalytic activity of the Mo sulfides have been reported by many researchers in the literatures Generally, Mo sulfide catalysts are prepared by an impregnation of aqueous solution of oxide precursors on Al Our previous work Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate ((NH Unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts were synthesized by using the hydrothermal method involving water, an organic (hydrocarbon) solvent and hydrogen. The catalyst synthesis was carried out in a 25 The commercial-supported catalyst NiMo/Al The N Catalytic activity and selectivity of metal sulfides were evaluated with a simultaneous HDS of DBT and 4,6-DMDBT in a 25 Hydrodesulfurization of DBT-type sulfur compounds generally proceeds through two pathways as shown in  The product selectivity of 4,6-DMDBT HDS is different from that in DBT HDS. Tetra-hydrodimethyldibenzothiophene (THDMDBT) was the major product from hydrogenation along with methylcyclohexyltoluene (MCHT) from HYD path, together with 3,3′-dimethylbiphenyl (3,3′-DMBP). Similar to the DBT HDS product distribution, 3,3′-DMBP, a product from DDS pathway, decreased when catalyst preparation temperature was increased, while the products from the HYD pathway (THDMDBT and MCHT) increased. The selectivity to 3,3′-DMBCH, the minor product, did not change significantly. Consequently, the HYD/DDS ratio increased from 1.2 to 1.6 for the DBT HDS and from 1.5 to 2.9 for the 4,6-DMDBT HDS with increasing preparation temperature from 300 to 375 The specific surface areas of the unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts prepared at various temperatures are shown in  The above results can be better rationalized by considering that the catalytic activity and selectivity of Mo-based sulfide catalyst depends on the coexistence of two different sites that promote HDS through the DDS pathway and the HYD pathway. A very useful “Rim-Edge” model for MoS According to the above-mentioned advances in structure-activity correlations, catalysts with a predominance of single unstacked layers will have a greater selectivity to hydrogenated products than those with a predominance of stacked layers. In the same context, catalysts with lower number of layers in stacks and/or with shorter slabs will have higher hydrogenation activity than the catalysts with higher number of layers in stacks and or with longer slabs. From the present HDS and HRTEM results on the effect of preparation temperature, it appears that there are relatively more HYD sites than the DDS sites on the unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts prepared at higher temperature. The catalyst prepared at lower temperature had higher number of layers and long slabs and it showed lower hydrogenation selectivity. On the other hand, the catalyst prepared at higher temperature had lower number of layers and short slabs and it showed higher hydrogenation selectivity. The HRTEM images are consistent with the observed results on the ratio of HYD/DDS in the product selectivity. Based on the above results and discussion, it is highly likely that the NiMo sulfide catalysts prepared at higher temperatures under the hydrothermal conditions in this work possess larger numbers of the brim sites (adjacent to the edge on the top layer of Mo-based sulfides) that have been recently discovered and shown to be active for hydrogenation by Topsoe, Besenbacher, Nørskov and their coworkers  Product distributions for the DBT and 4,6-DMDBT HDS are presented in For the 4,6-DMDBT HDS, THDMDBT, 3,3′-DMBP and MCHT were the major products while DMBCH amount were detected around 2.0% to 3.3%. Unlike the preparation temperature effect, the 3,3′-DMBP selectivity from DDS pathway did not show a considerable change but the selectivity to THDMDBT from HYD pathway decreased significantly from 45.6% to 35.3% when the catalyst preparation pressure was increased from 1.4 to 3.4 These results indicate that the H The specific surface area and pore volume of catalysts prepared at difference H  The product selectivity and HYD/DDS ratio results as shown in An organic solvent (decalin) was added to the aqueous solution of ATTM and Ni precursor and the effect of solvent amounts was investigated.  The beneficial effect of organic solvent in this study is consistent with the results reported by Yoneyama and Song Based on the above results on effects of preparation conditions, a series of unsupported NiMo catalysts were prepared with different Ni/(Mo The BET specific surface areas of the unsupported NiMo sulfide catalyst are summarized in The XRD patterns of the prepared NiMo sulfide catalyst series are shown in  A main purpose is to prepare catalysts with high activity in converting the refractory sulfur compounds such as 4,6-DMDBT that the conventional catalysts are not active enough to desulfurize efficiently. The catalytic activity results in Surprisingly, 4,6-DMDBT is slightly more reactive than DBT over the unsupported Mo sulfide prepared using ATTM without adding Ni (31.8% 4,6-DMDBT conversion vs. 27.7% DBT conversion). This was not expected initially but we have confirmed this trend by three duplicated experiments. This is mainly due to a higher activity of this unsupported and unpromoted MoS The HYD/DDS ratio decreased significantly when Ni was added into Mo sulfide catalyst. For example, for 4,6-DMDBT HDS, the HYD/DDS ratio is 11.8 with the Mo sulfide catalyst and 2.0 for the catalyst with the Ni/(Mo The remarkable increase in the catalytic activity by the addition of Co or Ni to Mo sulfide catalyst has been reported by many research groups. Upon increasing the concentration of the promoter atoms, the HDS activity may increase significantly. The other promoting effects may be highly dependent on the catalysts preparation procedure. The variation in the optimum Me/(Me During the catalyst preparation, the reaction between ATTM and Ni(NO In the presence of hydrogen gas, the bimetallic sulfide is formed according to the reactions: The chemical interaction between Ni and Mo atoms desired for effective NiMo catalysts implies that a good dispersion of the Ni promoter on MoS It is postulated that the organic solvent help to disperse and isolate the droplets of aqueous solution containing ATTM and Ni precursor under agitation which is heated rapidly to elevated temperatures of 300–375 The study of unsupported sulfide catalyst is a promising route for developing a better understanding and contributes to the development of better hydrotreating catalysts. Hydrothermal preparation of transition-metal sulfides is particularly interesting, because this method provides a highly active catalyst which does not require the sulfidation step. The unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts synthesized from ATTM by the hydrothermal method exhibited the excellent catalytic activity for the simultaneous HDS of DBT and 4,6-DMDBT. For the unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts, the HYD pathway was predominant as compared with the DDS pathway in the HDS of DBT as well as the HDS of 4,6-DMDBT. The unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts exhibit strong synergy between Mo and Ni for the HDS reaction. The maximum synergy in the HDS of DBT and 4,6-DMDBT was observed over catalyst with the Ni/(Mo The preparation conditions (temperature, H However, the selectivity of NiMo sulfide catalysts was affected in different way. The NiMo catalyst prepared at higher preparation temperature became more selective for the HYD pathway but less selective for the DDS pathway for both DBT and 4,6-DMDBT HDS, as reflected by the increasing HYD/DDS ratio from 1.2 to 1.6 for DBT and from 1.5 to 2.9 for 4,6-DMDBT with increasing preparation temperature from 300 to 375 Increasing the initial H HRTEM revealed that the NiMo sulfide catalyst prepared at lower temperature (300 An organic solvent (decalin) addition in the catalyst preparation resulted in the highly active catalysts with higher surface area and larger pore volume. This suggests that the use of a hydrocarbon solvent help to isolate and disperse the droplets of aqueous solution containing ATTM and Ni(NO The present study provides new insight into structure–activity–selectivity relationship and allows for controlling the catalyst selectivity as well as activity of unsupported NiMo sulfide catalysts by tailoring the hydrothermal preparation conditions. We gratefully acknowledge the support of US Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory through the Refinery Integration Program, US Environmental Protection Agency through NSF/EPA TSE program and the Thailand Research Fund through the Royal Golden Jubilee Program.