Recycling of valuable metals from waste lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) has recently attracted significant attention due to the environmental and economical concerns. In this paper, a simple and economical leaching process based on citric acid system was developed for the leaching of metals from the industrial waste LIBs without the manual separation of current collectors, i.e. copper and aluminum foils. The results showed significantly higher leaching efficiencies of metals due to the presence of copper and aluminum. About 91% Li, 90% Co, 94% Ni and 89% Mn were leached under the optimum leaching conditions of 0.5 mol/L citric acid, solid to liquid (S/L) ratio of 80 g/L at 90 °C for 80 min. Furthermore, the effects of the addition time and species of reductant on the leaching of Li, Co, Ni, and Mn were investigated, and the selectivity over Cu and Al as well. The kinetics data revealed that the leaching of Li, Co, Ni and Mn fitted best to the Avrami equation controlled by the surface chemical reaction, whilst the leaching of Cu and Al corresponded to the surface chemical-controlled reaction based on shrinking core model. The leaching feed before and after leaching were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).Lithium ion batteries (LIBs), with their unique technical features (such as specific energy density 100–265 Wh/kg, specific power 250–340 W/kg, and life span cycles 400–1200), are considered the best technology for energy supply of portable electronic devices, electric vehicles (EVs), and green technology ( LIBs usually consist of a cathode, an anode, an organic electrolyte with dissolved Li compounds such as LiPF Currently, the research is mainly focused on the recovery of metals from spent LIBs by leaching CAM with mineral acids like H Although relatively satisfactory leaching results can be obtained by leaching CAM with acid and reductant, the preparation of CAM is a complicated process. Before leaching, the spent LIBs are manually disassembled to separate the anode and cathode materials, followed by separating CAM from Al foil by using concentrated In this study, we investigated the leaching behaviors of Li, Ni, Mn, Co, Al, and Cu with citric acid from the industrial spent LIBs containing anodes, cathodes, current collectors and electrolytes. The effects of acid concentration, solid to liquid (S/L) ratio, temperature, and time were studied to optimize the leaching conditions. In order to maximize the leaching efficiency and the leaching selectivity, the reductants H The industrial spent LIBs scraps used in this study, a mixture of cathode, anode, electrolyte, and separator, were Tesla EV LIBs, supplied by Li-Cycle Inc. The scraps, within which the cathodes are composed of LiNi All leaching experiments were performed in a 500-mL jacketed pyrex reactor, kept under magnetic stirring and thermostated at a certain temperature by forced recirculation of heated water in the jacket, using a thermostatic bath with external recirculation. The jacketed reactor was equipped with a cover to reduce the loss of water by evaporation. A measured amount of LIBs powder (<150 μm) and 200 mL of citric acid solution in a known concentration were added into the reactor, with agitation provided by a stir bar at 350 rpm. The optimum leaching conditions were determined by applying variables as follows: citric acid concentration (0.25–2.0 mol/L), S/L ratio (20–100 g/L), reaction time (5–180 min), and temperature (50–90 °C). The leaching reagents were H To determine the composition of the LIBs scraps, 4 g of LIBs powder (<150 μm) were dissolved in 100 ml of aqua regia solution (HNO Citric acid (C The effects of reaction temperature and time on the leaching efficiencies of metals using citric acid were investigated under the following experimental conditions: 1.0 mol/L acid concentration, S/L ratio of 40 g/L, and a temperature range of 50–90 °C. The leaching results for Li, Co, Ni, Mn, Cu, and Al are shown in The leaching process of LIBs in citric acid of this study is in general a very fast process, where most of the reaction is completed within the initial 80 min. The leaching rate was very fast at the beginning, but stopped increasing after 80 min. This trend became more obvious when the reaction temperature increased from 60 to 70 °C or even higher. At 90 °C, 37.8% Li, 32.2% Co, 33.6% Ni, and 31.4% Mn were leached in the first 2 min, and their leaching efficiencies further improved to 90.8%, 89.2%, 93.8%, and 88.1% at 80 min of leaching. Continuous increase in the leaching time to 180 min showed no significant improvement in the leaching efficiencies. Therefore, 80 min was believed to be the optimum leaching time for the leaching process. The Cu and Al recovery in all of the leaching experiments of In addition, the leaching efficiencies of Li, Co, Mn, and Ni in this study were about 90%, notably higher than those reported in other literatures without reductants. Table S2 summarizes the related literature about metal leaching efficiency of leaching pure cathode material with different acids in the absence of a reductant. It can be seen that the leaching efficiencies of Co, Ni, and Mn are <50% during the leaching of pure LiCoO  The effect of S/L ratio on the leaching efficiency of each metal was also examined by using 0.5 mol/L citric acid at 90 °C, while varying the S/L ratio in the range of 20 to 100 g/L. When leaching metals from LIBs, hydrogen peroxide (H As shown in Since the addition of H  Ascorbic acid (AA) is a well-known, natural, and stable reducing agent that can be used in the leaching of spent LIBs (Eq. To determine the relationship between the metals leaching and the leaching parameters, kinetic analyses were studied during the leaching process. The leaching of metals from the LIBs scraps is a solid-liquid-gas heterogeneous process system, and the reaction is considered to occur on the surface of the unreacted particle. The shrinking core model, which includes surface chemical reaction control (Eq. Another kinetic equation that is employed to describe the multimetals leaching for some solid-liquid heterogeneous processes is the Avrami equation, Eq. Based on the data in For Cu and Al, the surface chemical reaction model and the diffusion control model show a better linear relationship than the Avrami equation with On the basis of the data in In view of the excellent reducing ability of Cu to promote metals leaching as mentioned above, a thermodynamic calculation of LIBs leaching in citric acid was conducted at 25 °C and 1 atm. The results indicated that the reducing power in the leaching of LiNi The XRD patterns of the original leach feeds (scraped LIBs) and the residues obtained under the optimum conditions at different time intervals, with the addition of H As can be seen from the XRD patterns of residues obtained with the addition of a reductant in The initial LIBs (i.e. shredded LIBs feed) and the residues were characterized by SEM-EDS, and the results are shown in In this paper, a relatively simple and economical leaching process was proposed for the selective recovery of Li, Co, Ni and Mn from industrial waste LIBs scraps that were obtained by only removing the plastic and steel cases. The presence of current collectors in the leaching of cathode active materials was demonstrated to effectively promote the leaching of Li, Co, Ni and Mn. Under the optimal leaching conditions of 0.5 mol/L citric acid, S/L ratio of 80 g/L at 90 °C for 80 min without reductant, 91.0% Li, 90.9% Co, 94.1% Ni, 88.6% Mn, 19.5% Cu and 26.9% Al were leached. The upfront addition of H None. Fei Meng expresses his gratitude to  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at