The recovery of vanadium from heavy oil fly ash having a high carbon content was performed using a four-step process consisting of a preliminary burning in order to reduce the carbonaceous fraction, followed by an acid leaching and an oxidative precipitation of vanadium pentoxide. The preliminary burning was conducted in the temperature range 650 to 1150 °C, below the initial deformation temperature (IDT) of the fly ash. The temperature of the preliminary burning step was revealed to be a significant parameter. Above 950 °C various phenomena (fusion, volatilisation of V, formation of V–Ni refractory compounds) occurred that adversely affected the recovery of vanadium. The burning temperature of 850 °C was found to be the best as a result of the trade-off between the overall vanadium recovery yield (83%) and the V2O5 weight percentage in the precipitate (84.8%).The recovery of vanadium from heavy oil fly ashes by acid leaching, oxidation and precipitation of the vanadium pentoxide may be unsuitable for ashes having both a high carbonaceous fraction and a low vanadium content. In this case the poor wettability of the ashes needs high liquid/solid ratios in the leaching stage, so a low vanadium concentration in the extract is obtained. That, along with a higher acid consumption, involves a lower yield in the stage of precipitation In this work the recovery of vanadium from a heavy oil fly ash containing a relatively high carbonaceous fraction (83.3 wt.%) and 3.8 wt.% vanadium was performed by preliminary burning of the fly ash in air at temperatures between 650 and 115 °C; after an acid leaching of the residue, vanadium pentoxide was recovered by oxidative precipitation. The recovery process was oriented to obtain a product that could be accepted by the ferrovanadium alloys market. Carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen content of the fly ash were determined by a LECO CHN 600 elemental analyser. Sulphur content was measured by a LECO SC 432 DR I.R. detector. Moisture (at 105 °C, in nitrogen atmosphere) and ash content (at 750 °C, in air) were determined by a LECO MAC-500 thermobalance. The ash fusion temperatures, in oxidising atmosphere, were determined by the standard procedures ASTM D 3174 and ASTM D1857. The lower calorific value (LCV) was determined by DSC (Differential Scanning Calorimetry) and the higher calorific value (HCV) was evaluated on the basis of C and H content of the fly ash. The burning stage was conducted by placing the dried sample (about 50 g) in a ventilated (aired) muffle furnace, at five different temperatures (650, 750, 850, 950, 1150 °C), for a period of time sufficient to burn 90–95 wt.% of the carbonaceous matter. Morphological analysis of the fly ash and of the combustion residues was performed by scanning electron microscopy (JEOL T300). The acid leaching and the oxidative precipitation stages were performed at atmospheric pressure in a Pyrex stirred reactor, equipped with a reflux condenser and placed in a heated oil bath. The acid leaching was conducted with sulphuric acid (2 M) at the boiling temperature of the solution (about 100 °C) for 1 h and at a ratio of 7 mL/g of solid, by using about 50 g of sample. The leaching solution, separated from the extract solid by vacuum filtration, was submitted to the oxidative precipitation stage in which vanadium pentoxide was obtained as precipitate. This last stage was performed under the conditions suggested by The composition of the mineral fraction of the fly ash, of the process solutions and of the vanadium pentoxide precipitates was determined by a PERKIN-ELMER PLASMA 4000 ICP-AES analyser (the solid samples were previously dried and digested with hydrofluoric acid and nitric acid in an autoclave at 120 °C for 2 h). The properties of the fly ash used in this work, collected from the electrostatic precipitator of a power plant burning heavy oil, are reported in As expected and reported in   The extraction yield of vanadium for the various burning temperatures is reported in By adopting the conditions indicated in the The composition of the washed V The overall yield, calculated with respect to the vanadium contained in the raw fly ash, and the V From the results obtained, the temperature of the burning step was revealed to be a significant parameter. Above 950 °C various phenomena (fusion, volatilisation of V, formation of V–Ni refractory compounds) occurred that adversely affected the recovery of vanadium. When the acid leaching was carried out on the raw fly ash, even if the extraction yield of vanadium was high (97%), no or poor precipitation of V The advantage of this approach over the direct leaching of the raw fly ash consists in the reduced volume of a more concentrated residue as a feed to the vanadium recovery process. Consequently, smaller amount of reagents will be needed, and the heat contained in the fly ash, due to the carbon content, could be recovered by fly ash burning. The process proposed is particularly suitable for heavy oil fly ash having a high carbon content.