A chemical characterisation of used batteries can give useful information to implement suitable recycling techniques and to estimate the flux of the different materials recovered. This work is aimed to provide quantitative data about the composition of mixed batteries (in particular, Ni–Cd, Ni-MH and Li-ion batteries) collected in a Northern Italian town in order to evaluate the feasibility of recovery processes applied to the selected material. The higher concentration of metals in the <3mm fraction suggested that significant quantities of valuable elements could be recovered: in particular, for a kg of the <3mm fraction deriving from disassembled batteries, about 390g Ni and 330g Cd can be recovered from Ni–Cd, 630g Ni, 80g Co from Ni-MH and 250g Co, 110g Ni, 120g Cu from Li-ion ones. Leaching tests applied to the same fractions, to assess possible contaminant releases, resulted in low metal content in aqueous solutions (except for Al and Fe, the concentrations of all metals remained below 1mg/kg). Even so, great care is required in all handling activities due to the high pH values of leachate solutions.Each year, more than 13,000 tons of rechargeable portable batteries are sold in Europe ( A research project concerning the management of spent rechargeable batteries (RB) was implemented by TRED Carpi s.r.l. (Modena, Northern Italy), as part of a LIFE project (named P.I.R.R.) in order to foster portable battery management and recycling in Italy. To support this project, an analytical characterisation of the rechargeable batteries collected and pre-treated by the industrial company was performed in laboratory. A battery is composed of an external case (made of steel, polymeric materials or paperboard), separators (made of polymeric materials, paper or paperboard), electrical joints (metals as Cu), electrodes, and electrolytes. Simple separation processes can recover some homogeneous material fractions as ABS polymer, or metallic scraps. Recovery of metals such as Ni, Cd, or Li, found in the electrolytic cell (electrodes and electrolytes), can be subject to different recycling processes, including the mineral processing techniques of pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical treatment ( However, in order to promote the recycling of this kind of batteries, it is necessary to know their composition. According to the producers’ estimates ( Ni–Cd: Fe (40%), Ni (22%), Cd (15%), plastic (5%), KOH (2%), others (16%). Ni-MH: Ni (33%), Fe (30%), lanthanides (10%), H Li-ion: Al (15–25%), carbon amorphous powder (0.1–1%), Cu foil (5–15%), diethyl carbonate (DEC) (1–10%), ethylene carbonate (EC) (1–10%), methyl ethyl carbonate (MEC) (1–10%), LiPF The aim of the present work is to determine the actual average composition of the main types of spent rechargeable batteries coming from the collection and pre-treatment system operating in Modena city. Leaching tests on the samples were also performed to estimate possible environmental releases ( The entire procedure followed in the present study is reported in Each selected battery type was fed into a continuous milling machine for size reduction, and a fractionation process was then applied, separating the materials in a coarse fraction >3 This process was not made to provide a high quality separation of specific materials, but in order to obtain an economic, rough separation of metal-rich fractions. About 1 In the laboratory, after a magnetic separation of the coarse ferrous residues contained in Ni–Cd batteries, all samples were divided through a suitable sieve into two further size fractions: At the end, from the three original samples, seven fractions were obtained as reported in Weight loss, mainly due to the vaporisation of moisture and other volatile compounds, was determined by drying the samples to a constant mass at 105 About 5 All metals except mercury were measured by ICP/AES; mercury was analysed by cold vapour atomic absorption spectrometry (CVAAS). Leaching tests were performed according to Limits of quantification and the mean coefficients of variance registered for each metal (in%) in the digested and leachate solutions were found from three different sub-samples of each classification, and are reported in The weight loss of Ni–Cd battery samples was 6.55% for the finer fraction (size <1 The finer fraction (size <1 Comparing the chemical composition of the fractions <1 The composition of ferrous fraction, apart from Fe (75%), mainly consists of a not negligible fraction of Ni and Cd; it is likely that these metals, together with K and Co, belong to the residues of dusts of cell material, rather than to the composition of alloy steel. This hypothesis is confirmed by the relative ratios registered in this sample (Ni/Cd: 1.3) and in the powder (Ni/Cd weighted average: 1.2). According to these results, about 390 The weight loss in the case of Ni-MH battery samples was found to be 4.29% for the fine fraction (size <1 Volatile component can be, as well as in Ni–Cd batteries, ascribed to the water content present in the electrolyte aqueous solution, mainly constituted of diluted potassium hydroxide. For the finest fraction, data show a predominance of Ni (that constitutes about 64% in weight), and significant amounts of Co, Tl, Sn, Mn, Fe and K. Also the 1–3 These data reflect clearly the composition of the electrodes of this type of battery. The cathode, the same used for the Ni–Cd batteries, is constituted of nickel and cobalt hydroxide. Comparing the concentration of these two metals in the fraction 1 On the other hand, negative electrode is made up mainly of nickel (high quantities in the fine fraction <1 Potassium derives from electrolyte, whereas iron could derive from the metallic alloys, used for the anode. The values obtained agree well with other literature data ( Weight loss for Li-ion battery samples was 4.67% for the finer fraction and 3.38% for 1 For this type of battery, the two fractions seem to be quite similar: they contain high quantities of Co, Ni and, to a lesser extent, Li. The 12% copper in the 1–3 Assuming the composition of the positive electrode in Li-ion batteries is LiCoO The values obtained agree well with other literature data ( Considering these results, it can be observed that about 250 The significant percentage of non metallic (not determined) compounds can be mainly ascribed to the presence of graphite anode and other materials, as carbonates and polymers used in this kind of batteries. As for the previous types of batteries, also in this case, Pb and Hg concentrations resulted below LQ (limit of quantification), which can be considered evidence of effective separation of other batteries.  The resulting electrical conductivity (4–11 All anions and elements dissolved in the eluates could be related to the electrolyte contents in the battery’s electrodes. In particular, the presence of potassium hydroxide (Ni–Cd and Ni-MH batteries), lithium salts as LiPF The leaching tests did not consider other anions that could be present, including phosphates, arsenates, and borates. In addition, it should be noted that the high pH values found resulted from a specific leaching test and other pH values and other metal concentrations could be found with different leaching conditions. Still, the high pH values suggest great care in handling this material, which would be highly caustic and corrosive coming into contact with water or humidity. Thus, particular attention must be paid in the critical steps of storage and transportation of the material. A chemical characterisation of the material obtained from a disassembly process of spent rechargeable batteries was applied to a simple management procedure, suggesting the possibility of recovering significant amount of economical added value materials, in particular metals. Ni-MH batteries show similar Ni/Co ratio, compared to Ni–Cd ones, in the fraction 1 Leaching tests resulted in a low metal release in water solution; the registered conductivity and pH values can be ascribed almost only to the dissolution of electrolytes. This leads to the conclusion that a limited metal contamination can occur if the material is put into contact with water and humidity, even if possible handling activities must take into account the high basicity of resulting leachate solutions. The data obtained from the investigated case study can be usefully employed to estimate the potential flux of elements as Ni, Li, Co and Cd in a suitable separated waste collection, and to set up proper recycling processes, in particular for the recovery of the most valuable metals. The authors thank Tred Carpi s.r.l. for supporting this research.