Magnesium alloys have become promising materials in the medical field, particularly in tissue engineering applications. To solve the lack of durability, the production of calcium phosphate coatings onto the magnesium alloys is under research worldwide. Specifically, the electrodeposition processes using the magnesium alloy as electrode material, are among the most interesting production methods found on the recently published research. The electrodeposition methods present many parameters that influence the quality of the final product and due to it the published literature presents a large scatter of results obtained with the same method. In this article four commonly used electrodeposition methods, i.e. the constant potential method, the pulsed potential method, the constant current method and the current pulsed method, have been evaluated to optimize the electrical parameters that are essential to achieve smooth uniform coatings with high reproducibility and simplicity of operation. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction have been used to characterise the obtained coating material. Using the constant current and the current pulsed methods, smooth uniform coatings have been obtained onto AZ31 alloy when a current density in a specific range is used (0.1–0.3mA·mm−2). These deposits are formed by plate-form particles of brushite. Using the current pulsed method plate growth of particles is observed when low frequencies (50Hz) and high frequencies (1000Hz) are used. The employment of various steps in that deposition method, applying the same current density range, confirms an increase of the layer thickness.Metallic implants have been used in medicine for several decades. Bone screws, plates and stents to treat cardiovascular diseases, are some few of the large variety of implant applications. The most widely used bioinert metals are titanium alloy (Ti6Al4V) and stainless steel (316L). However, recently magnesium alloys, with mechanical properties similar to human bones and unique biodegradation behaviour, have become an alternative material under research. These alloys for medical implant applications have been developed to exhibit good corrosion resistance and chemical stability in order to avoid the interaction with body fluids and to have anti swelling properties, non-toxicity and durability. However, when the alloys are introduced in the body two main problems usually arise: in some cases osteointegration is not obtained and, in other cases, the durability of the alloy is very short due to a high corrosion rate. To solve those problems several strategies are presently under development in tissue engineering, like the novel structure design of alloys, as well as a wide variety of surface modification methods There are diverse forms to produce hydroxyapatite (HA) coatings onto a base alloy by chemical methods, being the electrodeposition, the biomimetic and the sol-gel routes among the most interesting ones because of the simplicity of their production procedures A significant number of studies follow a common general practice of modificating the calcium phosphate layer by the addition of different organic or/and inorganic compounds to achieve improved properties In this way, the H The aim of this article is to analyze the four different electrodeposition methods and evaluate the most critical electrical parameters in order to achieve uniform, smooth and non-easy to detach calcium phosphate layers on commercial AZ31 magnesium alloy designing a non-costly electrolytic cell. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and X ray difractometry (XRD) were used to characterise the surface, the thickness and the composition of the coatings. To analyze the influence of the electrical parameters on the uniformity, morphology and thickness of the deposits the experiments were carried out with 20 The composition of the electrolyte was set to 0.15 For simplicity of construction the electrolytic cell was composed of two electrodes instead of a three-electrode configuration which includes a reference electrode. The magnesium alloy plate was used as cathode, while the anode was formed by a plate of the same configuration (20 To operate the electrolytic cell a home-designed system was prepared, consisting of the following components: a HQ POWER battery (model PS1503SB, input; 230 V The deposition process studies were started by using a constant potential method building the cell with a battery directly connected to electrodes submerged into the electrolyte, see This is a variation of the previous method. In this case the potential was pulsed using the assembly shown in In this set of experiments, the assembly of The current pulsed method was prepared using the assembly showed in Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), model JEOL 7000-F, was used to characterise the surface and thickness of the deposited layers. The equipment was aided with Schottky type field emission source. The acceleration voltage was set to 20 X ray diffractometer (XRD), model PANalytical Xpert PRO, was used to identify the deposited calcium phosphate phases. The diffractometer was equipped with a copper tube (λCu The results of the tests carried out to determine the adequate potential to produce a coating avoiding arc generation issues showed that a potential of 5 To solve the adhesion problems several authors suggest the application of pulses to favour the initiation of deposit nucleation and to increase the number of grains per unit area resulting in a finer grained layer, better fixed to the metal surface. When the constant potential method is used a negatively charged layer is formed around the cathode as the process takes place obstructing the good adhesion of ions. The pulse method allows the discharge of that layer when the current is switched off. As a result, the deposit is more regular and well adhered to the metal The obtained results showed that when DC is varied the appearance of the deposit changes. When high DC is applied (> The results obtained in previous experiments indicate that the cell construction for the constant potential method and the potential pulsed method is not effective to deposit a cohesive well adhered CaP layer. Although the potential variation measured between the cathode and the anode during the experiment time is very low, the control of the deposition process is not appropriate. Considering the results obtained by different authors The results demonstrated that when certain current value was exceeded, bigger round agglomerate particles were obtained. In those cases, the layers were irregular and porous. The results suggest the existence of a current density “window” on the range of 0.1–0.3 The images on The effect of process time was analyzed both on the deposit appearance and on the thickness. This study was developed varying the duration of the process from 2 Once the suitable current density window was defined in the experiments carried out in the constant current method, the current pulsed tests were made with the objective of achieve different thickness of the deposits and to determine any variation of the particles geometry and adherence to the base metal. In some studies is reported that pulsed methods give better results in corrosion studies than constant methods which is attributed to the closely packed CaP particles deposited The SEM analysis of both coatings demonstrated that the crystal morphology remained unvaried in both cases, as can be seen in The most relevant results of the study of the effect of frequency variation on the surface morphology and thickness of the deposits obtained when the current pulsed method is applied are exhibited in In this work the variation of the electric parameters in the constant current method and in the pulsed current method did not change the shape of the crystals in any experiment when current density values remained in a certain range. In all cases flake form CaP was obtained when current was controlled and the electrolyte temperature was set to room temperature. The acicular aspect of deposits is not achieved in any case. Although some authors reported flake form crystals when the electrolyte is heated to 80 The most interesting coatings obtained on the samples produced by the constant current method and the current pulsed methods were analyzed by XRD. The obtained calcium phosphate phase was identified as brushite (CaHPO A simple, non-costly and versatile cell has been developed, which allowed the production and testing of CaP coatings onto magnesium AZ31 alloy by means of the four most commonly used electrodeposition methods. The obtained results show that the constant current and the current pulsed methods are the two most effective ways to achieve a good adhesion of the deposits to the base metal in order to handle the produced samples without the risk of detachment when two electrode cells is used. The coatings obtained by those two methods did not present appreciable quality differences. Both methods generate smooth and uniform calcium phosphate layers identified as brushite, a precursor of hydroxyapatite. It was determined that for the production of acceptable quality coatings the current density in those electrodeposition methods should lay in a specific range. In this case, using the characteristics of the cell described and AZ31 alloy as base metal, that window is located between 0.1–0.3 When the current pulsed method is utilized the following conclusions have been obtained: low frequencies (50 The authors are grateful for the financial help and want to thank the