The heterogeneous nature of orebodies introduces large uncertainties into all quantitative evaluations, process design and process predictions. Measuring the extent of the variability of ore competence will allow the design process to account for variation in process performance through a quantitative knowledge of its uncertainties related to ore hardness.
                  The conventional JKMRC drop-weight test (JKDWT) establishes the relationship between input energy (Ecs) and product fineness (t10) from which the breakage potential parameter A × b can be estimated, by combining the broken progeny of groups of particles. A new method, the Extended Drop Weight Test (ExDWT), has been developed which is applied to individual particles and is therefore capable of capturing breakage heterogeneity at high resolution. This paper explores a number of features of the new method, based on breakage tests on individual particles from several different rock types.
                  The results showed that more accurate descriptions of particle size resulted in higher (softer) A × b values which suggests that the standard method may have been over-estimating rock competence. Regular-shaped cores broken diametrally were found to have higher (softer) A × b values than axially broken cores and irregular shaped particles. These tests also suggested that the true ore intrinsic heterogeneity is the main source of breakage variability measured by the ExDWT. The mean A × b values determined by the ExDWT showed no statistical difference to those determined by the standard JKDWT method, but the standard deviation of the estimate was much lower.
                  The results have demonstrated the potential of the new method for capturing the inherent heterogeneity of individual ore particles. Such information could be used to populate multi-component models of comminution.The problems which mineral engineers confront in designing, optimising and operating mineral processing plants arise mainly from the heterogeneity of the feedstock (the ore). Unlike in manufacturing, in which all inputs are generally uniform and stable, concentrators have to deal with the exact opposite, and it is this reality which makes mineral processing uniquely challenging. It is therefore important to understand and manage this heterogeneity so as to learn how to manage it for best economic results. In this paper we use novel experiments to improve our understanding of the heterogeneity of the comminution response of rocks, on an individual particle-to-particle basis. This heterogeneity arises from variations in its intrinsic characteristics including mineral grains and concentrations, pores, voids and cracks that may differ considerably in size and density. Rock breakage characteristics are influenced by the degree of heterogeneity where intrinsic variations increase local differential strain and stress within a stressed rock ( In the minerals industry, the essential task of breaking rock down into a specific size starts with drilling and blasting operations and continues by subjecting the ore to a series of breakage processes through comminution machines. The intrinsic variability of ore affects all processes and their performance. This makes ore variability a challenge in many mine sites and therefore a significant component of overall performance uncertainty. Large fluctuations in SAG mill throughput ( Testing the breakage behaviour of samples of ore provides basic knowledge of the orebody which is then used for plant and process design and process optimization. Even though the breakage characteristics of ores vary across a pit or even within a domain, most of the current ore testing methods do not capture this variability and report only average properties. Hence, it was felt important to develop new testing methods for measuring breakage variability rather than simply reporting an average characteristic. In the standard JKMRC drop-weight testing approach ( This approach includes the following implicit assumptions:    These three implicit assumptions mask both experimental variation and real intrinsic ore variability. The JKDWT approach provides an average description of ore resistance to breakage. To quantify the breakage variability that exists among the particles, Firstly, assuming an average mass for all of the particles within a size fraction may affect the parameters derived as model-fitting outcomes. The reason is that in the standard JKDWT approach, the average comminution energy, Secondly, the standard JKDWT approach does not detect competence differences among the particles. Comparison with particle by particle results suggests that this defect can deliver misleading results in competence classification or interpretation, in particular when applied to transition ore types which will often display considerable intrinsic variability. The ExDWT testing approach was developed to gain a better insight into the intrinsic variability within a sample of ore collected from belt cuts, a stockpile or domain. It measures the energy applied and the intensity of breakage for each particle separately; therefore, it can measure a probability distribution of breakage intensities at a given input energy rather than a single average value for a set of particles. Thirdly, particle shape and irregularity can also affect breakage. An investigation of the effect of particle shape is reported in this paper. By eliminating the above shortcomings, it is possible to quantify the intrinsic breakage variability of an ore type at the individual particle level. Such a measure may also assist in the definition of an ore type. In this paper we consider the ExDWT method in more detail and compare it with the standard JKDWT approach, including the following aspects: Measurement errors, including the effect of true variations in particle mass (averaged over several particles in the JKDWT method. The effect of particle shape (cores vs irregular particles) and orientation in the drop-weight tester. The effect of the definition of the t The difference between ‘equivalent’ and ‘standard’ t A comparison of the JKDWT and ExDWT in estimating the comminution potential as reflected in the estimation of the breakage parameter A × b from the t The ExDWT quantifies the breakage potential of individual particles in a given sample of ore. It involves measuring three particle properties: Particle Mass Residual height of DWT after breakage Fragmentation (t The mass of each particle is measured before breakage. Variation in the mass of particles within a size fraction affects the specific energy received per particle which is further described in In breakage testing mass loss occurs due to poor recovery of product after breakage, dust loss and loss in size analysis, which occur in both the JKDWT and ExDWT processes. However the JKDWT requires a full size (sieve) analysis whereas in the ExDWT approach, the progenies for each particle are collected from the breakage cell and screened on a set of sieves whose apertures are chosen to be equivalent to the t The amount of mass lost during the standard JKDWT size analysis is shown in  In single particle breakage testing, the sources of error fall into two main groups, before and after breakage. The experimental errors introduced before breakage are:   The experimental errors introduced after breakage are:      The Thus, the characteristic size would be: Other definitions of t The ExDWT approach was conducted on particles in the –22.4 + 19 mm size fraction from the four rock types mentioned earlier in a wide range of input energies. Three characteristic sizes were assigned by choosing sieves whose apertures were equivalent to the standard t The effect of particle shape (flaky vs. non-flaky) on the comminution characterisation outcomes has been discussed in the literature ( It was available in large lumps which could be cut into slabs suitable for drilling small cores. It is a more competent rock type than the others, and hence most of the drilled cores could be retrieved without being broken or damaged. Details of the cores are given in Experiments were extended to irregular particles of the same rock type in the −19 + 16 mm size interval (being the closest screen interval to the core size) in two separate experiments, constant mass and variable mass. For the first experimental scenario, 150 irregular particles were randomly selected and broken; the particle masses were selected to be in the narrow range 9.1–9.9 g, with a mean and standard deviation of 9.5 g and 0.26 g. For the second experiment, 150 particles were randomly selected with masses in the range 5.7–16.9 g with a mean and standard deviation of 9.6 g and 2.41 g. A comparison of the breakage testing outcomes with the cores and irregular constant mass particles is presented in  In the course of the experiments, the amount of −75 μm material produced per core/particle was measured ( The ExDWT approach was applied to five size fractions of four samples from the Barrick Cortez gold mine, each broken at three levels of input energy ( The Barrick Cortez samples were labelled as ‘A’, ‘B’ ‘C’ and ‘D’. Sample D comprised the circulating SAG mill pebbles generated from C feed. It should be noted that in the case of sample D with 334 data points, two sets were broken at 0.10 kWh/t (10 particles) and 0.50 kWh/t (9 particles) rather than three sets, due to a particle shortage for the −63 + 53 mm size fraction.  The initial size of an irregular particle can be defined in a number of ways, depending on the purpose (      Thus, the characteristic size would be: It is important to determine whether these different definitions of size lead to different estimates of A × b when fitting Eq. To test the null hypothesis defined earlier, 10,000 differences in A × b values were calculated between pairs of size definitions, and their significance determined. Absolute mean and standard deviation differences as well as calculated P(z)-values are presented in Inspection of the P(z)-values in The new definitions themselves produce A × b values that are not significantly different to each other, which suggests that any one can be used. Additionally, it was revealed that estimating t In the ExDWT approach, an equivalent t The P(z) values in The minerals industry does not of course process regular-shaped materials, and it is not usual to break regular-shaped cores by the JK drop weight tester in order to characterize the breakage behaviour of a given rock type. However, since the ExDWT testing approach quantifies breakage variability through measuring the degree of fragmentation for each particle, it was thought that shape irregularities might contribute to breakage variability. The ‘small cores vs. irregular particles’ experiments therefore aimed at exploring the effect of particle shape on the breakage variability by controlling the shape and mass effects. The null hypothesis here is that breaking cores or irregular particles of a given rock type within a single size fraction with similar mean masses does not lead to significantly different estimates of A × b. Bootstrap analysis was completed on each of the data sets achieved by breaking cores which were placed on the anvil both axially (lengthways) and diametrally (sideways), as well as irregular particles (-19 + 16 mm) with both constant and naturally distributed masses. The results are given in  There was no statistical difference between the axially-broken cores and either the irregular-shaped or irregular constant mass particles. The diametrally-broken cores have a significantly higher A × b than both the irregular-shaped or irregular constant mass particles, presumably because of the axial-diametral difference already established. With a P-value of 0.08 one might conclude that there is limited evidence of a difference between the irregular-shaped and irregular constant mass particles (significant at the 90% but not 95% level). Overall, the results of this limited suite of experiments indicate notable influence of particle geometry (or state of stress) on the breakage potential (A × b), which is specifically in agreement with results reported by The overlap of scatter apparent in To describe the resistance of a given rock type to impact breakage, the standard JKDWT approach fits the breakage model (Eq.  The standard JKDWT approach estimates the standard t The ExDWT approach to testing the competence of rock particles estimates the benchmark A × b value using data from a large number of individual particles and the newly proposed concept of a t We do not propose that the new method replace the conventional approach for estimating comminution potential in all cases, because it requires more work. However, it does generate more information which quantifies individual rock heterogeneity, and therefore in principle allows more resolution in, for example, the prediction of comminution machine performance ( In this work we rigorously compared the ExDWT method with the standard JKDWT method, and we used the ExDWT approach to determine the heterogeneity of samples of individual rocks, the effect of particle shape and orientation on impact breakage, and the effect of more comprehensive definitions of the t There is no significant difference between the equivalent t A × b values for diametrally-orientated regular-shaped cores were found to be significantly greater (softer) than those for axially-orientated cores, and both irregular-shaped (natural distribution of masses) and irregular-shaped constant mass particles. There was no difference in the A × b values between axially-oriented and both irregular-shaped and irregular-shaped constant mass particles. There was no difference in the generation of %-75 μm material generated in these orientation and shape tests. The work explored the effect on the estimation of A × b of using more comprehensive (and thus more precise) definitions of t This work confirms that the ExDWT approach is capable of capturing the intrinsic competence heterogeneity within an ore sample, in contrast to the standard JKDWT. This quantified variability could be captured by multi-component process models, enabling improved design and optimisation of comminution circuits. Future work should develop the necessary procedures for incorporating ExDWT measurements into multi-component models.  The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The authors would like to acknowledge The University of Queensland and JKTech Pty Ltd. for sponsoring this research, and we also gratefully acknowledge Barrick Cortez Gold Mine for supplying ore samples. We also thank the reviewers for many useful comments and suggestions which have been incorporated into the paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: