A comparative study of the electrochemical behavior of different copper sulfide minerals (chalcopyrite, bornite and chalcocite) in sulfuric acid solutions was performed. Carbon paste electrodes (CPE) containing mineral particles with nonconducting binder were used. The comparative study shows that the chalcopyrite oxidation process does not produce covellite as claimed by some authors. Chalcopyrite oxidation has been found to produce a nonstoichiometric sulfide, Cu
                        n−1Fe
                        n−1S2n
                     . On the other hand, it is apparent that bornite is not an intermediary species formed in the chalcopyrite reduction; the reduction of chalcopyrite directly produces chalcocite.The electrochemical behavior of sulfide and oxide minerals has been largely studied The dissolution of metal components from chalcopyrite (CuFeS More recent studies (Price, 1981; The differences of the electrochemical reactions associated to the chalcopyrite oxidation process could be associated to the different oxidation states of copper (i.e. Cu Other studies of hydrometallurgical processing of chalcopyrite have indicated the initial transformation to bornite (Cu A total of 0.8 g of graphite (Aldrich, 99.99% purity) was pulverized together with 0.2 g of mineral (chalcopyrite, bornite or chalcocite) in an agate mortar. The resulting powder was added with 0.8 ml of silicon oil (Aldrich) and this was mixed to form a homogeneous paste. This paste was placed in a 7-cm-long, 0.4-cm-diameter plastic tube provided with a plunger to eliminate the paste once it had reacted (approximately 0.5 cm); the surface was levelled with a glass spatula. Thus, the surface can be renewed for each experiment. Electrical contact was achieved with a platinum wire silver-soldered to a copper wire. A 100-ml glass cell suitable for work under inert atmosphere was used in connection with a device that allows the adaptation to a three-electrode system. The voltammetric response was obtained with a PAR potentiostat (model 273A) coupled to a personal computer. The working electrode was a carbon–mineral paste electrode; the reference was a saturated calomel electrode while a graphite rod (Johnson Matthey, 99.99% purity) was the counter electrode. Solutions of H Chalcocite, covellite and bornite are sulfide minerals proposed as intermediates in the electrochemical oxidation and reduction of chalcopyrite. For this reason, first we performed an electrochemical study of these intermediates in order to make a better identification of the electrochemical steps involved in the chalcopyrite redox processes. Unfortunately, the covellite was not available for our research team, but it could be formed by the chalcocite electrooxidation. The electrochemical studies of these minerals have generally used solid mineral electrodes. The voltammetric transformations between these sulfides have not been sufficiently discussed since a systematic comparison of the mineral oxidation processes using solid electrodes is troublesome because polishing makes surface reproducibility difficult. A suitable alternative to solid electrodes for electrochemical studies are carbon paste electrodes (CPE). In these electrodes, the mineral surface available for electrochemical studies is quite consistent  The initial oxidation of chalcocite forms djurleite When the oxidation of chalcocite were performed for 0.200≤ When the oxidation of chalcocite is performed for The reduction processes associated to blue-remaining covellite and covellite formed during the direct scan potential, The peak potential associated to the peak The electrochemical reaction associated with the peaks  The comparison of the voltammograms in 0.250<  The cathodic peak A deeper electrochemical study of bornite has been reported elsewhere  The comparison of The chalcopyrite reduction occurs via The comparison of voltammetric behavior of chalcocite, bornite and chalcopyrite allows the establishment of the steps involved in the chalcopyrite oxidation. The oxidation process of chalcopyrite does not produce covellite, as some authors have claimed, since no reduction of this species is observed on the reverse potential scan from voltammetric chalcopyrite oxidation This work was financially supported by DEPI-IPN. The authors are recipients of the COFAA-IPN and SNI fellowships.