Additively manufactured porous metallic structures have recently received great attention for use in hard tissue applications. In particular, periodic regular porous networks are found to be very promising in terms of mechanical performance and compatibility with the host tissue. This work investigates for the first time three different types of porous Ti-6Al-4V structures manufactured using selective laser melting (SLM) using a solid network based on a Schwartz primitive unit-cell. Both internal features and microstructure of the SLM-produced samples were investigated. A good consistency in both strut size and pore size was observed between the produced structures. The results of uniaxial compression testing were compared with results calculated using the finite element method (FEM) modelling. The results of mechanical testing for the 64% porous samples match the properties of cortical bone, with a stiffness of 22.3 GPa and a yield strength of 160 MPa. A minimal pore size of 596 µm was achieved, which is within the recommended suitable range for bio-integration. A comparison between the numerical models and the experimental results suggest that the geometrical inaccuracy caused by powder adhesion has an insignificant impact on the static mechanical properties.In parallel with the development of new β-type titanium alloys Due to their outstanding dimensional accuracy and high levels of design flexibility, additive manufacturing techniques play an important role in the optimization of the porous architectures in terms of the mechanical properties and osseointegration, enabling the production of complex-shaped samples suitable for biomedical purposes. Most conventional porous implants are made of stochastic geometries Compared to other TPMS approaches, the Schwartz primitive unit-cell was shown to have the largest fluid permeability Therefore, the objectives of the current study are to investigate (1) the manufacturability of porous Ti-6Al-4V samples with the Schwartz primitive unit-cell, (2) evaluate the mechanical performance of the architectures with experimental testing and (3) the effect of potential manufacturing irregularities brought about by the additive manufacturing of the selective laser melting (SLM) process through numerical modelling. To our best knowledge, studies presenting the Schwartz unit-cell for biomedical investigation of titanium alloys are very limited Three porous CAD models were generated using the network solid of the Schwartz primitive unit-cell (illustrated in While the model could be generated from an equation-based modeler, we have opted for a more conventional method: a single unit-cell was first generated and repeated in three dimensions in order to obtain full-size cylinders. The modelling approach is illustrated in The Ti-6Al-4V samples were manufactured using a Concept Laser Mlab Cusing using the selective laser processing (SLM) parameters presented in Densities of the SLM-produced samples were measured with the dry weighting method (i.e. accurate measuring of the weight and the volume). The weight of the dense sample was considered as the reference and the relative density of each porous sample was measured by: To study the microstructure, the SLM-produced dense samples were sectioned, then ground and polished using standard metallographic procedures. Afterwards, they were etched using a solution containing 10% HF, 5% HNO Mechanical properties of the specimens were examined through uniaxial compression tests using an Instron 5584 device equipped with a video extensometer. Compression testing was performed using a fixed cross-head speed of 0.001 mm/s at room temperature according to the standard DIN 50106. Four samples for each structure were used for compression. The direction of the compression was parallel to the SLM building direction. Firstly, three designed unit-cells were investigated under uniaxial compression. The results obtained have been used as a reference for the experimental testing. A single reconstructed unit-cell was extracted from the μCT scans of the 64% porous sample and converted into a solid model (STEP file) for use in the FEM package The material was described as an elasto-plastic material (Von Mises theory) and the input material's properties were extracted from the stress-strain curves obtained from uniaxial compression of the dense material (   Primarily, additive manufacturing techniques are advantageous to give near final parts requiring minimal post treatments. In order to obtain more accurate geometries that would match the initial CAD models, chemical polishing can be conducted. Wysocki Optical microstructural images of SLM-produced dense Ti-6Al-4V alloy are shown in The energy ( The stress-strain curves from uniaxial compression testing are presented on The numerical models from the finite element method have shown interesting outcomes. These suggest that the excess material (i.e. discrepancy in density from designed CAD models to the actual samples) does not influence the mechanical behavior. Indeed, if the actual porosity is adjusted to the initially designed values, a good match in the mechanical properties can be obtained, as illustrated in The evolution of the main mechanical properties (i.e. Young's modulus, yield strength, ultimate strength and ultimate strain) is summarized in the histograms on As Ti-6Al-4V is generally less ductile than commercially pure Ti (CP-Ti), porous areas may influence critically the deformation of porous Ti-6Al-4V. Nonetheless, the compression deformation observed for porous Ti-6Al-4V samples are significant and this indicates that porous samples in our study have been designed and fabricated appropriately. Irregularities due to the overhanging phenomenon resulting from the SLM process ( As the samples were only tested in one direction (compression parallel to the building direction), it was decided to investigate the potential effect of the observed overhanging material (i.e. In this study, three types of porous Ti-6Al-4V samples were fabricated by SLM using the Schwartz primitive pore geometry. This type of structure was found to be reproducible with the SLM process, showing little weight and density variations in the built specimens. The mechanical properties of the samples were within the acceptable ranges for hard tissue applications, showing a Young's modulus of 22.3 GPa, a yield strength of 160 MPa and a pore size of 596 µm. In addition, deformation strains accommodated by all samples were significant, indicating that the SLM processing conditions as well as the CAD models were appropriate. Macrostructural observations gave some insights into the internal aspects of the as-built structures. The results from the numerical models suggested that the irregularities caused by the manufacturing process have a negligible influence on the mechanical properties and integrity associated with uniaxial quasistatic compression. The authors acknowledge the support of Queensland Centre for Advanced Materials Processing and Manufacturing ( The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author, N.Soro, upon reasonable request.