This paper investigated the development of new techniques to recover fluorine as three valuable fluorides: cryolithionite (Li3Na3Al2F12), sodium hexafluorosilicate (Na2SiF6) and cryolite (Na3AlF6). The synthesis of these compounds was carried out through three routes: I) by precipitation “in situ” during the leaching process of β-spodumene at different temperatures and different HF concentrations, to produce Li3Na3Al2F12; II) by precipitation adding NaOH to the leach liquor of β-spodumene, to produce Na2SiF6 and Na3AlF6; and III) by co-precipitation from pure reagents, to separately produce Li3Na3Al2F12, Na2SiF6 and Na3AlF6. Reagents and products were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). The experimental results indicate that the production of the fluorinated compounds was possible. Following route I), an enhancement of the crystal size was observed after increasing the concentrations of HF. It was also observed that a decrease in temperature favors precipitation of the solid. Furthermore, the presence of Na+ from albite (gangue) was essential for the formation of Li3Na3Al2F12. The compounds Na2SiF6 and Na3AlF6 were synthesized together using route II), with a recovery of 92%. Through route III) the three compounds were synthesized separately and these compounds were used as standards for XRD analysis.Spodumene occurs naturally in α phase, with a monoclinic structure of the pyroxene type. This structure is resistant to the attack of chemical agents, either gaseous or liquid. Spodumene transforms into its β phase through calcination at 1100 The most common industrial processes for the extraction of lithium from spodumene are acid and alkaline digestion, and the ionic exchange method. The obtained products can be lithium carbonate, lithium hydroxide and lithium chloride, respectively. Acid digestion is carried out with concentrated sulphuric acid at temperatures higher than 250  All fluoroaluminates of alkaline metals tend to form solid solutions. This can be observed in their phase diagrams, where, varying the concentrations of each metal, substitutions in the original structure are produced. In one end of the series of the Na and Li phase diagram Na Na Most of the common processes used to synthesize Li Preliminary studies showed that in the leaching process of β-spodumene with HF, high dissolutions of the mineral were obtained, and sometimes, this process is accompanied by precipitation of metal fluorides, such as Li The fluoride ions in the leach liquor from the dissolution of β-spodumene with HF impair the use of this process at industrial scale. In this study, we have developed new techniques for the production of alkaline metal fluorides. Li The purpose of this work is to synthesize valuable raw material with industrial application, and to diminish the polluting effect of effluents with high amounts of fluoride ions, generated from the extraction process of Li from β-spodumene with HF. In addition, solids of interest were synthesized from pure reagents and these compounds were used as standards for XRD analysis. The experimental tests were performed in a closed vessel of 450 The reagents used to synthesize the different compounds were LiCl, AlCl The bulk composition of the ore is shown in The results of the characterization by XRD are shown in In The results of the studies carried out by SEM and EPMA on different particles of the sample, with and without thermal treatment, are compatible with those obtained by XRD. The compounds were synthesized following three different routes: Li In order to understand the influence of Na The course of the formation reaction of Li The choice of NaCl as a source of Na Na Li The products synthesized by all three routes were characterized through XRD, SEM and EPMA. For the mineral dissolution and synthesis of Li The formation of Li Based on the Li content (determined by AAS) of a sample mass of 5 In From the diffractograms of  In At concentrations of HF below the stoichiometric (      In the micrographs of The reaction proposed for obtaining a mixture of the compounds Na The results of the effect of NaOH mass in the recovery percentage of Na It may be inferred from the analysis of The results of XRD and SEM characterization of the solids synthesized by this route are shown in In The presence of Li In The results of the characterization by EPMA of the synthesized solids is shown in The EPMA analysis performed on each one of the particles marked in The reactions proposed for the synthesis of Na Characterizations of each synthesized compounds carried out by XRD and SEM are shown in Diffractograms in In In Results in The experimental results obtained show that: The synthesis through route I) leads selectively to the formation of Li By controlling the concentration of HF and Na in route I), the precipitation of Li The compounds Na The compounds Na