A simple technique, based upon interpolation and mass balancing, is proposed for minimizing the error propagation in the estimation of the flotation recovery of size-liberation particle classes. Liberation data obtained by a down-the-bank survey is used to illustrate application to industrial cells.As the costs of industrial comminution disallow complete liberation of the ore, a significant amount of valuable mineral entering a flotation circuit is often locked with gangue. The economics of comminution–flotation plants is thus strongly linked to the recovery of composite particles and their impact upon concentrate grade. In this sense, it has been stated that “many of the complexities of industrial flotation circuits are due to attempts to find the most efficient way to treat composite particles so that the recovery of the valuable mineral is maintained at a maximum while the dilution of the concentrate by gangue is minimized” ( The effect of particle size and particle liberation upon metallurgical performance is well established. Data from several plants show that the true flotation recovery falls sharply outside an intermediate particle size range whose boundaries vary according to the mineral being floated ( It must be emphasized, however, that size-liberation datasets are strongly affected by the propagation of the experimental error, even when the most modern techniques are applied for the measurement. This is a consequence of the limited number of particles that can be analysed by scanning electron microscopy at practical cost and execution time (around 2000 particles per sample, at the time of this writing). The objective of this paper is therefore to propose a simple technique for minimizing the propagation of the experimental error in estimating the recovery of size-liberation classes in industrial flotation cells. Scanning electron microscopy is usually conducted on particles of a narrow size interval. A portion of the sample is embedded in an epoxy resin block that, after hardening, is cut and polished to reveal internal sections of the particles. Special care is taken to avoid segregation of denser particles during hardening. What is left of the original sample is reserved for assaying and sometimes density measurement. The block is then placed under the microscope to generate a BSE image of the particles being scanned, while the approximated chemical constitution corresponding to each pixel in the image is determined by dispersive X-ray spectrometry. Image analysis allows the liberation of each individual particle to be quantified in terms of the number of pixels of valuable mineral upon the total number of pixels forming the image of the particle. At the same time, the grade of the sample is estimated iteratively, as a growing number of particles are being scanned. This process continues until the grade of the sample estimated by image analysis approaches the experimental assay. Alternatively, linear (1D) intercepts can be used instead of areal (2D) measurements. The end result is a liberation distribution, ranging from barren to fully liberated particles, with several composite classes in between. In strict terms, what is being measured on the polished sections is the areal grade of the particles (or sometimes the linear grade), which would justify a stereological correction for transformation to volumetric basis ( Therefore the technique proposed here is based upon the premise that the liberation data must comply with the metallurgical data (stream flowrate, head assays, size distribution and size-by-size assays), rather than the opposite, since the metallurgical data comes from samples of much larger masses. The metallurgical data will thus be balanced independently, with the results being used to constrain the mass balancing of the liberation data. In addition, an interpolation model will be applied for minimizing the scatter of the liberation distributions measured experimentally, at same time as reconciling each distribution with the grade and density of the sample it originates from. These steps are discussed in more detail in the upcoming sections. A flotation cell operating at steady state can be seen as a mass conservation node with one inlet and two outlet streams. Surveying all three streams provides experimental data redundancy, which is essential for mass balancing purposes. Benchmarking of industrial flotation circuits, however, is rarely conducted on individual cells. Rather, due to cost considerations, a typical mass balance flowsheet has a limited number of nodes, each one encompassing a selected group of cells. Not all streams in the flowsheet have to be necessarily surveyed. However, to ensure that there is sufficient data redundancy for mass balancing, the total number of streams being surveyed must exceed the total number of nodes by two streams at least. Most mass balancing packages currently available can handle size-by-size datasets. The data from each stream is usually structured in the following hierarchy: The total stream flowrate; The total assay of the stream; The weight percentage of each size interval; The size-by-size assays. After mass balancing the metallurgical data, the flowrate of the valuable mineral in any target size interval can be calculated in all streams of the flowsheet. This information will be used to constrain the mass balancing of the liberation data, as demonstrated later in the paper. A liberation distribution is usually discretized into twelve classes of volumetric grade, The average volumetric grade can also be estimated from the assay, Note, however, that the grades calculated by Eqs. Prior to the interpolation, the volumetric fractions of the composite particles (2 The core of the technique proposed here consists in recalculating the volumetric fractions of the barren and the fully liberated particles by adjusting two interpolation parameters: The interpolation parameters Note that The interpolated grade of each class, Rather than being adjusted directly, the parameters The first moment of the distribution is equivalent to the average volumetric grade of the composite particles, while the second moment is a function of the spread, The spread Finally, the volumetric fractions of the composite particles are re-normalized to satisfy Eq. In order to prepare the interpolated distributions for mass balancing, it is necessary to transform the data from volumetric to mass basis. Knowledge of the density of each liberation class, Obviously, In multi-mineral systems, Eq. Note that Eqs. The same calculation platform used for mass balancing the size-by-size metallurgical data can be used for mass balancing the liberation data of a target size interval. To that end, the data in each stream being balanced must be re-organized in the following manner: Replace the total stream flowrate by the mass balanced flowrate of the target size interval; Replace the head assay by the mass balanced assay of the valuable mineral in the target interval, Replace the weight percentage of the size intervals by that of the liberation classes, Replace the size-by-size assays of the valuable mineral by the grade of the liberation classes, In order to force the liberation data comply with the metallurgical data, both the flowrate of the target size interval and the grade of the valuable mineral must be assigned a very small standard deviation. This keeps those values fixed upon mass balancing the liberation data. Using zero standard deviations should be avoided, though, as this may render the mass balancing algorithm unstable. Given the flowrate of the target size interval in the feed and concentrate streams of any mass conservation node, If the node encompasses Eq. A down-the-bank survey was conducted at the primary rougher of a Pb–Zn industrial flotation circuit. As shown in Control room information provided a ballpark estimate for the feed flowrate, while the individual concentrate flowrates were measured by timed lip samples. All samples were sized and assayed to obtain size-by-size metallurgical data. A total of thirty two samples, encompassing four size intervals (− Galena, sphalerite and pyrite assays were calculated from Pb, Zn and Fe assays according to mineral stoichiometry. The non-sulphide gangue assay was estimated as the remainder. The mass balancing results in The liberation distributions obtained by QEM As shown in Prior to mass balancing the liberation data, various techniques were tentatively applied for the stereological correction. Unfortunately, this resulted in recoveries estimates well above 100% for many of the liberation classes, which precludes the use of the stereological correction in the present case. Comparison between raw and interpolated liberation distributions is shown in Results of mass balancing the interpolated distributions are shown in The effect of particle size upon galena recovery is shown in  Down-the-bank recoveries calculated by Eq. Using simple interpolation and mass balancing techniques can minimize the propagation of the experimental error in the estimation of the recovery of size-liberation classes. Forcing the liberation data comply with the metallurgical data increases the reliability of the recovery estimates, since the metallurgical data is obtained from samples of much larger masses. Results from a down-the-bank survey indicate a clear trend for increasing recovery with particle volumetric grade, which is even more pronounced for the coarse particles. Chemical addition, air flow and froth structure also play a significant role. The author wishes to thank all of whom contributed for the completion of this paper, in special S. Gay and M. Andrusiewicz, of the JKMRC, for early discussions on the stereological correction and mass balancing of size-liberation classes, as well as G. Wilkie and P. Gottlieb for assistance in obtaining and analysing the QEM*SEM data at the CSIRO back in 1996. A scholarship from the Brazilian Government for a PhD at the University of Queensland is also acknowledged with thanks.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at