Steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1), a well-studied coactivator of estrogen receptor (ER), is known to play an important and functional role in the development and maintenance of bone tissue. Previous reports suggest SRC-1 maintains bone mineral density primarily through its interaction with ER. Here we demonstrate that SRC-1 can also affect bone development independent of estrogen signaling as ovariectomized SRC-1 knockout (SRC-1 KO) mouse had decreased bone mineral density. To identify estrogen-independent SRC-1 target genes in osteoblastogenesis, we undertook an integrated analysis utilizing ChIP-Seq and mRNA microarray in transformed osteoblast-like U2OS-ERα cells. We identified critical osteoblast differentiation genes regulated by SRC-1, but not by estrogen including alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin. Ex vivo primary culture of osteoblasts from SRC-1 wild-type and KO mice confirmed the role of SRC-1 in osteoblastogenesis, associated with altered ALPL levels. Together, these data indicate that SRC-1 can impact osteoblast function in an ER-independent manner.Bone is an integral and highly specialized tissue that maintains a role in many important bodily functions such as structural support, protection of other organs ( The estrogen receptor α (ERα) is a major transcription factor involved in female-specific organ development and function ( ERα coregulators are proteins that bind to and modulate the activity of ERα ( Understanding the mechanism of SRC-1 dependent and independent E2 signaling in bone will provide a better understanding of the biology underlying osteoporosis. Thus, we undertook an effort to integrate the ERα & SRC-1 cistromes with the E2 and SRC-1 regulated transcriptomes to identify high confidence E2-independent and E2-dependent, SRC-1 target genes involved in important processes in bone. From our Generation of the BMD from the cancellous bone of lumbars (L1-L4) was assessed utilizing microcomputed tomography (μCT) using the 40 Micro CT scanner after 60 days of respective treatments. Endosteal envelope regions of interest were defined on the vertebral bodies of L1-L4 vertebrae starting 100 μm away from the vertebral endplates. Bone was segmented from the background using a global threshold of .3 g/c. The majority of samples were scanned at 16 μm resolution. Due to technical limitations, a subset of samples was scanned at 10.5 μm resolution. This subset was distributed across all treatment and genotype groups and final BMD measurements were not significantly different due to this technical modification (data not shown). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were performed as described before ( U2OS-ERα cells (supplied by TC Spelsberg, Mayo Clinic) (2 × 10 Osteoblasts were isolated and differentiated from the long bones of adult mice. Animals were euthanized at 6–8 weeks of age with inhalation of CO2. After euthanization, mice were rinsed in 70% EtOH and placed in a petri dish. Limbs were removed and cut in half at the joint. Skin and soft tissue were removed from bones with a razor blade and then ends were cut off of each bone. Individual bones were placed inside a 0.6 ml tube with a hole in the bottom, which was placed inside a 1.5 ml collection tube. Bones were centrifuged at 13,000x qRT-PCR was performed using the BioRad CFX 384 machine. Mouse osteoblasts were isolated and differentiated as described above. RNA was extracted (GE Illustra) from cells after 5 and 10 days of treatment with 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid (Sigma), and 2 mM 2-glycerol phosphate (Sigma). 1 μg of total RNA per sample was used to synthesize the first strand cDNA using iScript reagent (Biorad) in a total volume of 20 μl. Amplification of triplicate cDNA template samples for the target genes and their primers were performed with denaturation for 15 min at 95 °C, followed by 45 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 15 s, annealing at 55 °C for 30 s, and extension at 72 °C for 30 s. Values were normalized to Hypoxanthine Phosphoribosyltransferase 1 (HPRT) mRNA. PCR analysis was performed on each cDNA in triplicate and each condition represents the average from RNA isolated from at least 3 mice. All primers were supplied by IDTDNA ( Error bars represent SEM based on the average of the technical replicates from each mouse as referenced in the figure legends. The baseline comparison between the Previous studies have published on the loss of SRC-1 on BMD in two different knock-out animal models ( We utilized the previously established U2OS-ERα osteoblast-like cell line model ( We first identified genomic regions occupied by SRC-1 and ERα by utilizing ChIP-Seq. We observed extensive ERα binding across the genome. In total, 63,686 ERα binding sites were identified ( Gene expression array analysis identified genes regulated by estrogen and/or SRC-1. Overlap of data from ChIP-seq and gene expression array allowed identification of direct targets, and two examples are shown in In order to understand how loss of SRC-1 affects the levels of bone mineral density under normal physiological conditions, we harvested bone marrow from both Our study indicates that the BMD of Nevertheless, our ChIP-Seq and expression array profiling revealed numerous SRC-1 regulated genes that were not dependent on E2 signaling, providing further evidence for E2-independent action of SRC-1. This included classic osteoblast regulatory genes such as ALPL and osteocalcin (OCN). Importantly, although we were able to identify previously known ERα binding sites and E2 regulated genes, genes most critical for osteoblast differentiation and function were largely independent of ERα and E2. Further analysis of these SRC-1 regulated genes in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis also revealed those important in connective tissue development under the biological functions pathway, which included important functions such as size of bone (ALPL, CAV1, CD40, LIF), differentiation of bone (JAG1, NOTCH2, CSF2, SPP1) and proliferation of osteoblasts (TNFRSF11B, TGFBR1/2, IGF1R). This could account for the loss of BMD observed in both the sham-treated and ovariectomized mice for the OCN is produced solely by osteoblasts and assists in the mineralization process of bone by binding to hydroxyapatite, thus it is often used as a biomarker for bone formation ( This project was funded in part by the The authors have nothing to disclose. Expression data was generated from the BCM Genomic and RNA Profiling Core. ChIP-Seq was done at the MD Anderson Sequencing and Microarray Facility. Micro CT at BCM was done in the Micro CT Core and at Pitt in the Stem Cell Research Center. Histomorphometry was done at the MD Anderson Bone Histomorphometry Core. The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at