Alkaline transesterification of Cynara cardunculus L. seed oil with methanol for biodiesel production is investigated. Both in situ transesterification and conventional transesterification were studied using ultrasonication (24kHz, without external heating) and mechanical stirring (600rpm, 60°C). For in situ transesterification, the use of ultrasonication and mechanical stirring led to similar high % FAME content (96.0 and 93.0% respectively) after 20min. However the % yield of the extracted methylesters using mechanical stirring was lower compared to ultrasonication (50.4 and 85.1% respectively). For in situ transesterification via ultrasonication the optimum conditions were: 9.5% NaOH w/w of oil and a 550:1 methanol to oil molar ratio. In conventional transesterification, using ultrasonication, a high % FAME content of methylesters (97.0%) was obtained after 20min. Respective % FAME content for mechanical stirring was 95.8% after 1h. In both cases of conventional transesterification 1% w/w of oil NaOH as catalyst and a 7:1 methanol to oil ratio were used. The kinetics used for methanolysis reaction using sonication or mechanical stirring involved the irreversible second order reaction followed by the reversible second order reaction close to equilibrium. Cynara biodiesel properties determined, comply with the specifications of the European Standard EN 14214.According to the reports of international agencies there will be an approximate 50% increase in the demand for energy by the year 2030. Moreover the resources of oil and gas are expected to be exhausted within the next 50 Among various biodiesel production methods, transesterification is the most common. Transesterification converts triglycerides, by means of an alcohol, into fatty acid alkyl esters (biodiesel) and glycerol. In the conventional method, pre-extracted oil from seeds, by means of mechanical pressure or solvent extraction, is used as the raw material. However, the oil yield resulting from mechanical pressure is low while extraction requires large volumes of solvent primarily hexane. Hexane is classified as a hazardous pollutant and is responsible for atmospheric smog and global warming In situ transesterification or reactive extraction is a different method of production of alkyl-esters, directly from oil-bearing material. It was first studied by Harrington and D'arcy-Evans All oil seeds eventually can be used for in situ transesterification. Research on this topic has been carried out using rape seeds, sesame seeds, cotton seeds, sunflower seeds,  The microstructure of plant tissue is complex, consisting of cells, intercellular spaces, capillaries and pores As stated above, the main obstacle to large-scale commercialization of biodiesel production is its high cost. Consequently, recent research has focused on developing new methods in order to reduce this production cost. Along this line, novel reactor types have been developed that can improve the performance of transesterification. Recent research in Sonochemistry suggests ultrasonic irradiation as a new and more efficient mixing tool for the production of biodiesel, as higher yields and shorter times can be achieved using less catalyst and energy compared to conventional methods In the present study Sodium hydroxide (>  An ultrasonic processor (Model UP 400S from Dr. Hielscher GmbH) was used in this study. The sonicator power output was 400 NaOH (1.0 wt.% of the oil) was dissolved in methanol (7/1 methanol to oil molar ratio) and mixed with 80 After 1 Entire NaOH (1.0 wt.% of the oil) was dissolved in methanol (7/1 methanol to oil molar ratio) and mixed with 80 Entire The amount and composition of methylesters in biodiesel were determined as follows: 100 For conventional transesterification FAME content % defines the conversion of triglyceride extract to methylesters Yield of in situ transesterification was calculated based on the weight of isolated product and the oil content of the seed as follows Fatty acid composition and acid value of Moisture was determined using a KERN, model MLB50-3, moisture analyzer (Balingen, Germany) by weighing 3 Physical and chemical properties of the biodiesel sample produced from Statistical treatment included a 3 In order to investigate the main effects of the methanol to oil molar ratio, the % of NaOH w/w of oil in the seed and the possible interaction between them, a two-way ANOVA was performed for each of the two dependent variables (% of FAME content, % of yield). The model applied in each case was of the form: A set of preliminary experiments was carried out in order to determine the effect of methanol to oil molar ratio (450–650/1) and catalyst concentration (3.5–14% NaOH w/w of the oil in the seed) on yield and FAME content of the in situ transesterification via direct sonication. For conventional transesterification the required methanol to oil molar ratio is 6:1. By contrast, for in situ transesterification the minimum amount of methanol used should completely cover the seeds in the reactor in order for mixing to be effective. In this case the required amount of methanol to cover 20  The interaction of % NaOH w/w and the methanol to oil molar ratio is significant in all cases (p It seems that increasing the amount of methanol for a given NaOH concentration, also increases the yield of the extract. This is in agreement with other studies Additionally, it can be seen that in order to obtain a 90% yield, a 450:1 methanol:oil molar ratio is required at a catalyst concentration of 9.5% w/w of oil. At a catalyst concentration of 7.5% the methanol to oil molar ratio required increases to 550:1 and at 3.5% catalyst concentration the methanol to oil molar ratio further increases to 650:1. The above results show that increasing the amount of catalyst used decreases the required amount of methanol for extraction. Moreover,  However, the interaction of % NaOH w/w and the methanol to oil molar ratio is significant in all cases (p In most cases there is no significant variation in FAME content. Consequently, the high amount of methanol that is required for in situ transesterification serves the purpose of extraction of the reaction products from the mass of the seed and not the transesterification of triglycerides, since the conversion can be achieved even at low molar ratio of methanol. At low catalyst concentrations (3.5 and 5.5%) and for a 450/1 methanol to oil molar ratio there is an insufficient conversion inside the seed and this can explain the low FAME content measured inside the bulk solvent. As the amount of methanol used is increased, the extraction of reaction products also increases which will react with the rest of the catalyst inside the bulk solvent to give esters. According to the above results the optimum conditions for the in situ transesterification of The in situ transesterification of Haas et al. studied in situ transesterification of soybeans at room temperature using orbital shaking for 8 Generally, alkaline transesterification is preferred over acid catalyzed transesterification as the former is reported to proceed approximately 4000 times faster than the latter The progress of alkali-catalyzed in situ transesterification of It is thus clear that the % yield of esters is higher when ultrasonication is used compared to that using mechanical stirring. It is evident that ultrasonic irradiation performs a different and more intense type of mixing than mechanical stirring. According to the mechanism proposed for in situ transesterification, the reaction occurs within the seed matrix rather than in the bulk solvent When ultrasonic power is applied to a liquid, microbubbles are produced (cavitation). These bubbles grow over a few cycles and finally collapse and generate the energy for mechanical effects. When the reaction medium is heterogeneous, such as in the present case, this bubble collapse will no longer be symmetrical and as a result, a liquid jet will be formed which is targeted to the surface of the seeds at high speed. The mechanical effect of this is equivalent to high pressure jetting. Moreover, a second phenomenon termed “pitting” occurs, which exposes new surface area to the reagents. When the solid is in the form of small particles, such as those of macerated seeds in the present study, cavitation can produce a variety of other effects such as mechanical deaggregation, particle size reduction and disruption of the internal oil cell wall According to Georgogianni et al. also compared ultrasonication and mechanical stirring for in situ transesterification of cotton and sunflower seeds Comparison between mechanical stirring and ultrasonication for in situ transesterification of rice bran was carried out by Yustianingsih et al. using H Transesterification of Most of the studies have compared transesterification using mechanical stirring and ultrasonication with external heating. Takase et al. compared magnetic stirring (600 Gude and Grand also investigated thermal effects of direct sonication (20 The experimental data were further analyzed in terms of the kinetics of the process of The equation used to describe methanolysis overall reaction in the present study is: TG The reaction rate constant can be determined based on the increased amount of the product obtained at specific reaction intervals According to assumption (c) the integrated equation describing the methanolysis reaction rate close to equilibrium is The common equilibrium constant can also be experimentally calculated from the equilibrium degree of TG conversion, In line with the above assumptions the kinetic model that was applied in the present study of the methanolysis reaction involved the irreversible pseudo-second order reaction during the initial period of the process followed by the reverse second order reaction model close to equilibrium. To confirm this hypothesis experimental data were plotted versus time according to Eqs. Fitting data to Eq. Fitting data to Eq. To the best of our knowledge, the kinetics of ultrasonic assisted methanolysis have not been studied in depth. Colucci et al. Physical and chemical property data of the biodiesel produced from The density of Kinematic viscosity value is influenced by methanol and catalyst concentrations used and by FAME content of the final product The cetane number of Data in Biodiesel performance is inferior to that of petroleum diesel under low temperature conditions. The measured value of flash point for In the present study transesterification of Comparing in situ transesterification to conventional transesterification via ultrasonication similar FAME content was achieved (96 and 97% respectively) in 20 According to the kinetic model applied (irreversible second order reaction followed by the reversible second order reaction close to equilibrium), methanolysis of Based on the values of physical and chemical properties determined, it can be stated that Authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the