Room-and-pillar mining with pillar recovery has historically been associated with more than 25% of all ground fall fatalities in underground coal mines in the United States. The risk of ground falls during pillar recovery increases in multiple-seam mining conditions. The hazards associated with pillar recovery in multiple-seam mining include roof cutters, roof falls, rib rolls, coal outbursts, and floor heave. When pillar recovery is planned in multiple seams, it is critical to properly design the mining sequence and panel layout to minimize potential seam interaction. This paper addresses geotechnical considerations for concurrent pillar recovery in two coal seams with 21 m of interburden under about 305 m of depth of cover. The study finds that, for interburden thickness of 21 m, the multiple-seam mining influence zone in the lower seam is directly under the barrier pillar within about 30 m from the gob edge of the upper seam. The peak stress in the interburden transfers down at an angle of approximately 20°away from the gob, and the entries and crosscuts in the influence zone are subjected to elevated stress during development and retreat. The study also suggests that, for full pillar recovery in close-distance multiple-seam scenarios, it is optimal to superimpose the gobs in both seams, but it is not necessary to superimpose the pillars. If the entries and/or crosscuts in the lower seam are developed outside the gob line of the upper seam, additional roof and rib support needs to be considered to account for the elevated stress in the multiple-seam influence zone.Room-and-pillar mining accounted for about 40% of underground coal production in the United States in 2016. Pillar recovery, practiced in about one-third of the room-and-pillar mines, represents about 10% of the coal mined underground, yet it has historically been associated with more than 25% of all ground fall fatalities The degree of multiple-seam interaction can be influenced by the sequencing of seams, pillar and entry design, and the layout of workings Although mining sequence, panel layout, and pillar size are critical for the planning of concurrent pillar recovery in multiple seams, the size of leave blocks, stump size, and roof and rib support should also be carefully designed to minimize multiple-seam interaction during pillar recovery. This paper addresses geotechnical considerations for concurrent pillar recovery in two coal seams with 21 m of interburden under about 305 m depth of cover at the lower seam. This study concerns concurrent pillar recovery of two adjacent panels in two coal seams. The panels in the upper seam were developed with a 6–9-entry system and 21 m by 27 m center-to-center pillars. The overburden depth over the two panels ranges from 152 to 284 m. The barrier pillar between the two panels is 27–43 m center-to-center. The entry width is about 5.8–6.1 m, and the entry height is about 1.8 m. The immediate roof consists of shale and sandyshale. The roof is supported by four 1.5-m, 19-mm-diameter, fully grouted resin bolts on 1.2-m spacing for primary support and five 3-m, 15.2-mm cable bolts at intersections for supplementary support. The panels in the lower seam were developed with a 9-entry system and 21-m by 27-m center-to-center pillars. A barrier pillar of 61 m center-to-center was left between the two panels. The immediate roof is dark shale and sandstone, and the immediate floor is dark gray fireclay. The entry width is about 6.1 m, and the mining height is 1.8 m. The coal in the Powellton Seam is about 1.2 m thick, and about 0.6 m of top rock is mined to make a mining height of 1.8 m. The roof is supported by four 1.5-m, 19-mm-dia., fully grouted resin bolts on 1.2-m spacing for primary support and five 3.6-m, 15.2-mm-diameter cable bolts at intersections for supplementary support. The panels in the two seams were developed with different numbers of entries, and the workings were offset 6–21 m. The pillars in the retreat panels were designed by the mine engineers using the NIOSH-developed software, Analysis of Retreat Mining Pillar Stability (ARMPS) (NIOSH, 2010) and the numerical modeling software, LaModel (West Virginia University, 2011). LaModel was used to calculate the stability factor of the pillars over the area under maximum overburden depth of 305 m in the lower seam. The pillar sizes in both seams in the study meet the stability factor requirements established in the ARMPS and LaModel software programs. LaModel software was used to model the distribution of abutment pressure around the retreat panels   The retreat mining in the upper seam creates abutment pressure in the pillars adjacent to the gob, which transfers through the interburden to the pillars in the lower seam. The amount and extent of abutment pressure in the upper seam is related to the width of the gob, the gob material properties, and the overburden characteristics. The distribution of the abutment pressure over the barrier pillars, as well as the depth of yielding in the barrier pillar, largely determines the stress transferred into the interburden. Understanding how the abutment pressure transfers to the lower seam through the interburden is critical for optimal design of a multiple-seam mining layout. This study also uses the FLAC3D numerical software to model the stress transfer through the interburden under the abutment pressure created from pillar retreating in the upper seam  Full pillar recovery was conducted in both seams during the study. Right and left lifts, called Christmas trees, were used for pillar recovery in both seams, and coal stumps were left to support the roof during pillar recovery. Two mobile roof supports (MRS) were used for roof support inby the pillaring face, and 8–10 timbers were set up in the crosscuts as turn posts, as well as in the entries as breaking posts. The depth of cut for retreating was 9.8 m in both seams. The conditions of the pillar, roof, and floor were carefully monitored during mining of both seams.  The coal rib in the upper seam has about 43 cm of weak fireclay at the mid-height and a mudstone streak above the fireclay. The mudstone streak is very weak and becomes muddy after absorbing moisture. Rib sloughage was observed at the outby pillars within one block from the pillaring line. The severity of rib sloughage varied with overburden depth. The rib sloughage was 30–60 cm under 213–274 m depth of cover, and 15–30 cm under 183–213 m depth of cover. Only minor rib sloughage occurred under less than 183 m of cover in the active pillaring face. Rib sloughage of 30–60 cm also occurred at the rib of the barrier pillar under overburden depth of 152–213 m where the barrier width between the gob lines was about 30 m. The rib failure mode is largely controlled by the weak fireclay and the mudstone streak above it. With sliding at the mudstone streak and breaking of the fireclay, the rib normally spalled below the fireclay.  The right side of Panel I was extended by developing one block into the northern barrier pillar during retreating. The new pillars developed were under the barrier pillar of the upper seam and were retreated with half blocks where overburden depth was less than 274 m. Significant rib sloughage was observed at those pillars outside the gob line of the upper seam, but no significant rib sloughage occurred within the gob line of the upper seam. One row of the pillars at the right side of Panel II was also developed under the barrier pillar of the upper seam. Severe sloughage was observed at the pillar rib outside the gob line of the upper seam within two blocks of the pillaring line in Panel II under depth of cover of about 244 m. Pillar recovery can be conducted safely in close-distance multiple seams with proper planning and adequate ground support. Mining sequence, panel layout, and pillar sizing are primary considerations to minimize multiple-seam interactions, but depth of cut, stump size, leave blocks, and roof and rib support are also important in reducing the risk of ground falls during pillar recovery. Mining sequence concerns the sequence of mining in seams and panels. For full pillar recovery in close-distance multiple seams, descending order from the upper seam to the lower seam is the optimal sequence, as under-mining greatly reduces multiple-seam interaction in comparison with over-mining. Mining sequence in panels should be planned in such an order that pillar retreating between two gobs can be avoided unless large barrier pillars are left. For panel layout in close-distance multiple seams, superposition of panels and columniation of pillars minimize multiple-seam interaction. If the interburden strata is fairly strong with sandstone and sandyshale comprising the majority of the strata, as in this studied case, columniation of pillars are not necessary. If the panels in the upper and lower seams are not the same size, it is important to superimpose the retreated gobs, especially when the overburden is greater than 245–274 m deep. Mining within the gob lines of the upper seam always puts the pillar and roof under the de-stressed gob zone, and can be practiced if adverse roof conditions are encountered in the lower seam. Based on this study, it is important to note that the highest stress under the barrier pillar of the upper seam is not directly under the edge of the upper seam gob, but is at an angle of 20° away from the gob edge, considering a close-distance interburden of 15–30 m. Any workings developed within about 30 m outside the upper seam gob line are located in the multiple-seam influence zone. Depending on overburden depth and the strength of the roof and rib, development or pillar retreating in the influence zone may be possible, but potential rib sloughage, roof cutters, or floor heave should be anticipated. Retreat mining outside the upper seam gob line under deep cover also significantly increases the risk of coal outburst and, therefore, should be practiced with caution. Pillar design for multiple-seam mining should consider development loading, abutment loading, and additional loading caused by multiple-seam mining. Generally, for mining in close-distance multiple seams, pillars should be designed based on the overburden depth in the lower seam. If the panels in the lower seam stay within the gob lines of the upper seam, ARMPS can be used for pillar design as the pillars in the lower seam are generally under de-stressed zone as a result of pillaring in the upper seam With full pillar recovery, it is important to plan the slab cut into the barrier pillar to maximize extraction and the size of leave blocks, if necessary, to be left for bleeder ventilation. The barrier pillar and leave blocks define the gob line. The planned leave blocks in the retreat panel help support the roof in the bleeder entries. Either whole blocks or half blocks can be left at one or two sides of the panel, depending on the requirements for ventilation and the stability of the roof and remaining pillars. If the leave blocks in the lower seam are outside the gob line of the upper seam, whole blocks should be considered because those pillars will be subjected to elevated stress resulting from mining in both seams. To reduce the stress transferred from the upper seam, the size of the stumps left in the gob should be designed to facilitate caving. Excessive coal stumps left in the upper seam, if not squeezed or crushed in the gob, may behave as remnant pillars and create high stress in the lower seam. This situation may occur with strong roof in the upper seam under shallow cover. To eliminate multiple-seam interaction caused by the remnant pillars left within the gob in the upper seam, it is important to recover the projected retreat pillars in the upper seam as much as possible. If certain pillars in the upper seam have to be left without retreating due to local adverse roof conditions, the pillars at the same area in the lower seam should be evaluated for their stability under additional stress. If entries and crosscuts are developed outside the gob line of the upper seam, additional roof and rib support should be considered for those entries and crosscuts in the multiple-seam influence zone, depending on the overburden depth in the area and strength of the roof and rib. Based on the case study described in this paper of concurrent pillar recovery in two close-distance multiple seams, the following conclusions are made: Pillar recovery can be conducted concurrently and safely in close-distance multiple seams through proper planning and adequate ground support. Mining sequence, panel layout, and pillar size are the primary considerations to minimize multiple-seam interaction, but depth of cut, stump size, leave blocks, and roof and rib support are also important in reducing the risk of ground falls during pillar recovery. Interburden thickness and characteristics are the most important factor in determining the degree of multiple-seam interaction. The multiple-seam interaction also increases significantly with the increase of overburden depth. For full pillar recovery in close-distance multiple seams, it is optimal to superimpose the gobs, but it is not necessary to superimpose the pillars depending on the thickness and strength of the interburden. For interburden thickness of 21 m, the influence zone in the lower seam is directly under the barrier pillar and mainly within about 30 m from the gob edge of the upper seam. The entries and crosscuts developed outside the gob line of the upper seam are subjected to elevated stress resulting from multiple-seam mining. If entries and crosscuts are developed in the lower seam outside the gob line of the upper seam, additional roof and rib support should be considered to accommodate the elevated stress in the multiple-seam influence zone. The findings and conclusions in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Mention of any company or product does not constitute endorsement by NIOSH.