A convenient apparatus for density fractionating finely sized coal samples has been developed. It is inexpensive compared with the apparatus used in current methods. The apparatus and method are described, and a possible use of the test results in conjunction with ash content of coal matter is discussed.relative density of composite particles slope and intercept of line, respectively average ash content of composite particles in density fraction, in percent Float/Sink analysis of coal (or ores, in general) is a time consuming procedure for density fractionation. This is particularly true when working with relatively finely-sized samples requiring special experimental setups, e.g. the standard separating funnel and the funnel-flask methods suggested in Standards Australia ( Compared to the above mentioned methods, a convenient and inexpensive apparatus has been developed for part of the experimental work undertaken in The experimental apparatus was developed by combining the principles of separating funnel and funnel-flask methods. It was constructed by cutting away the bottom from a screw cap plastic bottle and connecting the bottle to a laboratory test tube with a 15 This method was found to be considerably more efficient and cheaper than both the separating funnel and the funnel-flask methods. It was also free of the contamination that occurs through material settling on the sides of the funnel. Moreover, it proved to work much better than the centrifuging method since even after 20 In the new method, the sample was placed at the bottom of the test tube. A drop of Triton-X100 was added as a wetting agent for coal as suggested by The equipment required being low cost and simple to use, it allows many separations to be run at the same time, making the method convenient for the analysis of large numbers of samples. Similar to The weight distribution of the size/density fractions together with their corresponding ash content could also have been used to construct standard coal washability curves. The author deeply acknowledges the constructive discussions during the course of this work; and in general, the invaluable contributions to his doctoral study by Prof. William J. Whiten. Author is also thankful to the reviewers, whose comments greatly improved the manuscript. The method was developed as part of the ACARP C15079 project.