The influence of ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH4H2PO4) on the potassium (K) retention ability in the ash phase and the ash melting characteristics during biomass combustion was investigated. Experiments were performed in a tube furnace experimental system and an ash melting point detector. The results show that the addition of NH4H2PO4 will increase the potassium retention ability in the ash phase. NH4H2PO4 can react with part of potassium elements within the biomass to form potassium phosphates and potassium calcium phosphates, which contributes to the improvement of the melting characteristics. Some stable double salts with high melting point are observed in the formed ashes. The feature temperatures of the formed ash were enhanced by different levels with the addition in of NH4H2PO4. SEM (scanning electron microscope) analysis proved that the addition of NH4H2PO4 could avoid the surface melting of the formed ash. NH4H2PO4 is an effective biomass additive which could not only enhance the potassium retention ability in the ash phase but also enhance the ash melting characteristic of biomass.The problems associated with the fast development of human society, such as climate change, environmental pollution and global warming, have created an international drive towards renewable energy. As a source of renewable energy, biomass receives more attention due to its environmental friendly characteristics, wide distribution and CO That is mainly because, alkali species, particularly alkali chlorides and sulfates, will cause alkali-induced slagging during biomass combustion It is important to reduce heated area ash fouling and slagging caused by alkali metal species for efficient and clean combustion of biomass by sequestration the corresponding volatile alkali species, especially the potassium compound In order to investigate the influence of phosphorus on ash-related problems, some fundamental studies were proposed. A simulation to study the influence of phosphorus on the morphology and distribution of K in biomass ash was carried out by Refs. The transformation process could be categorized into two methods: one is to capture gaseous K in the gas phase, and another method is to retain K in the ash phase. Regarding gaseous potassium capturing, a chemical thermodynamic equilibrium calculation and experimental study on the reaction properties between ammonia dihydrogen phosphate (NH Although previous studies give a good direction for solving the problems caused by the alkali metal elements and present a series of experimental studies for the gaseous potassium capture, the study of the influence of ammonium phosphate (i.e. NH This paper presents a detailed experimental study on the influence of NH Five typical biomass samples, MS, CS, RS, PW and PS were used in this study. These samples include herbaceous (MS, CS, RS) and woody plant (PW, PS) biomass, both with a high potassium content, which are widely used in cooking, heating and power generation and are retrieved from a rural areas of Dezhou, Shandong Province, China. All received biomass samples were pulverized and dried for 12 h at 60 °C in order to remove surface water. After that, these samples were sieved with a sieve of 80 mesh (sieve diameter 180 μm) and the proximate, ultimate and alkali metal (i.e. K) content analysis were performed. The proximate and ultimate analysis were conducted under the CEN/TS 14774-3 standard. The potassium content in the raw biomass samples were measured by ICP-AES (inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IRIS Advantage). The analytical pure ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (NH The potassium retention experiments were conducted in the tube furnace fixed bed combustion experimental system shown in RS had a significantly higher potassium content at 2.09% compared to other biomass samples as shown in the data in For further research of the biomass ash melting characteristics, MS, CS, RS, PW, PS (marked as MS-Origin, CS-Origin, RS-Origin, PW-Origin and PS-Origin respectively) and their NH   That was why the decreasing trend in potassium ratio was observed as the reaction temperature increased. The    The XRD patterns of the RS-Origin formed ash is shown in The addition of NH  It was obvious that the influence of NH There're still some future work need to be done. The combustion technology and methods of biomass with NH The influence of NH This study was supported by the