As a common gangue mineral, the inhibition of calcite is very important to enrich the valuable minerals by flotation. With the increasing complexity of mineral properties and higher requirements for environmental protection, developing a newly eco-friendly depressant for calcite flotation is necessary. In this study, the effects of polyaspartic acid (PASP), polyepoxysuccinic acid (PESA), and hydrolytic polymaleic anhydride (HPMA) on the flotation performance of calcite using sodium oleate as the collector were investigated through flotation experiments. The results showed that all the three depressants exhibited strong inhibition to calcite, and the inhibition capabilities decreased in the order of PASP > HPMA > PESA. The results of zeta potential measurement, contact angle measurement and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy indicated that the adsorption of sodium oleate on calcite surface was greatly decreased as the addition of the depressant. To investigate the inhibition selectivity, three depressants were used in fluorite flotation, and the results suggested that sodium oleate could still adsorb on fluorite surface in the presence of PASP. The flotation separation of fluorite from calcite could be therefore realized with PASP on the basis of the best selectivity among the three depressants.Calcite is a common calcium-containing salt mineral, and it usually exists in the form of gangue mineral associated with other valuable minerals in the ore deposits, which mainly include scheelite, fluorite, apatite, smithsonite, cassiterite, rhodochrosite, and so on. Therefore, separating calcite is obligatory to enrich the valuable minerals, generally by flotation ( The depressants for calcite in use can be inorganic and organic. The major inorganic depressants are water glass (or modified water glass) and phosphates. A great deal of theoretical research and flotation practice have demonstrated that water glass (or modified water glass) is the most widely used depressant in calcite flotation, and its addition can achieve the flotation separation of scheelite, fluorite, apatite, and smithsonite from calcite using fatty acids collectors ( In face of the increasing complexity of mineral properties and the higher requirements for environmental protection, developing a newly eco-friendly and efficient depressant for calcite flotation has become an urgent endeavor. Polycarboxylic acids are eco-friendly chemicals because they are nontoxic, water soluble, and highly biodegradable ( In this paper, the inhibition effects of the other three common polycarboxylic acids on the flotation performance of calcite were investigated through flotation experiments, and the relevant adsorption mechanism was analyzed by ways of zeta potential measurement, contact angle measurement and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Finally, to investigate the inhibition selectivity, the three depressants were used in fluorite flotation, and the flotation separation of fluorite from calcite was investigated through the flotation experiments of artificial mixtures. Pure calcite samples with 98.91% CaCO In this study, the chemically pure sodium oleate was used as the collector, polyepoxysuccinic acid (PESA), hydrolytic polymaleic anhydride (HPMA), and polyaspartic acid (PASP) were used as the depressants ( Flotation experiments of individual minerals and artificially mixed minerals were conducted using an XFG-II flotation machine (Jilin Exploration Mechanical Factory, China), as shown in For individual mineral flotation, the flotation recovery was calculated by dividing the weight of the concentrate or the tailing by their total weight. For the artificially mixed minerals flotation, the CaF For each measurement, 0.03 g mineral samples of −2 μm and 30 ml distilled water were added in a 100 ml beaker and stirred using a magnetic stirrer to obtain uniform suspension. Then, the pH value was adjusted to the desired value, and the flotation reagent was added and conditioned for 3 min. The zeta potentials of calcite and fluorite with and without reagent treatment were measured using a zeta-sizer analyzer (Malvern Instrument, England) open to the atmosphere, and the average of three measured values was recorded. Under the same reagent system, the test conditions were fixed except pH value, and the variation in the zeta potentials of calcite before and after reagent treatment was used to analyze the reagent adsorption on calcite surface. The crystal fluorite and calcite samples were used to measure contact angles. The sample was conditioned with reagents in a beaker according to flotation test requirements, washed by distilled water, dried, and measured using a JY-82C contact angle meter (Dingsheng Tester, China). The aperture, sample platform and the needle tubing were initially adjusted to make the measured sample and the needle tubing clearly shown in the testing software and the needle tubing was above the sample. Then, a droplet of 0.016 ml was dropped to the sample surface, as shown in The XPS spectra of calcite were recorded with an ESCALAB 250Xi X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., America) using Al Kα X-ray source operating at 200 W and the pass energy of 20 eV. The step length was 0.1 eV, and the vacuum pressure was less than 1 × 10    In conclusion, all the three polycarboxylic acids had good inhibition effects on calcite flotation following an order of PASP > HPMA > PESA, and their required concentrations were greatly affected by the concentration of sodium oleate. The effect of pH on the zeta potentials of calcite is shown in After the addition of sodium oleate, the zeta potential of calcite was reversed from positive to negative by 30 mV at pH 9, indicating the adsorption of sodium oleate on calcite surface. Furthermore, apart from the electrostatic adsorption between the positively charged calcite surface and the anionic group -COO After adding the depressant, the zeta potential of calcite changed to negative values within the pH range of 6–12, and it decreased when pH value increased. So it was indicated that all the three depressants could adsorb on calcite surface. Moreover, the reduced value of zeta potential was in the decreasing order of PASP > HPMA > PESA, as evidenced by 47, 39, and 37 mV for PASP, HPMA and PESA at almost pH 9, respectively, showing that the strongest interaction occurred between calcite and PASP. When the depressant was added prior to sodium oleate, the zeta potential showed no apparently negative shift compared with that with the addition of depressant alone. It was indicated that the adsorption of the depressant could interfere with the adsorption of sodium oleate on calcite surface, and thus the flotation recovery of calcite was decreased. Compared with the zeta potential of calcite treated with sodium oleate alone, the zeta potential of calcite treated with the depressant alone was much more negative, indicating that the interaction between the depressant and calcite surface was stronger than that between sodium oleate and calcite surface, and thereby the adsorption of sodium oleate could be hindered in the presence of the depressant. This result might be due to the even more carboxyls in the structure of the depressant. Furthermore, the negative shift caused by sodium oleate in the presence of PESA ( The contact angle is an instinctive response to the hydrophobicity and floatability of minerals, and in general, the larger the contact angle is, the larger the hydrophobicity and floatability of the mineral will be. The contact angles of minerals depend on measurement techniques, sample preparation procedure, roughness, origin, surface structure of a sample and pH ( The contact angle of calcite used in this study was 55.38° in distilled water. To further explore the adsorption mechanism between the depressant and calcite, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of calcite treated with only distilled water and the reagents at pH 7–7.5 were analyzed. After sodium oleate treatment, the shifts of O 1s and Ca 2p in binding energy were 0.13 and 0.27 eV, which were larger than the instrument error (0.1 eV). The concentration of C increased by 16.34%, while those of O and Ca decreased by 14.78% and 1.88%, respectively. The results indicated that Ca was covered by another substance. In general, fatty acid collectors adsorb on a semi-soluble salt-type minerals through the chemical adsorption of carboxylic groups that bind with lattice cations in low collector concentrations, and subsequently, surface precipitation or colloid deposition of calcium dicarboxylates occurs upon the reaction of ion carboxylate with calcium ions released from mineral lattices ( After the addition of PASP, the binding energies of O 1s and Ca 2p appeared with a negligible shift because the values were in the range of instrument error (0.1 eV). However, the N1s peak was observed after PASP treatment, and the concentration of O increased by 1.51%, while the concentrations of C and Ca decreased by 2.69% and 0.17%, which indicated that PASP could adsorb on calcite surface. As a semi-soluble salt mineral, calcite in aqueous solution will undergo a series of reactions as follows ( It can be seen that the concentrations of Ca After adding PASP prior to sodium oleate, compared with calcite without reagent, the shifts in binding energy of O 1s and Ca 2p were 0.13 and 0.09 eV, which indicated no changes in their outer electron densities. The appearance of N 1s peak also accorded with the adsorption of PASP on calcite surface. The atomic concentration of C increased from 37.79% to 41.32%, but the value was lower than that in the addition of sodium oleate alone (54.13%). Therefore, it was indicated that the adsorption of PASP decreased the adsorption of sodium oleate on calcite surface, thus decreasing its floatability. On the basis of the above results, the three used depressants exhibited strong inhibition effect on calcite flotation. However, in flotation practice, the inhibition selectivity directly influences flotation results. The flotation separation of fluorite from calcite is difficult due to the same calcium sites, and the efficient depressant plays a key role. Therefore, flotation experiments of single fluorite sample and the artificial mixture were carried out to investigate the selectivity of the three depressants, and the selectivity of the depressant was depended on the difference between the flotation recoveries of fluorite and calcite.  It could be seen from To further confirm the above results, the zeta potentials of fluorite surface in the absence and presence of PASP were investigated as a function of pH, and the the results are shown in Flotation separation of fluorite from calcite in the artificial mixed minerals (2:1) was investigated at pH 7–7.5, and the results are shown in In recent years, considerable research has shown that the density and spatial distributions of the surface active sites are the likely key factors that influence the selective adsorption of flotation reagents on mineral surfaces. The collector (sodium oleate) adsorbed on calcite surface through the interaction between oleate ions and calcium sites on the surface. However, when a polycarboxylic acid was added in the flotation pulp, the large number of -COO In this paper, three polycarboxylic acids were used as the depressants in calcite flotation. Flotation results showed that all the three depressants could effectively inhibit calcite, and the inhibition capabilities were in the decreasing order of PASP > HPMA > PESA. The inhibition mechanism was studied through zeta potential, contact angle measurement and XPS analysis. The zeta potential of calcite pre-adsorbed by depressant showed no evidently negative shift after adding sodium oleate, and the contact angle of calcite with sodium oleate greatly decreased when the depressant concentration increased. So it was indicated that all the three depressants could decrease the adsorption of sodium oleate on calcite surface, which was further confirmed by XPS analysis. In addition, the different inhibition capabilities of the three depressants were attributed to the difference in the interactions between the depressants and calcite surface. To investigate the inhibition selectivity, three depressants were used in fluorite flotation, and the results showed that only PASP presented a strong selectivity depending on the difference between the recoveries of fluorite and calcite. A concentrate containing 84.54% CaF In a word, three polycarboxylic acids were the eco-friendly and effective depressants for calcite flotation, and the flotation separation of fluorite from calcite could be realized with the addition of PASP. Given the excellent properties and inhibition performance, PASP would become a promising and applicable depressant for calcite in flotation field. This work is financially supported by