The fully-coupled, poroelastic solution for the time-dependent stress and pore fluid pressure of a hollow or solid, cylindrical specimen of porous, fluid-saturated rock undergoing the diametral compression test is derived and presented. The long-time asymptote of the poroelastic solution for the case of solid specimen recovers the related elastic solution of Hondros.9 Findings reveal the nontrivial trend and substantial effect of the pore fluid pressure disturbances on the rock effective stress. The failure of solid cylinder is predicted to occur instantaneously after the compressive load is applied, yet, at a point away from the specimen center point. Conversely, delayed failure of hollow cylinder may occur after the pore fluid disturbances within the specimen diminish.The Brazilian test, also known as the indirect tensile strength test, is a standardized laboratory method for measuring the tensile strength of brittle solids including rocks. Eq. The focus of this paper is on the coupled interaction of pore fluid flow and pressure disturbances with the stress evolution and failure of the rock sample undergoing the Brazilian-type test. The specimen is homogenous and isotropic. The solid phase of the specimen follows a linearly elastic constitutive model. The specimen is fully saturated with the saturating fluid. The stress state of specimen is plane-stress or plane-strain. Pre-existing flaws or fractures do not exist within the specimen. Under these assumptions, Biot's theory of poroelasticity Plane-stress and plane-strain models of the configuration and loading conditions shown in The mathematical formulation of quasi-static deformation of the rock sample requires solving Navier's equations of static stress equilibrium. Formulation of Navier's equations in polar coordinates takes the following form. Eqs. The stress tensor and pore fluid pressure in Eqs. (2a), (2b) and (3) are coupled through the poroelastic constitutive relations and by incorporating the kinematic variable defined by the divergence of the vector defined by relative displacement of the fluid phase with respect to the solid phase, The hydraulic diffusivity in Eq. The mixed-stiffness representation of the constitutive equation for volumetric deformation of the fluid and solid phases can be expressed in the following form. A solution approach similar to the published work on the generalized poroelastic wellbore problem The star (*) in Eqs. Substituting Eq. The general solution for the Laplace transform of the Fourier harmonics of Note that the compatibility of stresses as formulated by Eq. The stress components may be expressed in terms of Biot's stress function The specific forms of Eqs. By comparing Eqs. The particular and homogenous solutions to Eq. The stress components are then found by substituting Eq. Eqs. Eqs. A sudden, continued, uniform normal traction, Any other loading rate profile could be conveniently formulated instead of Eq. In the proceeding discussion of the results, the obtained solution in Laplace transform space is numerically converted back to time domain using the Stehfest algorithm. The validity of the obtained solution may be conveniently verified by substituting Eqs. The generalized Lamé’s solution for poroelastic hollow cylinders Axisymmetric deformation of a hollow, elastic cylinder with inner and outer radii Solid disk-shaped samples of rock are tested in the classical Brazilian test. The solution to this case can be recovered from the presented general solution by setting Substitution of Eqs. Eqs. The instantaneous ( Applying Eq. (48b) on Eqs. (43)-(45), after substitution for Eqs. The elastic solution to diametral compression of solid cylinders cannot be recovered from the general solution presented in this paper simply by allowing the limiting case of The plot of An implication of Eq. The stresses outlined in Eqs. Results of Eqs. Terzaghi's effective stress tensor is defined, as follows. The tensile failure of the rock sample is assumed to be governed by the larger principal component of Terzaghi's effective stress. Poroelasticity imposes contrasting effects on the failure tendency of rock samples in the considered cases. The time and location of the maximum effective tensile stress for each case is shown by point  To further elucidate the matter, the instantaneous and long-time responses of the solid disk are derived from Eqs. Details regarding conversion of the related Fourier series expansion to the functional forms of Eq.  A summary of the key findings regarding the location, time and required load of failure is presented in The classical solution to the elastic problem defined by the geometry and loading setup of the Brazilian test is generalized to the time-dependent poroelastic solution for diametral compression of hollow and fluid-saturated, cylindrical samples. Application of a constant diametral compressive load at