Zircon is notoriously inert. Aggressive processing methods such as alkaline fusion are conventionally used to extract zirconium values from the mineral. In this study results are presented with respect to microwave digestion of zircon using ammonium acid fluoride (NH4F·1.5HF). Two distinct experimental methods were used. In the first method the reaction was followed in the temperature range of 100 to 200°C, for a full reaction period of 60min at each temperature. The second method comprised successive digestion periods interrupted by washing and re-introduction of fresh acid fluoride at a series of reaction temperatures varying between 120 and 240°C. Complete digestion was achieved with the latter technique. The kinetics is shown to be controlled by product-layer diffusion. The two data sets were combined to derive consistent temperature-dependent kinetic parameters. A facile numerical technique for extracting these parameters from the experimental data is used.Zircon is chemically extremely inert ( Separation of the sodium zirconate from the sodium silicate is achieved by dissolution in water, filtration, and precipitation. Alternatively zirconium tetrachloride is produced by carbo-chlorination of zircon at > Depending on the temperature, CO can also form in reaction Zircon can also be made chemically reactive by dissociation in a plasma tail-flame at > H PDZ can alternatively be subjected to dry fluorination using anhydrous HF ( We here extend the work reported recently ( Prime grade zircon (d The residue was analyzed by FT-Raman spectrometry (Bruker Ram II) and XRD (Bruker A-D8 Advance), as reported by It is assumed that the reaction between zircon and NH AAF and ammonium fluoride, as well as the two ammonium fluorometallates, (NH A starting mass of 0.5 The reaction mixture was centrifuged and the supernatant liquid decanted. The solid residue was washed with water and propanol, dried at 80 Two distinct experimental procedures were employed. In the first case (Procedure 1), the samples were digested for full reaction times (excluding heating and cooling times) of 10, 20, 30, and 60 Thus for each reaction temperature four samples were used, and for each of these data points an initial and final value of The experimental results are given in A number of kinetic models are possible for fluid–solid reactions ( Here Eq. Application of the chain rule results in The assumption of a constant heating rate, Integration based on the assumption that the effective diffusion constant displays Arrhenius behavior, returns: The integral on the right hand side does not have an easy closed-form analytical solution, but it can quite readily be integrated numerically. An objective function, Several algorithms are possible to minimize Eq. Experimental data points for both procedures, along with This is strong experimental evidence for the interpretation that an adhesive layer of ammonium fluoro-silicate-zirconate forms around each particle, inhibiting access by diffusing For microwave digestion of zircon in ammonium acid fluoride as demonstrated here, the process is controlled by the diffusion rate of the active fluid species through the ammonium fluorometallate product layer. Zircon can be converted practically quantitatively to water soluble products by repeated removal of the product layer by washing. The order of magnitude value of the diffusion constant calculated from this work corresponds to that for diffusion in solids. The results suggest that a high-pressure vessel which allows vigorous agitation might improve the yield without washing steps. The authors wish to thank: The South African Nuclear Energy Corporation Ltd. (NECSA) for making facilities available and allowing these results to be published;