Coronary artery calcification (CAC) is highly prevalent in coronary heart disease and is associated with increased cardiovascular mortality and morbidity. CAC is strongly associated with atherosclerosis, and progression of CAC is a strong predictor of future adverse cardiac events These possibilities raise the intriguing and crucial question: are calcium deposits in atherosclerotic plaques friends or foes? In other words, do they contribute to plaque stability or do they increase plaque instability? This is still a matter of scientific and medical debate, and both sides have persuasive arguments supported by experimental and clinical data CAC can be measured clinically by noninvasive electron beam computed tomography (EBCT) and multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) and by invasive intravascular ultrasound (IVUS). These techniques register and quantify plaque volume and macrocalcifications (calcium deposits >200 μm), and they do not detect microcalcifications (calcium deposits <50 μm) and activity of the calcification process. EBCT and MDCT cannot discriminate between medial and intimal calcification. Macrocalcifications are detected as spotty and sheet calcifications; the spotty type is associated with plaque vulnerability. Microcalcifications have been observed in the fibrous cap of human atherosclerotic plaques, where they may cause biomechanical instability Paradoxically, several clinical studies reported that intensive lipid-lowering therapies reduced the risk of cardiovascular events, whereas progression of CAC was accelerated The mechanisms of statin-induced plaque stabilization in the presence of active calcification are still unknown and remain subjects for future investigations. An appealing hypothesis is that statin therapy accelerates calcification as well as conversion of microcalcifications into macrocalcifications, thereby reducing the life span of destabilizing microcalcifications in the plaque. Investigators postulated that statins may attenuate the vitamin K–based inhibition of vascular calcification by causing local vitamin K In this issue of The intriguing question arises again: is the observed increased progression of CAC in warfarin-treated patients good or bad? Warfarin is a vitamin K antagonist that targets both vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors and vitamin K–dependent extrahepatic proteins such as vascular smooth muscle cell–derived matrix Gla-protein (MGP). The crucial function of vascular MGP in suppressing calcification of arteries was shown in MGP knockout mice and in experimental animals with chemical knockdown by warfarin; in both groups, initiation and progression of vascular calcification resulted Similar mechanisms may be operative in coronary artery plaques of warfarin-treated patients, thus explaining the observed increased progression of CAC and the number of calcified coronary plaques Although both warfarin and statins likely increase CAC through vitamin K–dependent mechanisms, their effects on plaque stability may be not be similar and may not be reflected by CAC as recorded by IVUS. This notion is supported by the observations that statins reduced atheroma volume, whereas warfarin had no effect on atheroma volume. As pointed out by Andrews et al. Given that various features of CAC remain largely unseen by EBCT, MDCT, and IVUS, it can be anticipated that CAC may become a more informative and discriminative biomarker as soon as its features of medial and intimal localization and active microcalcifications can be visualized and metrically measured. Segregation of the aggregate CAC in this manner will require new noninvasive imaging protocols that can be used in clinical studies. Determination of the true nature of CAC on a personalized basis by using noninvasive imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography or magnetic resonance imaging to identify metabolic processes underlying CAC will likely eliminate the apparent paradox arising from the association studies of statin and warfarin use and CAC. A clear view of the features of CAC will also guide the design of new therapeutic strategies aiming to modulate CAC progression and regression by targeting the molecular machinery of CAC.