Background
                  Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an antifibrinolytic agent that has been used to reduce blood loss in orthopedic surgery. It has been shown to decrease blood loss in upper- and lower-extremity arthroplasty, as well as lower-extremity fracture surgery. The use of TXA for proximal humeral fracture surgery has yet to be evaluated. The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of TXA on blood loss in patients undergoing open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF) or arthroplasty for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A total of 101 patients were randomized to receive either a single preoperative dose of intravenous TXA (53 patients) or a control dose of saline solution (48 patients) at the time of proximal humeral fracture surgery. On the basis of patient age and fracture pattern, ORIF was performed in 57 patients (30 TXA and 27 control patients) and reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) was performed in the other 44 patients (23 TXA and 21 control patients). Intraoperative blood loss plus 24-hour drain output was used to calculate total blood loss for each procedure. The preoperative-to-postoperative change in hemoglobin level was also evaluated for each patient. Further stratification of blood loss and change in hemoglobin level based on procedure (ORIF or RSA) was performed as well.
               
                  Results
                  Compared with the control group, the TXA group had less average intraoperative blood loss (178 mL vs. 129 mL, P < .0001), less postoperative drain output (103 mL vs. 62 mL, P < .0001), and less total blood loss (280 mL vs. 188 mL, P < .0001). Compared with the control group, the TXA group had a smaller average preoperative-to-postoperative change in hemoglobin level (–2.6 g/dL vs. –1.5 g/dL, P < .0001). Further stratification based on procedure showed that among patients undergoing ORIF and patients undergoing RSA, those receiving TXA had less average total blood loss and a smaller decrease in hemoglobin level than the control group. No identifiable intraoperative or postoperative complications associated with the use of TXA occurred in any patient.
               
                  Conclusion
                  TXA was effective in reducing total blood loss and led to a smaller preoperative-to-postoperative decrease in hemoglobin level compared with control in patients undergoing surgery for proximal humeral fractures. This effect was consistent in patients treated with either ORIF or arthroplasty as the surgical procedure. TXA can be used to decrease blood loss in the surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures.Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an antifibrinolytic agent that has been used to reduce blood loss in orthopedic surgery. TXA has been shown to reduce blood loss in hip and knee arthroplasty, spine surgery, shoulder arthroplasty, and lower-extremity fracture surgery. Patients with proximal humeral fractures who consented to be enrolled in this randomized study and underwent surgical treatment between April 2015 and April 2019 were eligible for this study. The inclusion criteria consisted of patients with operatively treated proximal humeral fractures who presented to us during this 48-month period. Patients were indicated for surgery based on the fracture pattern and displacement, along with a shared decision-making process in which patients were informed of the risks and benefits of operative or nonoperative treatment, prior to them electing for surgery. Patient demographic characteristics and Neer fracture classification are shown in The decision to perform ORIF vs. reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) was based on evaluation of the injury pattern by the senior author (D.J.C.), as well as the patient's age. Displaced 2-, 3-, and 4-part fractures in patients aged <65 years who elected for surgery were managed with ORIF. In patients aged ≥65 years who elected for surgery, displaced 3-part fractures with no comminution of the greater tuberosity were treated with ORIF. Among patients aged ≥65 years with displaced 3-part fractures with comminution of the greater tuberosity or with 4-part fractures, those who elected for surgery were treated with RSA. In all patients included in this study, the fracture was treated in an acute fashion, typically within 1-2 weeks of the date of injury. The exclusion criteria consisted of patients who were not willing to undergo the randomization process. The exclusion criteria also included patients with a history of deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or an inherited hypercoagulable condition (factor V Leiden, protein C or S deficiency), as we do not use TXA in patients with these risk factors.  Patients were placed in the beach-chair position for the surgical procedure, and a deltopectoral approach was used in both ORIF patients and RSA patients. Patients undergoing ORIF were treated with a proximal humeral locking plate (DePuy Synthes, Warsaw, IN, USA) and suture fixation of the tuberosities to the plate. Patients treated with RSA received a cemented humeral component and a center screw baseplate with peripheral locking screw fixation (DJO Surgical, Austin, TX, USA). The tuberosities were repaired with heavy sutures to the shaft as well as to each other as the senior author previously described. We calculated intraoperative blood loss by direct measurement from the suction canisters at the end of the surgical procedure after subtracting for the irrigation fluid that was used. One Yankauer suction tube was connected to a separate canister for blood collection. A pulse lavage system with its own suction was connected to a separate suction canister to collect all irrigation fluid used during the case. The volume of blood (in milliliters) from the blood collection canister was added to the irrigation canister minus the amount of fluid that was used from the 3000-mL bag of irrigation fluid (Blood canister + Irrigation canister – Total irrigation fluid used) to estimate, as closely as possible, the value of intraoperative blood loss in milliliters. All patients had a Hemovac drain (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) placed for suctioning that was inserted deep to the deltopectoral interval at the time of wound closure. The deltopectoral interval was loosely closed over the drain with No. 0 Vicryl suture (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). Drain output was measured and recorded every 8 hours, with the drain being removed 24 hours after completion of the patient's surgical procedure. For each patient, we calculated “total blood loss” as the combination of the recorded intraoperative blood loss as noted earlier and the postoperative blood loss from the drain (Intraoperative blood loss + Postoperative blood loss = Total blood loss). The other component of blood loss that was calculated was the change (delta) in hemoglobin level from the patient's preoperative value to the postoperative value on the morning of postoperative day 1. Intraoperative fluids given to each patient were noted as well to observe for any possible dilutional effect that may occur if excess fluids were administered at the time of surgery. Per our protocol, the threshold for a blood transfusion after surgery was a hemoglobin level <8 g/dL. An a priori power analysis was performed to calculate the required sample size needed to detect a blood loss difference ≥50 mL. On the basis of previously published work, assuming an α error of .05 and 90% power, we determined that a minimum of 21 patients per group would be needed. All results were reported as means and standard deviations for continuous variables and as percentages for categorical variables. Differences between the TXA group and control group were evaluated using either the Student The comparison of intraoperative blood loss, postoperative drain output, and total blood loss between the control and TXA groups is demonstrated in Further stratification of the results was performed to compare blood loss between the control and treatment groups for patients who underwent ORIF as the operative procedure. The same stratification was performed for those who underwent RSA as the operative procedure. The results are presented in The data for preoperative-to-postoperative change in hemoglobin level are presented in No patients in either treatment arm of the study required an intraoperative or postoperative blood transfusion. No identifiable intraoperative or postoperative thromboembolic events or complications associated with the use of TXA occurred in any patient. The results of this study supported our initial hypothesis that TXA would reduce intraoperative and postoperative blood loss in patients undergoing proximal humeral fracture surgery. The intraoperative blood loss, postoperative blood loss, and preoperative-to-postoperative change in hemoglobin level were less for patients receiving IV TXA prior to incision compared with control. Further stratification examining the use of TXA in patients who underwent ORIF and patients who underwent RSA revealed that in both cohorts, those patients receiving TXA had decreased blood loss and a smaller decrease in postoperative hemoglobin level compared with patients who underwent a similar procedure and did not receive TXA. To our knowledge, this is the first study examining the use of TXA in proximal humeral fracture surgery. Gillespie et al In this study, we observed no thromboembolic events or complications related to the use of TXA. It should be noted that we excluded patients with a history of deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or an inherited hypercoagulable condition (factor V Leiden, protein C or S deficiency). These continue to be our contraindications for the use of TXA in our patients. We chose to use 1 g of IV TXA prior to surgery as the dosing regimen protocol for this study. Other studies have described using TXA topically, orally, or in various IV dosing schedules. Although the TXA cohort had less total blood loss and a smaller preoperative-to-postoperative delta in hemoglobin level, the clinical significance of this is unknown. The average total blood loss was 92 mL greater and the change in hemoglobin level was 1.1 g/dL greater in the control group compared with the TXA group. Although this reached statistical significance, the clinical relevance of these differences may have no bearing. No patient in either the control or TXA group required a postoperative blood transfusion. Moreover, no patient in either cohort had clinically significant postoperative hematoma development requiring a return to the operating room. The use of TXA reduced blood loss, but whether this is a cost-effective intervention that affects patient outcomes could not be determined from this study. The strength of this study is the randomized prospective nature of the study design. A limitation of the study is the single-surgeon design that may not be applicable to every surgeon's practice. Although the study was powered appropriately, a multicenter design with a larger cohort of patients would be more favorable. Another limitation is the short-term follow-up of the patients. This study strictly looked at perioperative blood loss in these patients. No long-term follow-up was performed to determine whether the differences in blood loss affected patient outcomes or infection rates. TXA was effective in reducing total blood loss and led to a smaller preoperative-to-postoperative decrease in hemoglobin level compared with control in patients undergoing surgery for proximal humeral fractures. This effect was consistent in patients treated with either ORIF or arthroplasty as the surgical procedure. TXA can be used to decrease blood loss in the surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures. Derek J. Cuff receives consulting fees and honoraria for educational services from DJO Surgical; receives royalties and consulting fees from Ignite Orthopaedics; and receives royalties from DePuy Synthes. All the other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.