In the present study, we explored the effectiveness and complications of omnidirectional internal fixation using a double approach for treating Rüedi-Allgöwer type III pilon fractures. A retrospective analysis was performed of 19 cases of Rüedi-Allgöwer type III unilateral closed pilon fracture. With preoperative preparation and correct surgical timing, the reduction was performed using anteromedial and posterolateral approaches, and the fracture fragments were fixed by omnidirectional internal fixation. Imaging evaluation was performed using the Burwell-Charnley scoring system. The Johner-Wruhs scoring system was used to assess the functional status of the patients. A comprehensive evaluation of efficacy was performed using a 5-point Likert score. The complications were also recorded and analyzed. All patients were followed up for an average of 16.2 months. The operative incisions of 15 cases healed by primary intent and with delayed healing in 4. All patients had achieved bony union at an average of 16 weeks postoperatively. No deep infection, broken nail or withdrawn nail, exposed plate, or skin flap necrosis occurred. The Burwell-Charnley imaging evaluation showed that 14 patients had anatomic reduction of the articular surface and 5 had acceptable reduction. Using the Johner-Wruhs scoring system, the results were excellent for 8, good for 7, fair for 2, and poor for 2 patients; the combined rate of excellent and good results was 78.9%. The Likert score of efficacy self-reported by the patients was 3 to 4 points for 12 patients, 2 points for 4 patients, and 0 to 1 point for 3 patients. The Likert score of therapeutic efficacy reported by the physicians was 3 to 4 points for 10 patients, 2 points for 5 patients, and 0 to 1 point for 4 patients. Omnidirectional internal fixation using double approaches was an effective method to treat Rüedi-Allgöwer type III pilon fractures with satisfactory reduction and rigid fixation, good joint function recovery, and few complications.In the early 20th century, “pilon fracture” was first used to explain the fracture of the distal tibia involving the articular surface by Étienne Destot In 1969, pilon fractures were first divided into 3 types (types I, II, and III) by Rüedi and Allgöwer Obtaining a painless and functional ankle joint with favorable healing of the fracture and soft tissue are the treatment objectives and the difficulty in treating Rüedi-Allgöwer type III pilon fractures. From June 2012 to June 2015, we adopted delayed omnidirectional internal fixation using anteromedial and posterolateral approaches to treat unilateral closed Rüedi-Allgöwer type III pilon fractures in 19 patients. The data were retrospectively analyzed to investigate the feasibility, curative effect, and complications with our treatment method. The present study included 19 patients (11 [57.9%] males and 8 [42.1%] females), with a mean age of 36.5 (range 25 to 56) years, who had been admitted to the orthopedics department from January 2011 to December 2014. All 19 patients had acute closed Rüedi-Allgöwer type III pilon fractures—a metaphyseal and articular surface comminuted fracture combined with an ipsilateral fibula fracture. Of these 19 cases, 6 (31.6%) had resulted from a traffic accident and 13 (68.4%) from falling. All the fractures were accompanied by different degrees of soft tissue injury. Using the Oestern-Tscherne scoring system The preoperative radiographs, computed tomography scans, and 3-dimensional reconstructions were examined. All patients underwent an average of 14.2 (range 10 to 20) days of treatment to reduce limb swelling before the operation. The protocol included placing the affected limb on the Braun frame, immediate calcaneal traction, extraction of blister fluid, sterilization of the blister area with iodine, and mannitol dehydration treatment. When the swelling had subsided and skin folds had returned, the patient underwent surgery. Before the operation, the patients were informed about the surgical procedures and the risks, and all patients provided written informed consent. With continuous epidural anesthesia, the patient was set in a floating position with a tourniquet used at the upper thigh. First, with the patient in a semiprone position, a posterolateral incision of the ankle about 10 cm long was made. After layer separation, the distal fibula fracture was exposed, reduced, and fixed with a locking anatomic plate. Next, the posterior malleolus fracture was exposed. Kirschner wires were temporarily used to fix the fracture block. Second, with the patient in the semisupine position, an anteromedial incision approximately 12 cm long at the tibia was made. The anteromedial and anterolateral fractures of the distal tibia were exposed. The Kirschner wires were used to reduce and temporarily fix the fracture block. In the reduction process, the articular surface should be anatomically reduced as much as possible. If a bone defect was present, an autologous iliac bone graft was placed. Two anatomic locking plates in the anteromedial and anterolateral positions were used to fix the fractures. Also, a Prophylactic antibiotics were given within 24 hours of surgery. When the drainage volume within a 24-hour period was <50 mL, the drainage tubes were removed. The patients were instructed to perform active extension and flexion exercises of the toe and ankle joint. The stitches were removed 14 to 21 days after surgery. The patients were followed up every month for the first 3 months and then every 3 to 6 months. Imaging evaluation was performed using the Burwell-Charnley scoring system after surgery All patients were followed up for a mean average of 16.2 (range 9 to 24) months ( Because type III fractures result from high energy mechanisms with direct axial compression and torsion violence, the fractures are usually accompanied by severe injury of the soft tissue, in addition to the crushed and uneven articular surface and lack of metaphyseal support. The soft tissue of the distal tibia is characterized by weakness of the subcutaneous tissue, no anteromedial muscle coverage, a poor local blood supply, and poor mobility of the medial skin. Obvious swelling of the ankle joint and tension blisters of the skin are the most common soft tissue manifestations. Also, this type of soft tissue injury often results in certain hysteresis and progression, which can lead to high incidence of complications at the incision postoperatively To date, no consensus has been reached regarding the best treatment program for pilon fractures. The variables include the fixation method, surgical approach, and choice of implants. In the early 1970s, Rüedi and Allgöwer put forward 4 concrete steps for pilon fracture under the traditional AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen) guidance Reduction and internal fixation of the fibula. Reconstruction of the articular surface of the tibia. Bone grafting in the bone defect area. Placement of an anatomic plate for medial support of the distal tibia. With the development of the AO concept, the biologic treatment principle of pilon fracture emphasized the delicate exposure of the soft tissue, limited fracture block stripping, and indirect reduction. The techniques of minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis or external fixation combined with limited internal fixation were advocated With the patient in a floating position, a combined anterior and posterior approach was used with posterolateral and anteromedial incisions. The width of the skin bridge between the 2 incisions was >7 cm. Some studies have shown that no effects were seen in the lower limb alignment, fracture healing rate, or complication rate regarding whether the fibula was fixed or not fixed The largest advantages of omnidirectional internal fixation using combined anterior and posterior approaches include accurate fracture reduction, adequate bone graft placement, rigid fixation, and a stable ankle capable of early functional exercise. We believe this approach will decrease the rate of fracture deformity and joint stiffness. However, the procedure for omnidirectional internal fixation is relatively complex. The procedure requires a greater amount of soft tissue stripping. Also, the use of a greater number of internal fixation materials will increase the tension on the local soft tissue. Thus, the risks of incision disunion, fracture nonunion or delayed union, and infection could increase. Promoting the advantages and avoiding the disadvantages to reduce the incidence of complications is the key to the success of the surgery. A broad consensus has been reached to prioritize the soft tissue treatment, because that is the basis of fracture healing and good long-term results In conclusion, omnidirectional internal fixation using a double approach was an effective method to treat Rüedi-Allgöwer type III pilon fractures with satisfactory reduction, rigid fixation, good joint function recovery, and few complications. The method provides an alternative treatment of complex pilon fractures with good mid-term clinical efficacy.