In this study, the effect of adaptation of B. subtilis to sphalerite and galena with respect to the selective flotation of sphalerite from a sphalerite-galena synthetic mixture has been examined. The changes in the surface charge of the mineral and the bacterium, cell wall components and the profiles of secreted proteins are discussed. The protein profiles of the unadapted and adapted cells are found to differ distinctly, both qualitatively and quantitatively, with impact on the selective flotation of sphalerite and galena. Electrokinetic measurements show shifts in the iso-electric points of not only B. subtilis but also of the chosen minerals after adaptation. Additionally, the zeta potential of B. subtilis is found to become less negative after bacterial adaptation to the chosen sulfide minerals, while it showed an increase in the magnitude of surface negative charge after various enzymatic treatments. The change in the surface morphology and cell wall components such as phosphate, uronic acid and acetylated sugars of the bacterial species during adaptation to sphalerite and galena has been assessed. Selective flotation tests on a synthetic mixture of galena and sphalerite confirm that sphalerite can be preferentially floated from galena in the presence of the insoluble fraction of lysed B. subtilis cells initially adapted to sphalerite, with a high selectivity index.A growing demand for minerals across the world, coupled with the depletion of high-grade ores over the years, has culminated in the exploitation of lean-grade ores with complex mineralogy. Additionally, some of the chemical reagents used in existing flotation processes viz., cyanides, chromates etc., have caused concern on environmental grounds. Recent developments in biotechnology have opened up possibilities for the utilization of microorganisms in mineral beneficiation as flotation collectors, depressants and activators. The application of microorganisms for bioflotation and bioflocculation has been critically reviewed (  Mineral samples of sphalerite and galena were obtained from Wards Natural Science Establishment, USA and Alminrock Indscer Fabriks, Bangalore, India respectively. The samples were subjected to dry grinding in a porcelain mill. The ground sample was then dry screened and the d  Bacterial cultures grown for 48 Bacterial cells were resuspended in 0.1 One gram of the mineral mixture (sphalerite and galena in the ratio of 1:1) was pulped in 200 Electrophoretic measurements were carried out using Zetasizer Nano ZS90, from Malvern Instruments Limited, Worcestershire, UK. Zeta potentials of the chosen minerals as well as that of the unadapted or mineral adapted bacteria were measured from pH 2 to 10 with an interval of one pH unit. In addition, the zeta potential of mineral adapted bacteria after various enzymatic treatments as described elsewhere ( The morphology of sphalerite and galena adapted bacterial cells was observed using a FEI Sirion, high resolution electron microscope from Icon Analytical Equipment Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, India. After vacuum drying, the samples were made conducting by gold sputtering coating using a JEOL ion sputtering device. The phosphorus, N-acetyl glucosamine and uronic acid content of isolated bacterial cell walls was determined as per the protocol described elsewhere ( The bacterial cell population or its components, interaction period with minerals, mineral surface coverage through bacterial adhesion etc. were set as controlling factors which determine mineral surface hydrophobicity with reference to flotation. The selective flotation recovery of sphalerite from a sphalerite-galena mineral mixture in the presence of intact or thermolysed The charged/hydrophilic surface of such bio-macromolecules could interact with the surface of the mineral to be floated and expose its hydrophobic surface to the aqueous medium. In the present case, this induced hydrophobicity could aid the flotation of the sphalerite mineral. The amphipathic nature of DNA, with the phosphate bearing hydrophilic surface on one side and the aromatic base containing hydrophobic surface on the other side, appears to fulfill the above criteria very well. Additionally, the distance between the interphosphate anionic species of DNA matches closely with the translational distance between adjacent zinc atoms of sphalerite rather than that of lead atoms in galena. Hence, the preferential flotation of sphalerite rather than galena is facilitated. Simultaneously, it can be expected that the non-amphipathic (charged and hydrophilic) macromolecules present in the grossly fractionated biomass bind the mineral to be depressed, i.e., galena. Thus, a combination of activator and depressant bio-macromolecules bring about selective flotation. The amount of extracellular bacterial proteins secreted by unadapted as well as mineral adapted cells is shown in To assess the above hypothesis, the total secreted protein obtained before and after mineral adaptation was evaluated for its potential to selectively float sphalerite or galena from a mineral mixture. Unlike the unadapted state, secreted proteins from the sphalerite adapted During mineral adaptation, changes are also expected to take place on the surface of the bacteria. This is reflected in the enhanced flotation recovery of the cognate mineral used for bacterial adaptation. In this context, electrokinetic methods offer insights into the global changes in surface charge of bacteria. To this end, studies were carried out to examine the changes in the electrokinetic properties of the bacteria grown in the presence of the chosen mineral. In order to determine the contribution of the major cell wall components to the surface charge of the cells, electrokinetic studies were also carried out after removal of the desired component by specific enzymatic treatment/s. Bacterial cell surfaces possess acidic and basic functional groups, such as carboxylic, phosphoric, hydroxyl, and amine groups. These functional groups are associated with peptidoglycan, teichoic acid, and teichuronic acid on the surfaces of Gram positive bacteria. The presence of acid-base functional groups on the cell surface is responsible for the amphoteric nature of bacteria. The zeta-potentials of the unadapted, mineral adapted and EDTA/proteinase K/lysozyme treated bacteria as a function of pH are shown in The surface charge of sphalerite and galena adapted bacterial cells are less negative, compared to the unadapted bacteria. Because of electrostatic attraction, free cations leached out from the mineral surface can neutralize the negative charges on the bacterial cell surface. Consequently, the density of negative charges is expected to decrease ( In order to evaluate the above proposition, the adapted bacteria were treated with ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) and the zeta potential of the treated cells was measured. This treatment results in the removal of the adsorbed metal ions and thus the negatively charged functional groups of the bacteria are exposed. Consequently, the measured zeta potentials of bacteria initially adapted onto sphalerite or galena followed by EDTA treatment are found to be similar to that of the unadapted bacteria. Another reason for the less negative charge of bacteria on adaptation to a mineral, apart from metal ion adsorption, is due to the presence of many protein molecules synthesized during adaptation on the bacterial surface. Bacteria adapted to sphalerite mineral secrete a higher amount of protein ( The zeta potential of bacterial cells adapted to the chosen sulfide mineral after the removal of cell wall was assessed. The zeta potential of lysozyme treated, sphalerite and galena adapted bacterial cells is found to be more negative than the untreated bacterial cell. Treatment with lysozyme produced quite a large increase in the net negative charge due to exposure of more phosphoryl and carboxyl groups present as teichoic acid and teichuronic acid in the peptidoglycan layer. Another major cell surface component which has received limited attention is extracellular DNA (eDNA). In order to ascertain the presence and secretion of eDNA, a highly polyanionic component, during the adaptation to the minerals, zeta potential of the bacteria adapted to the minerals after DNase 1 treatment was measured. DNase 1-treated bacterial cells are found to be less negatively charged compared to the untreated cells. This experiment confirms the presence of eDNA on the The zeta potential of the chosen sulfide mineral before and after adaptation to Maintenance of a high negative charge on the cell surface appears to be a necessity for bacterial survival. However, a considerable change in the composition of the cell wall is expected during mineral adaptation as evidenced by the selective flotation experiments. To confirm and reconcile this dual adaptive strategy, the cell walls of However, during galena adaptation the phosphate content is lower than the unadapted and sphalerite adapted state. This drop in negative charge is probably partially compensated by an increase in the uronic acid content thus helping maintain a certain level of the negative charge density on the cell surface. The low P/N ratio also indicates a net increase in the positive charge of the cell surface, a strategy to repel the toxic Pb The major conclusions from this study are as follows: Consequent to mineral adaptation, distinct qualitative and quantitative changes are observed at the bacterial cell surface and its components. Compared to the intact sphalerite adapted cells, thermolysed sphalerite adapted cells show enhanced selective recovery of sphalerite. Adaptation of bacteria to galena depresses the flotation recovery of sphalerite and marginally increases that of galena. This manifests in terms of low selectivity index for the recovery of sphalerite from the mineral mixture. Prior adaptation of bacteria to a mineral enhances the flotation recovery of that mineral, compared to that without adaptation. Prominent differences are observed in the protein profiles of the bacteria before and after adaptation. Secreted proteins from sphalerite adapted bacteria enhance the selective flotation recovery of sphalerite. In contrast, secreted proteins from galena adapted bacteria yield a very small enhancement in the selectivity index compared to that obtained with the secreted proteins of unadapted cells. From the electrokinetic studies, it is observed that the surface charge of sphalerite and galena adapted bacterial cells are less negative, compared to the unadapted bacteria. The zeta potentials of the bacterial cells after various enzymatic treatments exhibit more negative charge compared to the untreated mineral adapted bacteria. This indicates that bacterial cell wall acts as a multilayered defense against cationic toxins. A shift in the IEP of sphalerite is observed after bacterial interaction, whereas no significant shift in IEP is observed for galena after interaction with