A Monte Carlo procedure is presented for computing the joint state-of-knowledge probability distribution to be assigned to the coefficients of a curve fitted to a set of points in a two-dimensional coordinate system. Experimental data about this set may be available, but other relevant information may also be taken into account. The procedure is fully in line with the approach in Supplement 1 to the Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement. It consists of propagating the joint probability distribution of the input quantities through the mathematical model of the measurement by which the coefficients are defined. The model is usually obtained by least-squares adjustment, which is here interpreted differently than in the conventional formulation. However, applying other fitting criteria is also possible. Examples illustrate the application of the procedure.The problem of fitting a curve to a set of points in a two-dimensional coordinate system recurs throughout science and technology. It consists of estimating the values Likewise, the coefficients Sometimes the coefficients of the curve are the quantities of interest. However, other times it may be desired to determine the probability distribution At this point it is convenient to digress on notation and terminology. Upper case Latin letters denote quantities, lower case Latin letters denote given or known values and lower case Greek letters denote variables associated with the possible values of quantities. State-of-knowledge distributions are designated by the letter A quantity is interpreted according to the VIM’s definition However, it might happen that the phenomenon that generates the information about the input coordinates is too complicated, unknown or not perfectly understood, in which case the form of the function In any case, whether or not physical meanings can be attributed to the coefficients, it will be understood that they are Section The first goal of the analysis is to obtain the joint distribution In this section an outline of the analysis is presented; it can easily be extended to higher dimensions, e.g. to the construction and use of fitted surfaces Obtaining the distribution Independence If the input coordinates are all independent and there are no data of one of them, say If there are data, they are usually assumed to have been drawn from A Gaussian process is the most common probability model used to explain the variability of measurement data, but it is not the only one. Another example is a Poisson process, which is typically applied when ‘Prior’ functions for all imperfectly known parameters in the sampling distributions are required. The priors may be state-of-knowledge probability distributions that are given or that can be constructed from existing information. However, situations arise when All priors, proper or improper, are updated through their multiplication with the corresponding sampling distributions followed by normalization. This operation, based on Bayes’ theorem, results in the ‘posterior’ joint distributions of the unknown parameters. For example, multiplication of the sampling distribution Once the form of the function The system Note that in the proposed formulation the input coordinates might be exchanged, i.e., one might decide to fit a function of the form As mentioned above, in the present approach the estimated values After obtaining the distribution Naturally, this extreme case is of no interest. More generally the residuals Sometimes the measurands are the coefficients A common situation is that where the measurand is the stimulus From this general outline it may be seen that the formulation of the problem of evaluating the uncertainty associated with the construction and use of a fitted curve is relatively simple. However, the numerical implementation of the method may present difficulties. Indeed, it will rarely be possible to obtain the distribution Fortunately, at least in principle the distributions The conventional least-squares adjustment technique is different from the one exposed in subSection There is ample literature about conventional least-squares regression, recent references being e.g. Three examples are presented in this section. The first two deal with the rather common tasks of fitting a constant and a straight line using Gaussian sampling distributions. The third example illustrates the fitting of a non-linear curve to data generated by a Poisson process. Fitting a constant is the simplest instance of the proposed procedure; it applies when a certain quantity As a specific example consider key comparison CCQM-K25 In The issue of whether or not these distributions can be considered as being independent is interesting. In the key comparison at hand possibly there were correlations introduced e.g. by the use of the same reference materials. However, the laboratories could not have taken these correlations into account because presumably they submitted their results independently, i.e., under total ignorance of what the other laboratories did. Thus, covariances could only have been entertained by the pilot laboratory processing the information provided by all participants. However, for this to be possible much more detailed information would have been required, not just the reported triplets { Let us now consider stage two. The minimization In the model To examine the consistency of the results submitted by the laboratories the uncertainty of the residuals  Fitting a straight line to a set of points is a very common task in metrology. To illustrate the procedure advocated in the present paper consider example H.3 in the GUM: a thermometer is calibrated by obtaining In the GUM, this example is stated rather contradictorily. In effect, one reads in clause H.3.1 that the reference temperatures are known. This information can be interpreted as meaning that there is no uncertainty associated with their values, which can be deduced from These concerns have been raised in In stage two, the chosen calibration function, together with the minimization of the sum In stage three, suppose that the average of three readings indicated by the thermometer when in use is The mean of the Suppose a particle detector is calibrated by independently counting the number of particles coming from seven samples of radioactive reference materials having very long half-lives. The masses of all samples are equal and their certified activities A scatter plot of the values The Monte Carlo method was applied by drawing values By repeating this process 10 Suppose now that a sample of unknown activity It should be noted that the facts that the chosen calibration function is non-linear in the coefficients and that the statistical models of the coordinates A procedure for obtaining the joint state-of-knowledge probability distribution associated with the coefficients The ensuing probability distributions I thank Dieter Grientschnig for valuable comments on successive drafts of this paper. The support of Fondecyt (Chile) research Grant 1095160 is gratefully acknowledged.