For the safe of both production and life, it is a key issue to detect explosives effectively. Here, we report that trace amount of nitro compounds can be detected by the sensor based on porous ZnO nanofibers. As a result, the response towards 200ppb 4-nitrotoluene, 120ppb 2, 4-dinitrotoluene and 30ppm nitromethane are 6.8, 3.0 and 29, respectively. The detecting limit towards 2,4-dinitrotoluene and nitromethane is 3ppb and 100ppb. It is found that the sensing performance is greatly affected by the molecular structure of these nitro compounds under the same condition. That is, the sensing behavior is related to the alkyl group other than the nitro group. A reasonable sensing mechanism is proposed based on the theoretical and experimental results.Explosives are a series of compounds that shows great threat to the safety of society and individuals. Nitroaromatic and nitroparaffin compounds are two kinds of typical explosive compounds. 4-Nitrotoluene (NT), 2, 4-Dinitrotoluene (DNT) and the relevant compounds containing one or more nitro groups are representative nitro-aromatic compounds, which are extensively used as chemical reagents, solvents, intermediates and so on. Nitromethane (NM) and nitroethane (NE) are typical nitro-paraffin compounds which are important solvents. For the toxin in nature, the leakage of these compounds will cause serious environmental disasters Several kinds of metal oxide semiconductor sensors fabricated by TiO Herein, we report the detection of nitrocompounds by a ZnO nanofiber sensor. It shows higher sensing response value than those sensors based on the nitro group site and the resistance change direction is opposite. We believe that the enhanced sensing ability comes from the high reactive site of alkyl group activated by nitro group in the target molecules, other than the nitro groups themselves ( Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO ZnO nanofibers were prepared by a modified electrospinning method described previously The structure of the product was determined by D/MAX 2550 using Cu Kα, radiation (λ An alumina ceramic tube covered by two Au electrodes connected with four Pt wires was used as the substrate. A certain amount of the nanofibers (0.1 The X-ray diffraction pattern of the ZnO sample is shown in  To investigate the sensing process, the dynamic response-recovery curves towards trace amount of NT, DNT, NM and NE were obtained at 170 The response time would be reduced with the increase of the concentration of target gas, whereas, the recovery time would be prolonged at higher concentration of nitrocompound, as shown in Fig. S2. And the response time was in the range of several seconds to 200 Usually, the sensing response to nitrocompounds is attributed to the strong electrowithdrawing effect induced by nitro group To confirm the active site in these molecules, nitrobenzene (NB) and methylbenzene (MB) were selected as probing molecules since their structures are similar to NT and DNT except the methyl or nitro groups. As shown in As we know, the higher the charge density on hydrogen, the higher the activity of the alkyl group in a molecule. Although the interaction with ZnO cannot be neglected for understanding the final state of such a system, it is still significant to calculate the charge density and energy state of these free molecules or intermediates for the same ZnO. Therefore, the charge density of the hydrogen on the carbon atom adjacent to nitro group was calculated and summarized in  Those electrons will be given back to the conduction band of ZnO, leading to the decrease of the sensor’s resistance. However, it cannot explain the abnormal sensing order of NT and DNT. Although the charge density of hydrogen in DNT is higher than that in NT, the response is lower than that of NT. We believe that steric hindrance and electron withdraw effect induced by additional nitro group at the ortho site in DNT molecule may reduce the interaction and lower the response. In order to further investigate the order of reactivity, the HOMO and LUMO of these molecules has been calculated by B3LYP/6-31G* Level of theory as shown in Similar results are also presented for NM and NE, as shown in In summary, the sensor based on hollow ZnO fibers shows great sensing ability towards trace amount of explosive nitrocompounds on the alkyl group site at relatively low working temperature. For molecules with similar structure, the higher the HOMO level, the better the sensing performance is. In this case, the induction effect and the high activity of the intermediate anions are all important for the excellent sensing performance. This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: