Theoretical results, based on perturbation techniques, are presented for fully developed, both hydrodynamically and thermally, forced convection in both parallel plate and circular microchannels subject to isoflux wall boundary condition. Scaling effects, including variable property, viscous dissipation, velocity slip, and temperature jump, are studied for flow of both gases and liquids. The interactions between the aforementioned effects, due to temperature-dependence of the fluid properties that couples the momentum and thermal energy equation, are also examined in detail.Downsized devices (pumps, turbines, mixers, heat pipes…) are generally referred to as micro-flow devices (MFDs). Such devices have revolutionized complex systems for medical diagnosis and surgery, chemical analysis, biotechnology, and electronic cooling. Hence, it makes good engineering sense to understand the hydrothermal behavior of these systems. Unfortunately, existing correlations cannot be referred to as uniformly valid as flow of a gas shows different behavior from that of a liquid. For gases the mean free path of the molecules can be of the same order of magnitude as the characteristic length of the MFD through which the gas flows. Mainly for this reason, in the light of experimental observations, it is suggested that the Navier–Stokes equations be solved subject to slip-velocity and temperature jump at the wall. For such cases the Knudsen number, In view of the above, the interaction between fluid viscosity variation and frictional heating effects should be examined. Numerical studies of In this paper, based on perturbation techniques, the role of viscous dissipation on forced convection, with temperature-dependent viscosity and thermal conductivity, through microchannels and micropipes, under isoflux wall boundary condition, is analyzed theoretically. While viscosity of a gas/liquid increases/decreases with the temperature, the thermal conductivity can either increase or decrease. The wall velocity-slip and temperature-jump conditions were included for flow of a gas in the slip-flow regime while with  In order to have a general solution, we solve the momentum equation subject to slip condition at the wall ( The momentum equation, regardless of the fluid property variation effects, can be integrated once, subject to the symmetry boundary condition, as follows The thermal energy equation, in the presence of viscous dissipation, reads The appropriate boundary conditions are temperature jump at the wall and symmetry at Further analysis of the problem is impossible without mathematical models for the variation of In dimensionless form these two equations read Note that with wall heating the case of a liquid, where viscosity decreases with temperature, is represented by Hence, the dimensionless form of the momentum equation, with Similar to Therefore, making use of Eqs. ( Defining the mean velocity and temperature as For most practical cases, the viscosity variation number is small compared to unity, i.e. | Such a series solution allows for uncoupling the momentum and thermal energy equation as the zeroth order solution will be the constant property one with terms of higher order being neglected. Hence, the following equations should be solved to give the velocity distribution Note that the first order momentum equation just needs the zeroth order solution of the thermal energy equation, which is already available in the literature. For more details about the approach one can consult Therefore, solving the following equations, with the prescribed velocity field, will give the temperature distribution Now the problem is to solve Eqs. ( In this problem, there are a large number of parameters to vary and it is impossible to examine all of the possible combination of the controlling parameters. Hence, it is preferred to present     Closed form solutions are presented for both no-slip and slip-flow forced convection of a liquid and a gas with temperature-dependent properties in a microchannel with the effects of viscous dissipation being included. Two different cross-sectional shapes were examined being MP and MPPC under isoflux wall boundary conditions. The analytical results can be used for macrochannels where continuum assumption, and hence, no-slip condition is still valid.