In the current work, we investigated a methodology to assess the potential energy savings when a fluidised-bed separator (i.e., the HydroFloat) is incorporated into a conventional flotation flowsheet for flotation of coarse sulphide minerals (chalcopyrite). Overall metallurgical performance of the new flotation set-up is compared to a single stage conventional flotation flowsheet. In the modified flowsheet, coarser particle sizes (+150μm) from a coarse grind (d
                     80
                     =500μm) were floated in the fluidised-bed separator whereas the finer particles (−150μm) were channelled to a conventional, agitated flotation cell. The coarser and high grade concentrate from the fluidised-bed separator was then reground and floated again using a mechanically agitated flotation cell. The energy used in grinding and regrinding was calculated using the bond work index formula and compared with the energy consumed when the total mass of sample was ground fine (d
                     80
                     =150μm) and floated in the mechanically agitated flotation cell only. Observations made from the results indicate that the floatability of the coarse chalcopyrite particles in the fluidised-bed separator depended mostly on their liberation classes. The remaining unrecovered copper was either completely or mostly encapsulated by gangue minerals. Though the metallurgical performance of the conventional flowsheet was superior in terms of copper recovery, the modified flowsheet showed promise in terms of energy efficiency. The methodology developed herein may be used for assessing coarse flotation strategies as a function of ore mineralogy type.Froth flotation remains one of the widely preferred separation technique used in the mineral processing industry to concentrate valuable minerals from their gangue host minerals. Like other separation techniques, flotation requires that large rocks are crushed, and in most cases ground to fine sizes depending on the physical and chemical properties (density, grain size, texture, other mineral associations, chemistry, etc.) of the ore, to liberate the valuable mineral(s) to be recovered. The process of breaking down the ore to liberate the value mineral(s) is termed comminution. In the case of conventional flotation of base metals, the preferable particle size range for good recovery usually varies between 10 and 150 The poor flotation of coarse particles in conventional, mechanically agitated flotation cells is often attributed to the high turbulent energy dissipation caused by the rotating impellers (cell hydrodynamics) Mechanical flotation devices require huge electrical energy investments to operate. In a cost breakdown of large flotation cells by Rinne and Peltola Unlike conventional flotation cells, fluidised-bed separators operate without rotating impellers. Particle suspension is achieved by the smooth and hindered settling conditions of the particles rather than by the turbulent conditions of the traditional flotation cell. The tendency for a significant reduction in energy consumption, increase in coarse particle attachment and subsequent recovery is therefore increased. There are numerous advantages that fluidised-bed separators exhibit over conventional flotation cells with regard to coarse particle flotation. Some of these are discussed in detail in Jameson The aim of this study was to investigate the overall metallurgical performance and energy consumption rates when a fluidised-bed separator is incorporated into a conventional flotation set-up for coarse sulphide mineral flotation. This was done by comparing two flotation flowsheets. In the first part of the study (Flowsheet 1), the total feed mass was ground coarse ( Chalcopyrite ore was used in all the tests in this study. The ore was obtained from a copper mine in Australia. A chemical assay of the ore shows that it was a very high grade copper ore which contains 4.0% Cu, 7.5% S, 7.6% Fe, 3.0% Ca, 29.4% Si, and 0.9% Al. The mineralogical composition of the ore by particle size is shown in The set-up shown in The ore was first crushed in a laboratory jaw crusher, followed by a cone gyratory crusher to reduce the size of the lumps. The sample was then passed through a roll crusher and the product was screened through a 2.3 In the second part of the experiment, the entire feed mass (2 Potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) and polypropylene glycol (PPG425) were used as the collector and frother respectively. Diesel oil was used as a collector extender to enhance attachment of particles to bubbles. Lime was used as the pH modifier. The same collector concentration (450 The fine split portion (− In Flowsheet 2, the sample was pulped at 44% solids by weight. The flotation was conducted in a 4.5 The amount of energy used in the primary grinding and regrinding of the flotation feed in Flowsheet 1 (  The low recovery of the coarser chalcopyrite particles was attributed to two reasons, the main reason being poor liberation. This can be seen in the results presented in The second possible reason for the differences in the recovery between the coarse and relatively fine particles could be because of the differences in drag forces in the flotation cell as a function of particle size. Unlike the fine particles, the coarse particles are usually heavy and less buoyant. This means that it will take a much greater force to lift up the coarser particles from the top of the fluidised-bed to the overflow lip, compared to the force required to carry the relatively fine particles. Therefore given the same operating conditions (water flow rate, air flow rate and bed-level) for a particular flotation feed, the finer particles would be expected to perform better than the coarse particles due to the buoyancy limitation of the coarse particles. In When the coarse, high grade concentrate of the fluidised-bed separator was reground and refloated in the Denver flotation cell, 98% of the 23.5% of copper was recovered, with 0.4% going to tailings. This further reiterates how efficient and effective the mechanically agitated flotation cell was in floating chalcopyrite particles below 150  Comparing the two flowsheets, we observe that the recovery of the fine particles in the mechanically agitated flotation cell was very high (above 96% in all cases). The only major difference was in the flotation rate constants, where the flotation in Flowsheet 2 recorded a relatively low value compared with Flowsheet 1. This could, however, be related to the differences in the masses of feed treated in each case. In Flowsheet 2, 2000 To help mitigate the losses in the fluidised-bed separator, the study recommends that a grind optimization must be performed on the ore prior to flotation. The ore must be thoroughly studied (by means of QEMSCAN) to determine the optimum composite liberation classes by particle size at coarse grind sizes ( To confirm this hypothesis, a separate flotation test was conducted by grinding the 2 The main reason that was attributed to the increased recovery in this new test was the increase of exposed chalcopyrite surfaces as the particle size decreased. The extended grinding time helped in breaking up the coarse particles and exposing the valuable mineral (chalcopyrite) that may have been encapsulated within the gangue host. This enhanced reagent adsorption and bubble-particle attachment, and subsequently increased recovery. This lead to a further increase in energy consumed in the primary grinding of the feed, however, it is expected to be partly compensated by the reduction in energy that was used in the regrinding of the HydroFloat separator concentrate. For the purpose of comparison, the + In terms of energy consumption, Flowsheet 1 used less energy compared with Flowsheet 2. This is shown in Assuming the average throughput of a copper processing plant is 48,000 Apart from the reduction in energy consumption in comminution circuits and its associated economic benefits, there is also the added advantage of drastically reducing grinding media consumption, especially during primary grinding. Another important advantage is the potential significant reduction in reagent usage. This is because coarse particles have lower specific surface area, therefore requiring lesser reagent dosages during conditioning of flotation feed, compared to finely ground particles which have relatively higher specific surface areas. This study investigated the overall metallurgical performance and energy consumption rates of two different flowsheets. The first flowsheet consisted of a fluidised-bed cell (i.e., the HydroFloat separator) incorporated into a conventional flotation set-up (Flowsheet 1). The second flowsheet (Flowsheet 2) consisted of single stage flotation using a mechanically agitated flotation cell (i.e., the Denver flotation cell). In Flowsheet 1, the study established that the fluidised-bed cell was capable of treating and floating coarse (+ The financial support of the