In this study, the effect of MgO on the phase equilibria of iron silicate slags in equilibrium with Fe3O4 spinel and matte of fixed 72 wt % Cu were identified at controlled P(SO2) 0.3 and 0.6 atm. The experimental process includes equilibration, quenching and Electron Probe X-ray Micro Analysis (EPMA). Spinel (Fe3O4) substrates were applied to confirm the equilibrium was achieved in the primary phase field of spinel. It was found that the presence of MgO increases the liquidus temperature of slag under a constant SiO2 content, i.e., more SiO2 is required to be fluxed to keep a stable smelting temperature with MgO. The effects of CaO and MgO on the liquidus of the system were further compared and found that the influence of MgO is stronger than CaO at 1250 °C under the same weight content while opposite situation occurs at 1200 °C, which is different from the FactSage predictions. Thus, the present study provides important information not only for the industrial smelting process but also for the thermodynamic modelling.The present study is part of the comprehensive equilibrium studies of the iron silicate slags in equilibrium with matte, spinel and gases under controlled partial pressures of oxygen (P(O The advanced equilibrium techniques compose of primary phase material equilibration, quenching and electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) were applied [ In addition to the high-temperature equilibrium experiments, FactSage calculations were also performed in this study [ The experimental methodology has been described in detail in our previous studies [ Secondly, temperature, P(O Thirdly, three types of materials were prepared for the high-temperature experiments, including slags, matte and spinel (Fe Fourthly, regarding the high-temperature experiments, the holding time to achieve the equilibrium accounted for one key parameter to be determined. Based on our previous studies [ The typical microstructures of the present liquid/spinel/matte/gas equilibrium system at P(SO The chemical compositions of various phases were measured using EPMA. Regarding the liquid phase, 10–20 points were measured and an average value was calculated to ensure the accuracy of compositional measurements especially the MgO content, while 10–15 and 5–10 points were measured for the matte and spinel phase, respectively. As a result, the accuracy of compositional measurement could reach ±1 wt % with the standard deviations less than 1% of elemental concentration. The results at P(SO As for the matte phase, it could be observed that it was mainly composed of Cu, Fe and S elements while the contents of Si and Mg in the matte phase were close to 0 wt %. The MG in matte was close to 72.0 wt % Cu, demonstrating the target MG had been realized and the presence of MgO would not affect the equilibrium MG under constant temperature, P(SO As for the spinel phase, it can be observed that very low contents of SiO Next, the discussion would focus on the effect of MgO on the liquidus of slags. The results at P(SO Moreover, it can be noted from both figures that with increasing MgO content in the liquid phase, the liquidus temperature of slags increases. This phenomenon could be discussed based on the network roles of different oxides in the silicate liquid and glasses. MgO acts as a typical network modifier in the silicate liquid and glasses, and therefore it could replace the “FeO” in the pseudo “FeO”-SiO The effect of MgO on the liquidus temperature of the pseudo “FeO”-SiO On the other hand, based on the experimentally determined isotherms in As can be observed firstly, overall the trends from FactSage calculations were in agreement with those obtained from the experimental measurements; and the equilibrium SiO Additionally, it was found that an increasing P(SO In this study, the effect of MgO on the liquidus of “FeO”-SiO As can be observed firstly, both theoretical and experimental results indicate that the presences of CaO and MgO increase the equilibrium SiO Moreover, FactSage predicted that under the same content in weight, CaO has a stronger influence than MgO on improving the slag liquidus temperature. The experimental results at a relatively low temperature (1200 °C) are in agreement with the FactSage calculations. However, at relatively high temperature (1250 °C), at both P(SO In this study, the effect of an important minor element, MgO, on the phase equilibria of iron silicate slags in equilibrium with 72 wt % Cu matte at the accurately controlled temperature, P(SO The authors would like to thank