To improve comminution efficiency, the effects of several process parameters on the comminution capability of high pressure water jet mill were investigated. Fractal dimension of particle size distribution, as an index of water jet mill comminution capability, was used for describing the fineness of the comminution product. Nine process parameters including the pump pressure, the mixing tube length and diameter, the coal particle mass flow rate, the diameter of feed material particle, the standoff distance, loading times, hardness of the target and the impact angle were investigated individually. The results obtained from this study provide deeper insight into the high pressure water jet comminution technology and a basis for process parameters optimization. We also show that the fractal dimension of particle size distribution can be used to monitor the comminution capability and estimate the degree of particle comminution.Current comminution technology is energy consuming and very inefficient. More than 96% of the energy consumed during the operation of a conventional size reduction device goes into a non-productive work, with only 4% of the energy left to create new surfaces in the grinding process ( High pressure water jet comminution technique has been developed for more than 20 years since this technique was first used to disintegrate organic and non-organic by Mazurkiewicz in Rock Mechanics and Explosives Research Center of University of Missouri-Rolla ( The comminution mechanism of HPWJM is completely different from that of the conventional mill. In a HPWJM, most particles are broken into smaller ones instantly by high speed impact of these particles against a target. In this way, one avoids the defect that the product is ground with the conventional grinding technique. The advantages of high pressure water jet comminution technique can be summarized as the following ( High pressure water jet comminution is a branch of high pressure water jet technology, which has been widely used for cutting, cleaning and drilling. However, research on water jet comminution has been paid little attention ( In this paper, we present several experiments analyse the changes of the comminution capability of HPWJM due to process parameter variations based on these experiments. All the process parameters of HPWJM were investigated individually in this investigation. Compared with the orthogonal test, the effect of a process parameter can be fairly demonstrated in the case of single parameter test. The aim of this study is to obtain a fundamental knowledge about the effects of process parameters on the comminution capacity of HPWJM. Such a knowledge is essential for enhancing the water jet comminution efficiency, controlling process and optimizing parameters. In this section, the experimental system and procedure are presented in detail. This is helpful for understanding high pressure water jet comminution technique. HPWJM used in our experiment originated from Abrasive Water Jet equipment. Some researchers have found that a high percentage of its abrasives will be broken after they are used ( High pressure water jet generation. In this step, the high-speed water jet is formed when the high pressure water is issued from the water nozzle. The velocity of the high-speed water jet varies from 200 to 400 m/s. The high speed water jet has very high kinetic energy which is then transferred to the input energy for the particle comminution. Different pressure and flow rate lead to different input energy for particle fragmentation. A 3S-2 type reciprocating piston pump with a 110 kW diesel engine, made by General Engineering Machinery Company, Tianjin, People's Republic of China, was employed in our experiments. The acceleration and comminution step. The material particles are fed into the mixing chamber by a charger. These particles, mixed together with the high speed water jet in the mixing tube, obtain kinetic energy from the high speed water jet. The material particle flow rate is controlled by a charger, and can vary from 0 to 70 kg/min. The disintegration of particles is achieved instantly by the collision of these high speed particles with a target. The standoff distance and the impact angle Collection and grading of the product. This step comprises three particle collectors and a 75 mm hydrocyclone. The hydrocyclone is used for grading the pulverized particles. In the process for grading, the inlet pressure of the hydrocyclone is 0.2 MPa. Loop comminution. The circulation system is composed of a delivery pump and circulation pipe. Coarse particles are fed into the mixing chamber and comminuted again. It is a closed system for HPWJM. In the experiment, we used the coal sample produced in Datong, Shanxi Province in China. In order to guarantee the HPWJM to work properly for 5 min, each time the mass of the coal sample is determined by different coal feed rate. Before the coal was fed into HPWJM, the preliminary fragmentation by jaw crusher is indispensable. Dry sieving was performed with a Fritsch Analysette 3 vibrator sieve shaker with 50 Hz and an oscillation amplitude of 3 mm. The mean diameter of feed coal samples was 1.50 mm unless noted otherwise. The mean particle diameter was taken as the arithmetic mean of the upper and lower sieve sizes. After the coal sample was comminuted by HPWJM, the daughter coal particles were classified according to their sizes. The particle size distribution was determined by dry sieving, i.e., the + For comminution process it is common to link the process parameters of the mill to the parameters describing the fineness of the product. The fineness can be described in many ways such as the fractal dimension, the size distribution function, the mean diameter, and the specific surface area. In this paper, the fineness of the comminuted product is determined by the fractal dimension of the particle size distribution. The fractal geometry was proposed by Mandelbrot ( The fragmentation fractal dimension of the particle size distribution of the product, The fractal dimension determined in this way gives a measure of the comminution. Each value of In HPWJM the particles encounter two zones in which comminution occur. In the first zone particles have impact with the target. Particle comminution occurs mostly in this zone. The second zone is inside the mixing tube, where particles are accelerated to relatively high velocities. The pump pressure ( Based on the momentum and continuity equations for liquid and solid flow, the particle axial velocity can be determined by the following equation: The input comminution energy per unit mass obeys the following equation: It can be seen from Eq.  The comminution mechanism is particle disintegration by a high velocity collision of particles with the target (  The optimal value of the particle mass flow obtained after calculating the water flow rate is 30% of the water mass flow. The mass ratio,   The ratio of the diameter of the mixing tube (  Insufficient length of the mixing tube will result in the shortage of time for acceleration of particles, and hence the impact velocity will be lower. However, too long mixing tube will cause energy loss due to the friction between particles and the wall of the mixing tube. It is inefficient for energy consumption. The optimal length of the mixing tube is about 50–60 times of the mixing tube diameter. In For particle impact comminution of HPWJM, like Abrasive Water Jet used for cutting, operations are effective when the standoff distance is within the effective range of the jet. Indeed, we found that no particle comminution was observed when the standoff distance was bigger than the effective range. The hardness of the target is an important parameter. Low hardness target will result in an incomplete particle comminution and target wear. In the process of high pressure water jet comminution, the macroscopic fracture of the coal particles is the final result of growing, spreading, gathering and meeting of microcrack within the body when the particle collides with the target. The coal breaks into large and small pieces, following natural cleavage layers. At the same time, in the large daughter particle there are some new cracks generated due to collision. The new cracks will benefit the daughter particle fracture when the particle collides with the target again ( In this paper we have shown the effect of process parameters on the comminution capability of HPWJM based on our experiment. The fractal dimension was successfully applied to describe the fineness of the product in HPWJM. It is sensitive to the variation of the process parameters and the value of The pump pressure increase results in an increase of the fractal dimension when the pressure ranges from 20 to 60 MPa. The pressure bigger than 60 MPa only brings more energy dissipation as thermal and sound energy; The optimal value of the ratio of the water flow to the material mass flow is 30%, and the ratio of the mixing tube diameter to the water nozzle diameter is from 3 to 4; The length of the mixing tube does not significantly contribute to particle fragmentation. The optimal value is about 50–65 times of the mixing tube diameter; The impact angle increase results in the increase of the fractal dimension. Vertical incidence leads to a maximal disintegration efficiency; The standoff distance cannot exceed the effective range of the jet. In general, the standoff distance in our experiments is 5 mm; The Young modulus of the target cannot be less than 400 GPa. Tungsten carbide material can be used for achieving particle fracture easily without target wear. In summary, the results provide a deeper understanding about the effects of the process parameters on comminution capability of HPWJM. High pressure water jet comminution technique with so many advantages including low energy consumption and high comminution efficiency, no product contamination, the original crystalline shapes and surface glossiness of the grains being retained, no dust problem and environmental pollution, lower equipment wear and feasible for inflammable, explosive and thermally sensitive material comminution, it provides great potential for some new tasks such as material cycling, which cannot be resolved with conventional comminution technique. This work was supported by the National 973 Foundation of China (2005cb221502).