This paper investigates the phase equilibria of ammonium scandium fluoride phases in pure water, aqueous NH4F solutions and in mixtures of NH4F and alcohols. The solubility of the solid phases was determined at 25 °C. It was observed that (NH4)3ScF6 transforms into NH4ScF4 when contacted with pure water for 24 h. Solid phase transformation was also noted in NH4F solutions of concentration ≤ 0.5 mol/L. At NH4F concentrations ≥ 0.8 mol/L, no phase change has been observed, and the solubility of (NH4)3ScF6 decreases with increasing NH4F concentration due to the common ion effect. In NH4F-alcohol mixtures, the solubility of (NH4)3ScF6 decreases in the order: methanol > ethanol > 1,3-propane-diol > 2-propanol. This aligns with the decrease in the effective dielectric constant of the resulting solvent mixture, which is very similar for NH4F-alcohol mixtures formed by ethanol and 1,3-propane-diol.Scandium is one of the most valuable metals. Amongst many applications, it is used in the production of high strength and lightweight Al alloys and in solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) The techniques by which Sc can be recovered from waste streams include, but are not limited to, leaching, solvent extraction, crystallization and metallothermic reduction of ScF For successful design of a robust anti-solvent crystallization process, accurate solubility data in a range of compositions of the chosen solvent/anti-solvent system are indispensable. The present study focuses on the solubility of solid ammonium scandium fluoride phases, chiefly (NH The solubility of (NH An increase in the fluoride ion concentration favours the formation of higher order ScF It has been reported in previous research that (NH The solubility of salts in aqueous systems can be reduced by addition of solvents in which the desired salt has limited solubility. Of particular interest in this study are aliphatic alcohols, which consist of a hydrophobic alkyl chain and a hydrophilic OH group. The latter allows hydrogen bond formation with water molecules, leading to a high aqueous solubility of smaller alcohol molecules When a second solvent is introduced to a near-saturated aqueous salt solution, the solvent-solvent attractive forces that occur must be stronger than the solute-solvent attractive forces in order to de-solubilize the salt Almost similar values have been reported in other sources Crystalline (NH NH The NH At equilibrium, the solutions were visually checked to verify that complete dissolution of all solids had not occurred, and a supernatant sample was withdrawn from each container using a syringe fitted with a 0.22 µm PVDF membrane filter. ICP-OES was used to measure the total concentration of Sc from which the solubility was computed in units of g (NH  The XRD patterns of the dry residual solids after the solubility experiments indicate that solid phase transformations had occurred in pure water and NH As the fluoride concentration is increased to 0.8 mol/L (see The concentration of elements in the residual solid that was in contact with water closely matches that of NH The residual solids obtained from pure water ( The phase transformation could occur through dissolution of the hexafluoride product accompanied by recrystallization into the tetrafluoride product in pure water, due to dominance of ScF Following these observations, the solubility data are plotted herein as g (NH The solubility values under each set of conditions are tabulated, in the majority of cases as averages over 2–5 repeat experiments, with associated standard deviations in  The solubility of (NH The phase transformation of (NH  The solubility of (NH   Experiments were also conducted with 1,3-propane-diol and no phase separation was observed by the naked eye even at the highest concentration of 8 mol/L. The densities of liquid samples withdrawn from the top and bottom of the mixture were also similar. The phase separation observed with 2-propanol is attributed to the increased hydrophobicity of the molecule in comparison to methanol and ethanol, while for 1,3-propane-diol, this effect is circumvented by the increased polarity of the molecule due to its 2 hydroxyl groups. The solubility of (NH For the monohydric alcohols, the trend of decreasing solubility with increasing alkyl chain length is correlated to the decrease in the dielectric constant with increasing alkyl chain, as shown in It can be seen in A higher dielectric constant promotes charge separation between the cations and anions in solution, thereby favouring the dissolution of (NH Further elaborating on this phenomenon, Experiments were also conducted at 25 °C to quantify the dissolution of (NH In summary, addressing the purpose of anti-solvent crystallization of (NH With account taken also of possibilities for alcohol recovery for re-use in the anti-solvent crystallization process, methanol and ethanol are the most desirable candidates since they have significantly lower boiling points of ca. 64 °C and 78 °C, respectively, in comparison to ca. 83 °C and 213 °C for 2-propanol and 1,3-propane-diol, respectively. In addition, the market price of methanol and ethanol is significantly lower than that of 2-propanol and 1,3-propane-diol. Therefore, the operational costs of the process can be significantly reduced by using methanol or ethanol as anti-solvent. Finally, the choice of solvent should also take into account a detailed risk assessment, and whilst methanol is generally less expensive than ethanol, and only about half the volume is required in comparison with ethanol to achieve the same molar concentration, it poses a higher health risk to humans. Solubility data are reported for (NH Solubility data of (NH (NH  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This publication has emanated from research conducted within the SCALE project financed by the Calculations of mixture quantities for ethanol concentrations as mol/L and volume fractions in 2–4 mol/L NH   Phase separation in NH  The recovery (R, %) of (NH