This work deals with the removal of nickel ions by cementation on zinc from dilute nickel sulphate solution. The effect of different parameters such as, initial nickel ion concentration, temperature, rotation speed of a magnetic stirrer and concentrations of 1-aryl-3-(1-phenylpyrazolo [3,4-b]quinoxalin-3-yl)-2-propenone derivatives on the rate of nickel ion removal were investigated. The cementation reaction followed first‐order kinetics and diffusion controlling steps. The rate of cementation was found to increase in the presence of pyrazolo-quinoxaline derivatives. The value of activation energy and the increase in the rate of cementation with stirring support the fact that cementation of Ni2+ on Zn is diffusion controlled. The deposit morphology of nickel in the presence of chalcones was found to be dendritic. The dendrites create a local surface roughness which induces the formation of eddies. These eddies enhance the rate of nickel cementation. The experimental results were analysed by quantum chemical calculations.Wastewater containing Ni Recently, several research works have reported on metal cementation and applications devoted to patterning and nanostructure fabrication ( Cementation is considered as an important process for recovering valuable and toxic metals from industrial waste solutions. Cementation is used as a general term to describe the process whereby a metal is precipitated from a solution of its salts by another electropositive metal by spontaneous electrochemical reduction to its elemental metallic state, with consequent oxidation of a sacrificial metal. The process has been largely used in industry for a long time, not only in hydrometallurgy but also in the purification process of wastewaters ( Mechanistic studies of cementation reactions have revealed that cementation is electrochemical in nature which takes place through a galvanic cell ( The aim of the present work is to study the rate of cementation of Ni The morphology of the cemented specimens was monitored using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The study of the (SEM) analysis supports the experimental measurements and gives more light on nickel production. Quantum chemical parameters were calculated using semi-empirical AM1 and PM3 method to find a good correlation with experimental results. Analar grade NiSO R = phenyl 1-phenyl-3-(1-phenypyrazolo[3,4- R = R = R = R = biphenyl 1-(biphenyl)-3-(1-phenylpyrazolo[3,4- Fresh solution of NiSO A zinc sheet of the dimensions 7.5 The apparatus used consists of glass beaker containing 500 0.5 The viscosity was measured by Koehler viscosity bathing (Model K 23400). The diffusion coefficient was measured by the capillary method ( Nickel deposits were examined by the scanning electron microscope (Cambridge Stereoscan 360 SEM). Quantum chemistry was performed using MOPAC 9 Public Domain Version ( The effect of initial nickel concentration on the rate of cementation was studied at 50, 75,100, 250, 500 Nickel ions are transferred from the bulk solution to the zinc surface during cementation by (1) diffusion across the diffusion layer (δ) present at the zinc surface and (2) electrostatic attraction between the positively charged nickel ions and negatively charged anode of the galvanic cell: Zn/electrolyte/Ni through which cementation takes place. It is well known that both the rate of diffusion and rate of ion transfer increase with increasing reactant bulk concentration ( With increasing the initial NiSO Experimental work was also conducted to investigate the effect of stirring speed on the cementation reaction. The stirring speeds used were 100, 200, 500, 750 and 1000 Temperature is a key parameter in determining reaction rates and mechanisms, so cementation was performed at different temperatures: 25, 30, 35 and 40 The apparent activation energy E The values for enthalpy of activation, ΔH*(kJmol The change in the free energy of activation, ∆G*, with chalcone concentrations are only small, where in all cases ∆H* and ∆S* compensate each other to produce small changes in ∆G* (  The order of increasing percent acceleration could be explained in terms of the ability of the Ni It is found that, the percent acceleration depends on the charge densities of the Examination of the electrode (zinc sheet) by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) confirmed the changes in the electrode surface area as a consequence of the cementation process. Before cementation, the stripes due to the emery polishing are visible on the electrode surface (  It was indicated that the presence of these chalcones structures increase the surface roughness of the cemented metal i.e. dendrites and porosity of the surface increase due to hydrogen evolution. There are pitting and small holes which are a consequence of the attachment of the hydrogen bubbles, therefore the rate of cementation will increase (  In this work, we have investigated the effect of pyrazolo‐quinoxaline derivatives which attached to chalcone moiety as a side chain on the rate of cementation of Ni Rate of the reaction increases by increasing the concentration, decreasing viscosity, increasing diffusion coefficient and increasing temperature. The cementation reaction is found to be first‐order reaction and the controlling step is diffusion controlling steps. The acceleration caused by pyrazolo-quinazoline depending on the type of substituting group attached to heterocyclic moiety and its concentration. Rate of the reaction increases by increasing the speed of rotation which support that reaction is diffusion controlled reaction. The values of activation energy indicate that the reaction was diffusion controlled reaction. The morphology of the cemented specimens by using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and Energy dispersive investigation. The cement presents a dendritic aspect. The dendrites are assumed to create a local surface roughness, therefore generating eddies and increasing diffusion mass transfer copper cementatiion.  viscosity (g diffusion (cm time (s) concentration at time t (ppm) initial concentration (ppm) mass transfer coefficient (cm active area of zinc electrode (cm solution volume (cm activation energy (kJmol enthalpy of activation (kJmol entropy of activation (Jmol free energy of activation (kJmol standard cell potential (V) equilibrium constant absolute temperature (K)