Wood chips represent one of the most popular biomass fuel in latest cogenerating plants and in small heating systems. This fuel, being characterized by low bulk density, requires high transportation costs. This obstacle can be overcome by wood chips densification. The authors investigated the energy benefit of wood chips densification for transport operations for “short supply chain” as defined by the Italian government for the biomass fuel subsidy scheme. Three different woods (poplar, chestnut and a mixture of spruce and eastern white pine) chips and six different tractor’s trailed trailers were investigated. The total specific energy (kJ kg−1) required to transport a defined quantity of wood chips, the energy saving ratio (%) from chips’ compaction and the break-even distance (km) between raw and compressed chips were calculated. The results highlights that densification process of wood chips is an interesting opportunity to improve the transport energetic convenience. The benefit of wood chips densification is strongly affected by raw wood chips density values and by trailer characteristics: the benefit is maximum when the density of compressed wood chips to be transported attains the vehicle theoretical density.The main target of the 20-20-20 of the European plan on climate change adopted by the European Union (EU) in 2009 was to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions by 20% compared to the 1990 levels, to increase the share of renewable energy to 20% of the total energy consumption and to achieve a 20% increase in energy efficiency by 2020 In the 2012, biomass and waste represented about two-thirds of the renewable energy consumption of the EU Among renewable energy sources, biomass use has been strongly encouraged in order to replace fossil fuels in many applications, from heating to electricity production Woody biofuel production consist of different operations: growing and harvesting biomass, converting biomass to bioenergy and bioproducts, and, finally, delivering end products to distribution centers or end users Comminution is an effective process to make wood fuels competitive with other energy sources: comminuted woodchips can feed automated chip-fed boilers, offering user-friendly operation Wood chip can be transported by industrial vehicles and by agricultural trailers coupled with tractors In case of comminuted woody biomass (eg. woodchips), characterized by low bulk density, transportation and storage phases can be further optimized through densification processes that can be used to produce a uniform material with favorable physical and mechanical effects on the fuel properties According to Kaliyan and Vance Morey Densification processes, especially briquetting, improve combustion properties of biomass The present study investigates the possible beneficial effect of densification process on woodchip logistics comparing the energy required for transportation of raw and densified materials. The study does not approach economic analysis deferring this issue to further studies specifically conceived. Furthermore, the study aims at calculating the break-even-distance, the distance above which, the densification process became energetically profitable for the wood chips transportation. The investigation, unlikely previous studies, considers fuel consumption recorded on real tractor and trailer transport operation. The study considers three different woody materials and six different agricultural trailers. The investigation has been performed considering to transport 100,000 kg of raw wood chips from a point A (for example a comminution site) to a point B (for example a storing site or a power station). The maximum distance has been set to 70 km: it is the maximum distance to comply with the definition of “short supply chain” according to the Italian regulation Tractors and trailers are commonly adopted for agroforestry wood chip forwarding because they are more suitable to access rough terrain than trucks and because they are very common and cheap to recruit among agricultural and forestry operations The investigation is addressed at identifying a set of equations that can be applied to different kind of vehicle when the load capacity, the fuel consumption and average speed data are known. In this study, the fuel consumed for the transport has been measured with an experimental trial in real conditions on 3 km flat route. A 118 kW, 4 wheel-drive, and 19 gears full power-shift transmission tractor towing a 3 axles, 21 m Tractor’s fuel consumption and vehicle speed were recorded from the tractor via CANBUS diagnostic connector The data obtained with AgriReal trailer have been used to calculate the values of fuel consumption for the investigated additional trailers (AgriTrailer# in F k Load = real trailer load Load max = maximum trailer load Additional trailers (AgriTrailerl# in For the study we defined the theoretical density [kg m Chips from three different types of wood have been considered for the study: chestnut ( For the study we define the total energy (E E E E The compression energy is directly related to the target density [kg m Eq. E k ρ = briquettes density [kg m c = material-dependent offset coefficient [kJ kg  The material-dependent coefficients were measured by Cavallo et al. (2017) in a study related to the effect of compressing pressure on briquettes made from the same three woody biomass (PC, CC; MC) considered in the present study. The compression energy (E W Eq. k d = distance covered by the vehicle for wood chips transportation [km]; n More in detail, Eqs. In the present study, according to ORNL The amount of wood chips (W The trailers characteristics, in particular mass and dimension limits are required to calculate W The algorithm developed in this study has been adopted to calculate the numbers of travel required to move the W Break-even distance (d E k n n When the distance is lower than d The average fuel consumption and speed calculated on data recorded for the AgriReal trailer in full load condition are 14.1 kg h The fuel consumption obtained with AgriReal with fully loaded trailer has been used as reference to calculate the fuel consumption in other load conditions and for other trailers (AgriTrailer#) with a linear interpolation between the unloaded and full load conditions ( The linear interpolation between unloaded and full load conditions calculated according Eq.  The physical characteristics (moisture and density) of raw chips is reported in As reported in Eq.5, transport energy is directly proportional to the numbers of travels necessary to move the investigated material from point A to point B. The number of travels decreases when the biomass density increases, as long as the maximum payload does not limit the load size ( In the present investigation, the minimum number of travels requested to move 100,000 kg of densified wood chips is equal to 8. Indeed, after exceeding the theoretical density values for each of the trailers considered the number of travels does not decrease further ( The specific compression energy values required for compressing the three types of wood chips until the theoretical density values for the different trailers are achieved varies from 4.6 to 32.4 kJ kg Compression energy requirements are affected by the target density of the woodchip briquettes and by the physical properties of the investigated materials  Results highlight that the total specific energy (E Total specific energy required to transport raw wood chips ranges from 920.0 kJ kg The energy saving ratio represents the most important parameter to evaluate the energetic convenience of wood chips densification. The amount of energy saved moving for 70 km 100,000 kg of densified chestnut, poplar and a mixture of wood chips and the same quantity of raw chips with different trailers is presented in The obtained results highlighted that the wood chips transportation takes an advantage from densification saving up to 75.6%, 69.7% and 59.3% of energy for PC, MC and CC respectively. This saving is due to the reduction of the numbers of travels required for the transportation of the different materials. For this reason, it is possible to affirm that the densification process allows to better exploit trailer load capacity and make more energetically efficient, and finally more sustainable, the biomasses supply chain. Break-even distance represents a parameter to evaluate the energetic benefit of wood chips densification. The break-even distance calculated for all the investigated combination of trailers and materials are reported in As a sample result, Lines representing transport energy for raw and densified wood chips have different angular coefficients because of the different number of travels requested to transport woody material in different forms: 23 and 8 travels for raw and densified conditions, respectively. The results of the investigation show that densification is a suitable process to improve the energetic balance of wood chips transportation when tractor and trailers are used. According to the results, the benefit is unquestionable when for transport distances are above 5 km. For distances below this threshold, the benefit of compaction should be analyzed being the advantage of wood chips densification strongly affected by the density of raw biomass and by the characteristics of the trailer adopted for the transport. Additional studies are necessary to further investigate how other conditions of these two aspects affect the energetic benefit of row wood chips compaction. Moreover the study indicates that the energetic benefit is maximum when the biomass density to be transported is equal to the vehicle theoretical density. At this conditions, the energy being used for compression is purely addressed at transport optimization, without taking into account other aspect, such as the quality of the briquettes, of the densification process. The results of this study give a first and broad indications, from the energetic point of view, of the condition to take into account to adopt densification processes of wood chips and to select the more appropriate tractor and trailer for their transportation. The outcome of the study, and the method adopted to achieve it, is not limited to the biomass, and the woodchip investigated in the present study, but it can be applied to all the circumstances when a transport of raw material is required and to explore the possible benefit of its densification. The results of the study is based exclusively on energy balance in order to assess more objectively the benefit of densification. Nevertheless, under an economic point of view results might vary because of energy prices, labour costs and local contexts. Further studies should be addressed at investigate how these aspects affect the convenience of the wood chips briquetting for energy use. This research received no external funding. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank Alessio Facello (former research fellow at CNR-IMAMOTER) for data recording during the experimental trial.