A recent study found that chalcopyrite in the Telfer ore could float without a collector whilst pyrite did not float without a collector in the laboratory. In comparison of the flotation result with and without a collector, the two grade–recovery curves are clearly separated due mainly to less pyrite recovery and higher concentrate grades produced by collectorless flotation. Pre-aeration tended to promote collectorless flotation of chalcopyrite while it had a negligible effect on pyrite flotation. In addition to the laboratory study, pulp potential measurements were conducted in the plant. The results indicate that chalcopyrite is likely to retain its collectorless floatability after SAG milling. This may provide an opportunity of using a flash unit for collectorless flotation on the SAG mill discharge stream.Chalcopyrite is known to be floatable without a collector when moderately oxidised to form polysulphides on the surface ( In the natural chalcopyrite ore, pyrite generally co-exists in abundance and is the main potentially floatable gangue. Although pyrite is not naturally floatable, pyrite once activated by copper and rendered hydrophobic by collectors is difficult to depress and separate from chalcopyrite completely ( Based on these findings, However, no industrial application of collectorless chalcopyrite flotation has been reported in the literature. This is due to formation of hydrophilic metal hydroxides, principally iron from mill liners and grinding media, and precipitation of the hydroxides on the mineral surface during grinding such as semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) and ball milling (  This paper examines the collectorless floatability of chalcopyrite and pyrite in the Telfer ore. Pulp potential was measured in various streams of the plant using mineral electrodes together with a platinum electrode provided by Outotec. The main objective of the current study is to investigate possibilities of incorporating collectorless flotation in the sequential flotation operating strategy at Telfer. This could potentially improve chalcopyrite–pyrite separation and help move the plant grade–recovery curve into a more optimal regime. The Telfer ore processing plant operates two parallel trains. This paper focuses on Train 1 which processes a blend of the underground mine chalcopyrite ore and the open pit mine chalcocite ore. Because the head grade of copper is considerably higher in the underground ore, over 80% of the copper presents as chalcopyrite in the Train 1 feed. The processing train consists of a SABC grinding circuit, a copper flotation circuit and a pyrite flotation circuit. In the grinding circuit, there is also a flash flotation circuit treating a portion of the cyclone underflow, a Knelson concentrator treating the flash rougher concentrate and a Falcon gravity concentration circuit treating another portion of the cyclone underflow. The pyrite concentrate from the two trains is combined and further treated in a carbon-in-leach (CIL) circuit to extract the gold. Currently, Telfer uses thionocarbamate based RTD11A as the copper collector which is added in the mill discharge sump, flash flotation rougher feed, copper rougher feed box and head of the copper scavenger. The total dosage of RTD11A typically ranges from 5 The key production data in Train 1 in the first 6 A slurry sample was taken from the Train 1 SAG mill trommel undersize. This stream contained no reagents except lime which was mixed in the mill feed. The sample was wet screened at 212 The flotation tests were conducted in a 5-litre standard laboratory Denver cell, operated at an impeller speed of 700 Approximately 76% of the copper was recovered with a concentrate grade of 22.5% within the first minute of the collectorless flotation. At the end of the 10 Non-sulphide gangue was the main dilutant in the concentrate, contributing 29.5% of the total concentrate mass in the first minute and 62.4% after 10 It is noted that only 45% of the gold was recovered into the copper concentrate in the first minute and 75% at the end of the collectorless flotation test. Additional laboratory flotation tests were conducted using a sample from the same SAG mill trommel undersize stream to compare the flotation response of chalcopyrite with and without a collector. Test 1 was without a collector, Test 2 with 8 When comparing the flotation results with and without a collector in It should be noted that the flotation kinetic of chalcopyrite was found to be slower in the absence of a collector than that in the presence of collector RTD11A. The copper recovery was also lower without a collector at any stage of the flotation. The difference in final copper recovery at the end of the 10 The difference in gold recovery in the presence and absence of a collector was greater than chalcopyrite. The final gold recovery was 84.1% without a collector compared to 93.6% with a collector. The additional gold recovery with a collector was attributed largely to the increased pyrite recovery and to a lesser extent, collector enhanced flotation of composite and free gold. In the third test, although the initial collectorless flotation was slower than that with a collector in the second test, the flotation kinetic improved with the collector addition. There was virtually no difference in the final recovery between Test 2 and Test 3, as can be seen in It is interesting to note that the chalcopyrite recovery in the first minute without collector was higher in the third test than that in the first test. However, there was no indication of change in pyrite recovery ( It is also noticeable that the 20.3% copper concentrate grade within the first minute of collectorless flotation in the third test was considerably higher than 9.7% with collector in the second test and 13.5% without a collector in the first test. This may be explained by improved flotation kinetic after chalcopyrite oxidation. Sample taken from the Train 1 SAG mill trommel undersize stream was ground in a laboratory stainless steel mill with mild steel balls at 60% solids for 30 Two laboratory flotation tests were conducted, one immediately after grinding and the other after 30 With or without pre-aeration, chalcopyrite in the ground SAG mill discharge sample floated well without collector while pyrite remained depressed. At the end of the 10 Gold recovery was 70.4% at the end of the 10 It should be noted that during the laboratory grinding/screening process after the sample was collected from the plant, oxidation processes continued to take place. Together with water change, it would have enhanced collectorless floatability of the chalcopyrite in the ore. Nevertheless, it is important to know that pyrite remained non-floatable in the absence of a collector. Mineral electrodes including chalcopyrite and pyrite together with a platinum electrode and a pH probe were provided by Outotec. The advantage of using a mineral electrode is that the mixed potential measured by a mineral electrode correlates directly with the rate of main electrochemical reactions for the specific mineral ( Based on the measured Eh and pH, chalcopyrite in the SAG mill discharge would likely be able to float without a collector. It should be noted that during the slurry transfer, chalcopyrite would undergo further oxidation with dissolved oxygen, resulting in higher potential. After ball milling, the potential was outside the range for collectorless flotation to be considered. However, it is evident in Under the prevailing plant conditions at Telfer, chalcopyrite would likely retain collectorless floatability after SAG milling. This would provide an opportunity to selectively float chalcopyrite without a collector. Flotation cells such as the Outotec SkimAir® flash unit would be suitable for such an application as they are designed to handle coarse and high density feed. Currently, a flash flotation circuit is installed to treat a portion of the cyclone underflow at Telfer. The location of the current flash flotation circuit is designed to take advantage of the pre-concentrated gold and sulphide minerals in this stream, as described by At Telfer, the ball mill/cyclone re-circulating load is approximately 250% of the fresh mill feed. The flash flotation circuit draws approximately 30% of the cyclone underflow, or equivalent 75% of the fresh mill feed. However, based on the solids suspension and survey results, few particles larger than 300 As noted earlier, copper minerals and gold tend to concentrate in the finer size fraction in the SAG mill trommel undersize. If the metal distribution is compared on a size-by-size basis, it was found that SAG mill trommel undersize sample contained richer copper content than the cyclone underflow in the fine size fractions. This can be explained by a significant proportion of the fine copper minerals and gold being recovered into the cyclone overflow. The above analysis suggests that if the flash flotation circuit is to treat the full stream of the SAG mill trommel undersize without a collector, it will likely maintain the current recovery level while producing a higher concentrate grade. The current flash concentrate grade after cleaning appears most frequently in the range of 24–28% copper. In addition to saving on collector consumption, cyanide usage in the current flash rougher cell to depress pyrite and stabilise froth could also be reduced or eliminated. Other potential benefits include having no impact on ball mill density and no bypass stream from the flash rougher top outlet. Based on the current study, chalcopyrite in the Telfer ore is found to have collectorless flotation characteristics while pyrite does not float without a collector. Measurement results of the pulp potential in the plant indicate that chalcopyrite is likely to retain its collectorless floatability after SAG milling. This may provide an opportunity of using a flash unit for collectorless flotation on the SAG mill discharge stream to produce a high grade copper concentrate. Finally, it is worth mentioning that collectorless flotation is also proved to be an effective means to recover chalcopyrite from the pyrite concentrate after regrind at Telfer. This is beyond the scope of the current paper but will be reported separately. The authors wish to thank Newcrest Mining Limited for granting permission for this paper to be published. The authors would also like to thank Outotec for providing the mineral electrodes and in particular Mr. Mika Etelapaa for conducting the potential measurement in the plant. Professor Zafir Ekmekci, Dr. Cesar Gomez, Dr. Elaine Wightman and Professor Dee Bradshaw provided valuable discussion and advice. Their support is gratefully acknowledged.