Distal humeral fractures represent 2% of all adult elbow fractures. Injury mechanisms include high-energy trauma with skin involvement, and low energy trauma in osteoporotic bone. Treatment goals are anatomical restoration in young, high-demand patients and quick recovery of activities of daily living in the elderly. Complete fractures are relatively easy to diagnose, but partial intra-articular fractures are not. The clinical diagnosis must take into account potential complications such as open injuries and ulnar nerve trauma. Standard X-rays with additional distraction series in the operating room are sufficient in complete articular fracture cases. Partial intra-articular fractures will need CT scan and 3D reconstruction to fully evaluate the involved fragments. SOFCOT, AO/OTA and Dubberley classifications are the most useful for describing fractures and selecting treatment. Surgery is the optimal treatment and planning is based on fracture type. Complete fractures are treated using a posterior approach. Triceps management is a function of fracture lines and type of fixation planned. Constructs using two plates at 90° or 180° are the most stable, with additional frontal screw for intercondylar fractures. Elbow arthroplasty may be indicated in selected patients, having severely communited distal humerus fractures and osteoporotic bone. Open fractures make fixation and wound management more challenging and unfortunately have poorer outcomes. Other complications are elbow stiffness, non-union, malunion and heterotopic ossification.Articular fractures of the distal humerus in adults are difficult to treat because of their epiphyseal location. Although not a common fracture The treatment process consists of determining the injury mechanism, defining the diagnostic modalities and developing a treatment algorithm to allow the patient to completely regain full mobility of this complex joint. Normal function is hard to restore if the joint is deformed by malunion and/or stiffened by heterotopic ossifications or capsular and ligament contractures. In the frontal plane, the distal humerus has a triangular shape, is empty in the middle and is made up of a horizontal capitellum-trochlea segment inserted between the medial and lateral columns The medial column holds the medial epicondyle and medial portion of the humeral trochlea. When viewed from the side, this medial column appears continuous with the humeral shaft axis. Conversely, the lateral column is flexed relative to the humeral shaft, placing the capitellum ahead of the trochlea. The epiphyseal section of the distal humerus containing the trochlear and capitellum articular surfaces is in 4–8° valgus relative to the shaft, externally rotated by 3–8° relative to the metaphysis and flexed 40° relative to the shaft Complete fractures result from impaction of the proximal ulna onto the articular part (trochlea, capitellum) of the distal humerus. The impact can occur with the elbow flexed or extended. If the elbow was flexed at impact, the articular fragments move forward; if the elbow was extended, they typically move backwards Partial sagittal fractures of the lateral or medial condyle are the result of indirect trauma in valgus or varus while in full or nearly full extension. These fractures are accompanied by capsular and ligament injuries on the opposite side of the joint. The elbow will be acutely unstable. Isolated capitellum fractures are the result of compression of the articular surface by the radial head (as if the radial head gave the capitellum an uppercut) The clinical diagnosis is made when the patient presents a painfully swollen and deformed elbow. Because of the articular nature of the fracture, anatomical landmarks are disrupted. In complete bicondylar fractures, the two condyles can be moved independently of each other. In partial sagittal fractures, one of the condyles will be detached from the remainder of the humerus and moving freely. The forearm will be shorter because of proximal ulna migration and show either valgus or varus deformity. There is complete functional disability. The clinical diagnosis of complete or partial sagittal fractures is not particularly difficult. However, partial frontal fractures of the capitellum or trochlea can go unrecognised. The functional loss is hard to detect, but will reveal itself as either a passive or active flexion or extension deficit. The elbow shape is normal. Anatomical landmarks are in their usual location. Hemarthrosis with filling of the posterolateral recess of the elbow is a sign of intra-articular injury Skin lesions may occur posteriorly, where bone is located right under the skin. Open wounds add complexity when choosing the surgical approach Standard AP and lateral X-rays of the elbow are sufficient for detecting complete fractures CT scans are useful in partial or very distal fractures because the various fragments will be superimposed, which hinders precise analysis of the fracture on standard views. Three-dimensional reconstruction shows the shape and position of the bone fragments and is helpful in determining the appropriate surgical approach All of the proposed classification systems are based on determining the status of the columns and looking for sagittal or frontal fracture lines. The most used classification in France is the one put forward by Lecestre et al. The elbow joint must be mobilized early on to avoid stiffening and heterotopic ossification. Because of axial loads, the joint cannot be moved without inducing secondary displacement. Immobilization is only feasible in cases of non-displaced fractures, or as a temporary treatment in the elderly before arthrolysis and arthroplasty Distal humerus fractures are primarily treated surgically. But partial and complete fractures require different treatment strategies. Techniques range from conservative surgical treatment using internal fixation in young patients to elbow joint replacement in older patients with comminuted fractures. Controversy exists as to the best was to position the plates on each column: 90° or 180° to each other. The availability of locking compression plates has changed how we plan internal fixation and can result in lower morbidity. The main goal of surgical treatment is to obtain fixation that is stable enough to allow immediate postoperative elbow mobilization and prevent it from stiffening. If the distal humerus fracture is immobilized in order to avoid fixation failure, stiffening is almost assured and arthrolysis will have to be performed later on. The choice of surgical approaches for internal fixation of distal humerus fracture is a difficult one to make, which justifies the need for comprehensive presurgical planning. In elderly patients, one has to choose between an approach best for fixation and one that would be best for arthroplasty. In the ideal scenario, the procedure could be chosen at the time of surgery and only one surgical approach would be needed. Use of a medial approach The lateral approach is used most often with epiphysis fractures of the elbow The posterior approach is the only route that allows both columns of the distal humerus to be viewed simultaneously through one incision Various routes have been used for total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) Displaced partial fractures must be fixed with 2.7 This is the “gold standard” of distal humerus fracture fixation. Because the elbow has two columns (medial and lateral), each can be used for fixation in the frontal plane, even if the columns are not completely solid. The aim is to achieve simultaneous bicortical purchase of the screws through both columns. Since the introduction of early-precontoured anatomical plates In bicondylar fractures, the most mechanically stable construct is the combination of a lateral plate with at least four bicortical screws above the fracture site and a medial plate with at least two bicortical screws on either side of the site. A construct with two parallel plates (180° placement) is the best in terms of biomechanics In osteoporotic patients, screw hold in the diaphysis and epiphysis is precarious. In this group of patients, the primary treatment goal is bone union The basic principles of internal fixation for reconstruction of the distal humerus anatomical triangle are the following: temporary fixation of bone fragments with K-wires; restoring the normal width along with aligning the trochlear groove with the anterior humeral cortex; fixation of articular fragments to the medial and lateral bone columns using shaped plates; intra-operative verification that the hardware does not encroach upon the articular surfaces and fossa, and allows for full range of motion; making sure the fixation construct is stable enough to allow early mobilization of the joint. Locking compression plates (LCP) are particularly beneficial for partial distal humerus fractures. Monocortical fixation is sufficient since the diverging nature of the screws in the locked holes ensures good construct stability. These plates can rarely be used alone, but are often used with direct screw fixation. LCPs can also be used as a neutralization plate, resorting to shorter plate and one less screw per fragment. The benefit of using LCP in complex distal humerus fractures was shown in an experimental model where two plate fixation positions were evaluated: two posterior plates or medial and lateral plates at 90° to each other There is also clinical evidence of no secondary displacement or fixation failure occurring with LCP, especially in elderly patients with low-quality trabecular bone Total elbow arthroplasty has been proposed as an alternative treatment for distal humerus fractures in osteoporotic bone, especially in elderly patients, and for comminuted type C fractures. In cases where the surgeon does not want to disrupt the extensor mechanism, a posterior triceps sparing approach can be used Total elbow arthroplasty provides good early outcomes when treating complex distal humerus fractures in elderly patients, with immediate postoperative mobilization and quick return to activities of daily living Open distal humerus fractures are difficult to treat because of the need to simultaneously manage soft tissue injuries, often posterior and directly over the distal humerus, and also stabilize the fracture This is the most common complication of distal humerus fractures. If the stiffness is disabling, a full evaluation with thin CT slices and CT arthrography will help to identify osteophytes, radiolucent intra-articular foreign bodies and the volume of the joint cavity. The stiffness can be classified as either extrinsic or intrinsic, depending on if the joint is incongruent and the potential exists for loss of gliding between articular facets. Extrinsic causes of stiffness are anterior and/or posterior capsule adhesions, adhesions to the triceps or brachialis muscles, capsule contraction, intra- or extra-articular osteophytes, jutting out of fixation hardware. Mild stiffness (less than 30°) can be treated by arthroscopic arthrolysis Distal humerus non-union is quite common in osteoporotic patients after partial articular fractures. In complex fractures, this can result in unattached or free floating fragments in the joint. CT scan and CT arthrography evaluations must be performed to identify intra-articular injuries that could be excised by arthroscopy or in an open procedure. Fragments of the entire trochlea or capitellum may also be present. In younger patients, the bone can be freshened and the fragment reattached with fully buried hardware Two main types of malunion can be encountered: extra-articular ones that are easily treated with osteotomy and direct fixation after reduction; intra-articular ones due to lack of anatomical restoration of joint surfaced Osteomas or peri-articular ectopic ossifications contribute to posttraumatic elbow stiffening. The average published rate of heterotopic ossifications is 8.6% (range 0–21%) if preventative treatments are not used Distal humerus articular fractures are uncommon injuries requiring precise radiographic analysis for planning optimal treatment. In high-energy fractures in younger patients, the anatomy of the joint surfaces must be restored. CT scanning with 3D reconstruction helps the surgeon view all the fragments and choose the most suitable surgical approach for the injury in question. Fixation for complex fractures will consist of reconstruction plates or locking compression plates, with one plate being placed on each column to neutralize disassembly forces, especially rotational ones. We recommend using templates to put together the construct being implanted. The advent of monoaxial and polyaxial locking screws has changed the indications and extended fixation options to fractures in osteoporotic or diseased bone. The primary objective of distal humerus fixation is a perfectly stable fracture; this will enable the early rehabilitation needed to regain normal mobility. With low-energy distal humerus fractures in older, osteoporotic patients, the degree of fracture comminution and the absolute need for fast return to activities of daily living may lead the surgeon to choose total elbow arthroplasty or hemiarthroplasty. Fracture complications such as stiffness, peri-articular ossification, non-union and malunion are quite common. Since fracture sequelae are challenging to treat, the optimal treatment must be performed right away. The author declares that he has no conflicts of interest concerning this article.