This paper describes the removal of Ni(II) ions from aqueous solutions using clinoptilolite. The effect of clinoptilolite level, contact time, and pH were determined. Different isotherms were also obtained using concentrations of Ni(II) ions ranging from 0.1 to 100mgL−1. The ion-exchange process follows second-order reaction kinetics and follows the Langmuir isotherm. The paper discusses thermodynamic parameters, including changes in Gibbs free energy, entropy, and enthalpy, for the ion-exchange of Ni(II) on clinoptilolite, and revealed that the ion-exchange process was spontaneous and exothermic under natural conditions. The maximum removal efficiency obtained was 93.6% at pH 7 and with a 45min contact time (for 25mgL−1 initial concentration and a 15gL−1 solid-to-liquid ratio).Heavy metal pollution occurs in many industrial wastewater such as those produced by metal-plating facilities, dyeing operations, mining and metallurgical engineering, electroplating, nuclear power plants, aerospace industries, battery manufacturing processes, the production of paints and pigments, glass production, and municipal and storm water runoff. This wastewater commonly includes Ni, Cu, Cd, Cr, and Pb. The effects of Ni exposure vary from skin irritation to damage to the lungs, nervous system, and mucous membranes. It is also known carcinogen. The Turkish discharge standard in wastewater systems for Ni(II) is 5 The most widely used methods for removing heavy metals are chemical or electrochemical precipitation, both of which pose a significant problem in terms of disposal of the precipitated wastes Previous research has studied the ion-exchange capacities of titanates such as K Clinoptilolite is one of the most abundant forms of zeolite in Turkey, with a wide geographic distribution and large deposits. The typical formula for natural clinoptilolite is Na The present paper discusses the efficiency of clinoptilolite for removing Ni(II), which is known to be one of the major contaminants of the water at many sites around the world. We obtained clinoptilolite from natural zeolites extracted from deposits at Manisa (Turkey). In accordance with ASTM Method D4749 The chemical compositions of the zeolite samples were determined using a Rigaku RIX 3000 X-ray spectrometer according to the Rietveld method The metal concentration in the liquid phase was determined at the beginning ( The data obtained were applied to the Langmuir isotherm using the following linear expression of this model Another isotherm, the Dubinin–Radushkevich (D–R) isotherm, was calculated from the ion-exchange data. This isotherm is more general than the Langmuir isotherm since it does not assume a homogeneous surface or constant sorption potential. The D–R equation is expressed as follows The Freundlich isotherm was also applied to the ion-exchange data. This model has the following linear expression The kinetic parameters for the ion-exchange process were studied for the trial of ion-exchange at 25 Film and pore diffusion equations (Eq. The changes in Gibbs free energy (Δ The enthalpy change (Δ We studied the effects of clinoptilolite mass, contact time, pH, and initial metal ion concentration on the exchange of Ni(II) ions using the experimental conditions shown in Each experiment was replicated three times, and the mean values were used in our analyses. If the standard errors (SE) were greater than 0.01, the test was repeated to control for errors. The deviation of the metal uptake per unit weight of clinoptilolite (Δ The chemical composition of the natural clinoptilolite is presented in The evaluation of the FT-IR spectra of clinoptilolite was summarized in The zeta potential measurements were carried out as a function of pH with the relation of electrophoretic mobility of the particles. From the The effect of the mass of clinoptilolite on the retention of Ni(II) was studied using 100 The removal of Ni(II) as a function of contact time is shown in The effect of pH on the ion-exchange of Ni(II) by the clinoptilolite is presented in Ion-exchange isotherms or capacity studies are of fundamental importance in the design of ion-exchange systems since they indicate how the metal ions are partitioned between the adsorbent and liquid phases at equilibrium as a function of increasing metal concentration. When an adsorbent and metal ion solution is placed in contact, the concentration of metal ions on the adsorbent will increase until a dynamic equilibrium is reached; at this point, there is a defined distribution of metal ions between the solid and liquid phases. The Ni-exchange capacities at pH 7 were calculated by means of least-squares regression using Eqs. The regression values and correlation coefficients ( In order to determine the ion-exchange kinetics of Ni(II), the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetics models were examined. The slopes and intercepts of these curves were used to determine the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order constants The pseudo-second-order kinetic rate constant for Ni(II)-exchange on clinoptilolite was The temperature dependence of the ion-exchange was calculated by the linearized Arrhenius equation ( The results of the thermodynamic calculations are shown in Regeneration of clinoptilolite is an important step in order to make the ion-exchange process more economical. The regeneration efficiency for clinoptilolite at different eluent solutions of 0.1 This paper presents the results of a detailed study of equilibrium and kinetics of the ion-exchange process for removing Ni(II) ions from aqueous solution using a common, naturally occurring clinoptilolite. In all experiments clinoptilolite decreased the Ni(II) concentration under the discharge limit (5 These results suggest that the capacity of clinoptilolite to exchange certain metal can be calculated using the models described in this paper. The ion-exchange capacity of the clinoptilolite for Ni(II) equaled 3.28 I thank the Selçuk University Research Fund (BAP) for providing financial support of the work described in this paper. I also would like to thank Mr. Geoff Hart for his assistance in editing this paper.