Wastewater containing fluoride requires polishing after precipitation/coagulation treatment in order to meet stringent environmental legislation. Accordingly, adsorption characteristics of fluoride onto schwertmannite adsorbent were studied in a batch system with respect to changes in initial concentration of fluoride, equilibrium pH of sample solution, adsorbent dosage and co-existing ions. Equilibrium adsorption data were obtained at 295.6, 303 and 313K, and are interpreted in terms of two-site Langmuir, Freundlich, Langmuir–Freundlich, Redlich–Peterson, Tóth and Dubinin–Radushkevitch isotherm models. The experimental and equilibrium modeling results revealed that the capacity of schwertmannite for fluoride is high but insensitive to changes in solution temperature. An increase in equilibrium pH of sample solution reduced significantly the fluoride removal efficiency. In binary component systems, inner-sphere complex forming species had negative effects on fluoride adsorption while outer-sphere complex forming species improved slightly the fluoride removal efficiency. The schwertmannite adsorbent was regenerable and had the ability to lower the fluoride concentration to acceptable levels.Management of health hazardous ions such as fluoride is of public health interest since fluoride is responsible for teeth mottling and bone fluorosis. Wastewater from hydrofluoric, metal plating, soldering, glass, phosphate fertilizer, semi-conductor and other electronic industries are low in pH and contain high levels of fluoride. Due to strict environmental policies, however, industrial concerns are bound by law to treat waste streams to acceptable discharge standards. The current discharge standards for wastewater containing fluoride vary from country to country. For instance, Japan recommends a value below 5–15 Among the potential separation technologies mentioned above, adsorption is arguably one of the most suitable techniques for polishing wastewater streams, especially after precipitation/coagulation process. By polishing waste streams using adsorption technique, it is possible to meet the permissible levels of fluoride defined by most legislations. Furthermore, the technique is relatively low in cost, robust, environmentally benign and simple Successful and cost-effective removal of contaminants from wastewater by adsorption requires optimal operation of the adsorption units. To achieve this, design parameters must first be obtained through performance of adsorption equilibrium and kinetic experiments. The equilibrium data, which forms the backbone of this study, is normally generated in a simple batch experimental set up. Once such data is generated, it is a common practice to validate various isotherm models in an attempt to choose a model(s) that gives the best description of the experimental results. The frequently tested isotherm models are the Langmuir, two-site Langmuir, Freundlich, Langmuir–Freundlich, Redlich–Peterson, Tóth and Dubinin–Radushketvich isotherms. The details of these models are easily available in literature. These isotherms can be grouped into two- or three-parameter models. This work is part of a wider project in which we apply schwertmannite in removing health and environmentally hazardous inner-sphere complex forming species from water. Previously, we showed that schwertmannite has a very high capacity for phosphate ions Schwertmannite sample was prepared, using a wet chemical process whereupon urea was used as a neutralizing agent Data for sorption isotherm were generated by contacting 0.05 Experiments were carried out by varying initial solution pH values within the range of 3–11, using either 0.1 The ability of schwertmannite to reduce fluoride to acceptable levels at pH The effect of co-existing ions was explored at pH A single adsorption–desorption cycle was tested. Initially, using a similar procedure described in Section The residual fluoride concentration was measured by Horiba (Japan) fluoride-ion-selective electrode according to the Japanese Standard Method (JIS K0102). Accordingly, a calibration curve was initially prepared by recording potential values for a range of known fluoride concentration, mostly 0.1–5.0 Schwertmannite is an iron oxide hydroxide material with a poorly crystalline structure, high specific surface area (162 Equilibrium data is important in evaluating the adsorption capacity of an adsorbent for a given adsorbate. Information derived from such data is important also in comparing different adsorption media. In The interactions between schwertmannite and fluoride at 295.6, 303 and 313 Experimental data was further fitted to the Freundlich model (Eq. The three-parameter models, Langmuir–Freundlich (Sips isotherm) and Redlich–Peterson, were both linearized and their fitting validity tested against the experimental data. As an example, To determine the Dubinin–Radushketvich parameters, linear plots (not shown) of ln As mentioned previously, the objective function that was considered in comparing the various models was the normalized standard deviation,  In assessing a given technique for wastewater purification, regulatory compliance is a key factor to consider in the screening strategy. The present work considers, as an example, a fluoride level below 5 This section of the study assesses fluoride adsorption behavior in the presence of two kinds of co-existing ions: those that form outer-sphere complexes (chloride, nitrate, sulfate) and those that form inner-sphere (sulfate, phosphate) complexes with binding surfaces. The concentration of fluoride ions was fixed at 10 Nitrate and chloride ions are low-affinity ligands. Their adsorption mechanism is via formation of weaker bonds with the active sites at the outer Helmholtz plane, i.e. outer-sphere complexation. Thus, their presence in solution would have no effect on fluoride adsorption since fluoride adsorbs through formation of strong bonds with actives sites at the inner Helmholtz plane, i.e. inner-sphere complexation. The slight improvement in fluoride removal efficiency in the presence of nitrate and chloride could be due an increase in the ionic strength of the solution and/or a weakening of lateral repulsion between adsorbed fluoride ions, which in turn lead to an increase in fluoride adsorption. Similar observation, though explained differently, has been reported by Onyango et al. Wastewater purification by adsorption technology is economical if the adsorbent is regenerable. Moreover, reuse of adsorbent helps reduce environmental impacts of disposing used adsorbent. Initially, the schwertmannite adsorbent was loaded (adsorption step 1) with 7.9 Fluoride adsorption onto schwertmannite was studied in the temperature range 295.6–313