This paper presents a soft computing approach to estimate wet or green pellet size and strength and signifies the importance of individual process parameter. A huge portion of available minerals and materials is in the form of fine powder that makes their management and utilization a tedious job. Pelletization, a size enlargement technique, is used to tackle aforementioned problems and provides benefits such as ease of handling and storage, convenient transportation and improved process efficiency. Besides other characteristics, pellet size and strength are of prime significance and their accurate estimation can enhance the product quality. Real-life constraints (e.g., time in conducting experiments, repetition of experiments considering measurement errors, availability of resources, etc.) pose difficulties in generating sufficient experimental data at the laboratory. Hence, the concept of random population generation of genetic algorithm is exploited to fulfill data requirement where fitness functions are formulated using multiple regression. Better visualisation of pellets attributes and operating conditions is done through self-organizing map which also helped in deducing some important facts. Sensitivity analysis and construction of learning curves is also performed in present study. Finally, multilayer perceptron, a popular supervised neural network model, is applied on synthetic data to approximate pellet properties. Agreement between estimated and corresponding experimental values ascertained that neural network based system can be employed as an effective and credible tool to anticipate characteristics of wet pellets.Agglomeration is a size enlargement process where fine particles are transformed into larger aggregate particles. In many industries (such as drugs and pharmaceuticals, ore processing, fertilizers, iron and steel, etc.), size enlargement of fine material is a common practise. It enhances the productivity of industrial plants by providing desired size distributions and product geometry for increased functionality and protect users from hazards such as dust. The main purpose of agglomeration is to increase bulk density, better flowability, control of porosity and to reduce dustiness First step of pelletization process is wet pelletization in which fine particulates and water are mixed and rotated in pelletizer to form spherical balls. The solid particles coated with liquid collide with other particles and because of surface tension effects of liquid, granules grow subsequently to form coarser particles under the influence of rotatory motion of pelletizer. Wet pelletization plays a crucial role in overall efficiency and productivity of the process since following induration subprocess relies heavily on quality of wet pellets. Besides other characteristics, pellet size and strength are of prime significance. Basic process parameters that affect pellet quality are: speed of pelletizer, moisture content, inclination of pelletizer, binder content, pelletization time, particle size of material, etc. D50 (median pellet diameter) is the commonly used measure of pellet size while weighted mean drop number interprets its strength. Producing pellets with desired characteristics is a complicated task due to its sensitivity towards even the slight variation in affecting variables. This difficulty motivated the practitioners to develop model equations so that quality of produced granules can be estimated beforehand. Many researchers have worked towards the modelling of pelletization process because modelling provides an insight into its behavior, studying its characteristics and improving its output. Some of the popular models are developed by Capes and Danckwerts Solving a problem with precision and certainty using conventional computing techniques has a serious drawback of associated cost. However, in practical situations, we are often interested in a low-cost ‘good’ solution rather than a costly ‘optimum’ one. Soft computing provides low-cost, low-precision, reasonable solutions by leveraging the tolerance for uncertainty, approximate reasoning, imprecision, and partial truth. It is a consortium of methodologies that works synergistically and provides in one form or another flexible information processing capabilities for handling real life ambiguous situations Behzadi and others Rantanen et al. ANNs are considered as universal function approximators The paper is organized in five sections. The description of the problem has been given in Section Modelling a process imparts certain benefits such as estimation of actual output of the process, performance enhancement by identifying the critical input parameters, simulation, etc. There are two popular modelling approaches available in literature of wet pelletization – mechanistic and empirical Wet pelletization is the process of producing pellets by rotating a mixture of water and material into a pelletizer. Solid fines, in the presence of liquid, collide with other particles and grow subsequently to form coarser aggregates under the influence of surface tension effect of liquid and rotatory motion of pelletizer       Some measures, to estimate the percentage of desired size pellets and their quality, are outlined in the following:     In the present study, moisture content, inclination, disc speed and pelletization time are taken as operating parameters and their effects on D50 and drop number are estimated. MLP rely on quantity and quality of training set for producing acceptable approximations. Since data obtained from laboratory experiments was insufficient, concept of random population generation of genetic algorithm (GA) is exploited to serve the purpose. First, there was need to identify mathematical relationships between input parameters and pellet properties that could be supplied as fitness function to GA. Multiple regression is a suitable option to develop the relationships using laboratory generated data and the same has been employed in the present study. A comprehensive diagram of the adopted methodology is presented in Regression exploits the given data samples consisting of dependent and independent variables and tries to discover their associations in the form of mathematical equations Let us assume that there are A power equation is then used to estimate a dependent variable Values of Algorithm for multiple regression Define matrix Take logarithm of Add one column of 1′s as first column in Taking a new matrix Compute Take antilogarithm of first element of One noteworthy aspect is that various linear and non-linear regression models were considered before finalizing power model because it outperformed other tested models in fitting original dataset, i.e., the selected model was closer to laboratory generated data in comparison to other models and thereby, the consistency of new dataset was preserved. GA is a population based optimization method The first step is to drive the relationships between pellet properties and input parameters that could be used as objective functions of GA. Multiple regression (Algorithm 1) is used for this purpose and established relationships are mentioned later in Section To run GA for a given fitness function, range of different input parameters must be decided first. For the first set experiments, range of input variables is described in Once the ranges of various operating conditions are available, the next step is to encode the potential solutions. Binary encoding has been used for this task and chromosome length was taken as 15. GA was run for 10 generations with population size as 20, crossover probability as 0.8 and mutation probability as 0.01. Each iteration of GA generates a new population of solutions. In this step, some chromosomes are selected randomly from each child population. Since child populations usually have more than one instances of same chromosome, there is a possibility that identical chromosomes are selected. Therefore, duplicate solutions are carefully eliminated to avoid redundancy in the synthetic dataset. The last step is to convert the chosen chromosomes into corresponding real values. We would like to emphasize on the point that GA has not been used to produce optimum solution. The primary goal was to select chromosomes from various generations, so that they can be treated as replacement of original data. The agreement between synthetic and original dataset was maintained by adopting a regression model which was closest to the original points as mentioned is Section Network was set up with the three parameters as the input and particular property as the output. In other words, the input layer consisted of three neurons, while the output layer had one. Between the two layers, there was another hidden layer with suitable number of neurons. Out of 100 data sets generated using GA, network was trained with 70 data sets and 30 sets were utilized for cross-validation. The original data sets were employed for testing purpose. Neurons in the hidden layer, and learning rate were decided by repeatedly running MLPs on available data and adjusting them based on their estimation errors.    To obtain an MLP with better approximation power and generalization capabilities, several possibilities were considered in this study. Each model was tested for 100, 200, 500, and 1,000 learning cycles. Furthermore, backpropagation algorithm, with learning rate values as 0.01, 0.03, 0.1 and 0.3 was used before finally setting it to 0.1. Two set of experiments have been conducted for this study. In the first set of experiment, limestone was used with a drum pelletizer while in the second, manganese concentrate has been pelletized in a disc pelletizer. Limestone samples from three benches of Nandini mine, India, each of 1000 Experiments were carried out in a drum pelletizer of a diameter of 11.5 Manganese concentrate, prepared through magnetic separation, was stage crushed and ground to produce 100% passing 150 For this experiment, feed samples of 1 Using the generated datasets for both materials, regression parameters were computed by obeying Algorithm 1 and the same are listed in 1st set of experiments: 2nd set of experiments: (11) SOM is a powerful tool to demonstrate correlation between input space of high-dimensional data From lesser moisture content results in lesser D50 as corresponding maps have blue color in the same regions. for higher D50 drum inclination should be less angled. mean drop number was higher when drum inclination was more. coarser D50 was achieved when moisture is 14%, pelletization time is 20 In the second experiment, speed and moisture were the primary factors that influenced the pellet properties as exhibited by their feature maps in Based on color distribution of maps, several other inferences could also be drawn as below: D50 was higher when speed was high and lesser when speed was low. mean drop number depends more on speed and inclination of the pelletizer and was higher when speed and inclination were high. coarser D50 was achieved when moisture was 12%, speed was 40 As mentioned earlier, two set of experiments were carried out, with each having two attributes to be estimated. Firstly, sensitivity analysis was performed to examine the contribution of a process parameter in approximating pellet size and strength. Learning curves were also drawn for neural networks, associated with each attribute to ascertain their performance when number of examples were increased. Estimation results using MLP have been discussed in the following: To carry out the analysis, available data was supplied to MLP with one missing parameter while estimating a particular attribute and corresponding network error was recorded. The same procedure was repeated for each input parameter. When a significant parameter was absent, estimation error was relatively high. However, if less important parameter was removed, increment in error was negligible. The results of this study are illustrated in Effect of input parameters towards approximation of D50 for first set of experiments is depicted in Disc speed is taken as the third input parameter than pelletization time in second experiment. In this experiment, disc speed outperformed moisture content marginally in approximating both the characteristics, as estimation error was more when disc speed was withdrawn. However, In neural networks, learning curves are constructed to examine their performance in predicting output values as the number of data set increases. They are advantageous in deciding whether a particular neural network architecture is suffering from the problem of underfitting or overfitting and if it does, corrective measures can be taken. Learning curves have been presented for first and second experiment in Learning curves provide us a measure to select an appropriate neural network architecture by graphically representing the performance or the error of network as data samples increase. If approximation error goes high with increase in training examples, it means network is suffering from underfitting problem. Overfitting by neural network can be identified in case if estimation error of crossvalidation data sets does not reduce significantly with the increment in supplied data sets. Learning curves are also important in determining number of hidden layers and number of neurons in each hidden layer for a particular network architecture. Initially, for both experiments, estimation error for training data set was negligible as depicted in Identifying the relationships between process variables and pellet properties are very important while modelling the pelletization process. It helps in estimating the quantity and quality of produced granules for a particular set of operating conditions. MLP was used for this purpose as it estimates trends and patterns by learning from historical data without deriving any mathematical relationship between variables. Results of estimated green pellet properties using MLP have been summarized for first and second experiment in In first set of experiment, 18 standard experimental runs were conducted for three input parameters and corresponding values of D50 and mean drop number were recorded. Three process variables were analyzed using full factorial design of experiment, each with three levels, to produce 27 experimental results for second experiment and these results were then used to estimate pellet properties. 1, 2 and 3 values in both tables corresponding to moisture content, inclination, pelletization time and disc speed denote their levels. The actual values of D50 and mean drop number through laboratory experiment, and corresponding values obtained from MLPs are also presented in tables for comparison. For better and instant comparative study, actual and estimated pellet attributes are presented graphically in Such MLP model can extrapolate for a given set of operating conditions as it estimates D50 and mean drop number with good accuracy. So good estimation accuracy demonstrated by plots and table suggests that MLP can be used as a useful tool to model complex processes like pelletization. Nadeem et al. The results demonstrated that MLP estimated D50 and % yield of +9.42 The focus of present study was to analyze the characteristics of wet pellet under varied operating conditions using ANN. Some major findings of present study are: GA is commonly used technique for producing approximate solutions of an optimization problem, however, it can be useful in synthetic data generation as well. Moisture content and disc speed were identified as the most significant input parameters by sensitivity analysis for determining D50. For higher D50 inclination should be less angled. Inclination is a decisive factor that governs the strength of wet pellets as mean drop number was affected considerably, compared to other attributes. Pelletization time is identified as more important factor than inclination while estimating D50. ANN based method is proved a reliable approximation and analytical tool in identifying wet pellet characteristics under various operating conditions. We applied various techniques to analyze and estimate pellet properties under the influence of several process variables based on laboratory data but same method may be suitable for industrial data as well. SOM can produce better visualization of high-dimensional data thus leading to improved process analysis and as supervised ANN such as MLP can offer a fairly accurate estimate of pellet characteristics under varying process parameters. Certainly, SOM and MLP, together, can contribute immensely in enhanced understanding of the process under study. They can also be exploited for simulation of continuous pelletization process for future studies. Data generation through algorithms which are similar to GA, such as particle swarm optimization and others, could also be attempted. A more elaborated sensitivity analysis of process parameters could be carried out in future works since apart from individual effect, determining the accurate interaction among variables is of enormous help for pellet plant operators.