One mononuclear and two binuclear HgII complexes have been synthesized and characterized by X-ray diffraction, ATR IR and Hirshfeld surface analysis. Single-crystal X-ray diffraction showed that binuclear compounds are centrosymmetric and isostructural. All complexes form bifurcated intermolecular N–H⋯O hydrogen bonds that contribute to a formation of the centrosymmetric dimers. In binuclear complexes, sulfur atoms of thiourea ligands take the bridging role. These are the first examples of such compounds with mercury. In binuclear complexes of group 12 elements, halogens are usually the bridging atoms. The geometries of binuclear complexes are highly distorted with alarmingly low value of 
                        
                           
                              
                                 τ
                              
                              
                                 4
                              
                              
                                 ′
                              
                           
                        
                      parameter suggesting presence of additional donor that turned out to be phenyl ring (Hg⋯π interaction). The crystal structures are stabilized by additional noncovalent interactions, including halogen bonding which leads to the formation of chains. The differences and similarities of these complexes indicate that halogen ions have a great impact on the structures. Presented complexes comprise unique interactions between mercury-bonded halogen atoms and neighboring oxygen atoms of carbonyl groups (Hg–(Cl, Br, I)⋯OC contacts).Acylthioureas possess both carbonyl and thiocarbonyl groups within one molecule. They readily form complexes with soft Lewis acids such as copper, gold, and mercury ions Over the past few decades, benzoylthioureas and their complexes have received substantial attention not only due to their coordination ability, but also due to their antibacterial Complexes of aroylthioureas with heavy metals are isolated mainly as mono- or binuclear 1-Benzoyl-3-(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)thiourea (L) was prepared as described in literature Each product was collected from the reaction liquor in form of several monocrystals so the reaction yield was not determined. Obtained crystals were highly soluble in tetrahydrofuran, well soluble in acetone and chloroform, quite soluble in methanol and ethanol, but insoluble in diethyl ether, toluene, 2-propanol and water. For For For X-ray analyses were carried out using KUMA KM4CCD or STOE IPDS instruments. KUMA: Diffraction data were recorded at 293(2) STOE: Diffraction intensity data were collected on an IPDS 2 T dual-beam diffractometer (STOE & Cie GmbH) at 120.0(2) K with Mo The structures were solved by direct methods and refined anisotropically using the program packages The solid state IR spectra were measured using Nicolet iS50 FT-IR spectrometer equipped with the Specac Quest single-reflection diamond attenuated total reflectance (ATR) accessory controlled by Omnic computer software in range 4000–400 cm Melting points were measured on SMP30 (Stuart) and were uncorrected. In the description of the coordination polyhedra we have used Okuniewski’s Isostructurality of Hydrogen bonds motifs are described using Etter’s graph-set notation Hirshfeld surfaces and 2D fingerprints were calculated using the CrystalExplorer package ver. 3.1. Compound Ligands are arranged in such a way that both of them take part in bifurcated hydrogen bonds (inter- and intramolecular) resulting in the formation of chains propagating in [0 In the structure of No classical stacking interactions are present in this structure, however The complexes For highly distorted tetrahedral geometries, when In structure Isostructurality parameters for We have analyzed structures of mercury complexes with acylthioureas among entries deposited into the CSD v. The crystal cohesion of the complexes is ensured by intermolecular N–H⋯O hydrogen bonds, X⋯O In all structures ligand molecules adopt most abundant S-type conformation In The Hirshfeld surface (HS) of compound Due to their similarity, HS of The differences of interaction in these two structures are shown in the diagrams based on 2D Hirshfeld surface fingerprint decomposition ( Within presented work, we have synthesized and characterized three new HgX The study shows that halogen type have a significant influence on the final structure of complex. At the first glance, complexes CCDC 1579759, 1579758, 1579760 contains the supplementary crystallographic data for