Much is known regarding the epidemiology of clavicle fractures, particularly those of the middle-third and distal clavicle. Medial clavicle fractures are uncommon, and as a result, there is little information available. The purpose of this study is to review retrospectively a case series of medial clavicle fractures treated at a tertiary trauma center. All clavicle fractures treated at our institution over a 5-year period were reviewed by use of all available radiographic studies and medical records. These data were evaluated with respect to several epidemiologic points, including mechanism of injury, associated injuries, fracture orientation, fracture displacement, treatment, and associated injuries. Follow-up data were gathered in 32 of 44 available patients with chart review and telephone survey. We evaluated 57 medial fractures in 55 patients. Patients were typically men in the fifth decade injured as a result of vehicular trauma. Fractures were occasionally missed on chest radiographs but were always identifiable by computed tomography scan. Injuries were most often closed and without neurovascular injury. However, patients almost always had multisystem trauma. Operative treatment was rarely performed, and patients typically had little or no pain at the time of follow-up. Finally, it was found that 11 patients died within 1 month of their injuries, indicating that 20% (11/55) of patients with medial clavicle fractures died as a result of the trauma associated with their injury. Medial clavicle fractures remain a relatively uncommon injury compared with other clavicular fractures. However, they typically are accompanied by significant multisystem trauma and have a high associated mortality rate.Medial clavicle fractures have classically been described as uncommon, comprising less than 5% of all clavicle fractures. Institutional review board approval was obtained to evaluate the medical records and radiographic studies of all patients diagnosed with clavicle fractures by All available films were used to identify the location of all fractures. Most films were available on our institution’s computerized digital film system. Regarding plain radiographs, fractures were typically visualized on chest radiographs or shoulder films (or both). Dedicated clavicle films were occasionally ordered, but this was fairly uncommon. All multisystem trauma patients at our institution undergo a computed tomography (CT) scan of the head, chest, abdomen, and pelvis with sagittal and coronal reconstructions of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spines. This traumagram includes the clavicles, making it a useful tool for identifying clavicle fractures as well. Fractures were classified based on the system of Allman, After initial classification, we reviewed the films of those patients found to have group III fractures. In an effort to identify an association between fracture pattern and outcome, fractures were classified by pattern and displacement. Fracture pattern was classified as transverse, oblique intraarticular, oblique extraarticular, comminuted, or avulsion. Fracture displacement was classified as minimally displaced (<2 mm of fragment separation), moderately displaced (2-10 mm), or severely displaced (>10 mm). Once film review was completed, the medical records of group III fractures were analyzed. All records were available on our institution’s computerized patient file system. The charts were analyzed for several variables, including sex, age, right versus left side, mechanism of injury, open versus closed injury, neurovascular injury, multisystem trauma and associated injuries, method of diagnosis, treatment, and associated death. Few clinical or radiographic follow-up data were available in this series. Because there were 11 deaths, 44 patients were available for follow-up. We reviewed all charts for clinical outcomes and radiographic union. We then attempted to contact the remaining patients by telephone to gather additional follow-up data. Patients were questioned regarding their pain (none, mild, moderate, or severe) and whether they had undergone any operative treatment of their medial clavicle fractures. We identified 614 clavicle fractures in 593 patients. Of these 614, 389 (63.3%) were isolated fractures of the middle third and 132 (21.5%) were isolated fractures of the distal third. Ten patients had bilateral middle-third fractures, and four had bilateral distal-third fractures. Three patients sustained segmental fractures of the distal and middle thirds of the same clavicle. We identified 57 fractures of the medial third of the clavicle in 55 patients. Of the patients, 51 had isolated fractures not involving other parts of the clavicle, 2 had bilateral medial fractures, and 2 had segmental fractures that involved the medial third. These data are summarized in Analysis of our epidemiologic data revealed that middle-aged men were the most commonly affected demographic. Of the 55 patients, 44 were men (80%) and 11 were women (20%). The mean patient age was 46.3 years, although there was a wide range, with patients aged between 19 and 88 years being affected. Of the patients, 23 had right-sided fractures (42%) and 32 had left-sided injuries (58%). No data on hand dominance of the affected patients were available. We evaluated the mechanisms of injury ( Of the 29 patients involved in MVAs, 19 were the drivers. In this group, 10 fractures involved the left side and 9 involved the right side. Of the drivers, 8 were restrained, sustaining 6 left-sided and 2 right-sided fractures, and 10 were unrestrained, sustaining 4 left-sided and 6 right-sided injuries. In the remaining patient, who had a right-sided fracture, no documentation regarding restraint could be found. These injuries were typically found in multisystem trauma, were usually closed, and were without neurovascular injury. Multisystem trauma was defined as the patient having injuries other than isolated chest trauma. On the basis of this definition, 90% of patients (50/55) had multisystem trauma. Of these patients, 6 had open medial clavicle fractures (11% [6/55]) whereas the remaining 49 were closed (89% [49/55]). There was 1 vascular injury noted, which was a subclavian vein perforation from a gunshot wound. There were no neurologic injuries. The method of diagnosis was also assessed. Fractures were reviewed by use of the available plain films and CT scans. Of the 55 patients, 45 (82%) underwent traumagram imaging as described previously, with other films ordered as deemed appropriate. The medial clavicle fractures of 31 patients (56%) were seen on both radiographs and CT scans, whereas 10 (18%) had fractures visualized on plain films but no CT scan was obtained. The fractures of 2 patients were seen on CT scan, but no plain films were initially obtained. Finally, 12 patients (22%) had fractures that were seen only on CT scan and were not visualized on plain radiographs ( Review of patient medical records enabled us to catalog the associated injuries sustained by those patients with medial clavicle fractures ( We classified fractures in two ways: one system based on fracture pattern ( We also categorized fractures based on the amount of displacement. Fractures were classified as minimally displaced if there was less than 2 mm between fracture fragments. Of the 57 fractures, 25 (44%) met this criterion. Moderately displaced fractures were those with 2 to 10 mm of gapping between fragments. Of the fractures, 13 (23%) fell into this group. Finally, those fractures with more than 10 mm between fragments were classified as severely displaced. Of the fractures, 19 (33%) were classified as such. We attempted to correlate fracture orientation and amount of displacement with outcome, specifically the associated mortality rate. In the 11 patients who died within 1 month of their initial injury, there were 13 medial clavicle fractures. Of these, 9 were transverse, 1 was oblique, and 3 were comminuted. Nine were minimally displaced. There were 2 moderately displaced and 2 severely displaced fractures. Both patients with bilateral medial fractures and both patients with segmental fractures that involved the medial third died. We reviewed the treatment strategies used for these fractures. Of the 55 patients, 51 (93%) were treated nonoperatively with or without immobilization or with physical therapy (or both). None of the closed fractures was treated operatively. One patient who had an open medial clavicle fracture in addition to an ipsilateral acromioclavicular disruption and scapulothoracic dissociation underwent primary irrigation and debridement with open reduction–internal fixation of the medial clavicle fracture. This patient unfortunately progressed to a nonunion, and an attempted revision has failed. Two patients who had gunshot wounds underwent proximal clavicle resection as part of their treatment. No fixation was performed. Finally, 1 patient who had an impaling injury in an MVA with a subsequent open fracture underwent serial irrigation and debridements without internal fixation. The remaining 2 open injuries were treated nonoperatively. Thus, the primary indication for operative treatment in this series was the presence of an open medial clavicle fracture. Clinical follow-up was available in 11 of 44 patients, and radiographic follow-up was available in only 9. An additional 21 patients were contacted by telephone. Therefore, 32 of the available 44 patients (73%) had follow-up data at a mean of 15.5 months (range, 1-66 months) after injury. Of these 32 patients, 15 (47%) had no pain, 8 (25%) had mild pain, 7 (22%) had moderate pain, and 2 (6%) classified their pain as severe. In addition, 9% of patients (3/32) available for follow-up had undergone surgery for the medial clavicle fractures. None underwent any additional operative intervention at another institution. Follow-up radiographs were available for 10 patients in this group. At 1 to 2 months of follow-up, 6 had radiographic evidence of healing and 3 were not healed. Radiographic nonunion was identified in 1 patient. Fractures of the medial third of the clavicle are thought to be rare. Robinson Our analysis of the epidemiologic factors seems to be consistent with those in the literature. We found a male predominance, which does not differ significantly from the reported values of clavicle fractures in general. We found a large tendency toward vehicular trauma as the mechanism for medial clavicle fractures. Indeed, 84% of patients were injured in this manner. MVAs are a known cause of clavicle fractures, Patients who sustained medial clavicle fractures in this series almost always had multisystem trauma, and their clavicle fractures were usually closed injuries. We suspect that the reason for the predominance of multisystem trauma in these fractures is likely 2-fold. First, our institution is a level I trauma center with a large catchment area that includes 4 states. As such, our patient population includes many seriously injured patients. Furthermore, blunt trauma is much more commonly seen than penetrating trauma at our institution, which is likely reflected in the paucity of open injuries. Second, the high number and variety of associated injuries suggest that medial clavicle fractures are products of a high-energy mechanism, with accompanying multiple traumatic injuries. The majority of fractures were seen on both plain radiographs and CT scans. Of 57 fractures, 41 were visible on radiographs. However, a substantial number of fractures (22%) were seen only on CT scans. Combining these data with the increased incidence of medial-third clavicle fractures reported in this study suggests that these fractures may have been historically underappreciated. Because dedicated clavicle radiographs were not routinely obtained, we cannot comment on the utility of these views. However, chest radiographs may not be adequate to identify these injuries, and CT scans or perhaps dedicated views should be obtained when clinical suspicion exists. Multiple associated injuries were seen in these 55 patients with medial-third clavicle fractures. Chest trauma was certainly the most common, with a high rate of associated rib fractures, hemopneumothorax, and pulmonary contusion with or without associated respiratory failure. We believe that this reflects the high-energy chest trauma involved in producing medial clavicle fractures. Head and facial injuries were also commonly seen, as were injuries to the viscera, cervical spine, and extremities, again suggesting the high-energy nature of these injuries. Furthermore, 20% of patients with medial clavicle fractures died as a result of their injuries, reflecting the association of medial-third clavicle fractures with severe, life-threatening injuries in these patients subjected to high-energy mechanisms. Therefore, we suggest that physicians who provide initial treatment of patients with medial clavicle fractures and high-energy trauma should diligently assess them using CT of the head, chest, abdomen, and pelvis, as well as appropriate skeletal imaging, to search for associated serious injuries. In this series, treatment of these fractures was typically nonoperative, with the exception of open fractures. The one fracture that underwent open reduction–internal fixation progressed to nonunion, but no recommendations can be drawn from these data without more comprehensive follow-up data. Neither fracture comminution nor the amount of displacement correlated with associated death, because the majority of patients who died had transverse or minimally displaced fractures. However, both patients with bilateral medial clavicle fractures died, as did both patients with segmental fractures that involved the medial third. This again suggests that, although medial clavicle fractures themselves are not the instruments of a patient’s demise, the high-energy nature of these injuries is more likely the cause. The main limitation of this study is the lack of comprehensive postinjury follow-up. Most patients who survived had their care transferred closer to home and did not receive continuing care at our institution. However, by combining the available clinical follow-up with our attempts at contacting the remaining patients by telephone, we gathered follow-up data on 32 of the available 44 patients. Of these patients, 47% (15/32) had no pain, 25% (8/32) had mild pain, 22% (7/32) had moderate pain, and 6% (2/32) had severe pain at a mean follow-up of 15.5 months. Although our data seem to indicate that patients have little continuing pain from these injuries, a prospective study would be useful to gather more conclusive follow-up data. Follow-up radiography was scarce in this study, because only 10 patients had films available from their return visits, which were typically 1 to 2 months after discharge. Six had radiographic evidence of healing, and three were not healed. Radiographic nonunion was only identified in 1 patient. With the limited radiographic follow-up available, fracture pattern and displacement could not predict nonunion in this series. In summary, fractures of the medial third of the clavicle typically involve multisystem trauma and have a high associated mortality rate because of the high-energy mechanisms involved. In addition, injuries to the thorax, face, head, cervical spine, viscera, and extremities are common. Open injuries and damage to the neurovascular structures are uncommon. These injuries remain uncommon compared with fractures of the midshaft and distal clavicle, yet the incidence in this series (9.3%) is higher than that previously reported in the literature, which may reflect improved diagnostic accuracy when these fractures are identified by CT as opposed to plain radiographs.