We present a numerical method for estimating the stiffness-to-porosity relationships for evolving microstructures of Fontainebleau sandstone. The proposed study is linked to geological storage of CO2 and focuses on long-term and far field conditions, when the progressive degradation of the porous matrix can be assumed to be homogeneous at the sample scale. The method is based on microstructure sampling with respect to morphological descriptors extracted from microtomography. First, an efficient method of generation of accurate numerical media is proposed. The method is based on grain deposit, compaction and diagenesis and allows to reproduce user-defined morphological parameters. Second, two simple numerical models that mimic chemical degradation of porous aquifers are presented. Effective elastic properties are estimated within the framework of periodic homogenization and finite element approach. A fixed-point method on a self-consisted outer layer allows to consider non-periodic representative volume elements. Accurate predictions of elastic properties over a wide range of porosity are obtained. The overall evolutions of elastic behaviour due to the increase of porosity are in excellent agreement both, with experimental data and the results obtained by Arns et al.
                        1
                     .Geological storage of CO Chemo-mechanical coupling problem has been intensively studied in recent years, following pioneering works on concrete, mortar or cement paste. Obtained results confirm a general material weakening during chemical degradation (loss of strength and stiffness). Experimental studies considering CO The aim of this paper is to estimate evolution of elastic properties of saline aquifer, which is subjected to progressive chemical degradation due to CO The paper is organised as follows. Sandstone is a type of sedimentary rock composed of sand-sized grains of minerals. Rock formations that are primarily composed of sandstone usually allow percolation of water or other fluids and are enough porous to store large quantities of them, making them valuable aquifers or petroleum reservoirs. The investigated microstructure of Fontainebleau sandstone, obtained by microtomography, is presented in Basic characteristics of microstructure e.g. porosity, specific surface, number of pores etc. are quantified by global measures. Here we focus on pore volume fraction (porosity). The porosity of the investigated microstructure of Fontainebleau sandstone is equal to The granulomentry of a given phase can be estimated by mathematical morphology. Covariance function has been firstly introduced by Matheron For a given set (phase)  Mainly there are two different kinds of porosities, The main morphological characteristics of microstructure of sandstone may be presented as follows: overall porosity The aim is to reconstruct the sample, in a simple and efficient way, by implementing some basic stages inspired by natural formation process of sandstone. Following Bake and Øren, Regarding the granulometry of sandstone, which gives only a rough approximation of real granulometry ( Corresponding samples present loose packing of rigid spheres. During compaction, friction coefficient is set to zero, to facilitate rearrangements of the grains. This step is coupled with the next one - diagenesis. Because of its random nature, diagenesis may have a significant influence on the isotropy of the system. Therefore, in order to reduce that effect we decided to apply a compaction step. In the paper we investigate three different scenarii: triaxial compaction, sedimentation (compaction under gravity) and no compaction. In general, aim of diagenesis is to control porosity of a specimen by increasing radii of grains. In order to avoid border effects and regular packing of spheres, porosity is measured in a window (256×256 In order to chose the appropriate initial radius of the grain deposit and scenario of compaction, we analyse covariance functions presented in To dispel any doubts concerning the choice of the scenario of compaction, we present inhere a brief analysis of anisotropy of contacts. Within the framework of contact dynamic, it is convenient to use fabric tensor Finally, to generate the equivalent microstructures, we have chosen In  Binarized geometry of natural rock gives only approximation of real connectivity. Therefore, we investigate two different scenarii of dissolution. The proposed numerical model of dissolution is based on morphological dilation of the porous phase using cubic structuring element. The choice of a 3D isotropic structuring element  Dissolution processes, described by Eqs. Analysing characteristic size One of the tools that allows us to obtain effective properties is the so-called periodic homogenization. In this work we consider periodic boundary conditions prescribed on RVE cell within strain approach framework. When desired convergence is achieved, effective stiffness tensors are projected on the classical isotropy basis in order to extract bulk A microstructure defined by a binary image is already discretized. A regular cubic mesh can thus be constructed based on appropriated voxel: the larger the number of voxels, the finer the mesh. Let The elastic properties of the solid phase are taken form Mavko et al. The influence of We perform computations for last degraded states of sandstone geometry of each dissolution scenario. Numerical results are obtained for entire sample of size 256×256×256 Aforementioned methodology is applied for each considered sample at different dissolved states. For this purpose we investigate entire geometry of sandstone and degraded samples. Following resolutions M (defined in At the first sight, evolution of elastic properties as a function of porosity [ Although different mechanism responsible for porosity variation, our results and those presented by Arns et al. In This work presents an efficient and simple method to generated equivalent microstructures of heterogeneous media, that takes into account chosen morphological properties and is inspired by natural process of the formation of sandstone. To estimate equivalent constitutive behaviour, we have also presented a solution using additional layer associated with a fixed point method that enables to impose periodic boundary conditions on non-periodic geometries. A complete methodology to estimate evolution of mechanical behaviour from generated samples morphologically equivalent to microtomographies was presented. Modelling of dissolution phenomenon and the final results shows that a sophisticated modelling of the dissolution process will not affect significantly the results. We are specially grateful to Dr Philippe Gouze, who provided the CT image of Fontainebleau sandstone microstructure.