In this work, highly accessible cellulose microfibers produced from kraft wood pulp by a novel method based on a single mechanical treatment with a wet stirred media mill were characterized. The high mechanical stress of milling resulted in the complete disintegration of the fiber cell wall and produced cellulose microfibers with a length of below 50μm and diameter ranging from a few hundred nanometers to 1μm after only 5min of milling. The noticeable increase in BET (Brunauer, Emmett, Teller-method) surface area from the initial value of 2.2m2/g to 25–60m2/g and decrease in crystallinity index from 65% to 20–30% during milling (5–60min) indicated that microfibers possessed a highly accessible surface area and a large number of amorphous sites. This was also supported by the significantly increased reactivity of the microfibers compared to the reference pulp in the periodate oxidation reaction of cellulose to dialdehyde cellulose.The ongoing global trend to promote the production and usage of sustainable and biodegradable materials from natural resources as well as the saturation of traditional cellulose pulp markets in Western Europe and the USA have increased interest towards novel, high-value cellulose-based products. Cellulose micro- and nanofibers, which cover a variety of particles from microfibers and microfibrils to nano-sized whiskers, are considered to be amongst the new components with the highest potential for this purpose. The feasibility of these minuscule cellulose components with a high aspect ratio and surface area is based on their unique mechanical and chemical properties such as superior strength ( So far, the main efforts regarding cellulose micro- and nanofibers have focused on the generation of particles with a highly crystalline structure having optimized strength properties for use as reinforcing agents of composite materials ( Most of the methods presented for the production of intact and highly crystalline cellulose particles involve several processing steps including chemical ( Wet stirred media mills, which are able to comminute materials into smaller sizes than most dry mills ( The aim of this paper was to characterize micronized cellulose particles produced by a novel method based on laboratory-scale wet stirred pearl milling of kraft wood pulp. In addition, the chemical accessibility of the micronized cellulose was evaluated by regioselective oxidation of microparticles to dialdehyde cellulose (DAC) during milling. Laser diffractometry, BET (Brunauer, Emmett, Teller-method) surface area determination, specific volume measurement, and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) were used to measure the size and morphology of the micronized samples. The mechanochemistry of the milled particles, i.e. the chemical properties of mechanically stressed cellulose, was evaluated in terms of the average degree of polymerization (DP), crystallinity index (CrI), and total anionic charge. Bleached birch ( Sodium (meta)periodate (Sigma–Aldrich, p.a. grade) was used as an oxidation agent for the regioselective oxidation of cellulose to 2,3-dialdehyde cellulose during milling to characterize the reactivity and chemical accessibility of the micronized samples. A horizontal agitated laboratory pearl mill (Hosokawa Alpine AHM 90) was used for wet micronization of pulp. The mill consisted of a polyurethane covered milling chamber (1.1 The chemical accessibility and reactivity of the micronized cellulose were evaluated by oxidizing cellulose to 2,3-dialdehyde cellulose during milling. The oxidation agent (2.7 The average particle size of the milled pulp samples was determined with a laser diffractometer (Beckman Coulter LS 13 The specific surface areas were measured using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method based on N Analytical centrifugation (LUMiFuge, L.U.M. GmbH, Germany) was used to measure the specific volumes of the samples. The centrifuge measures light transmission at 800 FESEM (Zeiss ULTRA plus) images were taken from freeze-dried and sputter coated (Pd) sample drops placed on a glass microscope slide. The accelerating voltage during imaging was 5 The average degree of polymerization (DP) of cellulose in the untreated and milled samples was evaluated from the limiting viscosity, measured in cupriethylenediamine (CED) solution according to the ISO 5351 standard. The limiting viscosity values were converted to DP using Eq. The crystallinity of the cellulose was analyzed by wide angle X-ray diffractometry (WAXD). Measurements were conducted with a Siemens D5000 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation ( The total anionic charge of the samples was measured by the methylene blue adsorption method ( The dialdehyde content of the oxidized celluloses was determined by an oxime reaction ( The mean and cumulative volume statistical particle sizes, in terms of the equivalent sphere diameter of micronized particles given by a laser diffractometer, are shown in The surface areas of the micronized samples and original pulp given by BET analysis are shown in A novel method based on analytical centrifugation was used to measure the specific volumes of the micronized samples. Results with good repeatability were obtained by extrapolating specific volume values measured with various centrifugal forces to normal gravity. Specific volume decreased in a similar way to the mean particle size, showing a constant value after 20–45 According to FESEM imaging, wet stirred media milling completely disintegrated the original fiber structure and produced micro-sized particles with a relatively high aspect ratio. The microfibers produced by wet milling were found to have quite a frayed surface structure. This is probably related to the attachment of minuscule particles to the surfaces during sample pretreatment, use of dried pulp material and the disintegration mechanism of wet stirred media milling. In stirred media mills, comminution is based mainly on the continuous impact and attrition effects of grinding media that cause local stresses and can result in a frayed surface structure. For example, comminution in dry disintegration methods is in many cases caused by abrasion and the cutting effects of tangential forces, resulting in the tearing of smoother fibrillar particles from the matrix. The influence of wet milling on the mechanochemistry of micronized particles was characterized in terms of the degree of polymerization, crystallinity index, and the total anionic charge of cellulose. Mechanical stress causes changes in both bond length and in the angles of hydrogen bonded rigid cellulose molecules while distorting the mutual packing of polymeric chains, which leads to a decrease in crystal ordering. The DPs of the samples, calculated from the limiting viscosity values measured in cupriethylenediamine (CED) solution, decreased asymptotically as a function of milling time, as shown in The effect of wet milling on the crystal structure of cellulose measured by WAXD is shown in The crystallinity in terms of the crystalline index (CrI) decreased rapidly after 5 The total charges of original fibers and milled samples measured by the methylene blue adsorption method from samples which were converted to sodium form are presented in To evaluate the chemical accessibility and reactivity of the micronized celluloses samples, they were oxidized to 2,3-dialdehyde cellulose during milling. Highly accessible cellulose microfibers were produced from kraft wood pulp by a novel method based on a single mechanical treatment with a wet stirred media mill. The method resulted in microfibers with a length of below 50 This work was carried out in the Future Biorefinery Programme of Forestcluster Ltd. Ms. Katja Kilpimaa is gratefully acknowledged for her kind assistance in FESEM imaging while thanks also go to VTT Espoo for their pulp analysis.