Three models were used to describe the extraction of essential oils from oregano bracts using compressed carbon dioxide. They were developed on the basis of a plate-like geometry of the particles and were tested experimentally using various bract pre-treatments, pressures, temperatures and solvent flow rates. The two particle phase derived models applied, the Single Plate model (SP model) and the Simple Single Plate model (SSP model), differ only by the allowance or not for a film coefficient (k
                     f) and have as the only adjustable parameter the matrix diffusivity (D
                     m). The third model, the Fluid Phase/Simple Single Plate model (FP/SSP model), considers both the particle mass balance and a detailed description of the fluid mass balance. In addition to the matrix diffusivity the FP/SSP model may require the adjustment of the fraction of oil leached by the solvent during the pressurisation procedure (f
                     0). All models gave a good fit to the experimental data though the FP/SSP model gave the best fit. However, the matrix diffusivities found correlated very poorly with the estimated diffusivity of essential oils in carbon dioxide (D
                     12), which indicates a complex intraparticle transport.area of the extraction bed (m as defined in projected area of the plate like particles (bracts) (m as defined in concentration of oil in the fluid phase (kg m concentration of oil in the particle phase (kg m axial dispersion coefficient (m diffusion coefficient of the oil within the matrix (m extraction degree (%) mass flow rate of solvent (kg s fraction of oil initially dissolved in the fluid phase as defined in film coefficient (m s length of the extraction bed (m) mass of oil extracted from the bed (kg) integer extraction time (s) interstitial velocity of the fluid phase (m s superficial velocity of the fluid phase (m s volume of particles within the bed (m co-ordinate of the particle (m) axial co-ordinate of the bed (m) positive roots of the implicit equation thickness of the plate like particles (bracts) (m) porosity of the bed initial ( after infinite time ( The extraction of essential oils with compressed carbon dioxide is a modern technique that have shown, in particular applications, significant advantages over more conventional methods such as steam distillation and liquid solvent extraction. The gentle nature of the process allied to the relatively high solubility of the aromatic compounds in compressed carbon dioxide yields a high quality extract at a competitive cost. Among the main process parameters that affect the extraction are the pre-treatment of the herbaceous matrices, the extraction pressure and temperature and the solvent flow rate. The ability to predict the course of the extraction process, knowing the process parameters, is a powerful tool in both design and optimisation of a carbon dioxide industrial plant. Mathematical modelling is probably the most challenging and informative predicting tool. Generally, the extraction models reported in literature belong to three distinct categories: empirical models, models primarily based on the fluid phase mass balance and models primarily based on the particle phase mass balance. (A review of mathematical models is given by Reverchon In general, the models based primarily on the particle phase mass balance were found more adequate for the extraction of essential oils with compressed carbon dioxide. This is not surprising since, in many cases, the intraparticle transport was found to be the limiting factor of the extraction. Bartle et al In the present work, modelling of the extraction of essential oils from an aromatic herb using compressed carbon dioxide was studied. Oregano ( Extraction tests on oregano bracts were performed over a wide range of experimental conditions. For each test, a 30-g sample of comminuted bracts (or a 15-g sample in the case of intact bracts) was charged to the extractor. The extractor diameter and height was 95 and 45 mm, respectively. The porosity of the bed ( Prior to presenting the theoretical section, the experimental evidence which underlines the development and application of the models is presented. In general, literature reported that the limiting stage when extracting essential oils from aromatic herbs is the intraparticle transport. This arises from the relatively high solubility of essential oil components in compressed CO Most models proposed in literature were developed on the basis of spherical particles, the equivalent diameter being commonly estimated as the weight mean diameter calculated from a sieving process. However, in many cases the particle geometry is closer to a plate. Examples of plate geometry particles are the leaf material of aromatic herbs and flaked matrices. It can be seen from In previous work In the experimental extraction curves two fractions of essential oils could be distinguished. The first fraction, the non-retained oils, was easily extracted in the earlier stages, whereas the last fraction, the highly retained oils, was very slowly extracted at the latter stages of extraction. The fraction of non-retained oils is likely to be related to the fraction of disrupted glands (glandular trichomes) at the extraction stage, whereas the highly retained oils were presumably located within the glands that survived the matrix pre-treatment Despite the experimental evidence that intraparticle resistances primarily limited the extraction rates, the extraction of the oils out of the extractor vessel is also dictated by fluid phase retention. Fluid phase retention is responsible for the discrepancy between the oil extracted from the particles and the oil removed from the extractor. The fluid phase mass balance should therefore be included in the mathematical models if an accurate description of the extraction process is required. Three models are proposed and applied in the present work where the particles were described as plates. The first two models, namely the Simple Single and the Single Plate models, were exclusively based on the particle phase mass balance, and consequently cannot comply with the experimental evidence given in This model, originally proposed by Bartle et al The model assumes that: the extractable oil is initially uniformly distributed within the plate like particles, all particles are, at a given time, at the same extraction stage, intraparticle transport is described by a diffusional process through the thickness of the particles, concentration in the fluid phase is negligible when compared to that in the particle phase, the resistance to mass transport offered by the stagnant film is negligible and, the mass extracted from the bed equals that extracted from the particles (fluid phase mass balance is neglected). The SSP model equation, rewritten in terms of extraction degrees, is given below. In the above equation The SP model was derived from the equations proposed by Wong for the heat loss from an infinite slab to a surrounding medium The FP/SSP model combines the fluid phase mass balance with the SSP model. As mentioned previously, the latter is based on the evidence that intraparticle diffusion controls the extraction rate. Furthermore, the FP/SSP model also accounts for the likely presence of essential oils in the fluid phase at the start of the dynamic extraction. Upon system pressurisation, some of the non-retained oils are likely to be leached by the solvent onto the fluid phase. The FP/SSP model assumes that a fraction the intraparticle transport is described by the SSP model and, axial dispersion, fluid phase density and porosity of the bed are constant along the bed and independent of the extraction time. The modelling equation is given below, where The concentration profile in the fluid phase, In the above equations The leached oil is uniformly distributed in the fluid phase at the start of the extraction. During extraction, the solvent is fed at the bottom of the extractor. These initial and boundary conditions, applied to  In the SSP and SP models the only adjustable parameter was the diffusivity of the essential oils within the matrix, Other model parameters (non-adjustable parameters) were estimated from the experimental results or by correlations proposed in literature. The extraction degree after infinite time ( The best-fit parameters of the extraction models are shown in The FP/SSP model was initially applied to the experimental data with two adjustable parameters (FP/SSP model with The consistency on the best-fit values of The fraction of oil initially dissolved in the fluid phase ( In all experiments on comminuted bracts, the matrix pre-treatment was similar (atmospheric comminution in a commercial blender). The only difference in the pre-treatments occurred in runs 22 and 24 where the exposure period to the blender was, instead of 40, 20 and 60 s, respectively. The effect of particle size (resulting from different periods of exposure to the blender) on the rates and yields of extraction of essential oils was found negligible. Consequently, the fraction of oil readily available to the solvent in these matrices was likely to be similar. On the basis of this evidence and on the consistency of the best-fit values of It should be noted that by fixing The higher values of When comparing the SSP and SP models it can be seen that the latter presents, in general, slightly higher values of matrix diffusivity ( A sample of the comparison between the models and the experimental data is shown in It was also noted, that the inclusion of the axial dispersion coefficient in the FP/SSP model had little effect on both best-fit parameters and quality of the fitting. As a consequence, a first order differential mass balance may be adequate when describing the fluid phase mass balance in If a successful fit to experimental data is important when testing the accuracy of a theoretical model, the ability to predict its adjustable parameters is of utmost importance for its validation and use for simulation purposes. In all models presented the matrix diffusivity, describing the intraparticle transport, is the main (or only) adjustable parameter and needs to be successfully correlated. It should be noted that a constant ratio between matrix diffusivity ( Despite the good fitting to experimental data, the difficulty to predict the intraparticle transport of essential oils limits the ability of the models to predict extraction rates. The models proposed for the extraction of essential oils were found able to fit closely the experimental data. However, the main parameter of these models, namely the diffusivity of the essential oils within the matrices, is not easily predictable, which may limit the applicability of these models. A detailed study on the specific intraparticle mass-transfer mechanism(s) would certainly help to the development of a more versatile model. We express our gratitude to PRAXIS XXI Program and the European Commission-Directorate-General for Agriculture (Project No AIR-CT-0818) for their financial support.  In order to obtain a stable solution with this method, the time derivative in For a stable calculation, After choosing suitable values for Δ