We investigated the existence of a fractal law (power law) distribution of size pyroclastic fragments erupted during the fallout phase of the 79 A.D. Plinian eruption at Mt. Vesuvius. In particular, we performed a particle size distribution analysis on 18 white and grey pumice samples collected in six sites distributed in the SW sector of Mt. Vesuvius. Our measurements show that the fragmentation of samples in the investigated range (from 32 mm to 850 μm) follows a power law, guaranteeing the scale invariance of the process. The relationship frequency-size distribution of the fragments is verified independently from the nature (i.e., pumices and lithics) and stratigraphic height of the considered samples in the pyroclastic deposit. Therefore, the fractal fragmentation theory can be indicated for evaluating the relationship between the intensity of fragmentation (fractal dimension D) and eruption energy. In this way the apparent chaotic distribution of the particles in the fallout deposits hides a self-organized complexity revealed by the retrieved power law distribution. We further remark that a key aspect of our analysis is the founded evidence that the fractal dimension of the lithics is systematically greater than that of the pumices.Fragmentation plays a primary role in a variety of geological phenomena from colliding planetisimals to sand grains ( Many volcanological studies on the size distribution of volcanic particles were employed in the last three decades. In particular, The aim of the present paper is the systematic and quantitative analysis of the particle-size distributions of the 79 A.D. Plinian eruption deposits of Mt. Vesuvius, by investigating the fractal dimension of pumice and lithics fraction erupted during the fallout phase of the eruption. The paper is organized as follows: firstly a brief dissertation on the fractal properties of the power law distribution and a description of the 79 A.D. Plinian eruption will be given and subsequently, a description of the methods employed and data analysis will be presented. Finally, the last section is dedicated to the main conclusions of the work and the future developments. The fragmentation is a catastrophic phenomenon, since an infinitesimal increase of stress applied on a rock, at a critical point, produces an irreversible transformation of the system, through the mechanical separation of the constitutive element. When a system is near to a critical point is said to be in a state of self-organized criticality ( Upon fragmentation of a particles' population with a number of fragments per breakage cycle, called here the branching ratio, In such a way, since the fractal dimension can be independently derived from the relationship of a selected volume, Here, we will focus our attention on the analysis of the volcanic fallout deposit of the Plinian phase of the Mt. Vesuvius 79 A.D. eruption; in particular, we want to detect if the volcanic particles show a fractal features independently by the nature of the erupted products, i.e. pumice, lithics or crystal and if the fractal coefficient Mt. Vesuvius is the most famous and dangerous volcano of the world because of the high density of population (700 The high viscosity and dissolved water contents of these magmas were claimed as responsible for the explosivity in the case of the major Plinian eruptions ( Many works were carried out in the last 30 years on the eruption mechanisms and depositional processes of the 79 A.D. Plinian eruption that buried the Roman towns of Herculaneum, Oplontis, Boscoreale, Pompeii and Stabiae, with a thick blanket of pyroclastic fall and flow products (  In general agreement with the stratigraphic reconstruction of For what concerns the stratigraphy of the Plinian phase of the 79 A.D. eruption we present in this section the result of our survey ( In particular, we show five stratigraphic sections (Villa Sora, Villa Arianna, Porta Stabia, Porta Marina and Viale delle Ginestre) never published before and reported here for the first time. At Pozzelle Quarry ( At Villa Poppea site ( At Villa Regina archaeological site ( At Villa Sora archaeological site ( At the ruins of Pompeii four stratigraphic sections have been studied (see inset in At Villa Arianna archaeological site ( This study was carried out using the samples collected in the fallout deposits of the 79 A.D. eruption of Vesuvius. In particular, the layers of white and grey pumice have been sampled at six sites ( Sampling of a volume 300 cm Sieving process using 32 mm, 16 mm, 8 mm, 4 mm, 2 mm, 850 μm sieves ( Manual separation of the lithic and pumice components for each grain-size class; The fractal distribution has graphically identified on particles number log From the analysis performed on the six sites clearly emerges that the samples collected from fallout deposits of the Plinian phase and during the fallout phase subsequent to the emplacement of the first surge, show a typical power-law distribution with a very high We investigated the fractal properties of fragmentation process of the fallout deposits of the 79 A.D. Plinian eruption at Mt. Vesuvius. We found that: the number and dimension of the particles sampled in all deposits follow a power law distribution in the studied grain-size interval; the power law distribution is verified independently from the nature (i.e. pumice and lithic fragments) and stratigraphic height of the samples. Therefore this distribution of particles can be considered as an intrinsic property of the fragmentation process as reported by the fractal fragmentation theory; a progressive increase of the D-values passing from white to grey pumice; D-values of lithics are systematically greater than D-values of pumice. This may reflect different rheology of the materials involved in the eruptive process, or could be explained in terms of different fragmentation processes with the lithics that can represent pre-fractured material (i.e. rocks fractured by tectonic and/exogenous processes before the eruption) as lavas and carbonates. Therefore, the lithics and pumice size may reflect two different fragmentation processes: early tectonic/exogenous processes and later syn-eruptive fragmentation. Finally we want to stress that it should be very interesting in the future to extend this analysis also to volcanic products erupted during lower energetic eruptions, i.e. Strombolian and Vulcanian, in order to verify the possibility to use the fractal dimension as a tool to discriminate and characterize the volcanic events with different eruptive energy. Special thanks to Guido Ventura and Roberto Sulpizio, for the critical reading of this manuscript and for their helpful suggestions that highly improved our work.