Insulin-dependent type 1 diabetes mellitus (IDDM) has been shown to alter the properties of bone and impair bone repair in both humans and animals. The objective of this study was the detailed histomorphometric evaluation of the influence of the diabetic metabolic state on bone formation and remodeling during bone defect healing depending on the defect size in spontaneously diabetic BB/O(ttawa)K(arlsburg) rats, a rat strain that represents a close homology to IDDM in man.
                  Based on blood-glucose values at the time of surgery, postoperative blood-glucose course, and postoperative insulin requirements, 80 spontaneously diabetic BB/OK rats were divided into groups with well-compensated or poorly compensated metabolic state. Forty LEW.1A rats served as normoglycemic controls. Using a Kirschner wire, bone defects of different sizes were created proximal to the knee joint space in both femora. Ten animals from each group were killed on postoperative days 7, 14, 24, and 42, and specimens were processed undecalcified for quantitative bone histomorphometry.
                  In terms of bone histomorphometry, our study did not show any differences in bone defect healing between the groups where the defect size was 0.4 mm. Larger bone defects (0.8 mm) only showed significant differences in the structural calculations after the 24th postoperative day exclusively in poorly compensated diabetic rats compared to well-compensated diabetic and control rats (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01). In bone defect sizes more than 1.2 mm, severe mineralization disorders occurred within the first 14 days exclusively in rats with poorly compensated diabetic metabolic state with a highly significant (P < 0.001) or significant (P < 0.01) decrease of all fluorochrome-based parameters of mineralization, apposition, formation, and timing of mineralization in comparison to spontaneously diabetic rats with well-compensated diabetic metabolic state and control rats.
                  These results demonstrate that the bone repair of minor bone defects (0.4 mm) is independent of the diabetic metabolic state in spontaneously diabetic BB/OK rats. In larger bone defects (more than 0.8 mm), the bone defect healing in spontaneously diabetic BB/OK rats is impaired exclusively in poorly compensated diabetic metabolic states. This study suggests that strictly controlled insulin treatment resulting in a well-compensated diabetic metabolic state will ameliorate the impaired histomorphometric parameters of IDDM bone defect healing.Diabetes mellitus is associated with an extensive list of complications involving nearly every tissue in the body, including bone (for review, see Experimental models for insulin-dependent type 1 diabetes mellitus (IDDM) include the streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat Extensive histomorphometric research on spontaneously diabetic animals is only to be found in Verhaeghe et al. The spontaneously diabetic BB/OK rat develops an autoimmune insulin-dependent type 1 diabetes (IDDM) that bears several close resemblances to the syndrome seen in human type 1 diabetes. Like the human form, the disease has an early age of onset, occurs in lean animals, and is characterized by glucosuria, hyperglycemia, hypoinsulinemia, and ketoacidosis in both sexes. BB diabetes is characterized morphologically by a β cell-specific mononuclear cell infiltrate (insulitis) within the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. The autoimmune attack selectively destroys the insulin-producing β cells. As in human beings, disease development in the BB/OK rat is complex and polygenic, which makes BB rats a valuable model for human type 1 diabetes and its complications For the first time, this study examined the detailed histomorphometrical evaluation of the influence of the diabetic metabolic state on bone formation and remodeling during bone defect healing depending on the defect size in spontaneously diabetic BB/O(ttawa)K(arlsburg) rats instead of in animals with experimentally (streptozotocin) induced diabetes mellitus compared with normoglycemic diabetes-resistant controls. Spontaneously diabetic BB/O(ttawa)K(arlsburg) (F60/61) Diabetes in BB/OK rats was diagnosed on the basis of glucosuria (Diabur-Test 5000, Boehringer, Mannheim, Germany) followed by measurement of blood-glucose concentrations >300 mg dl Up to surgery, diabetic animals were treated with subcutaneous applications of a sustained release insulin implant using a trocar/stylet (LINPLANT™, ©LINSHIN Canada, INC., Scarborough, Ontario, Canada). The sustained release insulin implant contains bovine insulin in an erodible palmitic acid matrix and is characterized by an insulin release rate of about 2 IU day The animals were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of a Rompun® (Xylazin, Bayer, Leverkusen, Germany) (0.2 ml kg Using a Kirschner wire, one hole of 0.4-mm diameter located 10 mm proximal to the knee joint space and another of 1.2-mm diameter located 15 mm proximal to the knee joint space were centrally drilled in the right femur. In the same manner in the left femur, a 0.8-mm diameter hole was drilled 10 mm proximal to the knee joint space and a 1.6-mm diameter hole was drilled 15 mm proximal to the knee joint space. In each case, the corticalis of the opposite site was penetrated. The wound was closed with resorbable sutures. Eighty spontaneously diabetic BB/OK rats with a blood-glucose value of 389 ± 106 mg% (mean ± SD) at the time of manifestation and at an age of 95 ± 17 days were used in the study after a subsequent diabetes duration of 116 ± 17 days. Therefore, the spontaneously diabetic animals underwent surgery at an age of 208 ± 16 days. Based on blood-glucose values at the time of surgery (mg%), postoperative blood-glucose course (mg%), and postoperative insulin requirements (IU kg We used polychrome sequential labeling The experimental protocol adhered to the guidelines of the National Health and Medical Research Council of Germany for the use of animals and was approved by the animal ethics and care committee of the University of Greifswald. Femurs were cut distally, 5 mm proximal to the medial condyle articular surface, and proximally at 5-mm distance to the proximal drilling hole. The cut specimens were placed in 1.4% paraformaldehyde–5% sucrose–0.02 M phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.4) at 4°C for 48 h. They were then dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and acetone, and embedded in modified methylmethacrylate (Technovit® 9100, Heraeus Kulzer, Wehrheim, Germany) Bone histomorphometry in the cancellous area of femur was performed with a light/epifluorescent microscope (Model BH2-RFC, Olympus®, Tokyo, Japan) interfaced with analySIS software (Soft Imaging System, Münster, Germany). Nomenclature and symbols used in conventional bone histomorphometry are the same as those described by Parfitt et al. The significance of differences between groups was calculated with the unpaired Student's Data on blood-glucose levels at the time of surgery, postoperative blood-glucose levels, and insulin requirements are shown in  Where defect diameters were 1.2 and 1.6 mm in the diabetic animals, MS (1.2 mm: 287%,   Where defect diameters were 1.2 and 1.6 mm in diabetic animals, the trabecular bone volume (BV/TV) (1.2 mm: 151%,   Concerning larger bone defects  Where defect diameters were 1.2 and 1.6 mm in diabetic animals For the first time and with extensive histomorphometric data, this study has demonstrated the influence of diabetic metabolic state on the bone defect healing of different defect sizes in spontaneously diabetic rats. With a defect diameter of 0.4 mm, no statistically significant differences were found over the entire healing period among diabetic animals—regardless of their metabolic state and thus also independent of the effect of exogenously administered insulin—or comparing these to normoglycemic control rats. In contrast, the bone repair was initially unhindered where the defect diameter was 0.8 mm. However, as on the 24th day, only animals with a poor diabetic metabolic state (despite regular, controlled insulin administration) demonstrated disturbances exclusively in the structurally calculated histomorphological parameters. Until the end of the second week, the histomorphometric data of the larger bone defects showed a considerable mineralization disorder, which is the expression of a reduced and retarded mineralization process in animals with a poorly compensated diabetic metabolic state. These early disorders manifest themselves in highly significantly decreased fluorochrome-based indices. This results in highly significant or significant differences in all parameters of the mineralization, the apposition, the formation, the timing of the mineralization in the dynamic calculations between the well- and the poorly compensated diabetic animals and between the poorly compensated animals and the control animals up to the 14th postoperative day. Until now, only Beam et al. Various reports state a preventive or reverse effect of treatment with insulin in experimental There are also reports of disorders in the early phases of fracture healing in uncompensated streptozocin-compensated animals in the form of a 50–55% decrease in collagen content of the callus between the 4th and 11th postoperative day Histomorphometric results on bone defect healing have not been reported in spontaneously diabetic rats to date. So far, only Follak et al. In contrast to studies with untreated streptozotocin-induced In other words, according to the histomorphometric evaluation, even in larger bone defects, there were no significant differences to the normoglycemic control animal when a good diabetic metabolic state had been achieved with a controlled supply of insulin. For the fracture treatment of IDDM patients, it can be concluded that an exact repositioning with the smallest possible fracture gap must be the surgeon's goal: the smaller the remaining bone defect is, the more independent the bone repair process becomes of the diabetic metabolic state. On the other hand, one can clinically relevantly deduce that it is imperative that the diabetic metabolic state of diabetic patients be well-compensated during the treatment of larger bone defects in complications concerning the course of the fracture healing or in the more seldomly occurring primarily larger bone defects. In this way, the defect healing can proceed without disadvantages in comparison to a nondiabetic metabolic state as demonstrated in our animal experiment. As Bouillon In conclusion, we showed that with a defect size of 0.4 mm, no histomorphometric differences in the process of bone defect healing were detectable among spontaneously diabetic rats regardless of their metabolic state or between them and the normoglycemic control animals. In larger defects (more than 0.8 mm), differences in structural calculations occurred in the late stages of bone repair in poorly compensated diabetes. In 1.2-mm or larger defects, we demonstrated that exclusively in poorly compensated diabetes of spontaneously diabetic animals, a mineralization disorder occurs in the first 2 weeks of bone defect healing. With strictly controlled insulin therapy and a resulting well-compensated diabetic metabolic state, early severe mineralization disorders and the late differences in structural and dynamical calculations of the bone repair process in the poorly compensated diabetic metabolic state of the experimental animal can be avoided. The clinical significance of our results is that during operative treatment of standard fractures, the bone defect and therefore also the fracture gap must be kept as small as possible to achieve a relative independence of the diabetic metabolic state in IDDM patients for bone repair. If a treatment of larger bone defects is clinically necessary, a controlled blood-glucose level and insulin substitution must ensure a well-compensated diabetic metabolic state to ensure similar bone defect healing conditions as in a nondiabetic metabolic state.