Surface magnetization provides a possible approach for recovering weak or non-magnetic minerals via magnetic separation. In the present study, magnetite selective coating was used to enlarge the magnetic difference between ilmenite and titanaugite and further separate them. During this process, the selective coating behavior of magnetite was investigated with sodium silicate depressant and sodium oleate surfactant on mineral surfaces. The SEM analysis and magnetic separation results revealed that magnetite displayed a selective coating behavior on the surface of ilmenite and titanaugite, resulting in a large recovery difference by approximately 53% between them. The results of zeta potential and adsorption measurements indicated that sodium silicate preferred to adsorb onto titanaugite surfaces and prevented sodium oleate adsorption but not on ilmenite. Contact angle analysis suggested that the selective adsorption of reagents led to the hydrophobic difference of minerals. EDLVO calculation results illustrated that hydrophobic attraction dominated the selective adhering behavior of magnetite on ilmenite and titanaugite. After magnetite coating, the magnetic separation recovery and TiO2 grade of artificial mixtures were increased by approximately 26.33% and 4.7%, respectively.Titanium has been widely used in the fields of aerospace, transportation, medical devices, and catalytic industries [ Magnetic coating is one of surface magnetization methods which can increase the magnetism of a target material and achieve its separation from its contained conditions [ To effectively separate ilmenite from titanaugite by magnetic separation, the magnetic coating method was introduced to increase their magnetic difference. Sodium silicate depressant and sodium oleate collector were introduced to strengthen the selective coating behaviour of magnetite [ Purified ilmenite and titanaugite were obtained from magnetic separation tailings of the vanadium–titanium magnetite ore located in Panzhihua, China. The tailings were first treated with weak magnetic separator and high-intensity magnetic separator, and then the concentrate was repeatedly purified using a Wilfrey shaking table. Finally, the minerals particle size within −74 + 38 μm was picked for magnetic coating and magnetic separation tests. Magnetite was obtained from the lump ore sample at Nanfen mine; the sample was handpicked and crushed to −2 mm, then ground to −74 μm, and concentrated by the shaking table. Subsequently, it was ground in a stirred mill to −10 μm and purified with the weak magnetic separator to produce magnetite. The purified samples were washed several times with deionized water and dried at 30 °C. Chemical multi-element analysis and X-ray diffraction (XRD) of three minerals are presented in Sodium oleate (Tianjin Kermil Inc., AR) and sodium silicate were used as surfactant and depressant in magnetic coating tests, respectively. The suspension pH was adjusted by dilute HCl or NaOH solution. Potassium nitrate (Tianjin Kermil Inc., AR) was used as the background electrolyte in zeta potential experiments. All the reagents used were of analytical grade, and deionized water was used in the experiments in this study. The magnetic coating tests were conducted with a 40-mL-plexiglas cell under a stirring speed of 2100 r/min, and 3 g of purified ilmenite or titanaugite was used in each test. The suspension pH was adjusted to a desired value by HCl or NaOH solution, and then the desired amounts of sodium oleate or/and sodium silicate and 5% magnetite (a percentage of the quantity of ilmenite or titanaugite) were added and stirred for 5 min, respectively. The high-gradient magnetic separator purchased from ZRIZE was used for magnetic separation tests. The magnetic field intensity for magnetic separation tests was settled as 95.3 kA/m. The concentrate and tailing of the magnetic separation were filtered, dried, and then weighed to calculate the recovery. Scanning Electron Microscope (Ultra Plus from Carl Zeiss, Germany) was used to detect the surface morphology of mineral samples. The acceleration voltage is 0.2–30 kV (10 V step variable), the resolution of secondary electron image is 3 nm and back reflection electron image is 4 nm. Magnetic separation concentrates of samples which were performed with or without magnetic coating were collected for SEM tests (the non-coated magnetite were separated from the collected concentrates by hand lantern magnet). After filtration and drying, the samples were characterized by SEM. The adsorbed amount of sodium oleate on the surface of ilmenite and titanaugite in the presence of sodium silicate was determined via liqui elementar TOC II (Germany). For this, 1.5 g of the ilmenite or titanaugite sample was dispersed into 40 mL of aqueous phase with a desired pH value and conditioned for 5 min. Then a desired concentration of sodium silicate was added to the suspension and conditioned for 5 min in required tests. Following this, sodium oleate solution was added to interact with the mineral surface, and the mixture was stirred for 30 min. The conditioned mineral particles were separated by centrifugation, and the sodium oleate concentration in the separated supernatant was measured by liqui elementar TOC II. The adsorbed amount was calculated by Eq. The zeta potential of mineral particles was measured by the Nano ZS90 zeta plus potential meter. In each test, 50 mg purified minerals of ilmenite, titanaugite, and magnetite in size of −5 μm were added to 100 mL of deionized water; the suspension was conditioned by mechanical stirring for 5 min, during which the pH was adjusted using HCl or NaOH. Then the desired concentration of sodium silicate or/and sodium oleate was added and stirring for another 10 min, after which the suspension was taken to measure the zeta potential. The results presented are the averages of three measurements. The contact angles of ilmenite, titanaugite, and magnetite treated with or without sodium silicate and sodium oleate were measured via the JC2000A contact angle apparatus. Lamellar samples with a highly smooth surface were prepared by using the compression method. The samples were placed in a rectangular glass chamber and a liquid drop with a base diameter of 3–4 mm was introduced at the surface by a micro-syringe. Specific care was taken during the measurements to avoid vibration of the needle and distortion of the drop shape. Each measurement was repeated at least three times, and the average values are presented. All the measurements were performed at approximately 25 °C. The effect of pH on the magnetic separation recoveries of ilmenite and titanaugite was studied, and the results are displayed in From The recoveries of ilmenite and titanaugite as a function of sodium silicate concentration in the presence of 600 mg/L sodium oleate are presented in The surface morphology of ilmenite and titanaugite under different magnetic coating conditions was studied by SEM analysis, and the results are shown in To investigate the effect of sodium silicate on the sodium oleate adsorption and magnetic coating on the surfaces of ilmenite and titanaugite, the adsorption amounts of sodium oleate onto ilmenite and titanaugite as a function of the sodium silicate concentration was determined. The results are shown in Zeta potentials of ilmenite, titanaugite, and magnetite as a function of pH under different conditions are showed in The adsorption of sodium oleate on minerals can introduce their surface hydrophobicity [ The interaction between particles is determined from the van der Waals and electrical interaction energy based on the classical DLVO theory [ The van der Waals interaction energy is mainly determined by the Hamaker constant and radii of the mineral particles. The interaction energy between the magnetite and ilmenite or titanaugite particles can be calculated by the following equation [ The electrostatic interaction energy is usually determined by the charge potential and radius of the particles. The interaction energy between the magnetite and ilmenite or titanaugite particles can be calculated by the equation below: The hydrophobic interaction energy is usually determined by the acid–base free energy and radii of the particles. The interaction energy between the magnetite and ilmenite or titanaugite particles can be calculated with the following equation [ The contact angle is related to the polar and apolar components of the solid and liquid surface energy, which can be expressed by with the equations below, The interaction energy between magnetite and ilmenite or titanaugite was calculated by Eq. As can be seen in Mixed mineral tests were conducted under different conditions on the mix of ilmenite and titanaugite with a ratio of 1:1 at pH 7.4, and the results are listed in In this study, the results of SEM analysis and magnetic separation tests revealed that sodium silicate selectively decreased the coating amount of magnetite on titanaugite surfaces, which enlarged the magnetic difference between ilmenite and titanaugite and improved the separation of artificial mixtures by magnetic separation. The examination of the adsorption amounts and zeta potential indicated that sodium silicate selectively adsorbed on titanaugite and prevented the adsorption of sodium oleate over it, resulting in the adsorption difference of sodium oleate on ilmenite and titanaugite. Thus, ilmenite exhibited a higher hydrophobicity than titanaugite. The interaction energy calculation results indicated that the hydrophobic interaction energy between magnetite and ilmenite or titanaugite was the main reason of magnetite adhering to mineral surfaces. In particular, the difference in the hydrophobic interaction energy between magnetite and ilmenite or titanaugite determined the coating difference of magnetite. Briefly, the selective adsorption of sodium silicate led to the magnetite preferable coating on ilmenite surfaces and achieved the magnetic separation of ilmenite from titanaugite. This work was financially supported by the