Raw kaolinite (kaol) was experimentally transformed to P-type hydrated silica aluminate (HSA-P). After treated by LaCl3·7H2O solution, the final product of La-loaded for P-type hydrated silica aluminate (HSA-P-La) was obtained. The middle and final products were characterized using fourier transform infrared (FTIR), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Kaol, HSA-P, HSA-P-La was introduced into PP with intumescent flame retardants (IFR), respectively. And their effect on the flame retardant and thermal properties of PP composites was studied by limiting oxygen index (LOI), vertical burning test, cone calorimeter test (CCT) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The LOI increases from 18.0% of neat PP to 31.2 in composite of 75 wt% PP/25 wt % IFR, further increases to 32.5, 35.1, 37.5 in 75 wt% PP/23.5 wt % IFR/1.5 wt% Kaol, HSA-P or HSA-P-La, respectively. CCT results show heat release content and rate is best controlled in PP/IFR/HSA-P-La composite. Morphology observation indicates the char layer of PP/IFR/HSA-P-La composite is most compact and thick, which guarantees excellent fire resistance. At same time the effect of HSA-P/HSA-P-La was also compared with generally used A-type hydrated silica aluminate (HSA-A)/HSA-A-La. Anyway HSA-P/HSA-P-La exhibited higher efficiency than HSA-A/HSA-A-La in both flame retardancy and thermostability.Hydrated silica aluminate (HSA) is a porous tridimensional aluminosilicate and generally used as catalyst/adsorbent/ions exchange [ Kaolinite (kaol) is a natural mineral with rich deposit. In recent years, kaol [ Based on previous work, we tried to prepare HSA-P from kaol and also embed La PP (melt flow rate of 3 g/10 min) used in this work was produced by Sinopec Maoming Company (Maoming, China). The raw kaol with the average particle size about 20 μm was friendly offered by Xing Yi Mineral Processing Plant (Shijiazhuang, China). Ammonium polyphosphate (APP) was purchased from Shandong Jin Ying Tai Company, China. Melamine (MEL) was obtained from Henan Zhong Yuan Da Hua Company, China. Pentaerythritol phosphate (PEPA) was provided by Zhejiang Victory Chemistry Co., Ltd, China. In this work, Microencapsulation of APP (MCAPP) was obtained by the reaction between APP and MEL [ Formaldehyde solution (concentration of 36%) and lanthanum chloride (LaCl X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained with D/max-2500 diffraction. It was operating at 40 KV and 20 mA, using filtered Cu Ka radiation ( Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded on an instrument of Thermo Nicolet IS 5 in the range of 400–4000 cm Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted under N Microtopography was observed on a Hitachi S-4700 scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with the voltage of 10 kV. Limiting oxygen index (LOI) was tested with a JT-30 limited oxygen index instrument (Jiangning instrument, Nanjing, China), the samples size is 120 × 6.5 × 3 mm Vertical burning test were performed on a CZF-3 apparatus (Jiangning, China) to obtained UL-94 grade. The sample dimension is 125 × 13 × 3 mm The fire behavior was performed using cone colorimeter (FFT Co., Ltd) according to ISO 5660 standard. A 100 × 100 × 3 mm Raw kaol was calcined at 1000 °C for 2 h and metakaolinite with higher activity was obtained.4.5 g of metakaolinite powder was added into 30 mL of 3 mol/L NaOH solution. The mixture was then stirred and heated at 90 °C for 10 h. The reacted mixture was washed three times with ethanol, and then filtrated before being dried at 60 °C for 12 h. The product is referred as HSA-P. About 7.5 g HSA-P was mixed with 150 mL of 2 mol/L NH Compositions were extruded using a micro twin-screw extruder (Wuhan Rui Ming Plastics Machinery Co., Ltd) with the rotational speed of 40 rpm. The processing temperatures of different section were maintained at 160, 180, and 185 °C, respectively. The formulations are showed in The preparation of HSA-A/HSA-A-La and PP/IFR composite containing HSA-A/HSA-A-La has been introduced in the earlier work [ The FTIR spectra of kaol, HSA-P and HSA-P-La are showed in The spectrum of HSA-P is obviously different from that of kaol. The separated -OH group bands are merged into a diffuse peak in 3000–3700 cm In the spectrum of HSA-P-La, weakening on 601 cm   The LOI and UL-94 can effetive demonstrate the charateristics and performans burning behavior of the PP composits [ Supplementary video related to this article can be found at The following is the supplementary data related to this article: CCT can simulate the real fire hazards and reflect the fire risk, so it is widely used to evaluate the security of materials. The key CCT results including the heat release rate (HRR) and total heat release (THR) curves of PP composites are shown in From curves in THR curves reflect the total heat release of neat PP is 142 MJ/m In summary, HSA-P/HSA-P-La exhibited better control on both heat release content and rate, which can also be reflected quantitatively from fire performance index (FPI). The material's safety rank increases with the increasing of FPI. The FPI is regarded as the proportion of the time to ignition (TTI) and the peak HRR. The FPI of neat PP is only 0.018 m Mass loss curves in cone test indicated compared with sole IFR addition, all HSA postponed the mass loss rate during combustion and kept more char left after combustion. The char content left was similar for different HSA. The char morphology after cone test is observed at different macro/micro-scale and shown in The influence of kaol, HSA-P and HSA-P-La on thermostability of PP/IFR composite in the whole heating process is investigated by TGA under N In summary, both kaol and all the HSA additives postpone both the initial and main decomposition of PP/IFR composite to higher temperature, and the residue yield left after decomposition was increased. HSA loaded with La (HSA-A-La/HSA-P-La) exhibited a little improved effect than HSA-A/HSA-P and kaol. Based on the cone and TGA result, the effect of HSA as synergistic flame retardant was reflected both on heat release control and char formation during combustion and heating. Under the heating temperature of 450 °C for 30 min, the char was observed by digital camera. In order to investigate the inner morphology of the char layers, the char residues were cut carefully from middle, as shown in To acquire the decompose mechanism of PP/IFR/HSA-P-La in condense phase, the sample was heated at 300, 450, 600 and 800 °C for 8 min. And the char residue was characterized by FTIR and corresponding FTIR spectra are showed in To further investigate the chemical composition and interactions in the char of PP/IFR and PP/IFR containing HAS-P-La composites, the sample were studied by XPS, and the results are presented in In the C1s spectra of PP/IFR composite, by curve fitting treatment, three characteristic peaks at 284.8, 287.3 and 289.0 eV were emerged, which are corresponding to C-C, C=O and O=C-O bonding respectively [ Two separated peaks located at 134.0 eV (P-O-C) and 135 eV (P=O) appeared in P2p curve for PP/IFR composite [ The peak situation and shape of N1s changed the most after the addition of HAS-P-La. The results indicated that HAS-P-La can promote the production of cross-linked structure for char residues. It was clearly seen that the peak intensity of O1s in PP/IFR composite was varied from thatof PP/IFR/HAS-P-La composite. More C=O bond was formed in the char in PP/IFR/HAS-P-La composite, indicating more char was left in the residues. All the change indicated that new bonding may occurred among C/O/P/N element. In other words, more PP reacted with IFR and HAS-P-La, resulting in more char formation. According to the analysis above, the process of formation char of PP/IFR/HSA-P-La is showed in When at relatively low temperature, MCAPP released gas of NH Hydrated silica aluminate of P-type loaded with La (HSA-P-La) was prepared from kaol. HSA-P-La exhibited the best improvement on flame retardant of PP/IFR. For the composite of 75 wt% PP/23.5 wt% IFR/1.5 wt% HSA-P-La, LOI reached 37.5 and pass UL-94 V-0 rate. And heat release rate and content were also effectively controlled in cone test. Improvements on both flame retardant and thermal stability of PP composites were ascribed to the catalysis from HSA-P-La, which promote the formation of char. The promotion was further documented by tracing the structure change during heating. Kaol-based materials indeed exhibited synergistic flame retardant in PP/IFR. HSA showed improved effect than untreated kaol; and HSA-P exhibited better efficiency than HSA -A, at same time HSA loaded with transition metal would further lifted its synergistic efficiency. The authors would like to thank the