The kinetics of silver dissolution in silver electrorefining process was investigated using a series of synthetic electrolytes and different electrode sizes. Kinetic models at corrosion potential and industrial range overpotentials were constructed as a function of electrolyte composition and temperature. The results revealed that overpotential of 150–200 mV vs. corrosion potential represented the values corresponding to the industrial silver electrolysis. In order to achieve a high current efficiency in silver electrorefining, our kinetic models suggest that concentration of HNO3 should be less than 5 g/dm3 or 3 g/dm3 for operation at 25 °C and 45 °C, respectively.Silver electrorefining is used for precious metal recovery from either Doré bullion or copper anode slimes. In order to improve the process efficiency, high kinetics and current efficiency are required. Generally, silver nitrate solutions are widely used as the electrolyte in the silver electrorefining process [ Reactions that occur during the silver dissolution process in nitric acid - originally proposed by Evans [ The NO Dissociated This autocatalytic effect suggests that the corrosion of metals in nitric acid is governed by the concentration of nitrite and nitrate ions in solution rather than solely by acidity [ Several studies [ The corrosion of silver at low acid concentrations, using voltammetry measurements, has been reported at concentrations between 7.5·10 The understanding of the effect of industrial parameters, with an emphasis on the impact of temperature, silver and acid concentrations on the rate of silver dissolution at industrially applied overpotentials, is essential in order to improve the efficiency of the silver electrorefining process. As limited literature [ The ranges of the investigated parameters of synthetic silver electrolyte were selected in order to simulate industrial process conditions: temperature between 25 and 45 °C, silver concentration within the range of 40–100 g/dm Data analysis and experiment design were carried out using the modelling and design tool MODDE 8.0 (MKS Data Analytics Solutions) that allows the design of experiments (DOE) and multivariate data analysis. Nine linear experiments and three centre points were designed with the defining factors and levels as described in Regression analysis was based on the assumption that each parameter affects the current density independently. The final model was evaluated to ensure that it meets the required values of  Based on Eq. ( The surface area of the electrodes used in the measurements can also influence the current density magnitude. Thus, the effect of electrode radius on the flux of surface molecules was taken into account in this study via Eq. (6): By substituting the flux density value from Eq. (6) into Eq. (7) and The other benefit of using small electrode is to minimize distortion from From Eq. (7), the total current is proportional to the area of electrode, which for a spherical surface equals 4π Investigations were conducted using linear sweep voltammetry, in order to have a wide range of current – potential values, which would better reflect the extent of potentials used in industrial electrorefining operations. Measurements were conducted up to a maximum overpotential of 500 mV, which resulted in high current density; therefore, according to the terms outlined in Eq. (12), the effect of A linear correlation of current density with the inverse of electrode radius was observed at From the equations derived in Since the highest measured constant ( The kinetic model is presented in the form of a log-log Eq. in (14), while the simplified current density equation is presented in (15). As can be seen both from the scaled and centred and actual coefficient values, all parameters investigated were shown to increase the kinetics of silver dissolution. This result supports the reaction mechanisms defined in Eqs. ( Further investigation was conducted in order to construct a model describing silver dissolution rate at the representative current density of electrorefining operations in the industry. A typical industrial operating potential has been reported being 1.5–2.8 V in silver electrorefining [ Modelling for overpotential below 150 mV vs. As reported by Pletcher & Walsh, current density range in industrial silver electrorefining is 200–400 A/m The values of gradient ( These models demonstrate high levels of accuracy, as they have almost ideal As there is only one electroactive species, Ag The effect of re-dissolution on the current efficiency was calculated by using the models developed in this study. The current density model at overpotential of 150 or 200 mV was used as the operating current density ( By using Eqs. (22) and (23), silver electrolysis current efficiency is presented on contour maps as a function of [Ag In this silver kinetics study, the modelling of current density as a function of electrolyte concentration and temperature was found valid for all models having Analysis of current density using logarithmic linear regression indicates that HNO An overpotential range of 150–200 mV vs. Although re-dissolution of silver crystal product has been already proven to have detrimental effect to the process efficiency, more concentrated electrolyte and higher operation temperature promote the re-dissolution to a faster rate, thus reducing the efficiency further. In order to keep silver electrolysis current efficiency high, concentration of HNO This research has been performed within the SIMP (System Integrated Metal Production) project of DIMECC (Digital, Internet, Materials and Engineering Co-Creation) and using facilities provided by the Academy of Finland’s RawMatTERS Finland Infrastructure (RAMI-FIRI) at Aalto University. In addition, Arif T. Aji would like to acknowledge the funding support from