In this study, the ionic liquid betainium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (HBetTf2N), has been applied directly as a leaching agent on a low-grade rare earth element (REE) ore called Rödberg, from the Fen carbonatite complex ore deposit located in Norway. REE in Rödberg are mainly present in the form of fluoro-carbonates of bastnäsite group minerals. Factors studied during leaching were water ratio into ionic liquid, leaching temperature, pulp density (%w/v) and retention time. Leaching of Rödberg ore with HbetTf2N resulted to 65–100% recovery of light REE and 40–60% recovery of heavy REE. Additionally >80–90% of Ca and Mg content dissolves, whereas the HbetTf2N is selective against iron and silicon resulting in a Fe/Si rich residue. The metals dissolved into HbetTf2N after leaching are stripped with an aqueous acidic solution, regenerating the ionic liquid for reuse. Through acid stripping, REE concentration is doubled in the aqueous acidic solution, for further purification. The carboxylic acid functional group attached to the cation side of HbetTf2N is capable of dissolving bastnäsite thus enabling the development of new alternative methods for treating low-grade REE primary resources.Rare-earth elements (REEs) are a group of metals consisting of scandium, yttrium and lanthanides exhibiting similar chemical properties. REE global demand grows with an annual rate of 5% ( Extractive metallurgy of REE is industrially applied to minerals such as monazite, bastnäsite and ion-adsorption clays, with China being the main producer ( As alternatives to conventional hydrometallurgical treatment, ionic liquids (IL's) could hold the key to develop a sustainable and greener processing of low-grade REE resources. ILs, are room temperature molten salts, constituted by ions, generally an organic cation and an inorganic/organic anion. From a broad range of applications that IL's have, hydrometallurgical processes have a small share but with great potential. ( HbetTf2N is an ionic liquid functionalized with a carboxylic group attached to its cation side. Studies show that HbetTf2N and its similar derivatives dissolve a range of synthetic metal oxides including REE, yet Fe, Si and Al oxides are insoluble ( In this study, the ionic liquid HbetTf2N is applied for leaching REE from Rödberg ore, a low grade bastnäsite deposit of Fen complex. Several factors were studied during leaching followed by stripping experiments of the loaded ionic liquid pregnant solution for metals recovery and IL regeneration. By taking advantage of HbetTf2N properties a new treatment of low-grade REE resources is proposed providing several benefits such as high REE recoveries, regeneration of the ionic liquid for reuse and low acid input in the process leading to preconcentration of REE in the final aqueous solution for further purification. Betainium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide supplied from Iolitec with > Leaching experiments conducted in a mini reactor setup incorporated with temperature controller, mechanical stirrer and a vapor condenser. Filtration of the pulp made via suction filtration using Whatman GF/C glass microfiber filters of 1 Chemical analysis of Rödberg ore in the form of oxides can be seen in Rare earth elements (as oxides) in Rödberg samples found to be 1.04% wt. Individual REE content is shown in Mineralogical analysis with XRD identified minerals such as calcite [CaCO The molecular structure HbetTf2N can be seen in Protonated carboxyl functionalized HbetTf2N is able to dissolve a range of metal oxides including REE, whereas Fe, Al and Si metal oxides were found to be insoluble ( The following reaction (Eq3) describes metal extraction from HbetTf2N PLS and regeneration of the IL: In order to study the effect of water addition in HbetTf2N during Rödberg leaching, a series of experiments were conducted in a range of 0 up to 60%v/v water addition to HbetTf2N, at conditions of 90 Temperature effect was studied at 60 Kinetics was studied comparing LREE and HREE recoveries at 5 and 10% pulp density and 90 Mineralogical analysis with XRD in the leaching residue indicate almost total dissolution of calcite and dolomite whereas mineral phases such as hematite, clinochlore and quartz remain undissolved as can be seen in An ionic liquid pregnant solution (PLS) is obtained after leaching and solid liquid separation. The PLS solution obtained is a reddish clear liquid ( The stoichiometric amount of HCl needed for total metal extraction and IL regeneration was calculated from chemical analysis of the PLS ( During metal stripping from the loaded ionic liquid solution, it was found that all metals could be easily extracted, except Th, Sc and Fe which appear to form strong complexes with the HbetTf2N and more acid consumption is needed to increase their recovery yield ( A significant drawback of the proposed process is the IL losses obtained during acid stripping upon liquid/liquid interaction. During HCl stripping in In order to evaluate leaching performance of the regenerated IL, repeated leaching cycles using the same IL conducted (after acid stripping and regeneration) to a new portion of Rödberg ore based on the experimental procedure in Using FTIR analysis ( The resulting HCl solution obtained after stripping ( The resulting REE precipitate can be further purified in order to minimize the main metal impurities such as Fe, Al and Ca. Additionally further trials will be made using a range of conventional precipitate reagents (oxalates, carbonates, phosphates) with main goal to produce a less contaminated REE precipitate suitable for further REE separation by means of solvent extraction techniques. In this study, the functionalized ionic liquid HbetTf2N found to be able of dissolving bastnäsite, which is the main REE bearing mineral present in Rödberg ore. Factors studied during leaching indicate that water addition into HbetTf2N had a positive effect on REE leaching whereas increasing temperature at 90 “The research leading to these results has received funding from the