Purpose:
                  The frequency doubled, double pulse Nd:YAG (FREDDY) laser (World of Medicine, Berlin, Germany) functions through the generation of a plasma bubble. Upon bubble collapse a mechanical shock wave is generated, causing stone fragmentation. This mechanism of action is in contrast to the holmium laser, which cause stone destruction by vaporization. Observed clinical stone retropulsion and fragmentation with the FREDDY and holmium lasers has prompted a series of in vitro experiments designed to compare laser induced retropulsion and fragmentation with those of a holmium laser and pneumatic lithotrite.
               
                  Materials and Methods:
                  For retropulsion a hands-off underwater laboratory setup, including a horizontally oriented silicone tube 1.3 cm in diameter and a holder to keep the stone phantom in contact with the quartz laser fiber or pneumatic probe, was used. Previously weighed, cylindrical Bego stone phantoms (Bego USA, Smithfield, Rhode Island) were placed in the apparatus. Stone fragmentation was performed with the FREDDY or holmium laser, or the pneumatic lithotripter. The FREDDY and holmium lasers were tested at similar pulse energy and frequency settings. As a standard for comparison, a pneumatic lithotrite was tested with a semirigid probe and single pulse settings of 100, 200 and 300 kPa. Stone phantoms underwent 30 shocks per setting. Mean net retropulsion, defined as the final resting point of the stone, as determined by direct measurement, was recorded for each setting. For fragmentation plaster of Paris stone phantoms of known weights were used to compare the fragmentation ability of each laser. Stones phantoms were placed in a hands-off underwater setup, consisting of an inverted silicon syringe and holder immersed in tap water. The laser fiber (365 μm for the holmium and 280 μm for the FREDDY) was placed through the tip of the syringe in contact with the stone phantom. A total of 24 stones were divided into 4 groups of 6 per group. Two groups were fragmented with the FREDDY laser at 300 and 400 J total energy. The other 2 groups were fragmented using the holmium laser at 300 and 480 J total energy. Fragmentation efficiency was determined as percent weight loss.
               
                  Results:
                  For retropulsion at 160 mJ the FREDDY laser caused stone retropulsion to a mean distance of 7.6, 8.1 and 6.8 cm at settings of 5, 10 and 15 Hz, respectively. At 0.8 J the holmium laser retropulsed the stone to a mean distance of 3.3 and 4.9 cm at settings of 5 and 10 Hz, respectively. The pneumatic device caused stone retropulsion a mean distance of 8.5, 9.9 and 13.8 cm at pressure settings of 100, 200 and 300 kPa, respectively. The FREDDY laser generally caused less retropulsion than the pneumatic device, although this difference was only significant at the highest pneumatic lithoclast setting (p <0.05). At clinically relevant settings the FREDDY laser caused significantly more retropulsion than the holmium laser (p <0.05). For fragmentation at total energy settings of 300 and 400 J the FREDDY laser resulted in 44.9% and 86.8% weight loss, respectively (p <0.05). At settings of 300 and 480 J the holmium:YAG laser resulted in 3.3% and 7.1% weight loss, respectively (p <0.05).
               
                  Conclusions:
                  At lower frequency settings stone retropulsion was significantly greater with the FREDDY laser compared with the holmium laser. However, retropulsion was significantly less than that caused by the pneumatic lithotripter at all settings. Therefore, we recommend the use of an occlusive device, such as the Stone Cone (Boston Scientific, Natick, Massachusetts) proximal to the calculus during intracorporeal ureteral lithotripsy and in the ureteropelvic junction during percutaneous laser nephrostolithotomy. In vitro stone fragmentation was significantly greater with the FREDDY laser than with the holmium:YAG laser, suggesting that the FREDDY may offer a low cost alternative to the holmium:YAG laser lithotrite in select patients.In the last decade the use of intracorporeal laser lithotripsy for the treatment of ureteral and renal calculi has increased in popularity. Improved stone fragmentation of all stone compositions with a concomitant decrease in operative morbidity has been shown with transition from the early pulse dye lasers to the holmium:YAG laser and pneumatic lithotripsy. However, stone retropulsion (movement of the calculus away from the lithotrite during intracorporeal lithotripsy) is a potential problem with all of these devices. The frequency doubled, double pulse Nd:YAG (FREDDY) laser offers a new, relatively low cost alternative to the commonly used holmium:YAG laser. To our knowledge there have been no previous studies assessing the fragmentation and retropulsion characteristics of this new laser. In the current study we compared stone fragmentation efficiency and retropulsion characteristics of the FREDDY and holmium lasers with those of the pneumatic lithotripter. A hands-off underwater laboratory setup was used ( Plaster of Paris stone phantoms of known weights were used to determine the fragmentation ability of each laser. The tensile strength (measure of stone fracturability) of plaster of Paris stones is known to be 2.0 MPa, which is approximately the same as the tensile strength of human calcium and struvite calculi (0.1 to 3.4 MPa), and lower than that of Bego stones. Data from the retropulsion and fragmentation experiments were compared with commercially available statistical software using ANOVA. Statistical significance was defined as p <0.05.    Intracorporeal lithotripsy has developed sequentially from simple mechanical stone pulverization to electrohydraulic and pneumatic lithotrites, and most recently to laser lithotripsy. The FREDDY laser represents a unique innovation in the development of intracorporeal laser lithotripsy. As the name implies, the FREDDY is a double frequency, short pulsed, solid-state laser with wavelengths of 532 and 1,064 nm. The FREDDY laser induces the generation of a plasma bubble. Upon collapse of this bubble a mechanical shock wave is generated, causing stone fragmentation. This double frequency, short pulsed, solid-state laser provides the emission of long pulse intervals (1 to 1.4 microseconds). The different characteristics of the lasers and their mechanisms for stone comminution may also explain the greater propensity of the holmium laser to cause tissue injury compared with the FREDDY laser. With a long pulse duration of 300 microseconds and high pulse energy (200 to 2,000 mJ) the holmium laser releases large total energy levels in its vaporization bubbles, allowing it to cause thermal tissue injury when fired directly at the urothelium. To our knowledge this study represents the first direct comparison of the retropulsion characteristics and fragmentation efficiency of the FREDDY and holmium:YAG laser lithotrites. Zorcher et al reported the first series of in vitro fragmentation experiments with the FREDDY laser. In the current fragmentation study the size of the FREDDY laser fiber was somewhat smaller than that of the holmium:YAG fiber (280 and 365 μm, respectively). Previous studies of the relationship of stone fragmentation to fiber diameter with the holmium:YAG laser are equivocal in demonstrating a direct or indirect relationship. Stone retropulsion during intracorporeal lithotripsy is of serious concern during ureteroscopy. Unintentional displacement of stones from the ureter into the intrarenal collecting system can increase the complexity of ureteroscopic procedures, requiring special instruments (which increase cost), prolonged operative time and potentially greater patient morbidity. The use of an occlusive balloon or Stone Cone placed proximal to the calculus during ureteroscopic lithotripsy with any of the studied lithotrites may minimize the danger of stone migration to the upper tracts. Although plaster of Paris stones represent a useful research model, some stones found in the human urinary tract are not amenable to fragmentation with the FREDDY laser. For example, cystine stones do not absorb the 532 or 1,064 nm wavelengths emitted by the FREDDY laser and, therefore, they should be treated with other lithotrites. Investigations are currently under way at our laboratory to determine if altering the irrigation solution to change the surface characteristics of these stones would facilitate their fragmentation with the FREDDY laser. The FREDDY laser offers improved stone fragmentation efficiency and lower investment cost than the commonly used holmium:YAG laser lithotrite. However, the FREDDY laser is unable to fragment all stone compositions and it lacks the additional tissue applications of the holmium:YAG laser. Furthermore, there is an increase in stone retropulsion, which should be considered when using the FREDDY during intracorporeal lithotripsy. Therefore, we recommend the use of an occlusive device such as the Stone Cone proximal to the stone during ureteroscopic intracorporeal laser lithotripsy or in the ureteropelvic junction during percutaneous laser nephrostolithotripsy to minimize stone retropulsion. The clinical usefulness of the FREDDY is currently being assessed at our institution. 