Samples of the fine and superfine bauxite products from Porto Trombetas were studied in order to make possible the evaluation of the occurrence of iron bearing minerals and to verify the possibilities of minimizing their content. These samples are constituted by gibbsite, 63–68% in weight, iron oxy-hydroxides, 23–21% (basically hematite and goethite), clay minerals, 3–4%, and minor amounts of quartz, anatase, zircon and bohemite. Microscopy studies indicated that the iron is associated with gibbsite as classical locked particles or is presenting a very intimate intergrowth; discrete particles of hematite–goethite are responsible for 50–60% of the iron content. Mineral separations made by both magnetic and heavy liquids with two cut points each were carried out; magnetic and gravity separability curves showed that is possible to achieve a very substantial reduction of the iron content in association with very high recovery levels. The study showed that for bauxite fine and superfine products, Fe2O3 grades of 8% and 6%, respectively (53–55% of total Al2O3), would be achieved with potential aluminum recoveries at about 90% by gravity concentration or magnetic separation.The bauxite deposit of Porto Trombetas is located at the Low Amazon Basin, North of Brazil. The bauxite ore resulted from an in situ geochemical evolution of a thick layer of sediments ( In some areas of the deposit the fine and superfine products present high iron contents with free alumina far below the specifications. Fine and superfine pilot plant products with iron grades above 18% of Fe The samples were submitted to a particle size distribution by wet screening followed by chemical and mineralogical analyses as well as to magnetic and gravity separability studies. Mineralogical analysis were performed by X-ray diffraction, optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy with energy disperse X-ray spectrometer (SEM-EDS). Separability analyses were performed by size fraction considering two cut points either for magnetic and gravity separations. Gravity separability curves were attained by heavy liquid separations at 2.53 and 2.95 g/cm The chemical composition of the studied samples is presented on Particle size distributions presented as undersized cumulative curves are given on Mineralogical compositions are shown on Microscopy studies by optical microscopy and SEM-EDS pointed out that significant amount of iron shows a very intimate intergrowth with the gibbsite or is present as classical locked particles. Discrete free particles of hematite–goethite that would be possible separated by physical methods without further comminution represent 50–60% of the total iron content. A summary of the gravity separability results expressed as Al A summary of the magnetic separability studies expressed as Al Considering an iron content of 8% Fe Mineralogical studies indicated that the fine and superfine studied products are constituted by gibbsite, 63% and 68% in weight, iron bearing minerals, 23% and 21% (basically hematite and goethite), kaolinite, 3–4%, and minor amounts of quartz, anatase, zircon and bohemite. Microscopy studies showed that a significant amount of iron is related to discrete free particles of hematite–goethite that would be possibly separated by physical methods without further comminution. Both gravity concentration and magnetic separation methods would possibly be applied to achieve the desirable decrease on the iron content with high-related alumina recoveries. Further mineral dressing studies in pilot scale must be performed for a proper evaluation of the best option in face of the very high throughput of the bauxite fine and superfine products, unsteady products flow and local limitations on power supply. Reichert cones and spirals must be considered for gravity concentration after an additional desliming step and WHIMS for magnetic separation. The authors would like to acknowledge Mineracao Rio do Norte for their permit to publish the present data results.