The relationship between alumina leaching recovery in the Bayer process to the chemical modules of bauxite fed to the process has been studied using regression and artificial neural network (ANN) methods. The database for this study consisted of 332 sample analyses for bauxite and its subsequent red mud product, together with analyses of the leaching recovery in the Bayer process. The levels of Al2O3/SiO2, Al2O3/Fe2O3 and Al2O3/TiO2 were determined by SPSS software to be the appropriate predictors of Al2O3 leaching recovery in the stepwise variable selection procedure. The results of multivariable regression studies were not significant. The generalized regression neural network (GRNN) improved the correlation coefficient to an acceptable level of 0.86, with differences between −0.98% and +0.85% from the actual determined recovery. The proposed ANN method could be applied as a new method for the prediction of leaching recovery in the Bayer process, when the bauxite from different sources and with different chemical compositions is fed to the plant.Bauxite is a heterogeneous material consisting mainly of one or more aluminum hydroxide minerals, such as gibbsite [Al(OH) Alumina is produced from the Jajarm bauxite deposit in Iran via the Bayer process at a scale of 280,000 MT annually. Unlike the bauxite ores in most bauxite processing countries, the bauxite at Jajarm is mainly diasporic, with associated gangue minerals, such as kaolinite [(Al It is well known that ore chemical analysis can show the ore's mineralogical composition and that leaching recovery can be affected by variations in the feed mineralogical composition ( In the Bayer process, the bauxite dissolves in a sodium hydroxide solution at temperatures ranging from 100 °C to 250 °C, depending on the form of alumina in the bauxite ( In this work, the regression and artificial neural network (ANN) prediction of Al The abilities of neural networks, which were used as a tool to predict alumina recovery, have been approved for the modeling, identification and control of complex systems and to identify underlying highly complex relationships from input–output data ( A comprehensive database is required to cover the wide range of variations possible in the suggested procedure. Such a model must be able to predict the level of alumina recovery with a high degree of accuracy. Data used to test the proposed approach are taken from the Jajarm plant chemical analysis database daily. The database consisted of Al The “Al The leaching temperature and time were approximately fixed (274 Artificial neural networks represent a class of tools that can facilitate the exploration of large systems in ways not previously possible. These methods have seen explosive growth in the last decade and are still being developed at a breath-taking pace. In many ways neural networks can be viewed as nonlinear approaches to multivariate statistical methods, not bound by assumptions of normality or linearity. Although neural networks have originated outside the field of statistics, and have even been seen as an alternative to statistical methods in some circles, there are signs that this viewpoint is making way for an appreciation of the ways in which neural networks complement classical statistics ( Generally, a neural network contains one input layer, one or more hidden layers, and one output layer. Each layer comprises one or more neurons. The neurons are interconnected using weight factors. A neuron in a given layer receives information from all the neurons in the preceding layer. It sums the information, weighted by factors corresponding to the connection and the bias of the network, and transmits this sum to all the neurons of the next layer using a mathematical function ( The general regression neural network (GRNN), which is a kind of radial basis function (RBF) network, was developed by The GRNN predicts the value of one or more dependent variables, given the value of one or more independent variables. The GRNN thus takes as input a vector It is clear from Eq. In Eq. In this paper, the generalized regression neural network (GRNN) was recognized as a suitable predictor and used for the prediction of alumina leaching recovery at the Jajarm plant. Using a least-square mathematical method, the correlations between Al A stepwise variable selection procedure was used, in which variables are sequentially entered into the model. The first variable considered for reflecting into the equation is the one with largest positive or negative correlation with the dependent variable. This variable is entered into the equation only if it satisfies the criterion for entry. The next variable, with the largest partial correlation, is considered as the second equation input. The procedure stops when there are no variables that meet the entry criterion ( A linear regression plot for estimated recovery (Eq. A maximum recovery of 77.18% can be found in the applied database when the input variables of Al According to Eq. For using the GRNN in the MATLAB software package, the primary work was the arrangement of training and testing data. The process using the GRNN can be completed in two steps: Definition of input and output matrices for training phase after normalization, using the following statement:  Definition of input and output matrixes for testing phase, using the following statement:  The outputs, after the simulation step, are converted back into an unnormalized condition by the following equation: The test set, which examines the fidelity of the model, shows that the model could be used to estimate leaching recovery quite satisfactorily. The correlation coefficient (  The chemical modules of bauxite, which are representative of mineralogical composition, were used to predict alumina leaching recovery in the Bayer process. The variables Al Multivariable regression predicted the alumina leaching recovery with a correlation coefficient of 0.37 and differences of − The GRNN procedure predicted the Al It can be concluded that chemical modules of bauxite can be used as suitable predictors of alumina leaching recovery in the Bayer process. The proposed approach should be useful to geologists, mining engineers and plant engineers for evaluating the behavior of different ore types in the Bayer leaching process, and for suggesting suitable blendings of feed materials to achieve the highest/best recovery. The authors would like to acknowledge their appreciation of Mr. Ehteram, Managing Director of the Iran Alumina Company, and Mr. Shadloo, R&D manager of the Jajarm Alumina Company, for their kind assistance during this investigation; the first author would also like to thank the National Elite Foundation of Iran.