A study was made of the ceric-ammonium-nitrate-initiated graft copolymerization of polyacrylamide onto hydroxypropyl guar gum by solution polymerization technique. Six grades of graft copolymers have been synthesized by varying catalyst and monomer concentrations. The synthesized products were then characterized by various instrumental techniques like viscometry, elemental analysis, IR, thermal, XRD and SEM studies. The percentage of grafting increases with increasing catalyst concentration and decreases with monomer concentration taking other parameters constant.Graft copolymerization is a technique for modifying the chemical and physical properties of synthetic and natural polymers. Applications of these modification reactions are useful areas in polymer chemistry. Synthetic polymers are much more effective than natural ones due to their versatile tailorability. However, they are not shear resistant. Natural polymers mainly polysaccharides are fairly shear stable, biodegradable and cause drag reduction and flocculation at relatively higher concentrations. The biodegradability of natural polymers reduces their shelf-life and needs to be suitably controlled. It is thus evident that all polymers whether synthetic or natural have one or other disadvantages. Several attempts have been made in the past to combine the best properties of both by grafting synthetic polymers onto natural ones In the authors' laboratory, many graft copolymers have been synthesized by grafting polyacrylamide (PAM) onto starch Ceric ion has been used to initiate graft copolymerization of many monomers on various substrates HPG was procured from Shell, UK. Acrylamide was purchased from E. Merck, Germany. Ceric ammonium nitrate was obtained from Loba Chemie, Bombay, India. Acetone and hydroquinone were supplied by S.D. Fine Chemicals, India. Sodium nitrate was obtained from E. Merck, Bombay, India. HPG was used after purification. All other chemicals were used as supplied by the company. Natural polysaccharides contain proteins, fats and fiber materials as impurities. HPG was subjected to soxhlet extraction for about 70 h using 95% ethyl alcohol as suggested by Whitcomb and Macoskow Grafting reaction was carried out by ceric-ion-induced redox initiation method  Viscosity measurement of polymer solutions was carried out with the help of Ubbelohde viscometer (constant: 0.00575) at 27±0.1°C. The viscosities were measured in 1 M NaNO The elemental analysis of all the samples, namely, HPG and their graft copolymers was done using a Carlo Erba 1108 Elemental Analyzer. The estimation of only three elements, i.e., carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen was done. The infrared (IR) spectra of HPG, PAM, and HPG grafted PAM (HPG-g-PAM 6) were recorded in solid state using a KBr dispersion method in the transmittance mode. A Perkin–Elmer 630 IR spectrophotometer was used to record the IR spectra in the range of 4000–400 cm The thermal analysis of all the samples were carried out with Stanton Redcroft (STA 625) thermal analyzer. Both thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) of all the samples were performed up to a temperature of 600°C, starting from room temperature in an atmosphere of nitrogen. The heating rate was uniform in all cases at 10°C/min. Powder samples of all the polymers were subjected to XRD. PW 1840 and PW 1729 X-ray generator (Philips, Holland) were used for this study using CoKα radiation. The scattering angle (2 HPG was analyzed in scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in the powdered form. In the case of graft copolymers, small granules after sieving the pulverized samples were subjected for SEM study. PAM is also studied in the granular form. CAM SCAN SERIES-2 (Cambridge Scanning Company, UK) was used for the above study. The details of the graft copolymerization reaction and the percentage of grafting calculated are given in Intrinsic viscosity of a polymer is a measure of its hydrodynamic volume in solution, which in turn depends upon its molecular weight, structure, nature of the solvent and the temperature of the medium. For two polymers of approximately similar molecular weight, the branched polymer will have the lower hydrodynamic volume compared to its linear counterpart and thus have lower intrinsic viscosity value. Further, in the case of branched polymers, the longer is the branching, higher will be its intrinsic viscosity and vice versa. This has been observed in practice ( Molecular weight of the polymer samples can be estimated from the intrinsic viscosity [ The results of elemental analysis of HPG and all of its graft copolymers are listed in The IR spectra of HPG, HPG-g-PAM 6, and PAM are shown in In the case of PAM (   The TGA thermograms of HPG, HPG-g-PAM 6, and PAM obtained at a scan rate of 10°C/min in nitrogen atmosphere are shown in X-ray diffractograms of HPG, PAM, and HPG-g-PAM 6 are shown in  The present results conclude the occurrence of grafting of PAM onto HPG. Variation in the synthetic parameters results in a series of graft copolymers with varying number and length of PAM chains resulted in different intrinsic viscosities as well as different molecular weights. Study of IR spectra provides a strong proof of grafting. TGA results show different thermal decomposition patterns for the base polysaccharide and the corresponding graft copolymers. X-ray diffraction patterns show the presence of crystallinity in the case of PAM, which reduces on grafting due to disruption in the original structure. Morphological variation of graft copolymers, HPG, and PAM also support the above conclusion. The authors are grateful to ICAR (New Delhi) for financial support to carry out this research work.