Laboratory studies were carried out on the roasting of the bulk sulfide float, produced from the uranium mill at Jaduguda in India, assaying 11% Cu, 7% Ni, 0.4% Co and 3% Mo, adopting a factorial design scheme varying the roasting temperature in the range of 773–923 K, residence time between 4–6 h, addition of percentage quartz from 0 to 14, and addition of percent alkali sulfate between 0 and 6. Fisher's test indicated that the temperature, percent alkali addition and their interaction effects are effective for recovering Ni and Co in that order, whereas temperature alone was significant for recovering Cu. While leaching the roasted mass with water, an in situ solution pH of 3 was attained. Mo was partially recovered in these leach liquors since MoO3, formed while roasting, is not easily soluble under mild acidic conditions. Further roasting experiments at increased residence times for improving the recovery of Ni, and alkaline leaching experiments for recovering remaining Mo values from the initial leach residue indicated the possibility of recovering Cu, Ni, Co and Mo with corresponding overall yields of 98%, 65%, 93% and 93%, respectively by roasting at a temperature of 823 K, for 4 h residence time by adding 12% by wt. Li2SO4 before roasting.The concept of maximum utilization of a mined ore has a vital role in the exploitation of a deposit, not only in improving the economics of operation, but also in terms of conservation of valuable mineral resources, since mineral wealth is non-replenishable. The uranium ore from Jaduguda mine in India is one such deposit which needs to be looked into from this point of view. Apart from uranium, it also contains valuable minerals such as sulfide minerals of copper, molybdenum and nickel, as well as magnetite and apatite. Cobalt also occurs in diadochic substitution in the sulfide minerals. Recently, the occurrence of Au and platinum group elements (PGE) has also been reported Uranium Corporation of India Limited (UCIL), Jaduguda mines operates a 1200 ton/day mill mainly to recover the uranium values as an intermediate compound, namely, magnesium di-uranate. The run of mine ore after size reduction is processed first in the By-products Recovery Plant (BRP) in order to recover the sulfide minerals of copper, molybdenum and nickel in the form of a combined float termed the bulk sulfide float (BSF). The detailed beneficiation flowsheet of BRP is given in About 4 ton/day of BSF is produced in BRP. Its representative sample has been used as the feed in the present investigations. The mineralogical and chemical analyses of the BSF product collected at the plant are given in The chemical reactions during roasting of bulk sulfide product from the Jaduguda By-product Recovery Plant can be summarized as follows: Gas phase All the above reactions are exothermic. The heat evolved is more than adequate to maintain the reactants at the high temperature of reaction, once the reaction is initiated. All the roasting experiments were carried out on 40 g scale. The material to be roasted was charged into a silica boat and placed in a muffle furnace already heated to the desired temperature. The contents of the boat were periodically raked (at 1-h intervals) to ensure adequate exposure of all the particle surfaces to the experimental conditions. No airflow was introduced into the furnace during the reaction. After the desired residence time lapsed, the material was removed from the furnace and allowed to cool to atmospheric temperature. The roasted material was then leached in water for 30 min at 333 K, maintaining 30–40% solids by weight to obtain Cu, Ni, Co and Mo in the aqueous phase. The pH of the leach liquor was found to be around 3.3 as soon as the roasted material was mixed with water. The leach residue was again leached with water for 30 min under similar conditions. The two leach liquors were then combined and leach residue was thoroughly washed in order to obtain all the soluble values of CuSO Roasting experiments were carried out on BSF product according to a four-factor, two-level design of experiments to convert Cu, Ni, Co values into water-soluble CuSO The lower and upper levels of temperature are fixed close to the lower and upper limiting temperatures arrived at by The reactions during sulfatizing roasting of Ni and Co sulfides tend to slow down due to the formation of firm adherent shells of the reaction products on the surface of the mineral particles. It is reported in literature that formation of sulfates can be improved by using alkaline metal sulfates Another important parameter of any roasting process is the residence time. Hence, this factor was also considered as another variable of the factorially designed tests. The variables and their levels studied are given in The leach residues obtained in these experiments did not contain any of the metal sulfates. This was confirmed by analyzing the leach residues for SO The main effects and the interaction effects of the four variables studied are calculated by the analysis of variance (ANOVA) Fisher's test indicates that the main effect of temperature ( It is evident from the results of factorial tests that it is possible to extract >90% values of Cu and Co, while the recovery of nickel was low even under the optimum roasting conditions. In order to increase the yield of Ni, more experiments were carried out to study the effects of addition of alkali sulfate ( Though the discovery that the addition of alkali sulfates such as Li Since it was observed in factorial design tests that the effect of addition of Na As it was observed in the factorial design experiments that the temperature was another important factor playing a significant role, a few more roasting experiments were conducted varying the temperature in smaller step sizes ranging from 773 to 923 K. In all these tests, other roasting parameters were maintained at optimum values determined by the experiments conducted earlier. They include 12% (by weight) addition of Li The recovery curves of all three metals show that the recovery is nearly constant between 773 and 823 K, but decreases with temperature beyond 823 K. Hence, the optimal temperature of roasting must be within this range of temperature. It is also well known that the rate of reaction increases with temperature and hence the operating temperature must be as high as possible. This implies that the optimum roasting temperature should be around 823 K, which is well between the two theoretical limiting temperatures (753 and 923 K) arrived at from The statistical analysis of factorial design test results revealed that there is no effect of residence time on the recovery of Cu, Ni and Co. It was suspected that the step size considered in the case of residence time was not adequate to produce any effect on the recovery of the three metals. Hence, experiments were conducted at increased residence times beyond 6 h, mainly to check whether any improvement in the conversion of NiS to NiSO Having obtained a satisfactory level of extraction of Cu, Ni and Co, attempts were directed towards recovering the remaining Mo values in the leach residue. In all the above experiments, the in situ pH attained by the leach liquor as soon as the roasted material was mixed in water was around 3.3. Hence, MoO The studies on roasting of bulk sulfide float (BSF) under static bed conditions have revealed the feasibility of converting the valuable metals Cu, Ni and Co into water-soluble sulfate form and Mo into MoO Further experiments are needed on a large scale to implement the process on an industrial scale. Although various types of furnaces such as shaft furnace, multiple hearth furnace and fluidized bed roasting furnaces can be used, fluidized bed roasters are being increasingly applied because of better heat transfer and material transport. In addition, the roasting of sulfides being highly exothermic, spot temperature excursions and the resultant clinkering can be better avoided in fluidized bed reactors. A 2 kg/h fluidized bed roaster has been fabricated in the laboratory for carrying out studies under dynamic roasting conditions. This process, when fully developed, would be superior to the existing process of differential flotation of BSF at Jaduguda By-product Recovery Plant in that not only the recoveries of Cu and Mo would be higher but also the Ni and Co values can be recovered additionally. The authors are profusely thankful to Dr. N. Krishna Rao, Ex Head of Ore Dressing Section under whose guidance and constant encouragement the above work has been carried out. They are also grateful to Dr. C.K. Gupta, Ex Director, Materials Group, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre for his keen interest evinced during the course of investigation. Thanks are also due to their colleagues in Analytical Chemical Laboratory and Petrological Laboratory of this section for the analyses of various samples generated while carrying out the experiments.