Impact induced fragmentation has been extensively studied in mechanical, geotechnical, aerospace and mining communities due to its direct relevance to a variety of engineering applications. In the present work, we investigated the fragmentation of quasi-brittle spheres subjected to a range of impact velocities using the combined finite and discrete element method (FDEM) coupled with a rate-dependent cohesive zone fracture model. The statistics of fragment mass distribution and shape characteristics are collected and interpreted using fractal analysis. The fragment mass distribution can be described by a power law with the exponential coefficient depending on the impact velocity. Whereas some previous experimental and numerical studies have revealed a high degree of robustness of the exponent against the impact velocity. At higher velocities, the concentrated local stress at the contact point initiates an increased number of microcracks which evolve into finer fragments as the kinetic energy converts to surface energy during the comminution. Such mechanism results in finer post-impact fragment size distributions that correspond to higher power law coefficients. The variation of fragment shape with respect to impact velocity is characterized by the Domokos shape descriptor and aspect ratio. It is found that all the fragment shapes will cease their variation and reach stable distributions as the impact velocities elevate. The variations of fracture patterns, the two largest fragments, and the average fragment mass with impact velocity are in good qualitative agreement with the existing experimental and numerical results. The present study demonstrates that the combined FDEM coupled with the cohesive zone model is a promising tool in fragmentation studies for its physical soundness and its convenience in conducting detailed post-impact fragment size and shape analyses.Impact induced fragmentation of solid particles has been intensively studied by various research communities due to its direct relevance to aerospace engineering Experimental studies of either the single or double impact of individual spheres have been largely employed to understand the complex fracture mechanisms that govern the fragmentation process In parallel with continuum modeling, discrete element modeling (DEM) has been used to explore the detailed fracture process during an impact event. The application of DEM in impact fragmentation dates back to Potapov and Campbell Noticing the abovementioned advantages of continuum-based finite element modeling (FEM) and discrete-based DEM numerical approaches, we use the combined finite element method and discrete element method (FDEM) to study the fracturing and comminution of granular materials. FDEM is a time-explicit numerical method initially developed by Munjiza et al. In the current study, we limit our attention to a single particle subjected to high-velocity impact. FDEM can be readily extended to study the comminution of a batch of particles. The primary goal is to validate the physical soundness and the numerical stability of the combined FDEM and cohesive element scheme. A spherical grain is simulated to facilitate a direct comparison with the previous experimental and numerical studies, while the influence of grain geometry on fragmentation is not considered Among many computational techniques for modeling fracture propagation, the cohesive zone model combined with FEM or FDEM has demonstrated advantages in convergence and convenience in implementation The traction-separation behavior of fracture zone interfaces for different materials can be described by assigning various constitutive relationships. Several constitutive relationships of the cohesive zone model have been developed by experimental results from 3-point bending or 4-point bending tests It is possible to allow for a coupling between normal and shear components (i.e., adopting non-zero off-diagonal terms in The cohesive crack model requires the maximum traction Note that the engineering mechanics sign convention is adopted with tensile stress as positive. As shown in The tensile strength It should be noted that the above constitutive law of CIE is rate independent. The rate-dependency only comes from the inertial effect, which does not capture the entire physics of high-rate comminution A sphere with diameter of 60 The sphere is discretized using second-order tetrahedron elements and CIEs inserted along the boundaries of tetrahedrons. The mesh size effects are inevitable when using the standard cohesive zone model. The element sizes need to be less than the FPZ length to obtain reliable results using the cohesive zone model. Otherwise, the stress gradient in front of the fracture tip and fracture energy cannot be represented accurately when the FPZ is discretized by too few elements. As summarized by Turon et al. On the other hand, the minimum number of CIEs needed in the FPZ is not well established In the combined FDEM, each fragment is a subdomain of the original mesh. Their geometrical traits are identified by looping over the topology-based mesh data structure and then stored in a fragment library. This library is a structured collection of the objects of fragments that records the vertex coordinates and face-node connectivity. The fragment library is then used for the subsequent fractal and morphologic analysis. The surface area of a fragment can be computed from the surface mesh of the fragment that consists a set of non-overlapping triangles forming a closed surface. The volume of a fragment is computed by summation of the sub-volumes of all the tetrahedrons in the mesh. Principal component analysis (PCA) is employed to determine the orientation of the principal axes of fragments. PCA is a mathematical tool that transforms the data to a new coordinate system such that the greatest variance by some projection of the data comes to lie on the first coordinate, the second greatest variance on the second coordinate, and so on The size of a spherical object can be unambiguously defined by its diameter. However, fragments are typically non-spherical and highly irregular. Hereafter, the volume-based fragment size is defined as the diameter of the spheres that has the same volume as a given fragment In addition, three other shape descriptors, the Domokos shape factor During an impact process, the monitored quantities include the wall reaction force, the number of broken CIEs, and the energy distributed in the system. The accumulated fraction of broken CIEs is defined as the ratio of broken CIEs to the initial number of CIEs prior to impact. The kinetic energy is calculated from the velocity and mass of all fragments and is normalized by the initial kinetic energy of the sphere.  We make a comparison of the fracture patterns at the impact time of 0.1 By studying the evolution of the mass of the largest and second largest fragments in response to changing impact velocities, we can identify a critical velocity The evolution of fragment sizes with varying velocity can also be analyzed by studying the moments of fragment masses To further validate our simulation, we made a multiplicity analysis, which was introduced in the analysis of brittle fragmentation of glass Upon impact, multiple micro-cracks initiate at seemingly random locations and then coalesce as fracturing proceeds, resulting in the formation of fragments. This catastrophic process appears chaotic and unpredictable. However, out of the randomness, experimental studies on fragmentation phenomena have shown that the probabilistic mass distribution follows a simple power law above the critical impact velocity: In addition to the number density function defined in Eq. An alternative representation of the size-frequency distribution is the Gates–Gaudin–Schuhmann type: Based on simple mathematical derivations, Turcotte The dependency of the fragment mass distribution on impact velocity can be viewed more clearly in Similar results have been obtained from several earlier experimental studies. For example, it has been found that the fitting parameter A possible explanation is the dominant cracking mechanism occurred at different impact velocities. We defined a mode mix ratio As described in  We investigated the impact fragmentation of quasi-brittle spheres using the combined FDEM approach instead of DEM. The numerical results are in good qualitative agreement with the existing experimental studies and DEM simulations, which demonstrates that the combined FDEM analysis provides a valuable tool for the modeling of impact induced fragmentation. The mesh convergence analysis suggests that the FPZ should at least be discretized by approximately five CIEs to eliminate the mesh size effects. The main findings of this study are as follows: (1) With the energy conservation analysis, we found that damage dissipated energy is no more than 1% in all cases. A significant amount of kinetic energy from the main sphere can be taken away by the fragmented particles and further dissipated through subsequent collisions and friction with other fragments. The dependency of the fracture pattern on the impact velocity and the evolution of the mass of the two largest fragments when changing the impact velocity are in good agreement with previous experimental observations and numerical simulations, which corroborates the combined FDEM and CIE technique as a promising qualitative and potentially quantitative tool for studying dynamic fragmentation problems. (2) The impact fragmentation near the critical velocity doesn’t follow a universal scaling law. This can be explained by the fact that the dominant cracking mechanism occurred under different impact velocities. Under lower impact velocities, the fragments are mainly generated by a tension dominated breakup. However, the fracture process gradually changes when shear plays a role in the crack formation at higher impact velocities, which will generate more micro-cracks and further reduce the fragment sizes. This mechanism causes the relative frequency of large pieces to decrease significantly and leads to a faster decay of the distribution with a smaller exponent (3) Apart from the critical velocity of 7.5 (4) The generated fragments are typically more angular and more elongated at higher impact velocities. The evolution of the cumulative distribution of shape descriptors indicates that the fragment shapes change significantly near the critical impact velocity. Both the fitting parameters for the cumulative distributions of Domokos shape factor and convexity converge to stable values at higher impact velocities. This means that fragment shapes will cease their evolution and reach stable distributions as the impact velocities elevate. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the