When a publication is cited it generates a benefit. Through the country affiliations of the citing authors, it is possible to work upwards, tracing the countries that benefit from results produced in a national research system. In this work we take the knowledge flow from Italy as an example. We develop a methodology for examination of how the knowledge flows vary across fields, in each beneficiary country. We also measure the field comparative advantage of countries in benefiting from Italian research. The results from this method can inform bilateral research collaboration policies.The essence of scientific activity is information processing. Scientists talk to one another, read each other’s papers, and most important, they publish scientific papers. The science system consumes, transforms, produces, and exchanges “information”. The aim is to produce new knowledge. Knowledge has several peculiar features compared to other goods. Knowledge is intangible, as its essence is information. It is cumulative, which means that the present global stock and level of knowledge is the direct result of scientific advancements achieved by past generations. Knowledge does not wear out physically, and can be used unlimited times without diminishing its substance: it is “infinitely expansible without loss of its intrinsic qualities, so that it can be possessed and used jointly by as many as care to do so” ( In the current knowledge-based economy, the ability of national science systems to keep abreast and produce new scientific and technological advances is of paramount importance for sustaining domestic industrial competitiveness and socio-economic development. Access to new knowledge takes place via the channels that the scientists use to offer and disseminate it. Because the scientists’ principal goal is to produce new knowledge and diffuse it, they typically encode it in publications. New knowledge spreads internationally through scientific and technical literature, seminars and conferences, and personal communication between researchers. In addition to publications, the literature recognizes social networks ( In this work, we investigate the geographical flows of knowledge, To the best of our knowledge, there are very few studies on the geographic flows of “public” knowledge produced by countries. Moreover, they are very limited in scope. In this work, we extend the scope of previous studies, investigating the domestic and transnational flows of scientific knowledge produced in Italy, how these vary across fields, and the sectoral specialization of the countries benefiting from Italian research. The same methodology could also be applied for other countries. In the next section we present the data and method of analysis. Section To answer the questions of who benefits from a country’s scientific research, and whether differences occur across fields, we need to measure the flows of knowledge produced in the country. To this purpose, we adopt a bibliometric approach. All limitations and assumptions typical of bibliometric analyses then apply. Furthermore, from a geographical perspective, we define a publication as “made in” a source country if at least 50% of the institutions authoring it belong to that country. In this work we analyze the geographical flows of knowledge produced in Italy and encoded in publications (articles, reviews, letters, conference proceedings) indexed in the Web of Science (WoS) over the period 2004–2008. We carry out field level analysis, considering the WoS subject category (SC) identified for the journal that hosts the cited publication. We adopt a “full counting” approach, meaning that a publication published in multi-category journals is fully assigned to each SC. The cited Italian publications are distributed over 216 SCs in 13 scientific macro-areas We retrieve the country names of citing publications based on the affiliations of the authors. The resulting list includes two countries that have since subdivided: Yugoslavia and Serbia-Montenegro. We observe the dates of these events and reassign the subsequent scientific production among the current countries. The 179,110 2004–2008 Italian publications were cited by 2,211,772 publications. Since each citing paper cites on average 1.66 Italian publications, total benefits (to the end of 2015) amounted to 3,666,633. Each benefit was earned on average by 1.4 countries, so the total amount of gains was 5,124,147. In the following Subsection, we present the distribution of gains among countries, at both the aggregate and SC level. In Subsection For each citing country, we calculate the total number of gains. We now turn to field level analysis. To assess possible differences across fields, we repeat the same analysis in each SC. As an example, in  In SCs where Italy is not dominant, it is either second (in 63 SCs) or third (in 4) in share of gains; the USA follows closely, showing only one SC (Architecture & Art) where it falls below fifth position. Next, we explore the complementary aspect of gains earned by Italy and USA, per SC. As of the close of 2015, the 2004–2008 Italian scientific production had been cited by authors affiliated with institutions of 197 countries, out of the 204 indexed by InCites. In this section we present the results of the analysis of the geographical reach of (i.e. the number of countries that benefited from) Italian research in each SC. We expect that the higher the number and impact of cited publications in an SC, the higher will be the geographical reach of the SC. In fact the rank correlation coefficient (Spearman ρ) between geographical reach and number of publications is 0.812, and between geographical reach and average impact (average benefit per publication of the SC) the coefficient is 0.514. In  To control for the number of cited publications, we extract from each SC 100 random samples, each consisting of 100 cited publications. For each sample, we measure the geographical reach. We then average the 100 values of the geographical reach in each SC. In this subsection, we answer the last research question on the capability of countries to appropriate benefits across Italian research SCs, as compared to the rest of the world. We measure this sectoral specialization through an indicator named Scientific Gain Specialization Index (SGSI). SGSI measures a country’s capacity to benefit from another country’s research as compared to the rest of the world, across all research fields. SGSI is conceptually similar to the merchandise trade specialization index, whereby merchandise is replaced by knowledge. In operational terms, SGSI is calculated applying the Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA) methodology and, in particular, the with We adopt two perspectives: one domestic and one international. For the Italian case,  This analysis can be replicated for each country, to identify the SCs in which each country shows the highest comparative advantages in gaining from Italian research. To exemplify, Brazil shows the highest SGSI (94.1) in Dentistry, oral surgery & medicine; India in Integrative & complementary medicine (84.3); the Netherlands in Medieval & renaissance studies (93.0); South Korea in Engineering, marine (80.9) and so on. Most studies on international knowledge flows focus on cross-sector flows, particularly public-to-private knowledge flows, within a wider technology transfer perspective (Reddy & Zhao, 1990). Another current of studies in flows of knowledge enters under the umbrella of literature on international R&D collaboration ( Starting from the national scientific output indexed in WoS between 2004 and 2008, we have traced all citing publications upward, thus identifying all citing countries who benefited from Italian research over the period observed. There were 197 such countries to the end of 2015, out of the 204 indexed by InCites. As expected, we found a high correlation between the research size of recipient countries and their ability to benefit from Italian research. Also as expected, Italy results as the main beneficiary of its own research results, explained by concomitant factors: size and level of domestic stock of knowledge, self-citations, higher intensity of domestic collaborations favored by social and geographical proximity, and orientation of some research activities towards knowledge uniquely relevant to the given national context. Next, through a Scientific Gain Specialization Index, we were able to measure the comparative advantage of single countries in benefiting from Italian research, field by field. In comparing between fields, this analysis reveals the ones in which Italy (or another country under observation) benefits from its own research more than do other countries. The methodology developed provides useful results for informing national research strategies, for example the analysis of comparative advantage of foreign countries could be particularly pertinent concerning bilateral collaboration. Extending the observation period, would allow cross-time analysis to monitor how such comparative advantages vary along time. Thinking of a very few cases, such analyses could be of interest to diplomatic attachés, or trade negotiators dealing with scientific issues. In future research, we intend to extend the analysis to two or more other countries, then being able to carry out comparisons between countries in terms of their incoming and outgoing knowledge flows. The ultimate goal would be to measure the balance of knowledge flows for all countries, paralleling the measurement of technology balance of payments, and make this alongside other yearly reports of science and technology indicators. Giovanni Abramo: Conceived and designed the analysis, collected the data, contributed data or analysis tools, performed the analysis, wrote the paper. Ciriaco Andrea D’Angelo: Conceived and designed the analysis, collected the data, contributed data or analysis tools, performed the analysis, wrote the paper.