This study presents a new method to produce lightweight aggregates (LWAs) by granulating peat-wood ash using alkali activators. Peat-wood ash was granulated with potassium silicate and sodium aluminate in a high-shear granulator to produce spherical granules. Blast furnace slag, coal fly ash and metakaolin were studied as co-binders. A suitable liquid/solid ratio, granulation growth type, microstructure, strength, and crystal structure of granules have been determined. The granulation proceeded by induction-type growth behaviour and suitable liquid/solid ratio was between 0.34 and 0.43. In the BSE images it was observed that the precursor particles were embedded in a dense alumino-silicate matrix. The X-ray diffraction analysis supported the success of the alkali activation. All co-binders increased the strength of the granules, but the blast furnace slag produced the strongest granules. The study shows that by simultaneous granulation and alkali activation it is possible to increase the utilisation of ash and produce valuable products.The European Union has set a target to decrease CO One way to utilize ash and other waste materials is to produce lightweight aggregates (LWAs) that can be used in lightweight concrete or in civil engineering. Artificial LWAs made from waste by granulation, agglomeration or pelletization are ecologically sound since natural aggregates are saved and damaging activities of aggregate mining are prevented. LWAs are also cost efficient because waste materials are turned into products that can be sold. Different waste materials such as ash ( An interesting option to bypass the usage of cement and high-temperature sintering is alkali activation. Alkali activation of coal fly ash has been intensively researched during the last few decades and has been comprehensively reviewed in a state-of-the-art report by Provis and van Deventer ( The objective of this study was to make granules from peat-wood ash using an alkali activator as the liquid binding phase to glue the primary particles together in a permanent alumino-silicate matrix. The intention was to produce spherical granules using a high shear granulator and appropriate granulation conditions. To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have used the approach described herein to produce LWAs. We studied the effect of different alkali activators and co-binders on the strength of the granules. The paper aims for a proof of principle and focuses on the granulation mechanism and the extent of the alkali activation reaction. Peat-wood fly ash (P) was collected from a power plant that uses a circulating fluidised bed boiler. The proportion of wood in the fuel mix was approximately 30%. Ground-granulated blast furnace slag (S) (ORCEM, the Netherlands), coal fly ash (C) and metakaolin (M) were used as co-binders, and their effects on granulation and alkali activation were studied. The coal ash was from a pulverised fuel power plant. Metakaolin was obtained by thermal treatment of kaolin (Sigma Aldrich) at 750 Potassium silicate (KSil) solution was chosen as an alkali activator for its known ability to produce strong AAMs, especially with coal fly ash and slag ( Nine batches with different compositions were prepared ( A high-shear granulator (Eirich R-02) was chosen for this study due to its known ability to spread viscous liquids, to process sticky material and to produce more compact granules than low-shear granulators ( The granulation process was carried out using the following method: Dry precursors were weighed and mixed carefully prior to the granulation. Mixed material was added to the drum, and the drum and impeller were switched on. Liquid was added by drops on to the powder bed rotating inside the drum with a spray flask from the hatch of the granulator. Process was continued until the granules stopped growing. Each batch was sealed in an air-tight plastic bag and stored at room temperature until the analysis of the granules. The chemical composition of the precursors was determined with X-ray fluorescence (XRF) from a melt-fused tablet. The particle size distributions were measured with a Beckman Coulter LS 13320 and reported as volumetric-based size (d The crushing strength of the granules after 28 days was measured with a Zwick, Z100 Roell testing machine. TestXpert II-software was used to determine the crushing force of the granules. The pre-load force was 5 N, and the compression speed was 0.01 Loose bulk density and the granule size distribution were determined with standards ( A Siemens 5000 X-ray diffractometer with CuKα radiation (40 The cross-sections of three granules (5–6 The chemical composition of the precursors and their particle sizes are presented in  Standard ( The alkali activation reaction changes the conditions of granule formation during granulation. The alkali activator dissolves reactive alumino-silicates from the precursor particles, which then form a silicate-aluminate gel ( In contrast to previous studies on alkali activation of peat-wood ash ( In general, three separate phases can be observed in the granulation process: 1) wetting and nucleation, 2) growth and compaction and 3) breakage and attrition ( In the present study, the granule size growth was observed every 30 After 8–14 The scale-up is not straightforward for granulation processes and should be studied separately, especially when the material has a heterogeneous composition and alkali activation reaction may change the granulation conditions. However, after the experiments made in this study other waste materials (ashes, mine tailings and slags) have been successfully granulated with the same granulation parameters, but with different high shear granulator and different alkali activators [Unpublished results], which gives confidence that the findings are applicable more broadly. The granule size distribution varied from 0.125 The granule size distribution varied from 0.125 The strength of the granules was measured after 28  Cold-bonded fly ash-slag-cement granules were prepared by ( González-Corrochano et al. produced sludge-fly ash-used motor oil ( where X is the granule diameter and F is the fracture load force. As calculated by Eq. Arslan and Baykal ( In this equation, F is the fracture load force and d is the mean diameter of granule. Calculating by Eq.   The X-ray diffractogram of slag ( Coal fly ash contained quartz, mullite and amorphous material ( Quartz, anatase, muscovite and amorphous material were identified in the metakaolin diffractogram (  The angular shape and small particle size of slag can enhance granulation ( There is a distinct difference between the samples granulated with H In ordinary Portland cement concrete and concrete-type AAMs, the porosity of the product is an important factor affecting its applications ( Based on these results, a descriptive diagram modelling the granulation-alkali activation process is shown in a schematic way in In the present study, a new method to produce LWAs is presented. It was shown that by granulating peat-wood fly ash with an alkali-activator it is possible to produce strong LWAs. The granulation resulted in a relatively narrow size distribution with spherical granules. The granulation mechanism was induction type. The most suitable liquid/solid ratio was between 0.34–0.43, regardless of the composition of the precursor or the binder liquid. The use of KSil rather than Na-Alu as an activator resulted in higher strength granules. All co-binders increased the strength of the granules, but the strongest granules were obtained with slag. The peat-wood contained crystalline and amorphous material. An amorphous halo between 20° and 40° 2Θ was observed in the X-ray diffractograms of the alkali-activated samples, supporting the success of the alkali activation. In the BSE images it was observed that the precursor particles embedded in a dense alumino-silicate matrix. The production of the strongest granules with slag as a co-binder is likely due to it having a suitable particle size distribution, which enhanced packing. It was also the most reactive co-binder in alkali activation. Granulation of peat-wood ash by alkali activators can increase the utilisation of ash and generate valuable products that could be used in civil engineering or lightweight concrete. More generally, the manufacture of artificial aggregates from waste not only helps save natural resources, but offers an ecological solution to waste management. However, the bioavailability of hazardous components in granules should be studied before large scale usage becomes applicable. The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This work was carried out under the auspices of the “GEOPO” project supported by the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (Tekes) and various companies (Boliden Harjavalta Oy, Ekokem-Palvelu Oy, Fortum Power and Heat Oy, Helen Oy, Jyväskylän Energia Oy, Kemira Chemicals Oy, Valmet Power Oy, Metsä Group, Napapiirin Energia ja Vesi, Stora Enso Oyj, and UPM). The authors would like to thank the