Ecological economics has grown to be an active field with annual conferences, a technical journal devoted to the subject and international professional societies. Graduate students are attracted to the field by the exciting new interdisciplinary ideas that are being discussed. For many the field is critical because it raises hope that rational and sustainable environmental policies are possible. One major challenge of ecological economics has been the development of a system that will properly account for values in both nature and human societies. While most ecological economists have struggled to accommodate conventional economic philosophy in working on this challenge, H.T. Odum developed a novel approach that uses energy as a common denominator and that is based on a “donor” system of value instead of a “receiver” system based on utility ( From 1956 to 1963, Odum worked as the Director of the Marine Institute of the University of Texas, on the Gulf of Mexico coast near Corpus Christi, Texas. These were very productive years in terms of developing many ideas, including new theories of energetics, but most of his time was spent recording and analyzing diurnal oxygen curves from the Texas bays (see enclosed paper by Swaney and Hall). Hundreds of such curves were generated for the calculation of ecosystem metabolism. Comparisons of curves taken in pristine areas with those from areas with human impacts often demonstrated the loss of metabolism due to the impacts. These comparisons probably allowed Odum to express human impacts in terms of the ecological energetics that he observed in the changed metabolism. Somehow Odum got the idea (  In retrospect this appears to be a rather simplistic approach to ecosystem valuation but it represents a major intellectual leap. Odum helped in some way with this calculation since Anderson credits an interview with him in a footnote of his paper as the source for the 50% reduction factor due to ecological consumption. So Odum was involved to a greater or lesser extent in the first calculation of the value of an ecosystem service in 1958! However, he seems to have known this value was not quite correct because he only published it once (p. 147 in By the mid-1970s Odum had developed a system of energy quality factors or transformities to refine the life support calculation but the basis of the method of converting between energy and dollars has remained the same through to the present state of emergy analysis ( 