Purpose
                  To perform a biomechanical analysis of suture bridge fixation for tibial eminence fractures using PushLock anchors (Arthrex, Naples, FL) and compare it with traditional suture fixation and screw fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  This study used 24 porcine knees, divided into 3 comparison fixation groups: PushLock suture bridge fixation, screw fixation, and suture fixation. Each knee was dissected of all soft tissue, leaving only the anterior cruciate ligament. A tibial eminence fracture was created with disruption of the posterior hinge, and each knee was fixed with a randomly assigned fixation technique. After fixation, each knee underwent 2 phases of biomechanical testing. The initial cyclic dynamic phase assessed the displacement change after 200 cycles (in millimeters) and initial stiffness (in Newtons per millimeter) of the fixation construct. After completion of dynamic testing, each specimen underwent a single tensile failure test load to assess ultimate failure load (in Newtons) and displacement (in millimeters) to ultimate failure.
               
                  Results
                  There was a significant difference for the load-to-failure outcome variable among treatment groups (P = .004 by analysis of variance, 1 – β = 0.851). Mean ultimate failure load borne by the PushLock fixation group was statistically significantly higher in comparison with the screw (P = .007) and suture (P = .017) fixation groups. For the cyclical testing, the primary outcome variable of displacement change after 200 loading cycles failed to show a significant difference among the 3 groups (P = .412).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Suture bridge fixation with PushLock anchors is a new and effective surgical technique for the treatment of displaced tibial eminence fractures. By use of a high–bone density animal model, our results suggest that this suture bridge construct provides superior fixation with regard to ultimate failure load compared with standard screw fixation and suture fixation.
               
                  Clinical Relevance
                  The suture bridge technique provides another fixation option for displaced tibial eminence fractures with comparable, and in some instances superior, biomechanical properties to screw fixation and suture fixation.The tibial eminence is a nonarticular portion of the tibial plateau that serves as an attachment site for the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL), as well as the ligamentous ends of the medial and lateral menisci. On the basis of the classification system established by Meyers and McKeever The use of suture bridge fixation for the repair of both bony and soft-tissue pathology in orthopaedics has been extensively studied, primarily in the shoulder for repair of rotator cuff tears and greater tuberosity fractures. In this study 24 immature porcine knees were obtained and used. For each knee, the soft tissues and ligaments were completely dissected off the specimen with the exception of the intact ACL. For each specimen, a tibial spine fracture was created with a small osteotome. The dimensions of a penny (2 × 2 cm) were used as a template for creation of the fracture, and the depth was approximately 1 cm ( In the PushLock fixation group, the tibial spine fracture was fixed with three 3.5-mm polyetheretherketone PushLock anchors placed in the same locations as in the described surgical technique. A posterior anchor, preloaded with 2 strands of No. 2 FiberWire (Arthrex), was placed into the base of the tibial spine fracture ( In the screw fixation group, the tibial spine fracture was fixed with an antegrade, cannulated, 3.5-mm-diameter by 35-mm-long, fully threaded cortical screw. The tibial spine fracture was held reduced, and a guide pin was inserted perpendicular to the fracture line. The guide pin was overdrilled with a 2.7-mm drill, followed by placement of the cortical screw for fixation. In the suture fixation group, the tibial spine fracture was fixed with No. 2 FiberWire suture. After reduction of the fracture, a tibial tunnel drill guide was used to drill retrograde from the medial side of the tibia into the fracture fragment. This was performed twice to create 2 holes separated over a bony bridge. The holes on the fracture fragment were medial and lateral. A single No. 2 FiberWire was then passed through the drill holes and tied over a button on the medial tibial cortex to secure the fracture fragment. Biomechanical testing was performed with a method similar to that described by Mahar et al. There was a significant difference for the load-to-failure outcome variable among treatment groups ( For cyclical testing, the primary outcome variable of displacement change after 200 loading cycles failed to show a significant difference among the 3 groups ( Surgical fixation of tibial eminence fractures can be performed with either open or arthroscopic techniques, depending on the comfort level of the surgeon. Arthroscopy confers several advantages. Given the incidence of other concomitant intra-articular injuries, arthroscopy allows for an extensive inspection of the knee joint to identify and manage these associated injuries. It also minimizes the soft-tissue disruption and dissection that are associated with use of an arthrotomy for open fixation. The most common arthroscopic techniques for tibial eminence fractures are suture fixation and screw fixation. Many studies in the literature have reported good clinical results for both screw fixation and suture fixation, with high union rates and low rates of knee laxity. Suture bridge fixation of displaced tibial eminence fractures with PushLock anchors is an effective, growth plate–sparing technique that allows for rigid fixation of the fracture fragment. Biomechanical testing showed a statistically significantly higher ultimate failure load in comparison with suture and antegrade screw fixation. In this study there was no significant difference for ultimate failure load in comparing screw fixation and suture fixation, which is similar to the conclusion of Mahar et al. Two of the other testing outcomes (initial stiffness and displacement after 200 cycles) were similar among the 3 fixation groups. In addition, screw fixation did show less displacement to ultimate failure than both PushLock and suture fixation. Appropriately, in all 3 fixation groups, the initial stiffness was statistically similar, indicating that the quality of the initial fixation construct was adequate. This outcome measure was determined during the fifth loading cycle of the dynamic testing, not for the full 200 cycles. At the conclusion of the 200 cycles of tension loading between 5 and 150 N, the displacement of the fracture fragment was similar among the 3 fixation groups. This finding indicates that all 3 techniques were adequate at withstanding mild tension forces placed on the fracture fixation. Had the testing samples undergone cyclic testing at higher load, there may have been a difference in displacement among the 3 groups. With 1 primary outcome showing statistically similar results among the 3 groups (displacement after 200 cycles) and 1 primary outcome favoring the suture bridge construct (ultimate failure load), it is safe to conclude that suture bridge fixation with PushLock anchors is definitely comparable to screw fixation and suture fixation and likely provides a more rigid ultimate fixation, given its ability to tolerate a higher load. This ability to tolerate a higher ultimate failure load may allow for more aggressive rehabilitation protocols and quicker progressive weight bearing in the postoperative period. Regarding the secondary outcomes, the lower displacement to failure seen in the screw fixation group is logical because it was not able to tolerate as high of an ultimate load in comparison with PushLock fixation. Given similar construct stiffness, by definition, the screw fixation group must have less displacement at its lower ultimate failure load. Given that this is an in vitro biomechanical study, there are inherently several study limitations. Porcine knee joints were used in the experimental procedure in place of cadaveric knee joints. Though not a perfect match, porcine bone has been shown to be a reasonable choice to simulate human bone for research purposes. Suture bridge fixation with PushLock anchors is a new and effective surgical technique for the treatment of displaced tibial eminence fractures. By use of a high–bone density animal model, our results suggest that this suture bridge construct provides superior fixation with regard to ultimate failure load compared with standard screw fixation and suture fixation.