The effect of lubrication on the evolution of microstructure and texture during hot rolling was studied by means of texture analysis and finite element method (FEM) simulations. Hot rolling with lubrication gave rise to the formation of uniform rolling texture in the whole thickness layers, whereas hot rolling without lubrication led to the evolution of the pronounced through-thickness texture gradients. FEM calculations reveal that a larger friction between roll and sample causes a strain state severely deviated from a plane strain leading to the formation of shear textures in the thickness layers close to the surface.Rolling deformation can be simplified by a plane strain state. However, the strain state during rolling is strongly deviated from a plane strain state, since factors like geometrical changes during a rolling pass, friction between roll and sheet surface and strain and temperature gradients upon hot rolling can cause severe deviations from the plane strain condition (e.g. The evolution of through-thickness texture gradients during cold rolling was reported in detail elsewhere (e.g. The as received material was hot band of the commercial aluminum alloy AA 1050 with a thickness of 10 The crystallographic textures of the rolled sheets were determined by measuring pole figures by means of an X-ray texture goniometer. From three incomplete pole figures, the orientation distribution functions (ODF) During rolling, aluminum alloys tend to form the well-known copper-type rolling texture which is characterized by the development of preferred orientations along the β-fiber  Dry hot rolling led to a remarkable difference in the texture evolution, and totally different textures were observed in the thickness layers from the mid-thickness layer between center and surface In order to investigate the evolution of the micro-texture throughout the whole thickness samples, EBSD measurements were carried out on the longitudinal sections (observed from transverse direction) of the WOL and WL samples after hot rolling. Evidently, all layers of the WL specimen developed the typical rolling texture of homogeneously rolled aluminums. In the WOL sample, on the other hand, two distinguished textures were observed. The evolution of deformation textures is strongly affected by the strain state during deformation. Thus, the texture results obtained prove that hot rolling without lubrication led to pronounced differences in the local strain state through the thickness, which resulted in the formation of two distinguished textures. In order to analyze the effect of lubrication on the evolution of strain states during hot rolling, a two-dimensional finite element method (FEM) calculation was carried out with the commercial FEM package DEFORM-2D. Any deviation from the ideal plane strain condition is manifested in a non-zero strain rate component As reported in detail elsewhere The effect of lubrication during hot rolling on the evolution of textures at different through-thickness layers was studied in AA 1050. The sheet rolled with lubrication, and the center layer of the sample rolled without lubrication displayed textures which are typical of a plane strain state. The thickness layers close to the surface of the dry rolled sheet depicted shear textures. FEM calculations reveal that a larger friction between roll and sample causes a strain state severely deviated from a plane strain. the friction coefficient