CO2 gasification offers a relatively economical means for coal utilization while minimizing CO2 emission. Coal ash may play an important catalytic role; however, undesirable ash also causes troublesome problems in the process of CO2 gasification, especially for that of brown coal featuring high gasification activity and ash content. Therefore, it is necessary to remove the undesirable ash from the brown coal prior to the gasification. Heavy medium separation, one of the most popular ash removing clean technologies, could successfully separate coal fractions with various ash contents according to specific gravity. Consequentially, these coal or char fractions produced from pyrolysis in a newly designed quartz reactor were distinct in certain characteristics, such as ash and maceral compositions, specific surface area as well as carbon structure determined by Raman spectrum in this study, which, in turn, influenced the CO2 gasification of different char fractions both in the novel fixed-bed quartz reactor and Thermogravimetric Analyzer (TGA). Specifically, experimental results show that the heavier coal/char fractions had less vitrinite and exinite while more inertinite, leading to higher aromatization determinated by Raman spectrum. Carbon structure and content of exchangeable metal ion were the dominant contributors to the different behavior of coal fractions during the isothermal CO2 gasification, except at high conversion (more than 60wt.%, daf) of char fractions where ash content played a major role. For the non-isothermal CO2 gasification in TGA, heavier char fraction presented higher gasification reactivity due to its well-ordered pores.Among various utilizations of coal, coal gasification has long been considered as one of the most promising technologies Accordingly, efforts to reduce the undesirable ash are of great significance. One of the most popular coal cleaning technologies in China is heavy medium separation In order to investigated the effect of heavy medium separation on the CO Shengli brown coal was obtained from Shengli field in Inner Mongolia province, China and its proximate and ultimate analysis results were shown in Pyrolysis and gasification experiments for each fraction were conducted using a newly-designed quartz reactor (shown in Char gasification experiments were conducted at the same reactor with pyrolysis experiments. CO In order to investigate the variation of ash compositions in coal fractions, approximately 10 As shown in  However, the metallic elements which existed in brown coal were various and their effects on coal gasification were complicated; therefore, it was rather difficult to investigate the effect of the specific metal on gasification. In light of these factors, Sakewa In which oxide represents its content in ash. Previous literatures confirmed that the alkali index, B, has a good correlation with the CO As shown in After intensive studies on structure of low rank fuels (e.g. brown coal and biomass) and their derived chars, a new method was proposed to semi-quantify these amorphous carbon structures by deconvoluting Raman spectrum over the range of 800–1800 Currently, a high resolution micro Raman spectroscope (MRS) was used in this study, which consists of a microscope with a Raman spectrometer having spectrographic dispersion and multichannel detection. A 50 As represented in BET surface area of the chars was determined by an automatic volumetric sorption analyzer (Quantachrom, Autosorb-1). The measurement was conducted by N As shown in CO A Perkin-Elmer Pyris1 thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) with high temperature furnace was used to measure the reactivity of the char from the gasification in drop-tube reactor. About 10  However, when the char conversion was > Non-isothermal CO As an effective way of ash-removing clean technologies, heavy medium separation was conducted using Shengli brown coal, followed by pyrolysis and CO The coal/char fractions from heavy medium separation were very different in ash compositions, maceral compositions as well as carbon structure Carbon structure and content of exchangeable metal ion were the dominant factors affecting the isothermal CO For the non-isothermal CO The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support of this study by