This classic text on mineral processing by Dr. Barry A. Wills has been updated by the staff of the JKMRC, with T. J. Napier-Munn serving as overall editor. As indicated by Dr. Napier-Munn in the book's preface, over a dozen people were involved in the revision of the book, with each of the 16 chapters (which cover the same topics as in the previous edition) and one appendix being handled by one or more individuals having expertise in the particular topic. The list of these individuals is provided in the list of contributors. He points out that the book is not a complete re-write but rather the revisions were done only as needed, with each paragraph and figure being considered based on the following guidelines: “If it reflected current knowledge and practice, it was left unchanged (or modestly updated where necessary). If it had been entirely superseded, it was removed unless some useful principle or piece of history was being illustrated. Where the introduction of new knowledge or practice was thought to be important to preserve the book's currency, this was done.” The JKMRC staff has accomplished its goal. The book has retained its overall quality, while incorporating information on new technologies and practices. The result is that some chapters have been revised considerably, while only minor changes were needed in others, including updating and adding references throughout the book. Some of the revisions are noted in the following sections: In the Introduction, the prices have been updated (e.g., from 1984 to 1998 basis), and many costs were changed to U.S. dollars. Metal production numbers were also updated. Under Metallurgical Accounting, revisions were made to the sections on sampling, on-line analyzers, and process control. Discussions of statistical process control, fuzzy logic, and neural networks were added as well as new material on computer simulation, design of experiments, and plant trials. Additional detail is provided in the Particle Size Analysis chapter, including more discussion on laser diffraction instruments and on-line particle size analysis. Under Comminution, a discussion of stirred mills and high-pressure grinding rolls has been added as well as more discussion on work indices and information on the use of the SAG Power Index. The section on simulation has been revised, including information on the Discrete Element Method for modeling. The Crushing chapter includes a new discussion of liner wear and devices such as the Rhoadax crusher and Canica impact crusher. Additional discussion of crusher product monitoring and control is included. Similarly, the chapter on Grinding Mills contains new information on mill liners, mill operating conditions, and grinding media. The section on AG/SAG mills was expanded significantly. New sections on stirred mills, including a discussion of the ISA mill, have been added. A new section on the use of cycloning for dense particle removal in grinding circuits has been added as well as more detail on grinding circuit control and expert systems. In the Screening chapter, the discussion on the applications has been revised. New sections pertaining to the factors affecting screen performance have been added, including particle size, particle shape, surface moisture, feed rate, screen angle, and open area. A new section on screen models has been added. More detail is provided on screen vibration and screen types, including banana, high-frequency, modular, and Pansep screens. The section on screening surfaces has been expanded. Under Classification, the section on factors affecting cyclone performance has been revised substantially. It is now divided into three separate sections, with the other two sections focusing on mathematical models and cyclone scale-up. Under Gravity Concentration, new material was added, including discussions of the InLine Pressure Jig, Kelsey Centrifugal Jig, and Falcon concentrator. Under Dense Medium Separation, additional information on partition curve models was added. Under Froth Flotation, new information was added on reagents, the role of bubble generation and froth performance, entrainment, the engineering of flotation, and mineral surface analysis. The section on circuit flexibility was revised as was that on the Jameson cell, and a discussion on the Smart cell has been added. Sections were added pertaining to the flotation of nickel, platinum, and iron ores, and coal. Under Magnetic and Electrical Separation, information was added on rare-earth separators, electrical separation, and mineral sands separation, including a new flowsheet. The chapters on Ore Sorting, Dewatering, and Tailings Disposal were updated by removing some material (e.g., several figures) and adding new material. The book contains three Appendices, eliminating the appendix on Mineral Beneficiation References from the previous edition. Appendices 1 and 2 are the same as in the previous edition, while Appendix 3 has been completely redone. The BASIC computer programs for various process calculations (e.g., sample size determination, error estimation, and data reconciliation) were replaced with Excel spreadsheets for formulae from the chapter on Metallurgical Accounting. The appendix provides a description and example of each spreadsheet, which can be accessed through the Minerals Engineering International website. With these revisions,