Background: Supracondylar fractures of the femur in the elderly are difficult to treat. Total knee replacement is often not considered. The aim of this study was to compare the short to medium term outcome of fixation and total knee replacement in medically fit active elderly patients with no pre-existing arthritis in order to determine whether total knee replacement can be an alternative to internal fixation. Patients and methods: In this retrospective study, we included patients who were aged 75 or over with an ASA grade of two or less, walked independently before their injury, and sustained a type A or C supracondylar fracture. Four were treated with internal fixation and six with a cemented Stanmore knee replacement. Patients were reviewed clinically and radiographically a minimum of 6 months after surgery. Results: The advantages of total knee replacement were a greater proportion of patients returned to independent walking, rehabilitation was more rapid, and knee flexion was better. The advantages of internal fixation were a decreased need of blood transfusion, a smaller proportion of patients reported knee pain at follow up, and a better mean Oxford knee score at follow up. Anaesthetic time and level of patient satisfaction at follow up were similar. There were no peri-operative deaths. Conclusion: In this preliminary study, total knee replacement was a reasonable alternative to internal fixation for the treatment of supracondylar fractures of the distal femur in elderly.Internal fixation of supracondylar fractures of the femur is challenging, particularly in the elderly. It is often impossible to achieve anatomical reduction due to comminution. A stable construct is rarely achieved due to poor bone quality and this restricts early mobilisation. In spite of this, internal fixation is perceived to be the treatment of choice. Total knee replacement is rarely considered. There are only three reports of its use (in a total of 17 patients) in the English literature. The aim of this study was to compare the short and medium term outcome of fixation and total knee replacement for supracondylar fractures of the femur in medically fit active elderly patients with no pre-existing arthritis in order to determine whether total knee replacement can be used as an alternative to internal fixation. All patients who underwent operations for supracondylar fractures of the distal femur between March 1998 and July 2002 were identified from databases at both institutions. Information was also obtained retrospectively from hospital medical, nursing, physiotherapy and occupational therapy notes, community hospital nursing and physiotherapy notes and radiographs. Rigorous inclusion criteria were required in order to make valid comparisons between patients who underwent internal fixation and those who had total knee replacements. These are detailed in Short term outcome measures were anaesthetic time, blood transfusion, walking ability, peri-operative mortality (death within 30 days of operation), length of post-operative stay, and place of discharge. All but two patients were reviewed clinically and radiographically a minimum of 6 months after their operation: one patient had died and the other was unable to attend clinic and refused permission to be reviewed at her home. Follow-up information was obtained for her from her carer over the telephone. Medium term outcome measures were patient satisfaction, the range of knee flexion and the Oxford Knee Score which ranges from 12 to 60 (12 being the best and 60 the worst score). We identified nine patients who had undergone total knee replacement for supracondylar fractures of the distal femur. We excluded three patients for the following reasons. One of them did not walk before she sustained her fracture and had an ASA grade of four. She died on the same day as her operation. The other two patients (aged 94 and 96) did not walk before they sustained their fracture and had ASA grades of three. Their post-operative recovery was complicated by multiple medical problems. They were discharged 43 and 42 days after their operations respectively. At the time of discharge, one patient was able to walk with the support of an able-bodied assistant and one refused to walk. We identified eight patients who had undergone internal fixation for fractures of the distal femur. We excluded four patients for the following reasons. Three patients sustained fractures that extended many more than 9 We were therefore able to review four patients in the internal fixation group and six patients in the knee replacement group (see The mean anaesthetic time for the internal fixation group was 90 In the short term, walking ability was better following knee replacement than following internal fixation. Firstly, although patients were encouraged to walk as soon as possible after their operations, this occurred a mean of 3.3 days following knee replacement compared with 9.5 days following internal fixation. Secondly, a greater proportion of patients who underwent knee replacement walked independently at discharge (five of six compared with one of four) see Patients were discharged home more quickly after knee replacement: the mean post-operative stay was 15 days (range 9–19) after knee replacement and 23 days (range 9–41) after internal fixation. A greater proportion of patients was discharged to their original place of residence after knee replacement: three of six compared with one of four after internal fixation.  All surviving patients in the internal fixation group were either very pleased or satisfied with their knees. Five of the six patients in the knee replacement group were either very pleased or satisfied with their knees and one patient was disappointed with her knee. In the knee replacement group, two patients reported no pain, one patient mild pain and three patients moderate pain. In the internal fixation group, two patients reported no pain and one patient mild pain. The mean knee flexion was 75° (range 45–90°) in the internal fixation group and 86° (range 60 to 100°) in the knee replacement group. The Oxford knee score was determined for all patients in the knee replacement group and two of the three surviving patients in the internal fixation group: it was not possible to obtain a score for the third patients as she was wheelchair bound due to arthritis of both hips and both shoulders. The mean score was 32.5 (range 26–36) in the knee replacement group and 27.5 (range 24–31) in the internal fixation group. Three patients in the internal fixation group and five patients in the knee replacement group were reviewed radiographically. All three fractures in the internal fixation group united. There was evidence of degenerative change in one case. There was no evidence of loosening in any of the radiographs of the five patients in the total knee replacement group. In 1970, the AO group Up to 100% good or excellent results have been reported with various internal fixation devices. A stemmed cemented knee replacement seems an attractive solution to the technical problems encountered in the elderly. However, on review of the literature, one might conclude that knee replacement should only be considered as the last resort: its use has been reported in one patient with pre-existing rheumatoid arthritis, Our results show that good outcomes with high levels of patient satisfaction can be obtained with a knee replacement in medically fit elderly patients with no underlying arthritis. Moreover, when compared with internal fixation, knee replacement has advantages for the patient, in terms of walking ability and range of flexion, and for the health service, in terms of a shorter post-operative stay. Knee replacement did have some disadvantages when compared with internal fixation: there was a greater need of blood transfusion post-operatively, the mean Oxford knee score was slightly worse and a greater proportion of patients had moderate knee pain at follow up though there was no evidence of loosening. The LISS plate, a locking plate with multiple distal screw positions, may have theoretical advantages for the fixation of distal femoral fractures in osteoporotic bone. There are three main limitations of this study. Firstly it is a retrospective study. The potential problem of incomplete data was overcome by carefully reviewing not only hospital medical records but also community mutidisciplinary notes. In this way, we were able to obtain accurate information for the peri-operative period and patients’ progress. Secondly, we have reported our experience with what may seem to be a small number of patients. This is a relatively uncommon fracture and the number of patients in our study is comparable to other published reports. In this preliminary study, total knee replacement for the treatment of supracondylar fractures of the distal femur in the elderly had advantages over internal fixation for the patient and economic advantages for health care providers. It was a reasonable alternative to internal fixation. In order to reach statistically valid conclusions regarding the best management of these difficult fractures, a prospective randomised trial is required. Given that these fractures are relatively uncommon, this would have to be conducted as a multi-centre trial.