Purpose
                  To investigate the mid-term curative effects of the treatment of Pipkin type IV femoral head fractures using a reconstruction plate and bioabsorbable screws and provide the evidence for clinical practice.
               
                  Methods
                  From February 2010 to September 2014, 21 patients with Pipkin type IV femoral head fractures were treated surgically. There were 13 males and 8 females with an average age of 41.1 years (range, 20–65 years). The causes of the fractures included traffic accidents (13 cases), falls from a height (four cases), heavy lifting injuries (three cases), and sport injury (one case). All patients were followed up with radiography and three-dimensional reconstruction computed tomography and other checks and any complications were actively managed. Closed reduction of fracture-dislocation of the hip was attempted under general anesthesia using the Kocher-Langenbeck approach. Femoral head fractures were treated with internal fixation or excision based on the size of the fracture fragments, whereas acetabular fractures were fixed with a reconstruction plate and screws following anatomic reduction.
               
                  Results
                  The incisions healed by primary intention in all patients after surgery, without any infection, deep venous thrombosis, or other complications. All 21 patients were followed up for 36–76 months, with an average follow-up duration of 49 months. Postoperative imaging data showed that all dislocations and fractures were anatomically reduced, and bony union of the fractures was achieved. Heterotopic ossification was found in four patients, post-traumatic osteoarthritis in three, and avascular necrosis of the femoral head in two. At the final follow-up, the assessment of hip joint function according to the Thompson-Epstein scoring scale was excellent in 10 cases, good in six cases, fair in three cases, and poor in two cases. The rate of excellent and good functional outcomes was 76.1%.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The mid-term curative effects of a reconstruction plate and bioabsorbable screws in the treatment of Pipkin type IV femoral head fractures is significant, and such the treatment can significantly improve the patient's joint function and quality of life.Fracture of femoral head is a relatively uncommon injury, which is mostly caused by high energy trauma, such as traffic accidents, falls from a height, industrial accidents, and sports injuries. In 1869, Birkett There were totally 21 patients with Pipkin type IV femoral head fractures, including 13 males and 8 females with a mean age of 41.1 years (range: 20–65 years). The causes of fractures included traffic accidents (13 cases), falls from a height (four cases), heavy punch injuries (three cases), and sport injury (one case). Ten cases had the right hip affected, and 11 had the left hip affected. Femoral head fracture was combined with sciatic nerve injury in three cases, other fractures of limbs in nine, head injuries in four and thoracic injuries in four. In the emergency department, all patients were evaluated initially according to the Adult Trauma Life Support (ATLS™) guidelines, including an anteroposterior pelvis radiograph, CT scan and three-dimensional reconstruction. Meanwhile immediate closed reduction of the hip fracture dislocation was performed under general anesthesia, and then the skeletal traction was given to maintain the reduction. Under general anesthesia, the patient was in the lateral decubitus position on the contralateral side on a standard operation table, draped in a manner to allow free movement of the injured limb. A Kocher-Langenbeck incision was made and the fascia lata was incised in line with the skin incision. The posterior border of the gluteus medius and minimus were identified and retracted to expose the posterosuperior aspect of the hip capsule. This was facilitated by abduction and internal rotation of the limb. The piriformis tendon was tagged and released but the short external rotators (quadratus femoris and obturator internus) were preserved. The sciatic nerve was revealed and protected. And neurological exploration was performed in patients with sciatic nerve injury. After blunt dissection by periosteal elevator, the Hohmann retractors were used to retract the gluteus maximus, short external rotators and sciatic nerve medially. As the femoral head was dislocated posteriorly at the time of injury, the posteroinferior capsule was found to be seriously torn, such that repair of the capsule with a heavy suture was necessary to prevent further inferior extension at the time of surgical dislocation. The capsular rent was extended directly toward the acetabular rim, and then the capsule was released off the rim anteriorly or posteriorly as needed. With a gentle blunt dissection, the posterior wall of acetabulum was released and protected, then the hip was slowly and gently dislocated by flexion, adduction and internal rotation. Small or comminuted fragments of the femoral head which remained in the acetabulum were removed, the large fragments or fragments within the weight-bearing portion of the head should be reduced anatomically and temporarily fixed with Kirschner wires, which were sequentially replaced with bioabsorbable screws. The heads of the screws were countersunk below the cartilage level. Any soft tissue attachments to the bone fragment were preserved to prevent further damage to the blood supply of the femoral head. The acetabular fracture was reduced anatomically and then fixed with reconstruction plate plus screws to restore the congruency and stability of the hip. The repaired femoral head was then gently reduced after careful retracting the cut edges of the capsule. The capsular tear was repaired, piriformis tendon was reattached and all muscle tears were repaired. Finally, the wound surface was closed in layers after placement of a drain tube. Intravenous antibiotics were given to prevent infection in 24 h after the operation and low-molecular-weight heparin was given to avoid deep venous thrombosis. The drain tube was removed in 24–48 h postoperatively. Generally, the patients were encouraged to perform functional exercises of quadrates femoris muscles on the second day after operation while the skeletal traction was maintained until one month after operation. All patients were instructed to continue non-weight bearing for 6–8 weeks postoperatively, and then gradually shifted from partial to full weight bearing. Radiographs were taken immediately and at 1, 2, 3, 6, 12 and 24 months after surgery. Once the radiographs showed a fracture healing, progressive weight-bearing and active exercises for strengthening of the abductor muscles were started. The incisions healed primarily in all patients after surgery, without infection, deep venous thrombosis and other complications. Postoperative imaging data showed that dislocations and fractures had presented anatomic reduction and bony union. All the 21 patients were followed up for 36–76 months, with an average of 49 months. During the follow-up, three patients developed posttraumatic osteoarthritis. Heterotopic ossification (HO) was found in four patients, according to Brooker Classification Fracture of the femoral head is a relatively uncommon injury, which typically occurs following traumatic posterior dislocation of the hip joint. According to the statistics, about 5%–15% of posterior hip dislocations have been reported to be associated with femoral head fracture. The mechanism of femoral head fractures is traumatic posterior hip dislocation. Long-term fracture and dislocation of the femoral head will damage the blood supply of the femoral head, which will increase the incidence of avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Therefore, the prompt reduction of the associated hip dislocation not only can prevent further damage to peripheral vessels and nerves, but also reduce the incidence of postoperative avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Epstein et al. Pipkin IV femoral head fractures include posterior dislocation of the hip, femoral head fractures and acetabular fractures. Non-surgical treatment is often difficult to achieve a better effect. Because of the limitation of hospital transfer and the high cost of the long admission, this treatment has been abandoned. The surgery treatment is effective for Pipkin IV femoral head fracture, which can restore the anatomical structure of the hip joint, allow an early functional training, and promote the recovery of postoperative function. The principles of treatment include prompt reduction of the associated hip dislocation, early anatomic reduction, rigid fixation of large fragments, restoration of hip congruency and stability and removal of small and comminuted intra-articular fragments. The optimal surgical approach for the treatment of Pipkin type IV femoral head fractures remains controversial. Several surgical approaches have been recommended in previous studies, including anterolateral (Watson-Jones), anterior (Smith-Peterson), and posterior (Kocher-Langenbeck, Ganz) approaches. Although open reduction has become the primary means of managing femoral head fracture-dislocation, controversy exists with regard to excision or internal fixation of fracture fragments. When a powerful force caused by trauma is applied to the hip joint, the femoral head is believed to exit the acetabulum posteriorly as the head forcibly shears against the acetabular rim, leading to posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum. The most common cause is a dashboard injury. In the treatment of acetabular posterior wall fractures, anatomic reduction is particularly important. The quality of reduction is directly related to postoperative joint function. The main complications included traumatic sciatic nerve injury, post-traumatic osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis of the femoral head, and the formation of HO. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head and HO have been identified as post-traumatic complications of femoral head fractures and can lead to restrictions in hip function and permanent disability. Guo et al. In this study, we adopted the posterior Kocher-Langenbeck approach, which prevents further destruction of the soft tissue of the anterior hip and preserves the blood supply of the anterior capsule; however, surgery should be performed carefully to reduce the stripping and cutting of the gluteal muscles so as to protect the remaining blood supply of the hip joint and reduce the incidence of postoperative avascular necrosis of the femoral head. During follow-up, four patients developed HO, the incidence is 19%. Avascular necrosis of the femoral head occurred in two patients, with no obvious signs and symptoms in one patient, the other patient reported pain and limited motion of the hip in the second postoperative year, and subsequently underwent total hip arthroplasty, with good recovery of limb function after surgery. Pipkin type IV femoral head fractures include posterior dislocation of the hip, femoral head fractures, and acetabular fractures. Owing to the complexity of the anatomic structure, surgical treatment is particularly difficult and more likely to result in the development of post-traumatic osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis of the femoral head, and other complications. For the treatment of Pipkin type IV femoral head fractures, prompt reduction of the associated hip dislocation, selection of the appropriate surgical approach, anatomic reduction and solid internal fixation of the fractures, and restoration of hip congruency and stability are critical to achieve satisfactory clinical results. The mid-term curative effect of use of a reconstruction plate and bioabsorbable screws in the treatment of Pipkin type IV femoral head fractures is significant and such treatment can significantly improve the patient's joint function and quality of life.