Introduction
                  Despite good clinical outcome proposals, there has been relatively little published regarding the use of non-metallic implant for patellar fracture fixation. The purpose of the study was to perform a systematic literature review to summarize and evaluate the clinical studies that described techniques for treating patella fractures using non-metallic implants.
               
                  Methods
                  A comprehensive literature search was systematically performed to evaluate all studies included in the literature until November 2015. The following search terms were used: patellar fracture, patella suture, patella absorbable, patella screw, patella cerclage. Two investigators independently reviewed all abstracts and the selection of these abstracts was then performed based on inclusion and/or exclusion criteria.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 9 studies involving 123 patients were included. Patients had a mean age of 33.7 years and were followed up for a mean of 18.9 months. The most common method for fracture fixations included the use of suture material. Good clinical outcomes were reported among all studies. Thirteen patients (10.5%) presented complications, while 4 patients (3.2%) required additional surgery for implant removal.
               
                  Conclusion
                  There is a paucity of literature focused on the use of non-metallic implant for patellar fracture fixation. However, this systematic review showed that non-metallic implants are able to deliver good clinical outcomes reducing the rate of surgical complications and re-operation. These results may assist surgeons in choosing to use alternative material such as sutures to incorporate into their routine practice or to consider it, in order to reduce the rate of re-operation.Patellar fractures are relatively uncommon compared to other lower limb fractures. Because of a critical function in the extensor mechanism of the lower extremity, patellar fractures could lead to an important pain and secondary knee function impairment. For this reason, treatment efforts should be made to alleviate the impairment and to increase the clinical outcomes. Non-operative treatment should be performed in patients with patellar fractures without displacement (1–4 The aim of our study was to conduct systematic and qualitative reviews of the current literature to summarize and evaluate the clinical studies that described techniques for treating patella fractures using non-metallic implants. These data are then used to evaluate complications and re-operation of patients that underwent surgical reduction and fixation with non-metallic implants. This systematic review was conducted according to the guidelines presented in the PRISMA Statement (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) Of 3061 articles, 78 full-text articles were identified for review. Nine studies fulfilled the inclusion criteria and were included in the review. The articles included were published between 1998 and 2015. The evaluation of the quality of the included articles revealed that there were 2 randomized controlled trials (level of evidence 1) The pooled number of patients treated with non-metallic implants for patellar fracture fixation and included in this systematic review was 123, of whom 68 were male while 55 were female ( The surgical technique varied between studies ( Outcomes were poorly described and standardized in terms of their assessment. Subjective outcome scores utilized varied among the 9 studies. Three of the 9 studies reported postoperative Lysholm scores Thirteen patients (10.5%) presented complications, while 4 patients required additional surgery for implant removal. A breakdown of complications relative to the surgery is summarized in The most important finding of this systematic review was that the surgical management with non-metallic fixation for patellar fracture had a success rate of 90%. Of 123 patients included in the 9 studies selected in this review, 59% had a traverse fracture, while 27,6% and 13% had respectively comminuted and inferior/superior pole fracture. Historically, patellar fracture fixation using metal implants in configurations based on the tension band principle has been represented as the mainstay of internal fixation for transverse patellar fractures One aim of this systematic review was to consolidate and present studies reporting on the clinical outcomes of patients that underwent surgical reduction and fixation with non-metallic implants. The main finding of this work is surely the paucity of literature available on this topic. Even we considered all the papers reported in literature without any restriction on date of publication or surgical approach, only 9 articles were included in this review with just 123 patients treated with non-metallic fixation. Further, analyzing the relevant data from each included study, the attempt to find any sort of comparable parameter was elusive because of their heterogeneity in terms of patients’ features, type of fracture and treatment options. Further, outcome measurements were poorly described and just three of the 9 studies reported a clearly defined outcome measures, using scales that has been reported to have good reliability and sensibility. Concerning the re-operation, only 4 patients (3.2%) require additional surgery for implant removal. This data is surprisingly interesting, specifically based on what reported in literature concerning the use of metallic implants. In fact, hardware removal rate after operative intervention of patella fractures has reported to vary from 10% to 52% This study presents several limitations, above all the small number of the included studies and the total sample size. The major limitation of this review is the heterogeneity of the studies and the lack of high-level studies. Only four studies were level I and II series, while the remaining 5 studies were level III and IV series. Therefore, well-designed longer follow-up studies are further required for definitive conclusions. Another major limitation was that different surgical techniques were used for patella fracture fixations. In fact, there are a considerable number of techniques used including circumferential cerclage, figure-8 cerclage and transosseous fixation. Further, the effect of technical issues on outcomes cannot be neglected. Also, the studies often used different outcome measures or reported them with different scales, making a This study provides a summary of the existing literature on non-metallic fixation for patella fractures. The surgical management of patellar fracture treated with non-metallic fixation had a 90% success rate and a 10% failure rate. These results may therefore assist surgeons in choosing to use alternative material such as sutures to incorporate into their routine practice or to consider it, in order to reduce the rate of re-operation. In this systematic review, the surgical management of patellar fracture treated with non-metallic fixation had a 90% success rate and a 10% failure rate according to the authors’ objective assessment of outcomes.