We report here the first discovery of ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) indicator minerals and textures from the Rhodope Metamorphic Province (RMP), northern Greece. In particular, we document the exsolution of quartz, rutile and apatite in sodic garnet from metapelites (garnet–biotite–kyanite gneisses), which attests to the presence of a Si–Ti–Na–P-rich precursor garnet phase. Similar textures in garnet have been reported in the literature only once before for eclogites from the Su Lu UHP metamorphic province, China. We also document the presence of microdiamonds and multicrystalline quartz pseudomorphs after coesite, included in garnet from both eclogites and metapelites. We then argue that these rocks had once been transported to depths exceeding 220 km, well into the upper mantle, thus establishing the RMP as another important UHP metamorphic belt in the world.The hypothesis of ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) metamorphism of crustal rocks was first put forward to explain the formation of mantle-equilibrated (4.5 GPa/850°C) olivine-free, orthopyroxene eclogites of gabbroic composition from Norway α-PbO clinopyroxene, rutile and apatite exsolutions in garnet from eclogites, suggesting the existence of precursor majorite stable at depths exceeding 200 km ilmenite exsolutions in olivine and clinoenstatite exsolutions in diopside from Alpine-type garnet lherzolites, implying minimum depths of origin of 250 km two-pyroxene and rutile exsolutions in garnet from Alpine-type garnet lherzolites pointing to an initial majorite composition stable at oriented magnetite lamellae in olivine from Alpine-type harzburgites, indicating exsolution from a pre-existing wadsleyite phase stable at Here, we report the first discovery of diamond and former coesite inclusions in garnet, and of quartz, rutile and apatite exsolutions in sodic garnet from eclogites and metapelites of the Rhodope Metamorphic Province (RMP), northern Greece. We then argue that these rocks attained peak metamorphic The RMP is one of the major geotectonic units of northern Greece ( On the basis of calculated metamorphic UHP sedimentary lithologies were discovered in the structurally upper unit of the RMP as exemplified above, and particularly at its central and eastern parts (see The garnet–biotite–kyanite gneisses are composed of garnet and kyanite porphyroblasts set in a matrix of biotite, muscovite, plagioclase and quartz. Garnet porphyroblasts are rich in almandine component and measure, on average, 2–5 mm in diameter. They show exsolutions of quartz, rutile and apatite, and carry inclusions of biotite, kyanite, rutile, apatite, quartz, zircon and microdiamond (see The garnet–kyanite–staurolite–chlorite schists consist of garnet and kyanite porphyroblasts set in a matrix of garnet, staurolite, chlorite, muscovite and quartz. Garnet porphyroblasts (3–5 mm in diameter) contain inclusions of phlogopite, kyanite, quartz, rutile and microdiamond (see In this section we describe UHP metamorphic indicator minerals discovered in crustal rocks belonging to the structurally upper unit of the RMP (see multicrystalline polygonal quartz minute carbon cubes and octahedra mainly included in garnet porphyroblasts ( rods (or needles) of silica, rutile, and apatite exsolved inside sodic garnet porphyroblasts ( We have optically identified and subsequently verified (by electron microprobe (EMP) analyses As was the case with pseudomorphs after coesite, diamond in RMP rocks was initially identified optically and subsequently verified by both EMP analyses (pure carbon) and in situ laser Raman microspectroscopy. The diamonds appear as minute (average size ∼10 μm) cubo–octahedral inclusions in garnet porphyroblasts from grt–bt–ky gneisses of the Kimi, Sidiro and Pilima areas (  Perhaps the most important of our discoveries is the identification (by means of optical microscopy, EMP analyses and in situ laser Raman microspectroscopy) of quartz, rutile and apatite exsolution rods (or needles) in porphyroblastic garnet from grt–bt–ky gneisses of the Kimi area. Similar exsolution textures (i.e. clinopyroxene, rutile, and apatite exsolution rods in garnet) have been reported only once in the literature In the RMP, the presence of MPQ aggregates as inclusions in porphyroblastic garnet from amphibolitized eclogites is attributed to the breakdown of pre-existing coesite and constrains metamorphic pressures to a minimum of 2.6–2.9 GPa at 600–900°C An estimate as to the Taken collectively, the above pieces of evidence conclusively demonstrate the subduction of the RMP to depths of the order of 220 km and establish the province as one of the most important UHP metamorphic belts in the world. Prof. I. Chryssoulakis, National Technical University, Athens, Greece, kindly provided access to laser Raman microanalytical facilities. Dr. K. Andrikopoulos helped in obtaining and processing the Raman spectra. Prof. S. Sklavounos and Dr. E. Pavlidou assisted with the EMP analyses and the SEM images. Dr. P. Gautier, Université Rennes 1, France, donated the coesite-bearing amphibolitized eclogite sample from the Pilima area. Constructive journal reviews by Profs. D.C. Smith, Paris, H.W. Green II, CA, USA, and J.E. Dixon, Edinburgh, UK, and fruitful discussions with Prof. H.-J. Massonne, Stuttgart, Germany, are greatly appreciated. Mr. A. Avgerinas is cordially thanked for his CorelDraw expertise in drafting