Understanding long-term property evolution of cement fractures is essential for assessing well integrity during geological carbon sequestration (GCS). Cement fractures represent preferential leakage pathways in abandoned wells upon exposure to CO2-rich fluid. Contrasting self-sealing and fracture opening behavior have been observed while a unifying framework is still missing. Here we developed a process-based reactive transport model that explicitly simulates flow and multi-component reactive transport in fractured cement by reproducing experimental observation of sharp flow rate reduction during exposure to carbonated water. The simulation shows similar reaction network as in diffusion-controlled systems without flow. That is, the CO2-rich water accelerates the portlandite dissolution, releasing calcium that further reacted with carbonate to form calcite. The calibrated model was used for CO2-flooding numerical experiments in 250 cement fractures with varying initial hydraulic aperture (b) and residence time (τ) defined as the ratio of fracture volume over flow rate. A long τ leads to slow replenishment of carbonated water, calcite precipitation, and self-sealing. The opposite occurs when τ is small with short fracture and fast flow rates. Simulation results indicate a critical residence time τ
                     c – the minimum τ required for self-sealing – divides the conditions that trigger the opening and self-sealing behavior. The τ
                     c value depends on the initial aperture size through τ
                     c
                     =9.8×10−4
                     ×
                     b
                     2
                     +0.254×
                     b. Among the 250 numerical experiments, significant changes in effective permeability – self-healing or opening – typically occur within hours to a day, thus providing supporting argument for the extrapolation of short-term laboratory observation (hours to months) to long-term prediction at relevant GCS time scales (years to hundreds of years).Geological carbon sequestration (GCS) has been considered as a promising mitigation strategy to reduce anthropogenic CO Extensive modeling and experimental studies in recent years have characterized the evolution of well cement exposed to CO Recent studies have documented cement property evolution under flow-through conditions with defective or vulnerable interfaces (cement–cement fractures, cement–rock or cement–steel) continuously exposed to CO It was speculated that the fast flow and the formation of a calcium depleted zone prevent significant change in permeability and maintain aperture. In contrast, low flow rates allow calcite precipitation to an extent that is sufficient for self-sealing to occur. Those mechanisms can offer an explanation for the observations where large flow/fracture apertures minimize the formation of a protective calcite deposit and permeability increase ( In general, however, there is no framework that unifies contrasting observations under different conditions. The objective of this work is to identify and quantify key controlling parameters that can offer general guidelines for predicting conditions of self-sealing and fracture opening. Here we develop a reactive transport model constrained by experimental data of fracture permeability alteration during exposure to CO Well leakage pathways can develop at cement–host rock, cement-casing, and cement–cement (due to fractures and voids) interfaces. The focus here is the voids and fractures within the cement. While most CO Portland cement is typically classified into classes A through G, among which classes H and G are the most commonly used. In hydrated class H cement, the major components are calcium–silicate–hydrate (C–S–H), an amorphous solid phase with varying calcium–silica ratios, and portlandite (Ca(OH) As shown in Using the equality between the cubic equation and Darcy's equation, the fracture permeability can be approximated as: The reactive transport code CrunchFlow was used ( Here The reaction network in Here Aqueous complexation reactions are fast and are considered as thermodynamically controlled ( Thermodynamic parameters are from the EQ3/6 (    The flow velocity was calculated using Darcy's law for each grid block in the transverse and longitudinal directions. For example in the longitudinal direction at the grid block   To characterize the fracture property evolution, arithmetic average over slices transverse to the main flow is used to provide spatial distributions in the longitudinal direction.   To account for the non-simulated flow that is beyond 3.22 During the experiment, the sides of the two halves of the core were sealed using caulk to prevent leakage. The overall fracture flow The constant Using the total flow rate Here  During the experiment, the pH in the fracture decreased to less than 6 upon injection of acidic CO Within the cement matrix, the acidic water diffused about 0.5 To observe long term effects, the simulation was continued for 100 days.  To identify key parameters controlling property evolution, a sensitivity analysis was carried out for four parameters, including the specific surface areas (m Comparing the four parameters, changes in portlandite specific surface area (8.25, 16.5, and 24.75 The initial ratio The transverse dispersivity The sensitivity analysis shows key parameters controlling the timing and extent of sealing. Parameters that can accelerates Ca(II) precipitation accelerates the sealing process. Those include higher portlandite dissolution rates and higher calcite precipitation rates, as well as higher capacity for the acidic flow to interact with the cement matrix (low The role of initial aperture size and residence time in determining sealing dynamics is further explored by comparing three cases. The initial fracture residence time As has been discussed Section Case 2 presents a more aggressive dissolution of calcium bearing solid phases than in case 3. This is because the short residence time and smaller aperture resulted in rapid replenishment of the acidic water and insufficient contact time between cement and carbonic acid for pH to increase within the fracture. The pH was very similar to the inlet pH so that it can dissolve portlandite quickly and “wipe” out the precipitated calcite. In case 3, the slower portlandite dissolution led to a denser calcite buildup similar to the one observed in experiments ( The comparison shows that in all three cases, portlandite dissolved and calcite precipitated. The critical factor that controls the fracture sealing or opening is the capability of the fracture to replenish acidic water sufficiently rapid across the entire fracture to flush out the dissolution products of portlandite (elevated Ca(II) and high pH) so that the mass and volume of portlandite dissolution exceeds that of calcite precipitates (as in case 3), or is able to redissolve precipitated calcite (as in case 2). To understand the role of fracture properties and flow conditions in determining long-term fracture behavior, 250 numerical experiments were carried out using the parameter set that reproduced base case data by varying the initial aperture size, length, and flow rate. Each fracture was exposed to the same carbonated water as in the base case for more than 100 days. The largest permeability changes typically occur within relatively short time frames. In most self-sealing cases, permeability decreases by 1–2 orders of magnitude within a couple of hours to a day. After that, minor decrease occurs. This is because the time when the inflow of CO The residence time is a measure of CO The sealing capability depends on aperture sizes. With the same residence time, small apertures are sealed easily because of their small fracture volume and low calcite volume required for sealing. The opposite occurs for larger apertures. For a given hydraulic aperture  In general, under fixed pressure gradient conditions, calcite precipitation leads to flow rate reduction, which results in more calcite precipitation and forms a positive feedback between calcite precipitation and flow rate reduction. Constant flow conditions, however, do not allow this positive feedback loop. As such, with the same initial residence time and initial aperture size, self-sealing is not likely to occur. Therefore, we might expect similar figure however with different division line for constant flow conditions. Although most laboratory experiments in literature have been carried out under constant flow conditions ( Although This work describes a process-based model to investigate reactive transport characteristics and key parameters controlling the self-sealing and fracture opening behavior of cement fractures exposed to carbonated water under conditions relevant to GCS. The model was validated with flow evolution data from short-term flooding experiments and allows fundamental understanding of controlling processes and parameters. The model was used to predict long-term effects of carbonated brine leakage on fractured cement cores over a wide range of conditions, providing a much needed complement to short-term experiments. A total of 250 numerical experiments allowed the identification of residence time as a key factor affecting the long-term fracture property evolution. Long residence time allows for an increased contact between the cement matrix and acidic brine leading to elevated pH and Ca(II) concentration, calcite precipitation, and eventually flow reduction creating a positive feedback loop under constant pressure gradient conditions. This self-sealing behavior can lead to orders of magnitude reduction in the fracture flow, essentially providing a mechanism preventing CO The evolution of the permeability change over 100 days shows that significant changes occur within hours or days, suggesting short time experiments carried out for hours to days can be used to indicate long-term tendencies of permeability change. This is an outcome of the positive feedback loops with constant pressure gradient conditions, characteristics of natural systems. Constant flow experiments potentially introduce a bias in the system because artificial brine replenishment is created, a process that is critical to the evolution of the system. Thus constant flow conditions are likely to lead to fracture opening under conditions where self-sealing is expected under constant pressure gradient. Our work suggests that a constant pressure gradient, instead of constant flow, is a closer representation of field scenarios and therefore be used in future studies. One of the limitations of the model is the lack of geomechanical coupling. High flow velocities and dissolution of cement are conducive to mechanical removal of material within the fracture, limiting the possibility for precipitation and clogging. On the other hand, mechanical displacement of cement grains can also lead to the creation of reduced aperture zone through their blockage inside the fracture, which could then account for a possible flow reduction. Fracture clogging through the swelling of amorphous material and the reduction of asperities strength has been shown to cause self-sealing ( The model presented in this work provides a fundamental understanding of flow, transport, and reaction coupling during CO  This project was funded by the