An experimental study based on the homogeneous ferrioxalate-assisted solar photo-Fenton process shows the effect of the continuous addition of hydrogen peroxide and air injection on the degradation of non-biodegradable dye Reactive Blue 4 (RB4) solutions. The reaction was carried out in a CPC (compound parabolic collector) solar pilot plant reactor. It was shown that the degree of dye solution mineralization was enhanced because the scavenger effect of H2O2 was minimized. Air bubbling had a negative effect because oxygen reacted with oxalyl radical anions, diminishing the amount of generated Fe(II), and consequently the concentration of hydroxyl radicals produced under irradiation of oxalate in the presence of peroxide was lower. In addition, this system permits the use of lower concentrations of ferrous ion, reducing the costs of the later iron removal process. Under the optimal conditions selected in this system, TOC removal was increased from 61% to 82% with a shorter reaction time as compared with a peroxide dose at the beginning of the reaction. The efficiency of the mineralization of RB4 solutions was enhanced when the solar CPC reactor worked together with an artificial UV-A/C pilot plant, increasing TOC removal up to 95%. Artificial UV lamps can be used either to improve the process or as an alternative to solar CPC on cloudy days.The textile industry produces large quantities of wastewaters containing high levels of organic and color contaminants. The color and toxicity of dyes influence the quality of life by causing health problems, in addition to influencing the efficiency of some water treatment techniques. To avoid the environmental impact produced by the discharge of these types of non-biodegradable toxic pollutants, an efficient treatment of these effluents needs to be developed. Among the different advanced oxidation processes, the homogeneous solar photo-Fenton reaction is one of the most environmentally benign and cost-effective systems to generate hydroxyl radicals, In recent years, ferrioxalate has been used in the photo-Fenton reaction involving ferric compounds, but there is very little information on the ferrioxalate-assisted photo-Fenton system using ferrous-initiated processes. The use of ferrous sulphate is advantageous since it is less corrosive than ferric salts, very cheap and more soluble than ferric compounds. RB4 was selected as model pollutant since their high consumption in textile industry has attracted the attention of the public and the authorities with respect to the toxicological and environmental aspects. As previously reported Two additions of H The degradation efficiency of the solar installation on cloudy days was low. To overcome these drawbacks, in this work, a series of experiments was carried out with continuous addition of H A multivariate experimental design was performed to study the effect of all the variables simultaneously (pH, air flow rate, H RB4 (C When the irradiation started at time The initial concentration of hydrogen peroxide in the water was always 50 The CPC plant (manufactured by ECOSYSTEM, S.A.) is composed of a solar reactor that consists of a continuously stirred tank (50 The UV pilot plant (FLUORACADUS-08/2.2) is also shown in Changes in the RB4 concentration were determined from the absorbance at 594 The evolution of the concentration of H A central composite experimental design was applied to investigate the effect of five variables (pH, air flow rate, H The design consists of three series of experiments a 2 axial or star points (codified values central points, i.e., replicates of the central point (four experiments, 43–46). Temperature and incident solar power were not controlled during the experiment, but they were measured during the reaction so that their average values were included in the fitting. In all of the experiments, the disappearance of TOC followed pseudo-first order kinetics with respect to the TOC concentration as follows: In this work, a linear basis function (linear combination between inputs, To study the effect of the variables (peroxide flow rate, air flow rate, pH, and initial concentrations of Fe(II) and oxalic acid) on the response function (mineralization kinetic rate constant), experiments from a central composite design were performed. The complete experimental design matrix and variable ranges for the ferrioxalate-assisted solar photo-Fenton process with continuous addition of H Experimental results and NNs predictions for the mineralization rate pseudoconstant ( The results of a saliency analysis of the input variables for each neural network (%) are also shown in  As can be seen in  Previous tests (data not shown) showed that an excess of oxalate (concentration of oxalic acid above 60  To explain this behavior, Thus, when oxygen is injected into the solution, reaction On the other hand, as can be seen in According to the results discussed above, and taking into account that the aim is to obtain good mineralization efficiency at the end of the experiments, the following conditions were selected: H  TOC removal increased from 61% to 82% (160  The degree of mineralization of dye solutions was enhanced when hydrogen peroxide was continuously dosed because the scavenger effect of H Under the conditions selected in this work (H This system permits the use of a low concentration of Fe(II), and oxalic acid can also be used for pH adjustment, reducing the operating costs of later iron removal, chemicals and manpower. Financial support from the