As electronic waste (e-waste) is increasing, its by-products such as flue dust and wastewater, which are generated during its treatment process, are also increasing. In this study, the fine material generated in the processing of e-waste by both mechanical and thermal methods was investigated for the effective recovery and separation of valuable metals, including Cu and Fe, using both physical and chemical methods. The Fe in this sample was present mostly as magnetite, as determined by XRD, and was removed by magnetic separation. Three different acid solutions (HNO3, HCl, and H2SO4) were used for selective Cu recovery. All experiments were conducted with varying length of time (1–10 h) and temperature ranges (20–60 °C). The kinetics of Cu dissolution in HNO3 was studied, based on the shrinking core model, and the activation energy was about 5.0 kcal/mol. The dissolution of Cu in HNO3 was faster than that of other metals such as Fe and Al. In the case of H2SO4, dissolution of Cu was not observed, while Fe was completely dissolved after about 4 h at 60 °C. Based on the results of various leaching and the kinetic study, a two-step process was performed for selective metal recovery. H2SO4 was used to dissolve Fe as the first leaching process and HNO3 was used for Cu dissolution as the second leaching process. Through this two-step process, Fe and Cu leaching efficiencies were obtained at approximately 90% and 98%, respectively.As technology advances in both the electrical and electronics industries, a large amount of electronic waste (e-waste) is generated ( Recently, some researchers have reported on recycling studies for e-waste based on hydrometallurgy ( E-waste is generated from various types of electronic equipment, and the elements and compositions of e-waste depend on the materials that make up the electronic equipment. E-waste can contain up to 61% metals and 21% plastics ( Fine materials (<600 µm particle size), such as flue dust, are generated in the processing of e-waste by mechanical and thermal methods. According to In this study, the selective recovery and separation of Cu and Fe from fine materials of e-waste were examined. Magnetic separation was used as a physical method to remove ferrous materials. Cu was selectively recovered by using a leaching method as a chemical process. An acid leaching process was carried out with a variation of time and temperature in HNO An e-waste recycling company provided the fine materials for this work. In order to optimize the effective recovery process, size separation (RX-29, W.S. Tyler) was performed as a pre-treatment process and the max. size of the sieve was 600 µm. Next, magnetic separation was carried out to remove ferrous materials. The LB-1 magnetic barrier separator (S.G. Frantz Co.) was used, which consists of an electromagnet with two long pole pieces. An additional piece of low-field control (LFC-3) equipment was used for the separation of ferromagnetic materials from other magnetic and non-magnetic materials. The forward slope of the chute regulates the travel speed of the sample stream as a vertical slope under which the sample moves. The side slope of the chute is the horizontal slope in the left and right directions, and sample moves into magnetic and non-magnetic fractions under the influence of gravity, depending on the side slope. The LFC-3 can generate and control low magnetic fields at currents from 0 to 100 mA. The forward slope (20°) and the side slope (15°) of equipment were fixed and the applied current was 25 mA. In addition, the crystalline phase of the flue dust before and after magnetic separation was confirmed by XRD (Empyrean, PANalytical) equipped with a Cr tube. HighScorePlus (PANalytical) was used as analysis software of the XRD patterns. Samples were fused with a lithium borate mixture (40 wt% lithium tetraborate, 60 wt% lithium metaborate) at 1100 °C for 1 h. After the borate fusion process, the melt was dissolved in HNO Three acidic solutions, HNO   HCl was chosen as the second reagent for leaching. The results are shown in  Some researchers have used various additives, such as dichromate (K A kinetic study of Cu leaching on HNO Based on the results of leaching in various acids and the kinetic study, a continuous two-stage process was performed for selective metal recovery. To verify the effect of selective leaching, the solid/liquid ratio was increased to 100 g/L and the temperature and time were fixed at 60 °C for 4 h. In the leaching experiment in H Based on the above investigations, a process for selective metal recovery can be proposed. In this study, fine materials, including flue dust from e-waste processing, were investigated for recovery and separation of valuable metals, and the optimum conditions for Fe and Cu selective leaching were determined. In a single process, Cu showed the highest dissolution efficiency compared to Fe and Al in HNO The authors are thankful to the members of the NSF I/UCRC (WPI: 233110) on Resource Recovery and Recycling (CR