Copper is commonly produced by hydrometallurgical processes. The production of this metal results in the formation of emissions (unwanted solids, liquids and gases). In this paper, an effluent from a Cu producer company is valorized by means of Fe and Cu recovery.
                  In the current process, an effluent from the secondary solvent extraction (secondary raffinate) was sent to neutralization plant to be discharged. In this paper a modification of the process is proposed. The secondary raffinate was contacted with TP207 resin for Fe3+ and Cu recovery. Metals were eluted from the resins using another real effluent (primary raffinate, effluent from the primary solvent extraction) from the same plant.
                  Experiments for the uptake and elution were carried out in batch and in columns. The effect of pH, resin dosing, and temperature onto metals retention are analyzed. Retention efficiencies (loading capacities) were 50.1% (8.1mg·g−1) for Cu and 54.8% (23.2mg·g−1) for Fe3+ under the optimal operational conditions (pH=0.45 and T
                     =65°C). These values were confirmed in column tests. It is possible to recover Fe3+ and Cu from the secondary raffinate, leaving most of Fe2+ and other elements in solution. The experimental affinities that TP207 showed are: Cu>Fe3+
                     >Fe2+
                     >Zn.
                  The elution of Fe and Cu was quantitatively achieved with concentrated H2SO4 solution. When acidified primary raffinate was used as eluting solution, an enriched solution containing 14.3g Cu·L−1, 20.3g Fe2+·L−1, and 18.6 de g Fe3+·L−1 was obtained. This enriched primary raffinate can be reintroduced in the process as leaching solution.
                  So, after the modification of the process, using secondary raffinate as loading solution and acidified primary raffinate as eluting solution, the ion-exchange stage could substitute the external FeSO4 addition. In addition, 30–80kgCu·h−1 are reintroduced in the process.Copper extraction techniques from minerals consists of a series of chemical, physical, and electrochemical processes, that vary depending on the ore, local environmental regulations, and other factors. Near Seville (as part of the Iberian Pyrite Belt), it is located a copper deposit with 17.6 million tons of ore reserves grading 6.2% w copper ( The copper-bearing ore composition is given in A high part of the Fe In the current process, some external Fe Iron recovery from effluents (both Fe This study is intended to lead to the recovery of the Fe Ferric ion recovery from the SR by means of ion-exchange resins. Metals elution using a process stream that can be subsequently reintroduced as part of the leaching solution. The actual flow of SR is 120 All the chemical reagents used in this study were analytical reagents grade. Lewatit TP207 was supplied from Lanxess. Lewatit TP 207 is weakly acidic, macroporous cation exchange resins with chelating amino-diacetate groups for the selective removal of heavy metal cations. Selectivity of the resin is highly influenced by the pH of the solution ( The tests were carried out with real solutions generated by a copper hydrometallurgical plant from the south of Spain. The typical composition of the SR is presented in A set of experiments were performed in a batch technique for loading capacity determination. In each experiment, 150 Design of experiments (DOE) has become one of the most popular statistical techniques since 1990s ( The software Stat-Ease Design-Expert (version 9.0.6.2) was used for experimental design and response surface design and analysis. This software generates a set of experiments using the parameters with influence in the process. After the experiments, the software gives a response model of high statistical representativeness and it can optimize the response. In this study three variables affecting the recovery of Fe Because the pH is one of the influencing parameters in the resin performance, the effect of pH on Fe To design the experiments, it is first necessary to scale tests according to the space of interest to obtain the coded variables. The designed experimental matrix, the coded and the actual variables are shown in The responses were metal retention efficiencies (E The experimental data obtained in the tests were fitted by a polynomial equation in order to determine if any relationship between the factors and the response variables existed. The quality of fit polynomial model was expressed by R The obtained models of the RSM methodology predicted the optimum metal retention conditions with the resin TP207 in real solutions. To make predictions or determine the relative impact of factors in the value of the response, the equation in coded terms is preferred, representing the equation of the response variable normalized to range [− The elution of metals retained in the loaded resins was studied using PR and sulphuric acid as eluting solutions. The resin was previously loaded with real SR. The set of eluting batch experiments in technique were performed contacting the resin with the eluting solutions (RD equivalent: 250 The efficiency of stripping (S) for each metal was calculated according to eq. The tests for the determination of the breakthrough curve were carried out in jacketed glass columns (diameter: 2.2 All analyses for metal content determination of liquid samples were performed using an Atomic Absorption Spectrometer, model 3100 Perkin Elmer and Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, model ARL The experimental efficiency and loading capacities of the retention efficiency of Fe The highest values of distribution coefficients are achieved by Cu, and secondly for Fe It is possible to recover Fe Design-expert software was then used to compute the predicted E and capacity Q and the terms of the equations that correlate the responses with the studied variables were calculated in actual and coded terms ( The mathematical model for Zn loading capacity was not significant, so the model was not included in It is worth note the high efficiency of Cu and Fe The effects of pH, T and RD on efficiencies and loading capacities are shown by the coefficients of the first and second order polynomials. The three variables have influence independently and jointly over every response. In order to maximize the main objective of the paper (E The effect of temperature is probably due to the protonation of the carboxylic groups present in the iminodiacedic acid resin. These groups are partially protonated at all temperatures but their deprotonation degree increases at all temperature resulting in an increase metal capacities at high temperature ( The most influencing factor on Q As with Q For the Fe It is not easy the selection of optimal operational conditions attending to several objectives because the Fe The restrictions were maximizing Q Real SR was used as Fe Normalized breakthrough curves (for Cu, Fe Since one of the objectives of the study is the reintroduction of the recovered Fe Since in the leaching stage the acidity must be kept between 66 and 190 Two different temperatures were tested: T T The eluting efficiency of metals when sulfuric acid is used is higher than the achieved with acidified PR. When diluted acid is used (90 The resin TP207 retained Cu and Fe Seven BVs of acidified (190 In order to verify the possibility of resin reutilization, the same column was used in ten cycles. Each cycle consisted in: Loading: contacting resin TP-207 with 5 BVs of SR (pH Subsequent eluting at 30 After elution, resin was washed with 2 BVs of distilled water to eliminate acidified PR from the resin bed, 3 BVs of 4% NaOH solution and 2 BVs of distilled water, to eliminate any remaining NaOH (according to manufacturer recommendations). Acidified PR did not elute completely the metals retained by resin, so a number of active sites were reduced after the first cycle. The loading capacity decreased from 23.2 to 12.3 The amount of Fe In the first cycle, 362.1 This study focused in the possibility of Fe Ferric and copper can be eluted from TP207 resin by a sulphuric acid solution. The enriched solution contained 2.29–2.32 The optimal cycle of operation is: 1) contacting resin TP-207 with 5 BVs of secondary raffinate (pH Considering the actual SR flow, the modification of the actual process by including of an ion-exchange stage ( Efforts focused now on the elution stage, in order to improve the elution efficiency and achieve a better reutilization of the resin.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at