The surface texture of mineral flotation froth is well acknowledged as an important index of the flotation process. The surface texture feature closely relates to the flotation working conditions and hence can be used as a visual indicator for the zinc fast roughing working condition. A novel working condition identification method based on the dual-tree complex wavelet transform (DTCWT) is proposed for process monitoring of zinc fast roughing. Three-level DTCWT is implemented to decompose the froth image into different directions and resolutions in advance, and then the energy parameter of each sub-image is extracted as the froth texture feature. Then, an improved random forest integrated classification (iRFIC) with 10-fold cross-validation model is introduced as the classifier to identify the roughing working condition, which effectively improves the shortcomings of the single model and overcomes the characteristic redundancy but achieves higher generalization performance. Extensive experiments have verified the effectiveness of the proposed method.Froth flotation is the most widely used beneficiation method, but it is difficult to achieve optimal control of the method because of the long flotation process, the ambiguous internal mechanism and the key process parameters which cannot be detected online At present, the domestic and foreign experts have done some research on the analysis of the working condition of the flotation process. A performance recognition method for the antimony flotation process is proposed by Tang, where mutual coupling and obvious importance differences exist in froth image features Dual-Tree Complex Wavelet Transform (DTCWT) has related applications in many fields, such as image processing and fault diagnosis, because it solves the problems of shift variance and low directional selectivity in two and higher dimensions found with the commonly used discrete wavelet transform (DWT) The zinc flotation process is an important part of the lead–zinc flotation process. According to the difference of the physical and chemical properties of the mineral surface, the useful zinc particles are selectively attached to the bubbles under the action of flotation reagents, and then rise to the top of the flotation tank. The useless ore particles fall to the bottom of the pulp in the flotation cell, to achieve effective separation of minerals. The flow diagram of the zinc flotation process is shown in As is shown in Recently, an improved algorithm of the discrete wavelet transformation called the Dual-Tree Complex Wavelet Transform is put forward The wavelet function is The real component of six directions of the two-dimensional dual-tree complex wavelet transform is: ( The imaginary part of the six directions of the two-dimensional dual tree complex wavelet is: The six-direction selective bandpass image is composed of the real component obtained by Energy, variance and entropy are used as the texture feature to represent the work condition of the flotation process in zinc fast roughing. After the process of multi-scale decomposition of DTCWT, the energy, variance and entropy of the decomposed sub-image are defined as: As shown in After the extraction of the texture feature is completed, the classification can be realized by analyzing the energy of the froth image. A machine learning method called random forest used for classification and regression was proposed by Leo Breiman and Cutler Adele in 2001, which is widely applied in many areas Random forest, a collection of tree classifiers, is a kind of ensemble learning method. The base classifier is built by using the classification and regression tree (CART) algorithm without pruning. For every base classifier, random forests use bootstrap for self-help sampling and use sample data out of the bag to calculate error estimates. The nodes of each tree are randomly generated and only a few variables are chosen to be the segmentation variables for each node. In this method, many different base classifiers are produced. Therefore, it is called “random forest.” Computations performed by integrating multiple base classifiers improve the generalization, effectiveness and reliability of the model. Despite this, it is not ideal to have multiple base classifiers. The key of the integrated modeling method is the generation of various classifiers, the error distribution of each classifier is represented in a different data space. Many integration models are composed of the same classifiers. In order to increase the diversity of base classifiers, both the extreme learning machine (ELM) ELM solves the output weight s.t. Eq. For a small sample of training data, Eq. The output function of ELM can be obtained by Eqs. By replacing the hidden layer mapping of ELM with the kernel function satisfying the Mercer condition (such as RBF and the polynomial kernel), the output of the kernel extreme learning machine (KELM) can be represented as: This research uses the KELM with the RBF kernel because the RBF kernel function has a good local characteristic and strong learning ability. Adjacent sample data has a large impact on kernel function value. The number of training sets after resampling in this work is In conclusion, the steps of the heterogeneous integration model are: The performance and general error estimation of the entire random forest was assessed using stratified 10-fold cross-validation which is currently the preferred technique in data mining Briefly, the dataset is randomly divided into 10 equal folds. Each fold will be used as the validation set with the rest folds as the training set. The validation result of the overall performance is the average of 10 experimental models ( In this section, the method proposed in is simulated and validated by using industrial production data obtained in the zinc fast roughing process of a lead and zinc flotation plant in China. We collected data, including zinc grade and image, every 20 min for 2 months (24 h a day). Based on the experience of operators in the plant, 4 typical images are selected, and each kind has 100 froth images. As shown in The three-level Dual-Tree Complex Wavelet Transform is used because of its precision and computational complexity compared to others level in The data present in the three layers of the froth image texture feature of DTCWT decomposed dimension is very large; each sub-image has 6 directions in 3 layers, and each sub-image has 3 texture features, which is 54 features. This large number of features not only increases the difficulty of calculation but also contains redundant elements. It brings great difficulty to the subsequent industrial control systems. An important feature of the random forest algorithm itself is that it can evaluate the importance of variables. It provides four strategies for measuring the importance of variables. We use Out-off Bag data to evaluate the importance of every feature ( The classification ability of common GLCM In the 400 different images, the traditional image texture classification method can reach the highest accuracy of 86%. But, in our method, 89 images were correctly predicted as the underflow image; 92 images were correctly predicted as the overflow image; 87 images were predicted as the higher grade image; and 88 images were correctly predicted as the lower grade image. An average predicted accuracy of 89% was achieved by DTCWT and improved random forest method. As shown in This article proposes a texture feature extraction method with DTCWT in an attempt to overcome the limitations of the single-rate method. Our method has the advantages of approximate invariance of translation and selectivity of direction. Furthermore, an improved random forest integrated classification model, which combines KEML and a classification regression tree as a basic classifier, is introduced to eliminate the classification error of the single model. This method, which has been validated through the use of industrial data, can effectively present the process characteristics under different conditions, and can accurately identify the production conditions of zinc flotation, which provides effective guidance for field production.