Nanocrystalline Cu-14at.% Al alloy was synthesised by cryomilling. Milled powder was then annealed up to T/Tm
                     =0.87 and corresponding changes in grain size (by X-ray peak broadening analysis) and hardness values were recorded. The hardness of the milled powder (3.28GPa) decreases only ~17% (2.73GPa) after annealing at T/Tm
                     =0.87. The improved thermal stability was attributed to the dispersion of nanoscale intermetallic (CuAl2) phase, observed by Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) investigation of the annealed samples. The closure agreement of theoretically estimated mechanical property (hardness) with the experimentally obtained one elicits kinetic stabilisation (i.e. grain boundary pinning by intermetallic particles) is the governing strengthening mode at high temperatures.Advantages of nanoscale (ns, grain size Elemental powders of pure Cu (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) and Al (Cerac, 99.95%) were mixed in determined quantity to get the bulk composition Cu-14 Constituent phases of both milled and annealed powders were evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The XRD patterns were collected by RigakuDMax/An X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ The microstructure of both milled and annealed powders was investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM 2000FX) by using beam energy of 200 Microhardness (by BuehlerMicromet II hardness tester) of powder compacts were measured for each annealing condition as well as for milled powder under 25  TEM investigation would provide a comprehensive understanding of influence of annealing on Cu 14 The bright field and dark-field TEM images 900 The Scherrer grain size calculated from XRD peak broadening of both milled and annealed sample are shown in The variation of hardness with respect to the normalized annealing temperature ( Abovementioned discussion points out that formation of intermetallic phases, as observed by TEM ( The grain size (d) and precipitate size (r Using approach reported by Srinivasan et al. Following Labusch Using grain size from TEM 66 Existing research work suggests that ns copper can be thermally stabilized by addition of the insoluble elements (e.g. W in Cu Nanostructured Cu-14 Authors are grateful to Prof. C.C. Koch, NCSU, Raleigh for providing needful research facilities and valuable suggestions.