The synthesis of aragonite precipitated calcium carbonate by treating a suspension of Ca(OH)2 with CO2 gas was investigated with regard to the effects of Mg2+ ions and organic additives on polymorphism and alternative orientations. In the presence of a small amount of Mg2+, Mg-calcite formed, but as the Mg2+ ion concentration increased, the amount of Mg-calcite decreased and the amount of aragonite increased. Thus, the formation of Mg-calcite is suppressed and only aragonite is formed in the presence of 60mol% MgCl2. As the Mg2+ ion concentration increased, the aragonite that formed was found to have decreased in terms of its longitude and aspect ratio. Furthermore, the effect of Mg2+ ions in conjunction with organic additives was also investigated with regard to polymorphs and morphology and the structure-forming properties of the organic additives.Synthetic methods for the deposition of precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC) comprise the carbonation process, in which a suspension of Ca(OH) When calcium carbonate is deposited in this way it is known that polymorphs, the morphology, and the particle size distribution are influenced by the precipitation conditions, including the composition of the solution, the pH, the temperature, the degree of supersaturation, the stirring rate, and the presence of additive ions In the presence of Mg PCC is primarily used as a filler in rubber, plastic, paint, and paper products. In particular, aragonite PCC, which takes the form of needle-like particles with a very high aspect ratio, has the effect of increasing the bending strength and impact strength of rubber and plastic when used as a filler in these products. Due to this effect, PCC is employed in car bumpers and dashboards as a filler incorporated into thermoplastic and polypropylene resins. Furthermore, when used as a filler in paper products (up to 72% of the total global use of PCC), it increases the opacity and brightness of paper by increasing the dispersion of light; it is thus used as a filler or coating pigment for special-purpose papers. Moreover, it can readily be used as a new advanced functional material in place of existing paper fillers such as kaolin and talc due to developments in the paper industry and numerous new factory establishments. One of the interesting features about calcium carbonate to investigators is that it is highly abundant in nature. The mineralization process of inorganic materials controlled by living organisms is generally termed “biomineralization”. The biomaterials formed by such biomineralization processes perform various critical functions, for example serving as bone scaffolds, mollusc shells, iron-storage protein (ferritin), bacterial magnetite, or comminution (tooth). To date, over 60 types of such biomaterials have been characterized The purpose of this study is to synthesize new aragonite PCC with specific orientation states at lower reaction temperatures compared to existing synthetic methods via the novel use of Mg The following reagents were used as starting materials: Ca(OH) A slurry of Ca(OH) The morphologies of the dry precipitates were characterized by XRD, and the shapes, particle size distributions, and aspect ratios of the particles were observed by SEM. X-ray powder patterns were recorded in reflection mode using a Rigaku Ru-200 diffractometer operated using a copper source. The polymorphic ratio of calcite and aragonite in the PCC was evaluated using the following equation, where Reactions of Ca(OH) The yield of Mg-calcite decreased as the Mg  In order to investigate the effect of Mg  Ca Based on these results (  Considering the plane spacing values ( As observed in this study, magnesium has an effect on the formation of aragonite. Whether Mg During the last few decades, as part of the effort to develop new advanced materials by taking inspiration from biomineralization, many studies have been undertaken on the polymorphic and morphological control of calcium carbonate using organic matrices of proteins from living tissues that synthesize calcium carbonate or biominerals composed of calcium carbonate. Kitano and Hood In the present work, using magnesium ions and organic additives that have been proved to facilitate the synthesis of aragonite, the effects on the polymorphism and morphological control of PCC were investigated ( To sum up the influences of organic additives on the formation of aragonite, phthalic acid has the most marked effect, followed by malate, citrate, and then glucose. This order is in accordance with the order of the association constants for complex formation with calcium ions. The presence of organic additives in the mother liquor or growth solution influences the crystallinity and shape of the aragonite crystals. The presence of citrate ions in the mother solution decreases the crystallinity of aragonite; citrate or malate ions in the mother solution favor the formation of rod-shaped aragonite crystals and granular calcite crystals ( This study of aragonite PCC formation based on the carbonation process of introducing CO As the concentration of Mg As stated in Point 1, as the concentration of Mg As also stated in Point 1, when the concentration of MgCl As regards the effects of adding organic additives along with Mg