The use of coolants is normally required in the grinding of most of the engineering materials as it can significantly affect the ground surface quality and machining efficiency. Presently, in manufacturing industries, water or water emulsion is often used, but water has low viscosity and lubricity, which cannot provide sufficient lubrication, and the use and discharge of waste emulsion coolants is of environmental concern. In this study, water based coolants containing graphene oxide (GO) were developed to replace water or water emulsion, which is environmentally friendly. The lubrication characteristics of the GO coolants was investigated, and their grinding performance was systematically evaluated in terms of grinding force, force ratio and ground surface/subsurface damage. The experimental results showed that the GO coolants would significantly improve the lubrication with a much lower friction coefficient compared with water and emulsion coolants. The use of a 0.1 wt% GO coolant substantially reduced the tangential grinding force, and improved the surface quality in the grinding of Si and GaAs substrates. The improved grinding performance was attributed to the formation of a dynamic lubricating film of GO at the wheel-substrate interface.In the grinding of hard-to-machine materials, water or water emulsion is usually used as coolants to prevent thermal damage and enhance lubrication in the grinding zone. Water cannot provide sufficient lubrication in the grinding area, as it has low viscosity and lubricity [ In recent years, aqueous suspensions with inorganic nanoparticles such as Al A variety of nanoparticles were tested to examine their suitability as additives in aqueous lubrication, among which inorganic nanoparticles including Al In this study, tribological characteristics of the GO nanosheet water coolants were examined and their performance in grinding was evaluated systematically in terms of grinding force and surface quality using of silicon (Si) and gallium arsenide (GaAs) substrates as work materials. The GO concentration and grinding parameters were varied to investigate their synergistic performance. Through surface/subsurface analyses, the lubrication mechanism of GO coolants involved in the grinding was also explored. Commercially available multilayer GO powders (Hengqiu Graphene Technology CO. Ltd., China) were used as additives in water suspensions. Powders (or nanosheets) were added in pure water at different concentrations of 0.025, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 wt% to obtain aqueous GO suspensions. The suspensions were then stirred using an ultrasonic probe of 1500 W in power for 1 h, so GO nanosheets were well dispersed in water to form stable water-based GO coolants. During the stirring process, a circulated chilled water was used to maintain a reasonably constant suspension temperature. The microstructure and morphology of GO nanosheets were analysed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JSM-7001F, JEOL, Japan) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEM2100, JEOL, Japan). For SEM observation, GO powders were uniformly deposited on an ultrasonically cleaned silicon wafer surface. For TEM analysis, a GO coolant was firstly diluted using pure water until it appeared gold in colour, and was then dropped onto a copper grid using a pipet. Prior to examination, the grid was dried in a vacuum oven at ambient temperature for 24 h. The tribological behaviours of GO coolants were tested, together with pure water and a popularly used commercially available grinding emulsion, using a block-on-ring friction tester (UMT-3, Bruker, USA). The grinding emulsion of Daphne mistmulti MU32 (Idemitsukosan Co., Ltd., Japan) has a chemical additive to water ratio of 1:25. The normal load being used in the tribological tests was fixed at 20 N, and sliding speed was maintained at 250 mm/s with a total testing distance of 30 m. The blocks were made of AISI 304 stainless steel and the rings were made of AISI 52100 Cr alloy steel. Three tests were conducted and values were averaged with standard deviations. Grinding experiments were performed on a precision surface grinding machine (Okamoto UPZ315Li, Japan), which has a maximum spindle speed of 20,000 rpm with a spindle power of 2.2 kW. Two resin bonded diamond grinding wheels, namely SD800 and SD3000 (Asahi Diamond, Japan), have a diameter of 180 mm and a width of 5 mm. The SD800 and SD3000 wheels have average grain sizes of 20 μm and 5 μm, respectively. The wheels were trued and dressed using a silicon carbide rotary wheel that has a mesh size of 800, using different feeds of 5 μm and 1 μm for the SD800 wheel and 2 μm and 0.5 μm for the SD3000, respectively. The workpiece materials were commercially available silicon (Si) and gallium arsenide (GaAs) wafers, which were cut into rectangle specimens of 10 mm in width, 10 mm in length and 1 mm in thickness. The selection of Si and GaAs wafers as work materials is because they have a near-perfect surface, which is convenient for testing the effect of coolant on surface quality. The grinding tests were performed along the width direction of specimens in the up-grinding mode. Three different types of coolants, i.e. pure water, commercial emulsion and GO suspensions, were supplied into grinding area at a flow rate of 6 L/min. Grinding forces were measured using a piezoelectric dynamometer (9275B, Kristler, Switzerland). The friction coefficient of grinding, μ, was represented by the force ratio calculated by an equation, μ = After testing, specimens were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone and DI water for 20 min. Surface roughness of the ground specimens was measured perpendicular to grinding direction with a confocal microscope (LEXT OLS4100, Olympus, Japan). For each ground specimen, surface roughness R    The force ratios obtained from the grinding of Si and GaAs substrates are plotted as a function of GO concentration in    Values of surface roughness R  Similar roughness results were achieved in the grinding of GaAs substrates. As the ground GaAs surfaces exhibit distinct characteristics of brittle and ductile-like removal under the grinding conditions being used in this work. The effect of coolant type on subsurface damage was further investigated using this work material. Water-based coolants using GO nanosheets as additives were successfully synthesised. The GO coolants demonstrated superior tribological performance to water and a commonly used emulsion in the block-on-ring test, among which the 0.1 wt% GO coolant produced the best result. The machining characteristics of the 0.1 wt% GO coolant were systematically assessed in the precision grinding of Si and GaAs substrates, in terms of tangential force, force ratio, and surface/subsurface quality. The use of the GO coolant in the grinding significantly reduced the tangential grinding force, as well as force ratio, and thus improved the surface and subsurface quality, in comparison with those generated using the water and emulsion. The improved grinding performance with the GO coolant was likely due to the formation of GO lubricating films at the wheel-substrate interface, which enhanced the lubrication performance in the grinding zone. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from