The performance of a crusher is an essential element in achieving efficient production of aggregates or metals. The process performance depends on the design and configuration of each process equipment, the configuration of the plant, the design of the control and physical properties of the incoming feed. Crushers, however, do not operate in an ideal condition, and as a result, the crusher’ structure, electrical drive and hydraulic system will experience an uneven load during operation.
                  This paper aims to adapt a Hilbert transform to characterise the pressure variations in actual crushers during operation and to set up potential strategies for quantifying the variation. Two applications are also proposed for how this could be used in operation to compensate for the disturbances from unwanted loading conditions that affect the crusher performance.An essential part of minerals processing is the liberation of elements from the ore. This is achieved with comminution, either with crushers or mills or a combination of both. The performance of a crusher often determines the process overall efficiency. The crushing performance depends on the design and configuration of each process equipment, the configuration of the plant, the design of the controls and physical properties of the incoming feed ( Compressive crushing, such as utilised in cone crushers, is energy efficient because of the crushing principle that is employed and the imposed stress-state ( Current crusher controls usually provide an estimation of the average and peak pressure or power of a crusher. Various methods can, however, be applied to analyse an oscillating system. Methods such as fast Fourier transform ( The Hilbert transform has several applications with characteristics similar to those associated with crusher operation. This transform has been applied in geophysics ( This paper aims to adapt a Hilbert transform to characterise the pressure variations in actual crushers during operation and to set up potential strategies for quantifying the variation. Two applications are also proposed for how this could be used in operation to compensate for the disturbances from unwanted loading conditions that affect the crusher performance. In minerals processing, cone crushers are used in the coarse part of the process. The operational crushers used in this study are Hydrocone type crushers. Cone crushers have a static outer mantle (concave) and precession of an inner mantle mounted on the main shaft. The mantle rotates around its own axis ( There are three main systems that enable the crushing of rock particle. These are the material dynamics, the electric drive, and the hydraulic system. The material will accumulate, Eq. The nonlinear filling behaviour has been described by When the particles enter the crushing chamber, an intermediate flow pattern emerges with a holdup during compression in each zone. A detailed description of the crusher flow behaviour has been given by The hydraulic pressure is directly proportional to the internal force from the crushing operation. The pressure In many cases, the measured power and pressure are not stable. This is due to uneven loading conditions which may originate from low, segregated, or misaligned feed as illustrated in The position of the main shaft is controlled by the hydraulic system. The motion of the main shaft can be represented as Eq.  The pressure signal gives a higher resolution of the internal compression forces in the crusher compared to the power signal. The power signal gives a single component oscillatory signal while the pressure signal can contain additional disturbances. The electrical drive and the mechanical inertia acts as a filter for pressure signal. Since the crushers seldom operate in ideal conditions, vibration will occur due to the varying internal forces. These variations are also observable in the hydraulic and electrical systems. The vibrations are cyclic and often neglected. In some applications, limits are determined for the peaks which are used to detect cracks in the shell of the crusher which would amplify the measured vibrations. The Hilbert transform can be implemented to calculate the instantaneous envelope, phase and frequency of a time series signal, such as the crusher’s pressure and power signals during operation. The initial usage of the Hilbert function was in radio communication but has found its way to mechanical vibration diagnostics in different application, as earlier described. The Hilbert transform is a convolution that shifts the phase of a signal by −π/2, which results in a real and imaginary part of the analytic signal ( The analytical signal contains a real (  The phase of the signal is determined by measuring the angle of the analytical signal, whereas the time derivative of the phase yields the instantaneous frequency An important property of Hilbert transform is that the IE and IF always converge to the component with the largest amplitude in a multicomponent signal. When the largest component is subtracted from the original signal, the IE and IF will converge the next largest component ( To evaluate the Hilbert transform, different operating conditions were evaluated, including different oscillatory signal for both laboratory and operational crushers and both the power draw and pressure is used for the demonstrations. By applying the Hilbert transform on an oscillatory signal, the IE and IP can be identified. Hydraulic crushers such as the Sandvik Hydrocone, Metso G-cone, and Kawazaki Cybas Cone rely on the interpretation of the pressure and power signals to adjust the configuration of the machine to secure quality product and protect the equipment. In To demonstrate the application, the Hilbert transform was applied to a clean sinusoidal signal and the laboratory power signal. The experimental setup and the equipment have been described by For an operating crusher, the disturbance is larger. As stated previously, the force distribution within the crushing chamber can be caused by misalignment, segregation, change in material properties, and level in the hopper. In The two high-pressure zones are separated by 180 degrees caused by the supporting arms. The change in the envelope is illustrated in During the start-up, the crusher experiences systematic oscillation from two distinct components at 4 Hz and 8 Hz. The double application of the Hilbert enables a clear identification of the IE as illustrated in For crusher with segregated feed issue, the profile will have a local minimum as illustrated in Applying the Hilbert gives a clear instantaneous characteristic of the signal. The variances of the envelopes for a single and double application of the Hilbert transform are illustrated in The crushers appear to experience a sinusoidal modulation of two separate components: one at the same frequency as the crusher’s eccentric speed and another one which is identified at double the main frequency with a phase shift. This is the same phenomena as identified during the start-up of the crushers. The main frequency, around 4 Hz, acts as a modulation waveform while the second one acts as a carrier wave. In The mantle’s vertical position control for cone crushers is relatively slow in the current stage. Two different control strategies are usually applied to the crushers: either keep a constant CSS or a constant load (either pressure or power). In both cases, CSS is the manipulated variable, and the load is the control variable. For a constant CSS, a logical hysteresis control on the power draw and pressure is applied. Other strategies can be applied such as keeping the product as a control variable and using the eccentric speed of the crusher as a manipulated variable ( The Hilbert transform is an efficient control option when it comes to oscillating systems, both in a traditional feedback loop and in a feedforward configuration ( The initial application includes replacing the current signal estimations demonstrated in To demonstrate the application of the Hilbert transform as a control algorithm for a crusher, a segregation scenario was modelled using Eq. The proposed controller utilises the Hilbert transform to determine the envelope and phase of the pressure signal to create a control signal for the vertical position actuator, that is, the compression ratio, to compensate for the segregation. Therefore, using the vertical position of the main shaft as a manipulated variable. The Hilbert transform is continuously applied to the output to get information about the discrepancies between the model and the set target, which is to minimise the pressure envelope. The system implementation scheme is illustrated in Included in the crusher model is a response representation of a vertical actuator. The system is represented with a second-order transfer function with delay in Eq. The simulation aims to illustrate the response of the system and highlight the restrictions that could influence the implementation. If the system is in a stable oscillatory state, the controller should be able to reduce the oscillation by counteracting the force distribution by initiating sinusoidal change in the main shaft vertical position and, therefore, the CSS. In In the simulation, the analysis period was used to match the sample rate of the simulations that occur recursively for every 500 sample points or every second. It is not possible for the proposed controller to reach directly to an instantaneous change in performance in the current state. On the other hand, the performance can be improved by increasing the analysis frequency per period by a controller with a higher sampling period until the desired performance is achieved. It is also important to note that reducing the analysis window with respect to the sampling period limits the frequency range that can process. The variation is decreased in this demonstration but not eliminated. This approach could put a significantly more strain on the hydraulic system and auxiliary components with several practical implications such as leakage, cracking and heating, which is not covered in this demonstration. The Hilbert transform is an adaptive signal processing approach, and further development of the hydraulic system could improve crusher performance and reliability. Segregation and misalignment are common issues for cone crushers. Operators need to be aware of the consequences of operating under these conditions. This may include reduced operational utilization since the crusher cannot operate close to the maximum pressure or power, reduced availability due to increased wear and frequent failures and reduced profit because of increased maintenance and decreased production. Process designers should incorporate flexible feeding arrangement or provide a solution that can distribute the feed to minimize the segregation with current equipment. The yield and utilisation of the equipment and process are affected by its design, configuration, and overall operational strategy. In this paper, a novel approach has been presented to diagnose crusher signals and potential control approaches for cone crushers have been proposed. The diagnostics have been benchmarked with regards to current solutions and applied to different datasets including analytical approach, laboratory equipment, and actual process data. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has been performed within the