As renewable energy technologies emerge, it is important to determine the economic feasibility of introducing such technologies at mines. We present a case study of a mine in the Canadian territory of Nunavut, where extreme climatic conditions exist. It was determined that nearly 47,500L of diesel could be saved annually during the exploration phase with the proposed installations applied in the residential facility of the mine. This represents a savings of approximately 10% in diesel consumption relative to the base case. Solar thermal technologies also were considered for the residential facility, with a payback period of approximately 5 months. Simple energy efficiency strategies can have a payback period as short as 2.3 months. Reductions in energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions are estimated at 25% by pursuing the proposed efficiency strategies. If the mining company invests in wind turbines for the processing plant, approximately 35 million litres of diesel could be saved annually during the extraction phase. In addition, 9.7% of the carbon dioxide emissions can be reduced during the exploration phase and 50% during the extraction phase by utilizing renewable energy sources.In remote communities that typically lack access to conventional transmission lines, power is often delivered by diesel generators. Transport costs to remote sites increase the price of diesel and, consequently, the final price of energy delivery ( A study ( The Canadian territory of Nunavut has a population 36,600 ( The Government of Canada previously provided incentives for the deployment of renewable energy technologies in the country. For example, the The proportion of energy costs in mineral extraction and processing accounts for approximately 15% and 19% of the production costs for metals and non-metals, respectively ( The Diavik Diamond Mine is a case in point of successful renewable energy technology deployment in the mining industry. The company installed a wind farm consisting of four Enercon E70 wind turbines, with a total capacity of 9.2 Our industrial partner, whose identity will not be disclosed, is a mining company with a residential facility in North West Nunavut and a processing plant scheduled to be built in the next 3 years. Typically, the residential facility operates between February and October and closes when there are extreme weather conditions. Management is interested in reducing diesel consumption by including renewable sources in its energy budget. Our partner also plans to reduce generation costs by identifying ways to increase the efficiency of their residential facility. The objective of this paper is to assess the economic feasibility of deploying renewable energy sources at mines. Energy efficiency measures also are considered in an attempt to identify potential further savings in energy consumption. Typical climate constraints of the regional study are considered to assess the feasibility of installing photovoltaic modules and wind turbines at the study site. Specifically, we analysed the economic feasibility of implementing two renewable energy sources: solar photovoltaics (PV) and wind energy. We also included a bank of batteries for energy storage in the system. To analyse the feasibility of solar PV, wind energy and energy storage, we used the software package, Homer Energy, developed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL, USA) ( The electric load at the camp was estimated based on the average consumption per person in remote off-grid Canadian communities of 27.7 Three generators are set up in the facility (two for main power generation and one for emergencies). For the purpose of this study, only the two main generators will be considered. The remote location will remain confidential, as will the equipment details. The heating system is the component of the residential facility that consumes the most significant amount of energy. The vast majority of heaters operate with electricity, and only a few of them operate with propane and diesel. Two diesel generators (G1 and G2) are considered in the study and their characteristics are detailed in The average daily peak power consumption in the remote community was found to be 238 Solar and wind resources were taken from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) webpage and the database provided in RETScreen. The solar resource from NASA was obtained at the exact location of the study site, expressed as a daily average, but on a monthly basis. There was no public wind data available for the exact location of the study site, so we took the data from the nearest location in the database of the software RETScreen, from NRCAN ( The execution of the extraction phase depends on the exploration results of the feasible conditions to build the mine. For this reason, the options considered for the exploration phase were solar energy and an energy storage system. Wind technology was considered only for the extraction phase, where power consumption would be considerably larger than during the exploration phase. We are also interested in expanding our results to small remote communities where the generation scale must be planned according to the needs of the population. HOMER software takes the model inputs (technology options, costs, resource availability) and simulates all possible system configurations based on the hourly demand throughout the year and the availability of the supply options. After the simulation process, HOMER lists the most feasible configurations ordered by cost-effectiveness. It is also able to perform sensitivity analyses for resource availability and component costs. The objective of the optimisation was to provide the technically feasible option with the lowest net present cost (NPC). The power described illustrated in The annualised capital cost in where A capital cost of $5000 USD per kW of photovoltaic generation was considered in this study, calculated from information provided elsewhere ( The power generation system does not currently have a storage system to balance the demand and supply sides during peak and off-peak hours. For this reason, the sole inclusion of a battery bank will bring a reduction of 5% in the diesel consumption, due to the rescheduling of the generator's operation. The illustrated savings for the energy storage and PV systems implementation are reduced by the increased capital costs. For example, the commercial price of the Trojan L16P battery is approximately $160 USD per kWh, which is less than half that set for our simulations. This difference is due mainly to transportation costs to remote areas. The cost of electricity (COE) in the residential facility operating only with the diesel generators is $1.33 USD per kWh. The COE operating with 100 A sensitivity analysis that accounts for variations in the solar PV power generation capacity reveals that the optimum installation is 100 Given the conditions of the present residential facility (load profile, populations and overall costs), our results do not position a PV installation as an attractive option for remote communities. They rather provide feasible scenarios for its implementation in communities with larger load profiles. The results shown earlier were calculated using an average energy consumption of 3047  The main expense in our calculations corresponds to the battery bank. Reducing the costs of energy storage is a critical point when the introduction of renewable energy technologies in remote areas is assessed. These high costs can be reduced with more efficient energy storage systems and significant savings in transportation costs. Solar thermal evacuated collectors were considered for this stage of the study due to their high energy capture and high outlet temperature (approximately 95 A constant power generation of 23 For this part of the study, wind speed average data in  Wind energy-related costs illustrated in We also considered that the transportation costs doubled the capital costs of the deployment, similar to diesel transportation. In this way, the total cost for each wind turbine deployment, including the electric infrastructure (excluding the converter), was set at approximately 8,200,000 USD. We interpolated this value for an initial deployment of five wind turbines and then for 15, 20, 25 and 30 turbines, as illustrated in The left side of The right side of Because we varied the interest rate with the number of installed wind turbines, the NPC decreased when the interest rate increased, as illustrated in The right graph of In the tornado chart illustrated in In Canada, space heating accounts for 63% of the total energy use within a residential facility, according to NRCan. This dictates special attention to the heat flow and air flow in and out of buildings especially with the extreme cold conditions in northern communities. Investing in proper insulation to limit heat flow reduces the heating demand of buildings. Our industrial partner will install insulated walls in the buildings, consisting of R-32 in the outer walls, R-40 under the floors and R-60 in the ceiling. Heat recovery solutions present a great potential for saving energy in northern communities with high energy consumption caused by the extreme cold conditions and the resultant heating load. One form of heat recovery is generator heat recovery (GHR). Diesel fuel has an energy density of 10.7 Our results indicate that the installation of a PV system in a remote community is economically feasible when the energy consumption is within a certain range. In our specific study, a PV installation is economically feasible if the primary load is in the range of 3000–6000 We did not account for issues with electric lines, as they are out of this study's scope. However, during the implementation of renewable technology, special attention must be focused on the effects that an intermittent power source will have. State-of-the-art regulators with fast response and constant renewable source monitoring are tools that can mitigate the influence of unexpected variations in the renewable power supply. The economic values calculated in this study may be affected by the measures taken to address the aforementioned problems. The COE for the remote community reported in this study is estimated at $1.30 USD per kWh if solar PV modules are implemented. We estimated savings of approximately $0.03 USD per kWh in a residential remote facility. This also represents a reduction of approximately 1.76% in the COE estimated for the current configuration in the site under study. The estimated cost with the implementation of renewable energy is also similar to the reported subsidised average COE in the literature, set at approximately $1.3 USD per kWh. Adding the corresponding subsidies to the proposed COE will bring attractive revenue opportunities to the power suppliers. The estimated savings for an exploration site are approximately $37,000 USD for 3 years of operation, considering an average population of 96 persons every operative year and a 100-kW PV installation. The installation of a PV array for the exploration phase is the most suitable option when the interest rate value is below 10%. In the case of the extraction phase, the wind farm is the optimum option, even at interest rates up to 30%. In the case of the wind deployment, it proves to be the best option at a wide range of interest rates, having a more attractive NPC than diesel generators alone. The savings are expected to be larger when the population and energy demand increase during the extraction works with a wind farm installation with 16.5 Payback periods of 6 and 2 months are expected when solar thermal technology and energy efficiency strategies are considered, respectively. The proposed efforts in energy efficiency and solar thermal heating can lower the COE by saving approximately 0.83 The authors wish to thank the industrial partner for the facilitation of the data for the study. We also acknowledge the