A hydrometallurgical process that involves solvent extraction and selective precipitation has been used to selectively recover Co2+ from an aqueous filtrate containing mostly Co2+, NH4
                     + and NO−
                     3 ions and trace amounts of Pt2+, Al3+ and Fe3+ ions. The effect of pH on the precipitation efficiencies of Al3+ and Fe3+ ions from the leach liquor was investigated. Solvent extraction exhibited good performance in terms of both Co2+ and Pt2+ ions extraction efficiency and phase separation when ammonium salt of di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid was used as an extractant in the presence of a tributylphosphate modifier. Cobalt was stripped from the organic phase with nitric acid to yield cobalt nitrate.Cobalt is today one of the metals of high economic and strategic importance, largely because of its wide range of applications and dwindling supplies. Several hydrometallurgical processes have been developed and used to extract cobalt from various sources. A number of monodentate and chelating agents in organic media have been utilised as extractants of base metals from aqueous solutions ( Organic solutions of D2EHPA and its analogues have been used extensively as selective extractants of cobalt from sulphate or chloride containing leach liquors ( A 200 g aliquot of an aqueous solution obtained from a Sasol proprietary process containing known amounts of Al, Fe, Pt and Co was transferred into a 1000 ml beaker and heated to about 90 °C. A 25% solution of ammonium hydroxide was slowly added to the stirred hot metal-containing solution until a desired equilibrium pH was achieved at 90 °C. Formation of a brown gelatinous precipitate was observed over the 4–5 pH range during the addition of ammonium hydroxide to the impure cobalt-containing solution. The slurry was conditioned for 1 h and the precipitate was then separated from the solution by filtration. The precipitate was washed with sufficient water (200 ml) to remove the residual filtrate. The wash solution and the filtrate were combined at room temperature to form the final filtrate. This cobalt nitrate and ammonium nitrate-containing filtrate was reserved for the solvent extraction step (vide infra). A sample of the filtrate was analysed for cobalt, platinum, aluminium and iron. Separation of Fe from Al was achieved by reacting the Fe- and Al-containing precipitate with 25% aqueous sodium hydroxide at room temperature and pH 12. This treatment yielded a sodium aluminate solution and an insoluble Fe precipitate that was readily filtered off. An ammonium salt of D2EHPA was prepared via phase transfer metathesis by contacting 800 ml of 12.5% ammonium hydroxide solution with a 2000 g solution of kerosene containing 40% D2EHPA and 20% tributylphosphate (TBP) at room temperature. The resulting bi-phasic solution was stirred for 15 min, and the two phases were allowed to separate. The organic phase containing an ammonium salt of D2EHPA was used to extract Co from the filtrate obtained above. A 1000 g portion of a filtrate containing 18 mg/l Al, 4 mg/l Fe, 35 g/l Co and 3 mg/l Pt was transferred to a 5000 ml beaker. The pH of the filtrate was measured to be 4.1 at 70 °C. Approximately 2000 g of the organic phase salt was contacted with 1000 g of the aqueous filtrate at 70 °C and the mixture was stirred for 5 min. An equilibrium pH of 4 was attained upon mixing the organic and aqueous phases. The bi-phasic mixture was allowed to cool to room temperature prior to separation. The recovered aqueous phase was analysed for Al, Pt, Co and Fe using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). A 2000 g aliquot of the loaded organic phase produced in this experiment was stripped with a 1000 g solution of 10% nitric acid. The mixture was stirred at 70 °C for 5 min and prior to cooling to room temperature. The resulting bi-phasic solution was separated rapidly. The aqueous phase recovered after the stripping step was analysed for metals using ICP-AES. The aqueous phase obtained from the stripping step was dried to give cobalt nitrate salt that was purified by recrystallisation. The recrystallised cobalt nitrate salt was further analysed by X-ray fluorescence and X-ray powder diffraction using a Siemens D500 diffractometer fitted with a Co According to As can be seen from Despite reports that Co It has been pointed out in the literature that solvent extraction can be used to selectively separate Co The original aqueous filtrate from the precipitation step typically contains mostly Co The extent of metal extraction was determined by measuring the amount of residual Co, Pt, Al and Fe present in the aqueous phase. It is apparent from the results presented in It can be concluded that solvent extraction produced good performance in terms of both Co During the stripping of the loaded organic phase with nitric acid, the loaded organic phase underwent a colour change from blue to colourless. This implies that the loaded cobalt species were successfully stripped from the loaded organic phase by nitric acid solution. The ICP-AES analysis of the aqueous phase confirmed that all the cobalt species loaded in the organic phase during the solvent extraction step were stripped off from the organic phase. Consistent with the hexahydrated form of cobalt nitrate, elemental analysis of the recrystallised cobalt nitrate showed the compound to contain 20.0% cobalt by weight [theoretical: 20.0% in Co(NO The primary aim of these studies was to produce a chemically pure cobalt nitrate from a spent commercial catalyst. This was achieved via solvent extraction using ammonium salt of D2EHPA as an extractant. X-ray diffraction and elemental analyses results confirm that this objective was accomplished. It is therefore concluded that the solvent extraction method used in the present studies exhibits excellent performance in terms of extraction efficiency for both Co A secondary objective of this investigation was to selectively remove iron and aluminium species from an impure cobalt nitrate leach liquor via selective precipitation. It is concluded from the precipitation results that the selective precipitation of iron and aluminium species from the impure cobalt-containing solution at pH 4.5 and 50 °C was relatively successful. We would like to thank the management of Sasol Technology R&D for their financial support and permission to conduct these studies. The assistance provided by the personnel of Sasol Chemical Industries laboratories, Sasol Technology’s Materials characterization group, Mintek and SetPoint is acknowledged.