Objective
                  To investigate the in vitro effects of CCN2 on odontoblast-like cells proliferation and differentiation.
               
                  Design
                  MDPC-23 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 5% FBS. CCN2 was either added to culture media or coated onto culture polystyrene, addition or coating of dH2O was served as control. In the addition group, CCN2 (100 ng/mL) was added into culture media. In the coating group, CCN2 at the concentration of 1000 ng/mL was employed. Cell proliferation was performed using CCK-8 assay. Cell differentiation and mineralization were analyzed by ALPase activity assay, real time RT-PCR and alizarin red staining. One-way ANOVA with post-hoc tukey HSD test was used for statistical analysis.
               
                  Results
                  MDPC-23 cells exhibited robust proliferative activity upon exposure to either soluble or immobilized CCN2. ALP activity of cells cultured on CCN2-modified surface was continuously strengthened from day six (0.831 ± 0.024 units/μg protein versus 0.563 ± 0.006 units/μg protein of control) till day eight (1.035 ± 0.139 units/μg protein versus 0.704 ± 0.061 units/μg protein of control). Gene expression of BSP, OCN and OPN were promoted by soluble CCN2 after 48 h exposure. Moreover, gene expression of BSP, OCN, OPN, ALP, COL1 A1, Runx-2, DSPP and DMP-1 was significantly enhanced by immobilized CCN2. Finally, mineralization of MDPC-23 cells was accelerated by both soluble and immobilized CCN2 to different extent.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The findings indicate that CCN2 promoted proliferation, odontogenic gene expression and mineralization of MDPC-23 cells. It is proposed that CCN2 may be a promising adjunctive formula for dentin regeneration.The CCN family of proteins is a complex gene family consisting six distinguishing members, acronym of which was introduced from the first letter of The CCN family is now known to play essential functions that is involved in various important biological processes such as growth and development, embryogenesis, angiogenesis, chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, inflammation, tumorigenesis, wound healing, tissue regeneration, Among the CCN family, CCN2 has been standing out from other members in virtue of its multifunctional properties. It was incipiently isolated from serum-stimulated NIH3T3 cells as an immediate early gene whose cDNA encoding “fibroblast-inducible secreted protein-12” ( Previous studies had revealed diverse functionality of CCN2. It promotes adhesion, migration, and proliferation of endothelial cells Recent studies have shown that CCN2 is highly expressed during odontogenesis in developing mouse tooth germs. CCN2 was detected in dental lamina, dental mesenchyme and primary enamel knot from the initiation stages, differentiating pre-ameloblasts and odontoblasts at the crown stage, and continue to be present in outer dental epithelium and dental follicle, as well as involuting dental lamina and alveolar bony crypts ( Despite of the above findings, little information is available concerning the interaction of CCN2 with odontoblast lineage cell. Therefore, we carried out the present study to investigate the potential effects of CCN2 on MDPC-23 cells, a rat odontoblast-like cell line, in terms of proliferation, mineralization and differentiation. Recombinant human CTGF was purchased from Peprotech (Rocky Hill, NJ, USA), stored at −30 °C until use. Tissue culture treated polystyrene plate (TCPP) and non-tissue culture treated polystyrene plate (Non-TCPP) were purchased from Falcon (Corning, NY, USA). Dulbecco’s modified eagle media (DMEM), dexamethasone tablets, cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC), 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and Triton-X-100 were purchased from Sigma-aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Fetal bovine serum (FBS), TrypLE™ Express, 1×phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH of 7.4) were all purchased from Gibco (Grand Island, NY, USA). PBS tablets were purchased from TakaRa (Shiga, Japan). Glycerol-2-phosphate disodium salt n-hydrate (β-GP), L-Ascorbic acid phosphate magnesium salt n-hydrate (AA), 10% formalin neutral buffer solution, Alizarin red S powder and ALP assay kit were all purchased from Wako (Osaka, Japan). Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) was purchased from Dojindo (Rockville, MD, USA). Pierce BCA protein assay kit and methanol-free formaldehyde (16%, w/v) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Rockford, IL, USA). TRIzol and phalloidin were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Chloroform, 2-propanol and ethanol were purchased from Nacalai Tesque (Kyoto, Japan). FastStart Essential DNA Green Master for real time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (real time RT-PCR) reaction was purchased from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). We divided the present study into two experiments. In experiment one, we analyzed the effect of direct addition of soluble CCN2 protein into culture media using TCPP for culture. In experiment two, we physically coated the CCN2 protein on Non-TCPP surface. Briefly, CCN2 protein were resolved in dH MDPC-23 cells (generated by late CT Hanks at the University of Michigan) were generously provided by Professor Jacques E. Nör in University of Michigan. Cells were inoculated at a density of 1 × 10 The cell proliferation was measured using CCK-8 assay, different concentrations of CCN2 were used (1, 10, 100, 1000, 2000 ng/mL). For experiment one, CCN2 was added to experiment group at day one, cell proliferation assay was performed at day four; for experiment two, cell proliferation assay was carried out at day four. The absorbance of lysates was measured at 450 nm. Experiment group coated with CCN2 (1000 ng/mL) MDPC-23 cells were inoculated into 24-well plates (Non-TCPP, surface area: 2 cm For determination of ALPase activity, MDPC-23 cells in experiment two were used. After incubation of six, seven and eight days, cells were collected and lysed with 0.1% Triton-X-100 in distilled water, and the lysates were sonicated for 10 min on ice and then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4 °C for 15 min and then the supernatant was extracted. ALPase activity assay and protein quantification was analyzed according to manufacturers’ instructions, one unit of the enzyme activity is defined as release of 1 nmol Total RNA was isolated from cultured cells by using TRIzol reagent at the designated time. Isolated RNA was pelleted, washed with 75% ethanol and re-suspended in nuclease-free water. RNA concentration of each sample was measured using NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and one microgram of isolated RNA was then reverse-transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) using M-MLV reverse transcriptase in a 20 μL reaction system according to manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting cDNA was used for both conventional RT-PCR and real time quantitative RT-PCR. To investigate CCN protein family gene expressions in MDPC-23 cells, conventional RT-PCR was performed. After seven days in culture, the PCR products were run on 2% agarose gel and stained with ethidium bromide. Primer sequences were illustrated in For evaluation of cell differentiation, odontogenic gene mRNA expression was quantified using primers described in MDPC-23 cells were grown on 12-well plate, cultured in DMEM containing 5% FBS for five days until they reached confluence, and then 10 mM β-GP, 50 μg/mL AA and 100 nM dexamethasone were added as a mineralizing media up to three days. The culture media was aspirated and the cell monolayer was washed with 1 × PBS twice. Cells were fixed with 10% formalin neutral buffer solution for 20 min, and washed again with 1 × PBS. Then, alizarin red solution (ARS, 1%, pH 4.0) was added gently. After 10 min of incubation at 37 °C, the staining solution was removed and the cell monolayer was washed several times until the solution turned clear and transparent. Photographs were taken using a digital imaging system (Funakoshi, Tokyo, Japan) incorporating an inverted digital camera (Canon, Tokyo, Japan). To quantify the calcific staining intensity, the CPC method was used. Briefly, after staining with ARS, CPC (10%, w/v, in distilled water) was added to each well and incubated for one hour at 37 °C. After incubation, solution was transferred to a 96-well plate for absorbance reading at 570 nm. All the experiments were carried out in triplicate, results were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Data was subjected to One-way ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) with post-hoc Tukey HSD (Honestly Significant Difference) Test. Statistical significance level was set at * To investigate whether CCN protein family members express during odontogenic differentiation of MDPC-23 cells, the conventional RT-PCR on day seven and real time quantitative RT-PCR on day six and eight were performed. The results showed that among the six members of CCN protein family, only CCN1, CCN2, CCN4 and CCN5 were expressed ( Cell proliferation changes in response to different concentrations of CCN2 protein were evaluated by CCK-8 assay. First, we explored the direct addition effect, as shown in It can be clearly observed that MDPC-23 cells grown on CCN2 coated surface (1000 ng/mL) displayed an extended morphology and formed well-developed actin stress fibers, while most cells in control group showed a spherical morphology and extended incompletely ( ALPase activity is considered essential for biomineralization. To investigate the effects of CCN2 on the mRNA expression of odontogenic differentiation markers of MDPC-23 cells, we performed real time quantitative RT-PCR using specific primers for dentin matrix acidic phosphoprotein 1 (DMP-1), dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bone sialoprotein (BSP), osteopontin (OPN), osteocalcin (OCN), runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx-2), and type I collagen (Col1a1). In experiment one, data shows after addition of soluble CCN2 protein into culture media for 48 h, significant upregulation of target genes expression was observed compared to that of control group, including BSP, OCN, and OPN ( To explore whether CCN2 induces mineral nodules formation in MDPC-23 cells, alizarin red staining was performed on day eight in experiment one, day seven and eight in experiment two, respectively. The results showed that experiment group had promoted the calcium nodules formation in both process methods of CCN2 protein ( In the present study, we first demonstrated that except CCN3 and CCN6, other CCN family members are stably expressed to different extent during Second, we showed that the proliferation potential of MDPC-23 cells was markedly strengthened in the presence of both soluble and coated form of CCN2. Besides, we found that the enhancing effect of CCN2 on MDPC-23 cells proliferation was dose-dependent in its immobilized form. While its soluble form showed less efficient promoting effect on the proliferation. Odontoblast, a highly specialized cell line originated from dental papilla, which forms the dentin by secreting collagenous and noncollagenous organic matrix constituents and controlling the mineralization process throughout life ( Shimo et al. revealed that exogenous recombinant CCN2 stimulated the proliferation of dental epithelial and mesenchymal cells, which are crucial for differentiation and maturation of odontoblast, and odontoblast differentiation is inhibited by CCN2 neutralizing antibody ( Recently, ongoing studies have identified CCN2 protein as a growth and signaling factor which interact with cell surface molecules and intracellular signaling pathways. Through the interaction with low-density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins (LRPs) leads to the modulation of Wnt, extracellular regulated kinases (ERK) and protein kinase C (PKC) signaling ( To date, it has been proved that the gene expression of CCN2 is greatly influenced by different kinds of factors such as hormones, cytokines, growth factors, and even CCN2 itself. As an immediate early gene, it is well-established that upstream regulators such as TGF-β, bone morphogenetic protein-4 (BMP-4), FGFs and VEGF stimulate CCN2 gene expression ( Odontoblasts are aligned along the periphery of the dental pulp in a single layer and possess the ability to secrete dentine matrix and further form the tertiary dentine in response to stimuli such as attrition, caries, trauma and dental procedures ( To our knowledge, this is the first Nothing to declare. This work was supported by a grant-in-aid for scientific research from the Nothing to declare.