Displaced distal clavicle fractures remain a treatment dilemma. Nonunion rates as high as 30% have been reported (Anderson K: in Miller MD (ed): Clinics in Sports Medicine. Philadelphia, PA, Saunders, 2003, pp 319–326). In a high-demand, young, active patient surgical treatment has been recommended to provide the most predictable result. When surgery is deemed appropriate, multiple techniques have been utilized. This paper reviews several accepted techniques and introduces a surgical technique utilizing a very strong nonabsorbable suture to permit repair. The author has utilized this technique in a small series of patients where there has been significant comminution or poor bone quality precluding metal fixation.Distal third clavicle fractures account for approximately 15% of all clavicle fractures. There has been a disproportionately high number of nonunions of fractures involving the lateral third of the clavicle. Many authors have advocated surgical treatment for the Type II distal clavicle fracture. This has been secondary to the increased risk of nonunion. Still, it is the author’s opinion that in active patients with significant displacement, high-energy injuries, and potential skin compromise, surgical treatment would provide the most predictable outcome. Surgical treatments for Type II distal clavicle fractures have included a multitude of techniques. The indications for surgical treatment of distal clavicle fractures are not absolute and indeed are case dependent. Marked displacement, high-energy injuries, and potential skin compromise are typically treated in an operative fashion. A young athlete, laborer, or very active patient may find the potential for a delayed surgical procedure because of a symptomatic nonunion to be an unacceptable potential scenario. Once again surgical treatment would be recommended in this situation. Conversely, patients with minimal or modest displacement or with significant medical problems or other associated injuries may be best treated with a nonsurgical approach. Surgery in this situation could be reserved if the patient developed a symptomatic nonunion. The history of patients with Type II distal clavicle fractures frequently involves a direct blow to or a fall onto the top of the shoulder. Pain in usually focal in the superior aspect and adjacent to the acromioclavicular joint. Typically there will be a deformity present and will suggest the presence of a complete acromioclavicular joint separation. Eccyhmosis is a frequent clinical finding and unlike a complete AC sprain, the deformity is typically more medial when observed by a critical examiner. A mechanism of high-energy trauma should also arouse suspicion for associated injuries to the ribs and neck and the potential for any respiratory compromise. Radiographic examination should include a shoulder trauma series featuring an AP view, a modified axillary view, and a supraspinatus outlet view. In addition, the typical AC joint radiographs featuring an AP view and a cephalad tilted view (Zanca) are extremely helpful to evaluate displacement and comminution and for extension of the fracture into the acromioclavicular joint. It has not been our practice to routinely obtain computerized tomography in evaluating this injury. We typically place the patient into a beach chair or sitting position, with the upper body approximately 60 to 70° upright from the horizontal. We find it extremely helpful to use a table such as is used in shoulder arthroscopy procedures performed in a sitting position with the posterior aspect of the shoulder completely exposed. This allows thorough access to the top, front, anterior, and posterior aspects of the shoulder and also permits unimpeded intraoperative imaging to be performed. A 5- to 6-cm vertical incision (“saber cut”) is made between the AC joint and the fracture. Skin flaps are easily raised and frequently hemorrhagic tissues and/or hematoma is encountered. The deltotrapezial fascia is frequently torn in the area immediately over the fracture. If necessary a longitudinal incision extending the opening in the deltotrapezial fascia is made to permit mobilization and reduction of fracture fragments. A soft tissue elevator may be used to complete the dissection. If the distal fragment is at least 2 cm in length and is not comminuted, then fixation may be achieved utilizing basic AO technique. In this case a 3.5 reconstruction plate, a 1/3 or semitubular plate, or a T-plate may be used in a manner providing plate and screw fixation. When the fracture occurs between the conoid and trapezoid ligaments, a nontraditional approach using strong nonabsorbable suture or Dacron can also be used. Once again this technique is best for a fracture without severe comminution. In a method described by Goldberg, a suture is placed in a cerclage fashion around the proximal fragment and coracoid, reducing this fragment Levy has described another variation in technique. In the case of an extremely small or comminuted distal fragment it may be virtually impossible to achieve bony fixation using metallic screws either in an interfragmentary compressive fixation or through a plate alone A representative case of a 55-year-old female patient with a 4-week-old Type II fracture with comminution and osteopenia is shown in The postoperative regimen requires immobilization in a sling for 6 weeks. It is our opinion that the arm should be supported during this time, as it is a potential distraction force. Especially in the cases of extremely small distal fragments where suture material is the primary means of fixation and is certainly not rigid, we believe support of the arm is justified during the healing phase. After 6 weeks radiographs should confirm progressive bony union and passive and active assisted range of motion can be initiated. Typically in our experience, by 3 months all fractures have been healed and the patient has returned to work or athletic activity. This fixation method of combining traditional plate and screw fixation with cerclage or transosseous suture fixation for distal lateral clavicle fractures was utilized in seven cases. All of these fractures healed and there were no complications or reoperations. The operative treatment for distal clavicle fractures has featured a multitude of fixation techniques, none of which have proven to be the standard fixation. The presence of an extremely small or comminuted distal fragment can compromise traditional screw and plate fixation. This paper describes yet another method, which features bony fixation using a very durable and strong nonabsorbable suture either by itself or in combination with traditional plate fixation. This has the advantage of providing stable fixation and there have been no episodes of complications or reoperation. We believe that the technique described represents another viable option for preserving the acromioclavicular joint, minimizing complications and the necessity for hardware removal at a second procedure.