Arsenic is one of the main contaminants in soil, especially in (former) mining areas, but arsenic can also be a source of exploitable metals, if present as arsenides. In the following paper we report the microbial leaching of an arsenide (e.g. safflorite (CoAs2)) for the first time. Bioleached cobalt yielded up to 92% in presence of citric acid, while the non-inoculated and chemical controls yielded in merely 4% and 10%, respectively. Even though high yields were achieved, the arsenide turned out to be a difficult leaching substrate, leading to a diverse activity. While the addition of citric acid improved the cobalt liberation and resulted in a more stable activity, the absence led to yields ranging from 35% to 82%, depending on the ability to cope with the arsenide. From the comparison of the leaching with 1% and 2% (w/v) ore, it can be concluded that the decreased activity resulted in an unfinished leaching. Furthermore, the typestrains of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and Leptospirillum ferriphilum were not able to grow in presence of the arsenide.Arsenic is a common element in the earth crust with an average concentration of approximately 5 ppm present in more than 300 minerals, of which 60% are arsenates followed by 20% sulfides and 10% oxides ( Even though arsenic had historically many applications such as herbicide, fungicide, and pesticide, it is nowadays mainly used as the semiconductor GaAs ( Despite being a major problem, some arsenic minerals, such astennantite ((Cu,Fe) Hydrometallurgical leaching, more so the microbial leaching, has, however, scarcely been investigated. One of the reasons might be the rather low abundance of arsenides. Although, in the recycling of gallium from GaAs, hydrometallurgy does play a role. This work aims to show the bioleaching of cobalt and nickel from an arsenidic ore. The preliminary, although already promising, results of this study aim to propose the possibility to utilise arsenides as a valuable resource for strategic elements; especially since the cobalt production from arsenides is negligible until now. The used ore material originated from Irthem (Bou Azzer, Anti-Atlas), Morocco, and was purchased online from Jentsch - Rohsteine and Mineralien (  Culture maintenance of the pure cultures was carried out at 30 °C on a rotary shaker in a 100 mL flask containing 20 mL DSMZ medium No. 882 consisting of 132 mg/L (NH All leaching tests were performed with 100 mL medium in 250 mL flasks under the same conditions as the cultivation. Prior to the ore addition, each batch was already grown for two days to provide a sufficient activity and ferric iron concentration. A first leaching experiment with 1% (w/v) washed arsenidic ore was performed for 8 d (starting with the ore addition) with the BiCoNi4 culture as well as with In a second, larger scale, experiment, a 10 d leaching with 1% and 2% ore was done in several replicates (seven replicates for 1% (w/v) ore; a triplicate for 2% (w/v) ore), non-inoculated and chemical controls were performed as before. In a following experiment, consisting of an inoculated triplicate as well as duplicates of non-inoculated and chemical controls, the influence of citric acid during the leaching of 1% (w/v) was investigated, thus all assays were supplemented with 5 mM citric acid. The experiment was carried out similar to the second one. For the elemental composition of the ore material, an Ethos Plus 2 microwave (MLS) The pH and redox potential of the leaching batches were determined by a SenTix 21 (WTW, Germany) and a SenTix ORP probe (WTW, Germany), respectively. The major elements of the used arsenidic ore are shown in Since high arsenic concentrations are to be expected during the dissolution of the arsenidic ores, a first experiment was conducted to see whether a microbial leaching is even possible. Metal yields of the first leaching test with the pure and mixed culture are shown in As a consequence of the activity difficulties, the larger scale leaching was started with seven BiCoNi4 replicates containing 1% of the arsenidic; however, the cobalt liberation was again diverse (refer In order to allow a better comprehensibility the best two assay with 1% (w/v) ore and BiCoNi4 were combined as Bio1-A, the next best three as Bio1-B and the two with the least activity as Bio1-C. Although the cobalt yield ranged in a wide span from 35% (Bio1-C) to 82% (Bio1-A), the non-inoculated and chemical controls yielded only 4% and 11%, respectively. Nickel showed an overall more uniform metal release between 80% and 100% for the biological assay, but the non-inoculated (16%) and chemical (37%) controls were also significantly higher than for cobalt. The different leaching behaviour of cobalt and nickel can be explained with the mineralogy of the Bou Azzer mining district, in which cobalt is predominantly found as skutterudite or safflorite and nickel either as nickelin (NiAs) or rammelsbergite (NiAs Except for the duplicate Bio1-A, which resulted in the highest cobalt concentrations, no significant difference between 1% (w/v) and 2% (w/v) ore was observed; indicating, that the leaching was not yet finished. In all biotic assays as well as in the chemical control, the redox potential dropped rapidly and stayed low, despite a continuous metal release, which is uncommon if compared to sulfides like spahlerite ( Ferric iron precipitates like jarosite ((H,K,Na) Fe As seen in Based on the low redox potential and the incomplete leaching (refer In both the non-inoculated and chemical controls a cobalt yield similar to the previous experiments was observed; thus, the citric acid itself had no effect on the cobalt liberation (refer In Concluding from these points, an arsenite oxidation is mandatory. Even tough H The general leachability of arsenidic ores by acidophilic iron oxidising culture was shown, which might a pose a new resource for cobalt and nickel. Even though the concentration of cobalt in the inoculated assays was quite diverse, a significantly higher yield of 35% in the worst and 92% in the best case (with citric acid) was achievable, which is three times higher than the chemical control or even nine times higher than the non-inoculated control. The similarity of the leaching with 1% and 2% ore indicates that the leaching was not finished and the experimental time should be prolonged. A possibility to decrease the variance in the bacterial activity, but also to promote the leaching rate might be found in the addition of citric acid. Moreover, the reasons for the inhibition of the presence of the ore should be further investigated. A first hypothesis is that maybe attachment plays a negative role, since attached cells face a higher arsenic concentration compared to planktonic cells. However, the addition of citrate might bring further problems by preventing arsenic precipitation; especially since the formation of scorodite is probably the best solution to deposit arsenic. Furthermore, the positive effect of citrate is not yet understood and should be further elucidated. Future studies will also evaluate whether the leaching approach for this ore can be used to leach other arsenides such as GaAs, which may also follow in a new approach to recycle semiconductor wastes. The authors would like to thank Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 