Sewage sludge can be dried in paddle dryers and turned into an interesting material for energetic valorization. This costly operation generally relies on manufacturer's know how and is not very flexible. Setting up a descriptive model of such dryers could lead to a better energy integration of this technology and make sludge drying more competitive by adjusting the operating conditions in order to reach the desired water content depending on subsequent applications. This paper presents the development of such a model adapted to a continuous pilot-scale sludge paddle dryer. The model combines sewage sludge flow description by means of a homogeneous Markov chain and drying kinetics thanks to the penetration theory, leading to the simulation of water content and temperature profiles along the dryer during steady-state operation. The principle of coupling these models is presented and the approach is validated against experimental data in various operating conditions. A parametric study emphasizes the crucial role of wall temperature and sludge residence time on the final water content, while stirring speed or sludge initial water content are less influent.Sewage sludge (SS) management is a matter of growing importance as its production keeps increasing with population growth and legislation evolution. Storage and hygiene issues, as well as landfilling limitation, contribute to make drying a necessary step in sewage sludge treatment and valorization However, rheological behavior description of such a product remains a scientific challenge. SS is a complex material whose behavior is not yet modeled by classical rheology particularly during drying when its water content decreases. Moreover its properties can vary according to numerous factors, including the type of physicochemical and biological wastewater treatments, pre-conditioning and dewatering techniques used, or the period of the year Few studies focused on the description of sludge drying in paddle dryers in continuous operation: while Arlabosse et al. More recently, Charlou et al. developed a methodology for measuring experimental RTD with a good repeatability in a pilot-scale paddle dryer installation The so-called penetration theory has been developed in the 80s for the description of heat transfer by conduction to agitated granular free flowing solids; it was later extended to the description of drying such agitated beds The lab-scale pilot paddle dryer used in this work is represented in The Markov chain modeling of sludge flow has been described in another publication The flow model considered here is illustrated in The sum of the different transition probabilities for a given cell must be equal to 1: this is the condition of normalization for Markov chains, expressed in Moreover, it is also supposed that sludge can only move to neighboring cells during Δ All the transition probabilities At this point, the calculation of the  Using The so-called penetration theory considers the continuous contact drying of an agitated wet granular packing as a succession of static periods and of instantaneous mixing of the bulk. It has been proven efficient in describing drying kinetics of SS in batch lab-scale installations under different operating conditions: partial air vacuum As emphasized in Neumann's solution for Fourier's equation concerning the classical fusion of a 1-D solid with constant wall temperature allows calculating the sludge bed average heat transfer coefficient during However The overall resistances in both cases can then be defined as Heat flux conservation leads to The characteristic particle diameter is then set at 1.15 mm in a first attempt as in Another important parameter of this theory is the heated area in contact with sludge. If it can be straightforward in batch installations, provided that all the heating area remains covered by sludge during drying, it may vary along a continuous dryer not only due to SS water content change, but also to the local sludge volume in each cell. For this reason, a contact area is computed for each cell in the Markov model, depending on the amount of sludge in this cell and on its water content. Each cell is considered as a half-cylinder topped by a rectangular volume of the same height; the rotor bearing the paddles is situated on the same symmetrical axis than the half cylinder. The area corresponding to the side walls and the rotor is taken into account for heat transfer, since these elements are heated and their surface temperature is assumed constant. The cell structure and this contact area as illustrated in As long as SS can be considered as a continuum, i.e. before granulation occurs, bulk specific density of sludge A limit water content Coupling the flow and heat transfer models is easily done when both models are set up on the same characteristic time. The following algorithm is used in order to determine SS water content and temperature profiles at steady state for a given set of operating conditions: The dryer is initially filled with sludge at 100 °C and Water vaporization occurs in each cell according to the penetration theory during a fictitious period Δ The amounts of dry SS and water due to the continuous feed are added to the first cell, along with the corresponding enthalpies: water content and bulk temperature of the cell are re-computed; The contents of the different cells are redistributed along and out of the dryer according to the Markov chain, due to the macro-mixing occurring after Δ These steps are repeated a number of times representing at least twice the dry solids mean residence time; Iterations are stopped when a steady-state is reached: such a steady state would be assessed by the stability of water contents and sludge temperatures in the cells for a certain time. As observed earlier, the choice of the transition time Δ Some other simplifications are considered in this study: If SS temperature is lower than 100 °C in a cell because of fresh sludge feeding or mixing with cells below 100 °C, the heat flux necessary to heat up the sludge in this cell to 100 °C is subtracted to the heat flux computed with the penetration theory. An empirical correlation ( Convective heat flux from the superheated steam atmosphere is not taken into account in this study. Even though steam used as a sweeping gas is generated at a temperature of 160 °C, its temperature inside the dryer fluctuates around 120 °C due to punctual heat losses and low flow rate (1.1 kg/h). Moreover its speed is very low, and the flow of steam generated by the drying sludge itself is close to or superior to that of sweeping gas depending on operating conditions. Finally, two criteria have to be matched for exiting the algorithm: water content and temperatures stability are evaluated as in Several initial conditions were tested: the simulated dryer was filled at the beginning with sludge at 100 °C and 1 < A series of experiments were carried out with varying operating conditions, which are gathered in Sludge water content profiles for the three experiments of Another observation is that there seems to be two zones in the dryer: in the first one, water content decreases faster for all experiments, down to a water content of ca. 1.5 kg/kg db for exp. A and below 1 kg/kg db for the others. After this phase, a slower decrease in water content is observed and the drying fluxes look rather comparable between the experiments. This is emphasized in Two zones are clearly distinguishable: in the first half of the dryer, mean drying rates are close to 0.5 kg/h, while in the second half they are close to 0.1 kg/h for all experiments. The discrepancies are important however, so the mean drying rates were calculated over the first four samples and the five last ones: they are gathered in For the following simulations, the same parameters as in Simulated drying fluxes are also in qualitative agreement with experimental values, even though the latter are very scattered, which makes it difficult to go further in the analysis. It is interesting to see that in spite of the non-deterministic approach in modeling and strong hypotheses, SS drying behavior is well predicted in varying operating conditions by the model without any specific optimization procedure. Nevertheless, the simulated profiles are smoother and more monotonous than the experimental ones, so there is no clear difference between the two halves of the dryer. This could be due to the assumption of a constant recirculation coefficient. Indeed, sludge flow properties vary strongly during drying, and it is expected that the behavior of pasty sludge in the first half of the dryer might be quite different from that of granular sludge in the second half, as is suggested by the experimental results. However, there is no scientific base for quantifying these differences, hence the choice of a constant Krischer curves were plotted from the simulation data and are illustrated in Evolution of SS temperature with respect to its water content is illustrated in A parametric study was conducted in order to check some parameters influences on the results. Drying temperature, assimilated to the dryer wall temperature Wall temperature Simulations were run with wall temperatures Inlet SS flow rate Simulations were run with Stirring speed Simulations were run with stirring speeds Inlet SS water content Simulations were run with SS initial water contents Recirculation coefficient Simulations were run with varying values of the recirculation coefficient In the present version, the model was built to describe a single shaft paddle dryer and is not readily usable for a full-scale installation characterization. Particularly, it is based on the knowledge of the dry solids hold-up in the installation and the contact area is deduced from it at each calculation. Scale-up would require several steps in its development: The validity of the model flow based on Markov chains should be tested on larger-scale installations, particularly regarding the effect of several shafts on SS RTD, Heat transfer and drying rates computations should be carried out on the basis of an already known contact area between SS and heated walls (i.e. a pre-determined SS volume) and not on an arbitrary SS amount in each cell. This point implies working with non-homogeneous Markov chains, in which transition probabilities depend on the state of the system: indeed, with the assumption of a fixed SS volume in each cell, the amount of dry solids in each cell depends on its water content, and so does the calculation of the matrix A better accuracy could be obtained with the knowledge of the evolution of particle size distribution with the extent of drying. This important parameter is indeed decreasing in granular state due to comminution, as already observed for china clay On a more fundamental level, there is a missing link between SS water content and temperature and its rheology, that could help relate SS state and its flow properties, particularly regarding the parameter Paddle dryers are widely used for SS or other pasty products drying, but are operated based on empirical knowledge. A model was developed for the description of continuous SS drying in a single-shaft pilot paddle dryer in steady-state operation. The model combines SS flow description by means of a homogeneous Markov chain and heat transfer and drying kinetics thanks to the penetration theory. The principle of coupling these models is presented and the approach is validated against experimental data in various operating conditions. A parametric study confirmed the strong influence of operating parameters such as wall temperature and inlet SS flow rate; on the contrary, stirring speed showed almost no influence in the range tested, while SS initial water content only had a limited influence on the outlet water content. Finally, the recirculation coefficient was shown to have a quite weak influence on outlet water content in the present configuration, but its role must be better understood for scaling-up purposes. This represents one of the few adjustments that would be required in order to adapt this model to full-scale installations description: its evolution towards a fixed-contact area configuration would make it a powerful tool for industrial installations study and optimization.