The progress in recent years in characterising the properties of the interface between air and water in the presence of commonly used surfactants in mineral flotation (termed frothers) is summarized. The focus of this review is on techniques that provide access to dynamic aspects of frother interactions at the interface between air and water, and those techniques that provide a unique perspective of equilibrium adsorbed layer properties. Profile analysis tensiometry (PAT) and other forms of interfacial tension measurement are described, and recent work highlighted. In addition, the methods of dilational interfacial rheology, which probes the viscoelastic properties of the air-water interface and the influence of dynamic adsorption processes, is discussed in relation to published work on flotation frother, as is work on measurement of rising bubble velocities, which allows probing of the dynamic adsorption layer (DAL). In addition to these more traditional measures of interfacial activity and effect, the study of the air-water interface with vibrational spectroscopy, and its relevance to flotation (with reference to recent published work), is described.Mineral flotation is an industrial process used to separate and concentrate ores by exploiting the contrast in the surface wettability of mineral particles (and hence their ability to attach to air bubbles). Hydrophobic mineral particles attach to passing air bubbles and form aggregates of a density smaller than the suspension itself. The aggregates float to the top of the flotation cell and are collected. Hydrophilic particles do not attach to the air bubbles and they sediment to the bottom of the flotation cell [ The interfacial activity of frothers, and their function in a complex multi-phase flotation mixture, is relatively unique in the area of surfactant science. However, there is still a need to understand their interaction with the air-water interface, as a first step in benchmarking their performance, and to understand observed differences in effectiveness in flotation. This article aims to summarize and provide comments on the last 10 years of research in the area of frother studies at the air-water interface, with a specific emphasis on the use of techniques that can give information on dynamic aspects of chemical and physical processes. This emphasis is required in the study of frothers, as mineral flotation has steps that occur on very short timescales, and quiescent colloidal systems or attainment of thermodynamic equilibrium are not commonplace in the process. One of the most commonly used techniques to study frother adsorption is the measurement of interfacial tension. Generally, a number of approaches are available for determination of gas-frother solution interfacial tension including Wilhelmy plate or Du Noüy ring methods [ Qu et al. [ Emerging bubble is an alternative geometry for profile analysis tensiometry. This technique is more difficult to control due to the compressibility of air and hence the possible fluctuations in the bubble volume. However, it eliminates the evaporation issue and allows for adsorption studies at very low concentration [ An alternative approach, which provides the information about the kinetics of adsorption with higher time resolution for short measurement time, is the maximum bubble pressure technique. In this approach the pressure, Jávor et al. [ Although the most insight is gained from dynamic measurements some useful information can be found with static measurement. Fong et al. [ Recently, Le et al. used the Wilhelmy plate technique to study the adsorption of MIBC and cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) mixtures at the air–water interface. They observed an unusual synergistic behaviour, specifically the interfacial tension of MIBC–CTAB mixtures increased with concentration for a given (intermediate) concentration range. This positive synergism could not be explained by existing theoretical models, and Le et al. suggested it was due to the existence of two distinctive molecular arrangements at adsorption zone: one dominated by bulky structure of MIBC, the other dominated by CTAB [ Depending on the concentration, molecular size, and surface activity of the frother, the interfacial tension decreases at a certain rate and reaches a value where it no longer decreases, i.e. the point where the adsorption/desorption processes of the surfactant has reached thermodynamic equilibrium [ A frother should also provide enough stability to the freshly generated bubbles undergoing various mechanical stresses, which would directly affect the layer adsorbed at the bubble surfaces. Any surface deformation would create gradients in frother concentration at the bubble surface and, as a result, increases the chances of coalescence between deformed bubbles leading to froth instability [ To understand the ability of frother molecules to compensate the change in the surface area it is important to characterise the frothers adsorbed at bubble surfaces under periodic compression and expansion cycles. The interfacial dilational rheology is such a technique which allows studying a change in the interfacial tension in response to area changes, by performing harmonic sinusoidal expansion and compression of the surface area [ The complex surface dilational modulus,  The Eqs.  From Although it is possible to calculate the theoretical values for dilational visco-elasticities over a wide range of frequencies, experimental methods have a narrow range. Each experimental method for dilational rheology, the range of frequencies at which they operate, and a comparison with calculated visco-elasticities of different surfactants, are discussed in detail in an excellent review by Mucic et al. [ The surface elasticities or viscosities correlation with the foamability or foam stability can be often found in the literature [ Fainerman et al. studied dilational rheology of the Triton-X series surfactants for the frequencies between 5 × 10 PPG of different molecular weights has been studied by Diez-Pascual et al., for a range of frequencies (1 × 10 An alternative approach to evaluate mechanical properties of the gas-liquid interface when surface molecules interact to form an elastic interfacial network was proposed by Ferri and collaborators [ Bubble velocity in an unbounded liquid phase depends mainly on its size [ Existing experimental approaches do not allow for the direct observation of the DAL formation at a rising bubble surface. There is lack of experimental techniques to probe the bubble surface directly, hence a quantitative correlation between dynamic surface phenomena, properties of the adsorbed layers and the shape and velocity of the rising bubble cannot be established [ In addition to experimental studies, numerous theoretical approaches regarding various aspects of the influence of surfactants on the bubble motion as well as the formation and properties of the DAL have been developed by Dukhin et al. [ In papers from the group of Finch at McGill University in Canada the single bubble rise technique has been used to study effect of flotation frothers on the bubble shape, path of bubble rise and the velocity profiles [ Building upon the concept of critical coalescence concentration, CCC [ The values of CMV for wide range of flotation frother were collected and analysed by Kowalczuk et al. [ The two main techniques of vibrational spectroscopy that are applicable to studies of the gas-liquid interface are (i) external reflectance infrared (IR) spectroscopy [ For external reflectance IR, the presence of an adsorbed surfactant film at an interface causes an alteration in the reflectance of the IR beam specifically at energies that correspond to the molecular vibrations of the layer. The absorbance of particular wavelengths of light alters the optical parameters of the layer, which in turn alters the reflectance of light of that wavelength. This altered reflectivity is also a sensitive function of the polarisation of the incoming light and the angle of incidence, a feature of the technique that allows orientation information to be gleaned from spectra recorded with varying polarisation/incident angle [ VSFS is a much more complicated technique for obtaining a spectrum of an interfacial film. It makes use of the non-linear optical process of sum-frequency generation (SFG), whereby the interaction of two wavelengths of light within a non-centrosymmetric medium can result in the combination of those wavelengths to produce light with the sum of the two original light frequencies. An interface with an oriented layer of molecules is a non-centrosymmetric system and is able to give rise to SFG [ As with external reflectance IR, the degree to which a signal can be detected with VSFS varies with the polarisations of the different light beams (incident IR, incident visible, and SFG visible), and the angles of incidence/generation of the light. Through careful modelling of SF intensities, it is possible to extract information of molecular orientation [ Curiously, it is the more complicated of these two techniques that has seen the most application in gas-liquid interface studies of relevance to flotation research. In an interesting study published by Wang et al., VSFS was used to study the water structure immediately adjacent to a wetting film between an air bubble and a silica surface, indicating the presence of ordered water in the stable film at the silica surface [ In work of more direct relevance to flotation (in that the surfactant studied is an actual flotation frother) the same group published VSFS data that was used to analyse the presence and structure/orientation of MIBC, one of the most commonly used frothers in mineral processing, at an air-water interface [ In later work, the authors extended this investigation of extended interfacial layers (initial monolayer and associated underlayer) to two short-chain alcohols (1-hexanol and 1-pentanol; commonly studied as frother molecules) [ Although there is a distinct lack of external reflectance IR studies on flotation frothers, there does exist in the literature some exceptionally relevant investigations of dynamic gas-liquid interfaces. The majority of interfacial vibrational spectroscopy of the gas-liquid interface is performed for adsorbed layers at equilibrium. This is far from the real system in flotation, where bubbles have residence times in the seconds/min time regime within flotation cells, and the adsorption layer of surfactants varies in composition at different sections of the bubble [ The paucity of investigations in the flotation area may be due to the inherent complexity in both acquisition and analysis of the data obtained from such experiments. However, the need for unambiguous chemical composition and structure information for surfactant layers in flotation research is clear, and it is likely that more work will be done in this area in the future. Flotation involves multiple reagents and often with competing or complementary interactions at the gas-liquid and solid-liquid interfaces. Determining the identity of surfactant species present at the gas-liquid interface will help significantly in connecting reagent characteristics with flotation outcomes and understanding/identifying potentially deleterious effects. Mixed surfactant systems can be characterised using other methodologies and information inferred/determined relating to the composition of the adsorbed layer (such as dynamic interfacial tension measurements), but vibrational spectroscopy has significant potential to give relatively clear information on layer composition. Another area where vibrational spectroscopy may have a significant role to play in studying flotation frother interfacial layers is in the area of bubble-mineral interactions and particle attachment. The interactions between two bubbles in flotation rarely occurs with bubbles unladen with particles, and therefore the link between frother structure and orientation and bubble-bubble interactions is less important than that between bubbles and particles/solid surfaces. An appreciation of composition and structure may well prove insightful when one considers the initial interaction forces, wetting film rupture, and initial spreading (dewetting) of a bubble against a mineral particle. As mentioned above, there has been some work in this area from the group of Jan Miller, using VSFS to characterise the interface between a bubble and a solid surface [ It is clear that there is wealth of data being generated on the influence of frothers on the properties of the air-water, with new insights being revealed using techniques that probe the dynamic aspects of adsorption and bubble characteristics. It is also encouraging that data is beginning to be generated for systems that include the presence of not one but two types of flotation reagents (e.g. frothers and depressants). In many instances, molecules like depressants (often large organic polymers) do not associate with the neat air-water interface, but the possibility is there for co-adsorption when a frother has already populated the interface. The implications of this co-adsorption on bubble properties and air-water interface characteristics (including interfacial layer composition) can be determined using the techniques reviewed above. The next step would be to the correlate this information with flotation outcomes, a necessary step in relating this fundamental colloid and interface science with the targeted industry application. Only when the link through to process outcomes is established can one rationally determine reagent choice, or indeed consider design/synthesis of new reagents. Another critical step that needs to be made in regards to the air-water interface, frothers, and flotation is the move to study the attachment and spreading of bubbles onto solid surfaces with frothers present in the system. Although the properties of individual bubbles is important in the study of the air-water interface in flotation, the natural next step to consider foams and foam stability (as one would do in some other areas of science) is not as useful as it may appear. Flotation involves the formation of froths – particle laden foams, with the particles attached to the air-water interface. Traditional measures of foam stability, and the connection to the properties of layers of surfactants, are of interest in flotation, but ultimately represent a slight departure from the real system. However, there is much that can be (and should be) learned about the influence of frother adsorbed layers on bubble-particle attachment. The question of how frother choice affects the bubble-particle collision process, thin film drainage and rupture, and dewetting of a mineral particle has yet to be answered to any satisfactory extent. All of the abovementioned techniques have a central role to play in such investigations, as they provide the detailed information of the properties of the interface prior to collision. As with multiple reagent investigations, considering the influence of frother choice (i.e. determining interfacial tension, the properties of the DAL, and interfacial elasticity) on particle collection efficiencies will be valuable in optimizing flotation outcomes. Lastly, it is appropriate to highlight a move toward interfacial tension measurements in non-traditional devices. Microfluidic devices are currently under investigation for interfacial tension measurements of liquid-liquid interfaces [