Construction of tunnels is often associated with fault or structural features that could affect tunnel stability during the construction phase and service life. Therefore, failure characteristics of hard rock around circular tunnels induced by pre-existing structural features under high in-situ stresses have been the subject of various studies. In the current study, a combined finite element approach, namely ELFEN, has been used for better reflection of entire failure process (including crack initiation, propagation and coalescence) and intrinsic properties of hard rock mass, thus rock heterogeneity, around circular tunnels during excavation unloading process. Parametric analysis which consider the dip angle, location (exposure or not), frictional coefficient of structural planes and lateral pressure coefficient was conducted in detail to reveal the mechanical responses of circular tunnel induced by structural plane under unloading condition. Numerical results indicate that the failure intensity of rock tunnel is a function of both dip angles and frictional coefficients of structural planes. The most critical dip angles of structural planes leading to failure in tunnel rocks largely depend on the frictional coefficient. Also, the results indicate that the released strain energy for the case of exposed structural plane is higher than those not intersecting the tunnel, leading to more violent rock failure for the former. With the increase of the lateral pressure coefficient, the failure intensity and damage extent around the tunnel is aggravated, especially for the roof and floor of the tunnel. Rock failure can be categorized as slabbing failure near excavation boundary and shear slip failure, controlled by structural plane. Progressive slabbing failure induced by excavation unloading may activate internal structural planes and the extensive release of energy caused by shear and slip failure may in turn further induce the slabbing failure. Rockburst is more prone to be triggered under such condition.The increasing demand for resources has led to construction of a large number of mining and tunneling projects at depth due to the exhausting of reserves at shallow depths Fissured rock masses are complex engineering medium that is widely encountered in underground engineering, such as water tunnels and hydro power structures, mining and transportation Other researchers have concentrated on failure characteristics around tunnels or rock samples containing central holes by means of numerical simulation, laboratory tests, theoretical analysis and field monitoring. Li et al. It should be noted that while much effort has been dedicated to understand failure properties of rock materials containing pre-existing cracks or central holes, little attention has been paid to the effects of the integrated response of structural plane and excavation unloading effect. Moreover, the frictional effect of pre-existing cracks was seldom considered in previous studies. This could be due to the difficulties in preparation of rock samples in laboratory tests or acquiring the exact structural plane parameters in field investigation. Zhou et al. Numerical approaches are the main tools used for simulating the fracturing processes of a rock and rock mass, because modeling can greatly reduce the cost of studying rock behavior in various stress states. Manouchehrian and Cai Note that though FDEM approach has been employed in analyzing rock failure process in the aspects of laboratory scale or field measurements, little attention was paid to the failure mechanisms of rock around deep tunnels affected by near-by faults or weak planes. In the present study, a FDEM approach (ELFEN, Rockfield Software Ltd.) is adopted to simulate the hard rock fracture induced by structural planes around deep-buried circular tunnels, with particular attention being paid to the effect of dip angle, location (exposure to the wall or being sealed and inside the ground), frictional coefficient of structural planes, and lateral pressure coefficient. Characteristics of a typical hard rock (Marble) extracted from Hongling Lead-Zinc mine, located in Inner Mongolia, China was selected for representing material properties in the numerical simulation. Rock heterogeneity is also considered by specifying a certain range of modeling parameters in the current study, and a linear unloading process is adopted to realistically reflect gradual relaxation during excavation of a tunnel. Parametric analysis was carried out to investigate the failure modes, evolution of released strain energy and effective plastic strain around an underground tunnel. The entire failure processes including crack initiation, propagation and coalescence, induced by structural planes, are reproduced to further investigate the rock failure mechanism under different conditions. This paper is intended to provide an insight into the failure mechanism of hard rock, induced by structural planes in the periphery of tunnels to be excavated. The combined finite/discrete approach is a numerical method that combines continuum mechanics principles with dis-continuum algorithms to simulate multiple interacting deformable solids The geometry of the models used in this study is shown in Properties of a typical hard rock (Marble) from Hongling Lead-zinc mine was used for numerical simulation. For a realistic representation of the properties of the underground rock mass, the material heterogeneity was considered in the present study. Note that the heterogeneity in the current study is irrelevant to the direction inside the material. It is mainly used for characterizing the discrepancy of physical and mechanical properties in each location or position An important feature of ELFEN is that an explicit fracture could be introduced when all the fracture energy was consumed In 2D plane strain problem, Face loading is selected to apply in-situ stresses to the model boundaries, where vertical stress is applied on the top domain while horizontal stresses are applied on both sides of the model. Linear loading over 0.01 s is employed to avoid instantaneous loading which results in violent and unwanted fracture propagation in the model. After 0.01 s, the face loads in each direction are remained constant until the end of the numerical calculation. The excavation relaxation was specified on the circular tunnel object. A linear relaxation curve was assigned to the circular tunnel representing the excavated material, in this case a linear ramp over 0.005 s starting from 0.01 s was used. When the tunnel is deactivated, the relaxation was automatically applied to release the stresses according to the specified curve. This avoids the sudden change in stress state which would occur with instantaneous removal of material. The bottom boundary is fixed in the vertical direction. The loading and unloading paths are shown in In the present study, a circular tunnel at a burial depth of 1000 m was selected to reflect the deep highly-stressed structure. The horizontal and vertical stress components are In the present study, a numerical viscous damping (i.e., proportional to velocity) is introduced in the FDEM simulation. Velocity proportional (viscous) damping can be applied to any type of entity and to some or all degrees of freedom, as required. It is specified as a percentage of critical damping. ELFEN calculates the critical damping factor automatically, and then multiplies by the factor specified by the user. The factor ranges from 0 (i.e. no damping) to 1 (i.e. critical damping). The damping applied to all the nodes created for entities to which it is assigned in the pre-processor. For example, if all the surfaces in a 2D problem are selected, then every node in the problem will be subjected to point damping During dynamic unloading process, when unloading stress wave arrives at the model boundary, a certain of tensile stress wave might be reflected back from the constrained boundary given the fact that the prescribed boundaries is inappropriate or finite. To tremendously reduce or even eliminate the influence of reflected waves on simulation results, the “non-reflecting boundary” set in ELFEN numerical simulation was employed in the current study. The non-reflecting boundary enables high frequency waves to pass though the boundary rather than being reflected, as in the case of either a prescribed or free boundary A series of models without the structural plane were set up and analyzed for comparison with the model containing structural plane to validate ELFEN software package. Four lateral pressure coefficients of By observation of the newly generated cracks and the effective plastic strain around the circular tunnel, the evolution law with the increasing Note that when In this section, the failure characteristics of an underground tunnel at a depth of 1000 m are investigated, with a constant frictional coefficient of 0.1, and the structural plane as assumed to be exposed to the tunnel wall. The dip angle of structural plane varied from 30° to 90°.  In this section, three different frictional coefficients for structural plane of 0.1, 0.5 and 1 were considered in the analysis, respectively. In the case of However, for the case where When looking at the failure characteristics influenced by frictional coefficients at dip angle of 60°, the variation of failure intensity and extent of a monotonous decreasing trend with the increasing frictional coefficients can be deducted.  Based on the above-mentioned analysis, it may be inferred that the failure characteristics of hard rock around circular tunnels is the integrated response of dip angle and frictional coefficient. In underground tunnel engineering, some structural planes intersect tunnel boundaries (exposed) while others are concealed in the rock (unexposed) but close to the proximity of tunnel walls. To investigate the influence of structural plane location on the rock failure characteristics, the unexposed structural plane around the circular tunnel was simulated to make comparison with the results of the modeling of exposed structural plans that was discussed in Section 3.1. The frictional coefficient of the structural plane was set to be 0.1.  According to the description of Zhou et al. Underground openings are seldom located under hydrostatic pressure, so it is necessary to investigate the influence of the ratio of horizontal and vertical in situ stresses on rock failure, at presence of structural plane. In this section, the conditions under various  In order to better illustrate the influence of For monitoring point 6 (rightside of the tunnel), the effective plastic strain remains at relatively higher level (greater than 0.006) when For monitoring point 7 (tunnel invert), the values are always 0 when For monitoring point 8 (left side of the tunnel), no effective plastic strain is observed when The above-mentioned analysis and observations suggest that the extent of failure at different locations around the circular tunnel should be assessed based on the analysis of the combined effects of lateral pressure coefficient, configuration of structural plane, and rock heterogeneity. A combined finite/discrete element approach using ELFEN software package was adopted to study the hard rock failure around deep circular tunnel at the presence of structural planes of weakness. A linear relaxation path was used for realistic simulation of the excavation-unloading process, and the rock heterogeneity was also considered in the present study. The dip angle, location and frictional coefficient of the structural plane as well as the lateral pressure coefficient were changed in the modeling to investigate their influence on the failure characteristics of the circular tunnel. Numerical results show that rock heterogeneity may cause asymmetric failure in the periphery rock of the circular tunnel. The failure modes can be classified into slabbing failure induced by excavation unloading and shear and slip failure induced by the activation of structural plane. However, these two types of failure modes seem to interact in some cases. While the gradual slabbing failure may contribute to the stress concentration and dynamic response around the structural plane, the activated structural plane begins to shear and slip and may in turn further causes slabbing failure near excavation boundaries. Under such condition, the extensive and violent coupled reaction may lead to the serious failure and dynamic response, even the rockburst. Based on the parametric analysis, the following conclusions have been obtained: The favorable dip angle leading to rock failure (crack propagation and nucleation) around the tunnel depend on the frictional coefficient. These two factors are not isolated in controlling the dynamic responses of the underground tunnel. When frictional coefficient is 0.1, the rock failure around the tunnel is most likely when a structural plane at dip angle of 60° is present, while the dip angle of 45° and 30° are more active at frictional coefficient of 0.5 and 1, respectively. The dip angle of 90° has little influence on rock failure, where local slabbing failure composed of fewer visible cracks is only observed near tunnel boundaries. The failure intensity and damage extent with an unexposed structural plane around the periphery of circular tunnel is not so severe compared to the case where the tunnel wall is intersected by an exposed plane of discontinuity. Hence, under the same condition, possibility of encountering rock burst is lower with an unexposed structural plane. The failure intensity and extent of damage (released strain energy) presents a monotonic increase with the increase of lateral pressure coefficient for a constant dip angle. On the other hand, failure intensity follows a trend of initial increase, then decrease with the increase of dip angle for a constant lateral pressure coefficient. Rockburst is more likely under the condition of higher lateral pressure coefficient. Analysis of effective plastic strain in each monitoring point suggests that failure extent at different locations around the circular tunnel is not only influenced by the lateral pressure coefficient, but also depend on the configuration of structural plane and rock heterogeneity. The FDEM modeling is deemed as an effective and convenient way to study the failure processes of rocks subject to different stress state, stress pathways and occurrence of structural planes in underground engineering involving tunnels at high depth. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial supports from the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: