A non-enzymatic glucose sensor based on a pencil graphite electrode (PGE), a modifier suspension including the conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and CuO nanoparticles was developed. Then it was subjected to cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry to evaluate the electrochemical performance of the modified electrode. This sensor showed good catalytic activity, sensitivity and wide linear range. In addition, the effect of addition of multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) to the modifier suspension on the activity of sensor towards glucose was investigated. The PEDOT:PSS/CuO/MWCNTs-PGE based sensor exhibited better electrocatalytic activity towards glucose. At an applied potential of +0.70 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), this sensor presented an acceptable sensitivity of 663.2 μA mM−1 cm−2 in a wide linear range up to 10 mM. It, also, showed excellent reproducibility (relative standard deviation of 1.1% over seven identically fabricated electrodes), very good long-term stability (only 7% loss in current response over a period of one month), and excellent anti-interference ability in the existence of common interfering species.In-vivo and in-vitro glucose level determination in blood or other sources such as foods and pharmaceuticals is very important [ In recent decades, enzymatic glucose biosensors have been commercially used to determine glucose levels in a great extent. However, there are disadvantages of using enzymes due to inherent flaws of enzymes including high production cost; complicated immobilization procedures; poor stability; and high sensitivity to pH, temperature and humidity. Therefore, attention has recently being paid to non-enzymatic glucose sensors which display features like low production cost, reproducibility, simplicity, high stability, and high sensitivity [ Conducting polymers (CPs) have been used as electrode coatings, to improve the physico-chemical properties of bare electrodes in various fields of chemical and biological sensors [ Although pencil graphite electrode (PGE) has been successfully used in the cathodic and anodic voltammetry due to its high electrochemical reactivity, good mechanical rigidity, low cost, simple technology, and easy modification [   To clean multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), first 0.1 g MWCNTs were suspended in 50 mL of concentrated HNO3. This suspension then ultrasonicated for 2 h followed by stirring for 12 h. The powder was collected on a filter paper and then washed for several times with distilled water until reaching to the neutral pH. Finally, MWCNTs were dried at 90 °C overnight. Through a suitable combination of stirring and sonication and without any stabilizer or dispersant, CuO nanoparticles can be stabilized in water for a long time [ To apply the modifier suspensions on the electrodes surface, a very easy and inexpensive technique of drop-coating was used. First 5 μL of PEDOT:PSS/CuO suspension or PEDOT:PSS/CuO/MWCNTs suspension was dropped onto the reaction area of the PGE and then air-dried. After drying, the same method was employed to apply a PVA layer on the electrode reaction area. These electrodes can be re-used provided that their surfaces are thoroughly water-washed in an ultrasonic cleaning bath and are subsequently alcohol-washed. To evaluate the electrochemical performance of the sensors, cyclic voltammetry (CV), and chronoamperometry (CA) measurements were performed using Potentiostat/Galvanostat Autolab30 (from EcoChemie, NL) with General-Purpose Electrochemical System software package (GPES 4.9) in a conventional three-electrode cell. This cell includes a modified PGE as the working electrode as well as an Ag/AgCl electrode and a Pt electrode as the reference electrode and the counter electrode, respectively. Electrochemical measurements were conducted at room temperature and a freshly prepared electrolyte solution was used for each measurement. To investigate the activity of modified electrodes towards glucose oxidation, CV measurements were carried out in the presence and absence of 4.0 mM glucose in 0.1 M NaOH solution at a scan rate of 50 mV s EDS spectrum of washed MWCNTs is shown in  Although the glucose oxidation process in an alkaline electrolyte using CuO is still not well understood, the most accepted mechanism from the previous works by Marioli and Kuwana and later by Wei et al. can be described as the following multistep process [ In the next stage, the deprotonation of glucose activates its isomerization to the enediol form followed by oxidation of this intermediate structure to gluconolactone in contact with Cu(III) species and finally hydrolyzation to gluconic acid. However, as another possible route of the glucose oxidation in an alkaline medium, it was also suggested that it might not simply produce gluconolactone and gluconic acid but might instead entail C As it is seen in The effect of pH on the electrochemical behaviour of the PEDOT:PSS/CuO modified PGE was studied using cyclic voltammetry in four different concentrations of NaOH solutions. As it can be seen in To investigate the current response of modified electrodes to different glucose concentrations and based on CV measurements, a constant potential of +0.70 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) was selected to perform the CA measurements. The linear regression equation for PEDOT:PSS/CuO modified PGE is given by I The PEDOT:PSS/CuO/MWCNTs-PGEs sensor studied in this work showed better sensitivity and linear range compared to many other non-enzymatic glucose sensors using CuO as summarised in To investigate the reproducibility of developed sensors, seven identically fabricated and modified PGEs were subjected to CA measurements at +0.70 V in 0.1 M NaOH and their current responses were compared. The Relative Standard Deviation (R.S.D) was calculated to be ∼1.4% and ∼1.1% for PEDOT:PSS/CuO solution and for PEDOT:PSS/CuO/MWCNTs solution, respectively. It reveals that these sensors are highly reproducible. Due to better amperometric results for the modifier solution containing MWCNTs, this solution was selected to evaluate the stability and selectivity. To study long-term stability or “shelf life” of these electrodes over time, amperometric current responses of seven identical electrodes were measured towards glucose over a period of 30 days at a time intervals of five days. During this period of time, the electrodes were stored at room temperature in the air. At each time interval, one of those seven electrodes was subjected to the CA measurement. As it is indicated in Due to co-existence of oxidizable species such as dopamine (DA), ascorbic acid (AA), uric acid (UA) in human blood and the effect of carbohydrate compounds on the determination of glucose, the anti-interference ability is an important factor for sensors. To address this point, the selectivity of PEDOT:PSS/CuO/MWCNTs modified PGE was evaluated by amperometric measurements towards DA, AA, UA and some possible interfering sugars such as Fructose, Sucrose and Lactose in 0.10 M NaOH at +0.70 V vs. Ag/AgCl reference electrode as shown in Two types of modifier suspensions were prepared—the first was made of a mixture of PEDOT:PSS and CuO nanoparticles and in the second one MWCNTs were added. A cheap electrode, as well as a simple modification process, make the developed glucose sensors economic as the modifier films were simply prepared by drop-coating of the modifier suspension on the surface of a pencil graphite electrode. The sensors were electrochemically characterised using CV and CA. Analyses of electrochemical measurements of sensors reflect the success of the modified PGEs in sensing the glucose. These sensors have a high catalytic activity due to the use of CuO nanoparticles in the PEDOT:PSS conducting polymer. The addition of MWCNTs to the suspension provides a higher current response to these sensors. This work introduced a cost-effective sensor with good performance for glucose monitoring in biomedical applications.