Single bubble velocity profiles for a 0.8
                        mm
                      diameter bubble in solutions of Triton X-100 are simulated by solving the Navier–Stokes equation combined with the Marangoni effect under pseudo-steady state conditions assuming the stagnant cap model and applying different mass transfer control steps. The fit between the experimental and simulated velocity profiles indicated that the mass transfer mechanism for Triton X-100 from bulk solution to the surface of a rising bubble is boundary layer mass transfer controlled.Adsorptive bubble processes are encountered in extractive metallurgy, chemical engineering, agriculture, environmental engineering and biotechnology ( The velocity of a single bubble rising in a surfactant solution depends on the time elapsed (distance travelled) from point of release ( As surface active species in solution adsorb at the surface of a rising bubble, the surface becomes less mobile and the drag force increases. Consequently, the bubble decelerates with the distance (time) travelled. The velocity profile is concentration dependent, however, the terminal velocity of a given size bubble is the same in surfactant solutions of different concentration (e.g., profiles a and b for surfactant solution in Models of surface mobility of bubbles (and drops) in surfactant solution have recently been reviewed ( The mass transfer and the concentration distribution on the bubble surface are controlled by the fluid flow around the bubble and one of the following three rate limiting steps: adsorption–desorption kinetics, mass transfer in the continuous phase, and surface diffusion on the interface. The adsorbed surfactant layer on a buoyant bubble surface, termed a dynamic adsorption layer (  For a rigid sphere freely rising in water with Numerical methods have been developed ( In this paper, experimental and simulated velocity profiles are compared. The simulated profiles are obtained by numerical solution to the Navier–Stokes equation for the stagnant cap case combined with the Marangoni stress produced by assuming different mass transfer mechanisms. To minimise computing time, the mass transfer process is approximated using existing correlations. To the authors’ knowledge this is the first experimental test of the theory of the dynamic adsorption layer. The velocity of a free rising bubble in a surfactant solution is governed by the momentum balance (Navier–Stokes equation), the mass balance, and the force balance on the bubble surface with boundary conditions supplied by the dynamic adsorption layer model. The bubble considered here is sufficiently small ( For a bubble without surface deformation, the governing equations in dimensionless form in spherical coordinates are as follows (symbols with ′ are dimensionless): Vorticity transport equation: The presence of a surface tension gradient causes a force on the bubble surface that must be balanced by the viscous tangential stress. The differential equation relating the surface coverage and shear stress given by The adsorption of surfactant molecules onto the bubble surface induces a diffusive flux between the bubble surface and the bulk solution. For a moving bubble at relatively high velocity, the mass transfer can be regarded as restricted to a thin concentration boundary layer. The boundary layer mass transfer and adsorption are consecutive steps for surfactant transfer. The transfer rate from the bulk solution to the bubble surface may be adsorption (kinetic) controlled or boundary layer mass transfer controlled. Surfactant molecules adsorbed on the bubble surface may also be transported by surface convection and diffusion along the interface. For steady flow, surfactant interfacial conservation is described by the following equation: If one integrates To simplify The total surface area of the bubble is the sum of the stagnant cap part and the bare (mobile) surface When boundary layer mass transfer is the control step, the mass transfer rate can be expressed in terms of the mass transfer coefficient When the mass transfer is surface adsorption controlled, the surfactant concentration in the sublayer equals the concentration in the bulk solution, i.e., The distinct surface regions (mobile surface and stagnated surface) of the bubble under the stagnant cap model contribute to the mass transfer differently. In this section the contribution of each part is treated separately. The velocity profile will be simulated under different assumptions as described below. For the Therefore, the flow boundary layer and mass transfer boundary layer at the rear of the bubble are much thicker than at the front. The adsorption and desorption at the rear part of the bubble can be ignored because of the thick concentration boundary layer and small diffusion coefficient ( The mass transfer coefficient is Considering boundary layer mass transfer at both the bare surface and the stagnant cap, Assuming surface adsorption is the mass transfer control step, and the surface concentration is the same as the simulated result from the stagnant cap model, then The simulated surface coverage is obtained from the force balance on the bubble surface. It is believed to be different from both the equilibrium and maximum surface coverage at steady state ( If the average surface coverage over the stagnant cap part of the bubble is identical to the equilibrium surface coverage at steady state,  Following McLaughlin, the effect of adsorbed surfactant was modeled by a stagnant surfactant cap on which a no-slip boundary condition was imposed. Once the flow field was computed, the balance between the shear stress and the surface tension gradient was used to compute the surface tension as a function of position and the Frumkin equation was then used to determine the surface concentration of surfactant. The initial condition for a run was a clean bubble moving at the steady-state speed. This is a reasonable assumption for sufficiently small bulk concentrations of surfactant since the experiments indicate that the bubble attains a maximum velocity that is close to the steady-state velocity in pure water before beginning to slow down ( On each iteration, the Finally, the time needed to attain a cap angle must be computed. This was achieved using available mass transfer correlations as discussed. Once the flow field and the Reynolds and Weber numbers were computed for a given cap angle, a separate computer program computed the time needed for the cap angle to grow from the previous value to the current value. With this procedure, the time needed to completely immobilize the surface of the bubble was computed by systematically increasing the cap angle so that the cap extended from the bottom of the bubble to each grid point on the surface of the bubble. The above procedure is summarized in the flow chart shown in The set-up used to generate the single bubble velocity profile is a square Plexiglas column The bubble size was determined using a stationary camera with diameter measured to within The first requirement is to establish experimental repeatability. To begin, the velocity profiles of a single bubble were compared in tap and distilled water. The bubble decelerated in both and no significant improvement was achieved by using distilled water. (In addition, the volume of solution needed is more than Next, bubble velocity was compared for a series of three randomly selected bubbles in the same batch of surfactant solution ( Lastly, velocity profiles were measured in both tap water and solutions of the same concentration on different days ( Simulations for the five possible physical models were performed. The simulated profiles are compared with the experimental data for a The physical parameters for Triton X-100 used in the simulation are from  In The simulation results with adsorption kinetic control on the entire bubble surface ( In the above simulation, the Langmuir von Szyskowski constant (the ratio of desorption and adsorption rate constants, Increasing the adsorption rate constant does result in a better fit to the experimental data. However, it is in contradiction to the observation of Fainerman et al. (1998) who suggested that for most surfactants non-diffusional adsorption kinetics can be expected if the ratio The shear force affects the surface coverage on the bubble. It may be suspected that under shear compression the amount of surfactant in the dynamic adsorption layer reaches the maximum surface coverage ( Assuming the surface coverage in the dynamic adsorption layer is the same as the stationary equilibrium state value ( The square root of the mean squared difference between simulated and experimental velocity ( Assuming adsorption kinetic control (model 3), the table shows that taking a high In principle, provided the mass transfer control step is known, the appropriate parameter (mass transfer coefficient or adsorption/desorption rate constant) can be back calculated from the measured velocity profile. This opens up a new method for estimating such parameters using a dynamic technique. One origin of the deviation of simulation results from the experiment data is the pseudo-steady-state approach to solving the equations of fluid flow and mass transfer. This approach discriminated different mass transfer mechanisms at relatively low computation cost. The next step is the simultaneous solution of fluid flow and mass transfer, for which we believe we have laid the foundation. The work represents the first test and validation of the theory of the dynamic adsorption layer. The comparison of the simulated and experimental velocity profiles shows that the stagnant cap model and boundary layer mass transfer control are valid for Triton X-100 adsorption onto a rising  Two of us (Y.Z. and J.A.F.) wish to acknowledge the Research Grant from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). J.B.M. acknowledges support from the US Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-FG02-88ER13919.