The bioleaching behavior of copper and nickel from a low-grade nickel, copper, and cobalt-bearing sulfide ore was investigated. A recovery of 94% Ni, 62% Co and 70% Cu was achieved in 68 days of flask leaching including 18 days of acid pre-leaching and 50 days of bioleaching. However, a recovery of 46% Ni, 39% Co and 13% Cu was achieved in 139 days of column leaching including 19 days of acid pre-leaching and 120 days of bioleaching which indicates that nickel and cobalt have the same leaching behavior. Potassium, sodium and iron(III) ions in the leach solution formed jarosite within the ore bed with some nickel and copper ions incorporated into the jarosite precipitates thereby diminishing the overall metal recovery. Magnesium was preferentially leached by acid from the gangue minerals leaving a magnesium depleted silicate skeleton, but discrepancies in the residue analysis indicate that magnesium re-deposits into the silicate skeleton during bioleaching.In the last decade, extensive efforts have been made to expand bioleaching technology to primary copper sulfide ores, and to a lesser extent nickel sulfide ores ( In the present study, a low-grade nickel–copper–cobalt sulfide ore obtained from Hami, Xinjiang Province, China, was subjected to flask and column bioleaching. The purpose of this study was to investigate the leaching behavior of the metals (Cu The low grade nickel-bearing sulfide ore used in the test was obtained from Hami, Xinjiang Province, China. The chemical analysis of the ore sample showed Ni 0.45%, Co 0.013%, Cu 0.18%, Fe 9.07%, S 2.05%, MgO 7.30%, CaO 7.95%, SiO The ore samples used for column leaching were crushed and screened to − All chemicals were of analytical reagent grade from the Beijing Chemical Reagents Factory and were used as starting materials without further purification. De-ionized water was used throughout the Cu, Ni and Fe co-precipitation experiment.  The low-grade ore powder (− Representative − A solution of 10 g/L Fe(II), 0.5 g/L Cu or 1.5 g/L Ni in 90 mL fresh 9 K media was mixed with 5 mL The samples used in leaching were characterized on a Germany Bruker-axs D8 Advance X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The operation voltage and current were kept at 40 kV and 40 mA, respectively. Solutions were analyzed for Ni, Cu, Co, Fe, K and Na using America Baird Co. PS-6 inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES). The pH of the supernatant at room temperature was measured with a pH meter (PHSJ-4A) and the redox potential (ORP) in the leaching solution were measured with a Pt electrode with reference to a saturated Hg/Hg Extraction of 94% Ni and 65% Co was achieved in 53 days flask leaching with 18 days acid pre-leaching, followed by 35 days bioleaching ( Nickel, copper, cobalt and iron were all extracted rapidly after inoculating bacteria, but then the rates of extraction became very slow 10 days later. The variation of pH and ORP (redox potential) of the pregnant leaching solution and the recovery of nickel, copper and cobalt were consistent: after inoculating bacteria, the ORP increased rapidly and stabilized at 660 mV, whilst the pH first decreased and thereafter increased (  After the bioleaching, the residues were rinsed with dilute sulfuric acid (pH 1.8) and dried at room temperature and analyzed using X-ray diffraction ( A recovery of 46% Ni, 39% Co, 13% Cu and 14% Fe was achieved in 139 days column leaching including 19 days acid pre-leaching and 120 days bioleaching. Like the flask leach solutions, the concentrations of potassium and sodium were very low in column leach solution with the potassium concentration much lower than that of sodium ions (   Over time, the total soluble copper and nickel concentrations slowly decrease (  The bioleaching of a low-grade nickel, copper, cobalt bearing sulfide ore was technically feasible through 68 days flask leaching and 139 days column leaching after acid pre-leaching to react with basic magnesium and calcium minerals. The results indicated that nickel and cobalt had similar leaching behavior and were more easily leached than copper. The presence of potassium, sodium and iron(III) ions in the leaching system led to the formation of jarosite within the ore bed which incorporated nickel and copper ions into the jarosite precipitate, thereby diminishing the overall recovery of metal value. Discrepancies between the magnesium leaching results, residue analysis and XRD analysis suggest that Mg This work was supported by the