This paper discusses inferential measurement models for semiautogenous grinding (SAG) mills. Inferential measurements of SAG mill discharge and feed streams and mill rock and ball charge levels are obtained utilising process measurements and recognised process simulation models. Inferential models of recirculating load and cyclone underflow split are also presented. Results for the mill inventories and process streams are validated against reference simulation model data. Uncertainty analyses are conducted to assess the influence of the various model parameters. Mill weight based estimates for mill inventory are shown to be the least uncertain. The results suggest that regular calibration of oversize crusher and primary cyclone feed instrumentation, regular measurement of the SAG mill discharge screen aperture, oversize crusher gap setting and process water specific gravity and careful fitting of the SAG mill discharge grate model parameters will minimise uncertainty in the inferential models.This paper describes inferential models of the mill inventory and various streams in the primary grinding circuit and is a continuation of earlier work ( The inferential models of the SAG mill discharge, inventories and feed will be described following a review of related works and the presentation of the relevant simulation models. The review is divided into mill charge and discharge measurement and feed size distribution measurement. Discussion of the inferential model results precedes a brief analysis of the inferential model uncertainties. To conclude, the major findings of this paper are summarised. The contribution of this work is the presentation of inferential models of the SAG mill discharge rate and size distribution, rock charge, total feed and fresh feedrate and size distribution. An inferential model of the primary underflow split is also presented which allows definition of the circuit mass balance. The results of an uncertainty analysis of these models is also presented. The discussion centres on the primary grinding circuit shown in SAG mill fresh (stockpile) feed (t/h), SAG mill feed water addition (m SAG mill powerdraw (kW), SAG mill load cell (t), Cyclone feed water addition (m Cyclone feedrate (m Cyclone feed density (% solids w/w), Oversize crusher feedrate (t/h). This section reviews inferential measurements for mill inventory levels and mill discharge properties and the direct measurement of mill feed size distribution. This section reviews mill inventory measurement by measurement-type: powerdraw, weight, conductivity probe and energy balance, and, sound measurement and acoustic spectral analysis. Several mill powerdraw models have been developed since the work of Powerdraw is a function of mill load (mass and volume). This characteristic may be exploited to estimate mill charge levels. More recently powerdraw models have been utilised to estimate total charge level ( Mill weight is measured by mill bearing pressure or strain-gauge load cell. Since the 1980s, when it was considered unreliable ( A simple weight model is obtained through linear regression of the mill weight measurement against the internal states (inspection/state estimation) of the mill ( Similar to the powerdraw model utilisation, mill weight models have been utilised to measure the total charge level ( Shell lining and lifter bar components are secured to the inside of the mill shell with bolts. Conductivity probes fixed within the bolts (usually the longer lifter bar bolts) can measure conductivity during a mill revolution to gain information regarding mill charge. Conductivity is high within the charge, rises on entry at the charge toe and falls on exit at the charge shoulder.  Moys and colleagues have worked extensively with the conductivity probe technique and have applied and progressed the technology from laboratory-scale through pilot-scale to industrial scale ( The initial use of mill sound measurements and acoustic spectral analysis as a control variable and an inferential mill charge level measurement received a mixed review ( The measurement of charge position, motion and collisions is being pursued using the processing of surface vibration signals from accelerometers on the mill shell, sent to a fast data acquisition system and interpreted with the aid of a discrete element methods mill model ( Inferential measurement of total mill volumetric charge ( Novel use of mill weight and mill powerdraw for simultaneous inferential measurement of total and ball charge levels, as described by Measurement of the SAG mill discharge is required to satisfy the basic grinding circuit control requirement of determination of the circulating load ( Inferential measurement of mill discharge is important where flow measurement is lacking. In the absence of flow measurement of SAG mill discharge water addition, Moys and colleagues have used thermocouples to define the energy and mass balances around the mill discharge sump to enable the inferential measurement of the mill discharge water addition rate, mill discharge density and viscosity and the mill charge viscosity ( Inferential measurement models for the SAG mill discharge are presented in the inferential models section. These models provide the discharge stream flow properties and size distribution and can be utilised for recirculating load and SAG mill rock charge determination (also described). Feed size distribution measurement is considered an important process measurement (     Texture based image processing is developing to as a possible alternative to the above to address difficulties associated with order-of-magnitude particle size ranges, the presence of mud and water, and concealment of particles methods ( With feed size measurement technology, particularly pattern recognition methods, reaching a high level of maturity, opportunities now exist to manipulate AG/SAG mill feed size distribution through stockpile feeder operation and blast pattern selection ( Direct measurement of feed size distribution has progressed to an advanced stage. However, there is scope for development of a model-based alternative. A novel model-based method for the inferential measurement of the feed size distribution which could be utilised as where capital or installation costs of the pattern and textural instrumentation are prohibitive is presented in the inferential models section. Several simulation models require description prior to the presentation of the inferential models, namely, the mill solids balance, liquid balance, powerdraw and weight models. In this work a The solids mass balance for the SAG mill is based on the Whiten perfect mixing model ( The mill product (the SAG mill discharge stream, SMDC) is calculated as follows: The water mass balance is as follows: According to the Morrel powerdraw model ( Since the material in the inactive part of the charge is in ‘freefall’, the mill weight consists of the mill shell weight and the weight of the material in the charge kidney (the active portion of the mill charge that is in contact with the mill shell), refer to Inferential measurement of the SAG mill inventories, feed rate and sizing and mill discharge rate and sizing requires the development of suitable models. This section details the development and utilisation of the new inferential measurement models. An overview of the model utilisation and calculation sequence is as follows: The oversize crusher feed (OSCF) and primary cyclone feed (PCFD) streams are calculated from the oversize crusher feedrate, primary cyclone feed flowrate and density data and assumptions about the size distributions (based on SAG mill grate size and discharge screen aperture size). The addition of OSCF and PCFD less the discharge water addition yields the SAG mill discharge stream (SMDC). The mill discharge size distribution (smdc) and passing sizes ( The SAG mill rock charge (SMRC) is calculated by SAG mill discharge function model inversion. SAG mill fractional total filling ( SAG mill total feed (SMTF) is then calculated by mill model inversion after making assumptions about the ball charge size distribution. Oversize crusher product (OSCP) and primary cyclone underflow (PCUF) are calculated by the direct application of the crusher and cyclone models. SAG mill fresh feed (SMFF) is calculated by subtracting oversize crusher product (OSCP) and the primary cyclone underflow to SAG mill (PCUS) from the SAG mill total feed (SMTF) stream. The fresh feed size distribution (smff) and passing sizes ( The oversize crusher feed mass flowrates and stream properties (OSCF) are calculated as follows: The Rosin–Rammler size distribution function is given in Eq. Since it is conventional in mineral processing to represent size distributions in cummulative percent passing format, Eq. The primary cyclone feed properties (PCFD) are calculated from the plant measured variables of cyclone feed flowrate, PCFD The SAG mill discharge properties (SMDC) and size distribution (smdc) are estimated by the addition of the estimated primary cyclone feed and oversize crusher feed streams Potential now exists to utilise the SAG mill discharge inferential measurement as a measure of SAG mill performance. Control objectives and strategies could be formulated centering on this inferential measurement. For example, the SAG mill discharge size distribution measurement could be utilised as a measure of the relative loading of the primary and secondary grinding circuits. A coarse size measurement could indicate that the primary circuit is highly loaded. This indication could provide feedback to the SAG mill feedrate control loop. One of the “basic requirements” of a grinding circuit control system is the “measurement of the circulating load, so that overload may be prevented” ( In this case, where there are two recycle streams (oversize crusher feed, OSCF, and a proportion of the primary cyclone underflow, Potential now also exists to utilise the recirculating load inferential measurement as a measure of SAG mill performance. Control objectives and strategies could be also formulated incorporating this measurement. For instance, the recirculating load measurement (RCL) could be utilised as feedback for control of SAG mill water addition or primary cyclone underflow split to the ball mill (PC The SAG mill rock charge properties (SMRC) and size distribution (smrc) are estimated by the reverse-application of the SAG mill grate discharge function on the SAG mill discharge stream estimate, incorporating a size distribution assumption. The mill discharge flowrate The calculation of mill rock charge, The values of The mill water charge, The fractional total filling ( Analysis of Eq. The mill inventory estimates from mill powerdraw data are determined by the solution of Eq. A second residual, similar to Eq. The solids component of the SAG mill total feed (SMTF/smtf) is estimated by the inversion of the steady state perfectly mixed mill model, Eq. the mill product, assuming a ball charge size distribution and using the rock charge and ball charge information from Steps 2 and 3, allows the determination of the specific comminution energy, Ecs the breakage rate function, using the information from (a) to (c), the total feed estimate, The use of the steady state perfectly mixed mill model is valid since the mill charge and discharge estimates are determined from the prevailing operating conditions regardless of whether the mill contents are increasing, decreasing or at steady-state. A valid estimate of the total mill feed is possible providing the calculation time between the discharge and charge estimates and the total mill feed estimate is relatively short. SAG mill total feed water is determined by the steady state balance for the water: The estimate of the oversize crusher product, OSCP/oscp, is determined by applying the crusher model, Eq. The Nageswararao model ( The estimate of the primary cyclone underflow, PCUF/pcuf, is determined by applying the cyclone model to the estimate of the primary cyclone feed, PCFD/pcfd, determined in Step 1. The estimate of the SAG mill fresh feed (the new feed from the stockpile), SMFF/smff, is determined by subtracting (from the SAG mill total feed SMTF/smtf) the SAG feed water addition MV The estimate of the SAG mill fresh feed eighty percent passing size, Potential now exists to utilise the SAG mill fresh feed size inferential measurements as a measure of crusher or blasting performance and of feed size disturbances reporting to the mill. The fresh feed solids inferential measurement could be utilised for metallurgical accounting purposes. Control objectives and strategies could also be formulated incorporating these measurements. For instance, the feed size measurements could be utilised in feed-forward control of mill feedrate where coarse feed results in feedrate reduction and and fine feed leads to increases in throughput. The primary cyclone underflow split to the ball mill, PC present estimates of the SAG mill discharge, oversize crusher feed and primary cyclone feed streams, the primary cyclone underflow split to the ball mill from the preceding time step, and models of the oversize crusher and primary cyclone, The primary cyclone underflow solids component, The estimation of the primary cyclone underflow split to the ball mill, PC Inferential measurements have been developed for the SAG mill inventories, feed rate and sizing and mill discharge rate and sizing. The inferential models utilise process measurements and process models to obtain novel inferential measurements of stream and inventory characteristics. For example, the oversize crusher feed, primary cyclone feed and mill discharge measurements are utilised to obtain an inferential measurement of the SAG mill discharge. The inferential model results were assessed by comparison to the results of a process simulation model. The simulation used Eqs.       The mass balance components of the inferential model estimates (Solids Flow and Density) in The size distribution component of the inferential model estimates ( The SAG mill discharge (SMDC) estimate displays good agreement. The SAG mill rock charge (SMRC) estimate, however, exhibits high relative error. This is attributed to the extrapolating nature of the SAG mill rock load inferential model (Step 2). Analysis of the model found that the relative fraction pebble point open area ( The size distribution estimates for the oversize crusher feed (OSCF) and product (OSCP) and the primary cyclone feed (PCFD) and underflow (PCUF) exhibit high relative errors (38–54%). Since the estimates of the SAG mill discharge (SMDC) and fresh feed (SMFF) are not unduly affected, the oversize crusher and primary cyclone stream size estimates are considered acceptable. Furthermore, the majority of model parameters were fitted manually which was consistent with the research objectives. Furthermore, the The inferential models presented in this paper have been validated against a single set of reference steady state conditions. Therefore, further model validation would be required prior to entering an implementation phase. The inferential measurement of total charge ( The inferential model estimates in column (3) show good agreement with the bracketed reference information in column (1) as evidenced by the percentage error results in column (4). Column (5) and (6) of The uncertainty results were also analysed in terms of the relative contribution to the estimate error (RCE): The relative contribution to estimate error analysis showed that for the the mill weight residual, Eq. For the mill powerdraw residual, Eq.   Eqs. The estimates for mill discharge solids flowrate and density, see the accuracy of the oversize crusher feed rate, OSCF calibration checks of the primary cyclone feed density gauge measurement, the SAG mill discharge screen aperture size should be monitored and measured regularly to ensure the corrected fifty percent passing size, SMD50c, may be adjusted as required. the specific gravity of the process water, SG  The parameters that have the most influence on the uncertainty in the inferential SAG mill fresh feed size distribution measurement are the oversize crusher feedrate, OSCF The estimates for mill fresh feed solids flowrate and density exhibited excellent agreement with the simulation data, see  The SAG mill fresh feed rate (solids and moisture) is one of the measured variables available on the plant. As a result it could be perceived that the solids feedrate estimate has a lesser importance than the other estimates presented here (especially considering the dry nature of the fresh feed stream). However, it is an important estimate since production targets are set on a (dry) solids throughput rate basis, and, it is an integral component of the fresh feed density estimate which is required to determine the (dry) solids production targets and, at an operational level, is a characteristic for which indication is desirable. The inferential model of the SAG mill fresh feed provides satisfactory indication of fresh feed rate, density and size distribution. The results show that to minimise uncertainty in the inferential feed size indicators and the feed solids rate and density estimates: the accuracy of the oversize crusher feed rate, OSCF due to the implicit importance of the oversize crusher product size (via OSCF calibration checks of the primary cyclone feed density gauge measurement, the SAG mill discharge grate parameters, Inferential measurement models for SAG mill discharge and feed streams and inventories have been presented and validated against reference simulation model data. Satisfactory results were achieved and augmented by uncertainty analyses that highlighted influential model parameters. Further model validation would be required prior to implementation. An inferential model of the primary cyclone underflow split to the ball mill, PC Good ball ( Good estimates of SAG mill discharge rate and size distribution are possible. Error in the transfer size estimates increases from the eighty percent passing size ( Uncertainty analysis found that to minimise uncertainty in these estimates errors may be minimised through the monitoring of the SAG mill discharge screen aperture size and the appropriate adjustment of the corrected fifty percent passing size, SMD50 The mill discharge model allows the calculation of the recirculating load (RCL) which enables the full definition of the primary circuit mass balance which allows for monitoring, control and optimisation of the prevailing operating conditions. Good estimates of SAG mill fresh feed rate and size distribution are possible. The error levels in the estimate of the size distribution increase with decreasing particle size This trend is due to the inferential model predicting a size distribution that is more fine and broader than the simulation data and the additive characteristic of the cummulative passing format of the size distribution. Uncertainty analysis found that to minimise uncertainty in these estimates by ensuring the accuracy of the oversize crusher and primary cyclone feed instrumentation, through regular calibration, and the crusher gap setting, via regular lead-bob gap checking. The SAG mill discharge grate parameters: pebble port size, Acknowledgements go to Northparkes Mines for their assistance with and permission to publish circuit information, the Centre for Process Systems Engineering for part hosting and the University of Sydney for providing Australian Postgraduate Award funding for this research.