Planning industrial flotation operation and earlier flotation equipment sizing are commonly based on batch flotation testing, where ideal operating conditions can be provided. Each plant has its own batch flotation standards and typically uses a time scale-up factor in order to compare laboratory and plant flotation performance. However, flotation scale-up is more complex, and it is not yet completely understood.
                  In this work, a novel scale-up approach was developed, where the effects of the hydrodynamic regime (mixing), solid segregation (effective residence time) and froth recovery on the plant flotation rate were identified and evaluated. Each effect was then described by means of correction factors applied on the batch flotation rate, which was considered the optimal condition. These factors can be determined from laboratory and plant experimental data. This methodology was successfully applied at the rougher copper flotation plant of Codelco Norte Division, Codelco-Chile, for cells of 160 and 300m3.In recent years, industrial flotation cells have shown a considerable increase in size related to the large increase in mineral treatment by flotation worldwide. Due to their greater size, fewer cells are now necessary for larger flotation capacities, and lower specific power consumption and more efficient control can be provided using large flotation cells, with significant economical benefits (economy of scale). Scale-up methods for flotation cell design have been mainly based on geometrical similitude and dimensional analysis with the use of dimensionless numbers (air flow number, power number, specific power, etc.) in order to reach similar solid suspension and similar pulp mixing conditions at different scales ( At the laboratory or pilot scale, significant effort has been expended to describe and model the collection process (e.g., Robust scale-up methods are necessary for the earlier steps of design and the prediction of industrial flotation circuit performance from batch tests. From a metallurgical point of view, however, the scale-up problem has not been completely solved yet.       In both approaches ( In this work, a scale-up approach based on the identification of physical dimensionless parameters to account for the effects of froth performance, cell mixing regime and solid segregation was developed. The scale-up model was applied for comparison between the collection efficiency of two large cells (160 and 300 The development of a scale-up methodology is necessary for planning the industrial flotation operation and earlier equipment sizing, which are usually based on batch flotation tests. The use of scale-up factors is required because the knowledge and measurement technologies are still insufficient for a reliable prediction of the flotation plant performance from laboratory tests using physical variables alone. The operating conditions (gas dispersion, particle size distribution, chemical conditioning, etc.) in the laboratory flotation tests are typically different than the plant operating conditions. In order to identify and evaluate the scale-up factors, the performance of the first cell in a rougher flotation bank was compared with the batch flotation of the industrial cell feed pulp with otherwise similar reagent conditioning and mineral characteristics. The first cell of the bank is more sensitive because it represents the largest rate of change (a higher recovery in a shorter time). In this sense, the following scale-up approach is proposed, as shown in The scale-up relationship was developed based on dimensionless parameters. First, a scale-up factor ( The froth effect, The cell mixing effect The solid segregation In order to estimate the actual residence time in a large operation with several rougher lines, the actual flowrate distribution of the feed pulp on the parallel flotation lines must be evaluated. This was the case in the flotation plant where the present study was developed. The flowrate distribution was evaluated by the radioactive tracer technique. Liquid and solid tracers were injected into the common rougher distribution box, and on-line data acquisition from the tailings stream of each rougher line was simultaneously recorded; see The residence time distribution of single cells and a bank of cells, were obtained by the radioactive tracer technique for global solids, solids at three size classes (+150; +75 −150; +45 −75; and −45 The mean residence time, The solid segregation factor ( For batch kinetic evaluation, flotation tests were carried out in the metallurgical laboratory of the flotation plant under standard batch procedures. In order to estimate the scale-up factor, samples from the plant feed stream were taken and immediately used for batch flotation tests, keeping the same pulp conditioning and the same particle size distribution of the plant feed. For the plant flotation tests, the short-cut method was applied ( Flotation rate constants were obtained for laboratory batch tests and a single industrial cell from experimental data adjustment using Eqs. The overall cell recovery ( The froth recovery, The mineral transport from the pulp to the froth by true flotation was calculated using a USM-Bubble Load Sensor ( After the froth zone recovery ( Metallurgical and hydrodynamic characterization of large flotation cells was carried out in the rougher circuit at the copper concentrator of Codelco Norte Division, Chile. The concentrator consists of two SAG mills, from which the mineral is fed to three parallel rougher lines; each line consists of eight OK-160 cells (160 For comparative purposes, rougher Lines 1 and 3 were selected. Rougher Line 1 was evaluated considering a single TC-300 cell installed as the first cell of Line 1, followed by six TC-160 cells in operation (total volume: 1260 In order to evaluate the new TC-300 cell performance, considering the OK-160 cell as the reference at the same plant conditions, the novel scale-up approach (presented in this work) was applied. The hydrodynamic performance of both cells was also evaluated and is described in For cell hydrodynamic characterization, liquid RTD for TC-300 cell and OK-160 cells were obtained by the radioactive tracer technique. For comparative purposes, data from both cells were fitted by the N mixer in the series model (Eq.  The maximum mineral recovery, The The model parameters estimated from batch tests (using the same feed of rougher Lines 1 and 3) and industrial cell data, considering the mean residence time per cell obtained from RTD measurement, are shown in In order to evaluate the Using the data presented in The cell mixing factor ( For the TC-300 and OK-160 cells, dimensionless recoveries, The global solid residence time was about 90% of the liquid residence time in both lines ( The flotation rate constants for batch (   In order to evaluate the new TC-300 in comparison with the OK-160, the novel scale-up approach was applied for simulating a rougher flotation circuit consisting of eight OK-160 cells versus a flotation circuit consisting of five TC-300 cells. Metallurgical performance simulation was developed by considering the mineral represented by the batch flotation rate,   Substituting the values from The new scale-up approach has been successfully validated by comparison of batch flotation results with industrial single cell flotation performance (first rougher cell) treating the same feed pulp. Application of the scale-up approach in designing of a new circuit, for which no industrial data are available, requires the knowledge of the expected feed particle size distribution (considering the hydrocyclon effect) and chemical conditioning in the future plant feed, in order to prepare the batch feed pulp to perform the corresponding batch tests. Finally, for flotation bank design, the use of a methodology consisting of the sequential calculation of each individual cell is recommended ( A novel approach for the scale-up of batch flotation results for plant metallurgical performance has been developed and validated. The effects of froth recovery, cell mixing and solids segregation were identified and described by means of dimensionless factors. The actual scale-up factor, The scale-up method allowed the comparison of the TC-300 and OK-160 cell performances, where similar collection efficiency between both cells was found. The froth recovery showed the most significant effect on the scale-up factor for both cells. The authors are grateful to El Teniente Division CODELCO-Chile for providing access to its plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. The funding for process modeling and control research was provided by CONICYT, project Fondecyt 1070106, NEIM ICM-Mideplan, Santa Maria University, Project 270522, and the Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy.