Alexander Del Mar's prescient and profound contributions to monetary economics have been basically disregarded for the duration of a century. This paper sets out Del Mar's contributions to monetary economics and economic statistics and demonstrates the striking relevance of his contributions to modern monetary thought. The contemporary arbiters and judges of intellectual merit were aware of Del Mar's writings but Del Mar was excluded from contemporary reference and recognition. His exclusion had led to his having been denied his rightful place in the history of economic thought. One explanation for the silencing of Del Mar is that his intellectual position placed him in opposition to the views of the leaders of the profession. Del Mar was also forthright in his criticisms of his contemporaries' views and was open in his writings in commenting on prior anti-Semitism. We present evidence suggesting that prejudice and bigotry in high places in academia were involved in Del Mar's exclusion from the consolidating profession of academic economists in the late 19th century. Alexander Del Mar was the most original monetary economist in the United States prior to Irving Fisher and also a pioneer statistician. Beginning in the early 1860s and continuing into the early 20th century, Del Mar wrote some 36 books and monographs and numerous articles on monetary economics, monetary history, and economic statistics. His writings contain profound new insights and vision, and their relevance to contemporary monetary thought is remarkable. His contributions appear to have had a marked influence on Irving Fisher, who characterized Del Mar as “one of the outstanding advocates of stabilization of (his) time” This paper has two main purposes. First, we describe Del Mar's intellectual contributions and demonstrate the striking relevance of these contributions to contemporary monetary thought. Yet, the profession has, by and large, been silent on Del Mar for the duration of a century. The second objective is to address reasons underlying this silence. The disregard of Del Mar by successive generations of economists appears to stem from his original exclusion during the 1880s and 1890s from the consolidating profession of academic economics. Unlike Henry George, for example, whose writings had mass appeal, Del Mar's scholarly style was directed at professional economists. If his contributions were to receive recognition, the recognition would have had to come from inclusion in the professional community of economists. The recognition and the inclusion were not, however, forthcoming. Two contemporary towering figures in the formation of the American academic community were conspicuous by their silence on Del Mar. The two figures were David Wells and Francis A. Walker. We provide evidence showing that both were aware of Del Mar and his writings. Each may have had personal professional reasons for ignoring Del Mar and thereby setting the stage for the lack of recognition by the academic community. Wells and Walker were metallists. They may have ignored Del Mar because Del Mar took the contrary position that the essence of money is to measure value and that, as such, money could be composed of any substance including paper provided it was managed so as to maintain a stable price level. Del Mar's position was, therefore, diametrically in opposition to the views held by Wells and Walker. Approval by Walker was, in particular, a prerequisite for professional acceptance. As As suggested in Milton Friedman's introductory note, there was also ostensibly a less-intellectual factor in the exclusion of Del Mar from the academic community of his time, in particular again with reference to Walker. In the interest of professional integrity, given our question why Del Mar has not received the recognition due to him, we address this factor, which unavoidably involves issues of ethnicity and prejudice. We believe that, after a century of neglect, the reasons for Del Mar's being excluded from the intellectual community by his contemporaries should receive peer review and the evidence should be provided to allow the profession to judge for itself. Henry George, who an important popularizer of economics during the late nineteenth century, also chose to ignore Del Mar. This has serious consequences, for, in so doing, Henry George is open to the charge of plagiarizing Del Mar's theory of interest-rate determination. In  During the 1860s, Del Mar formed editorial connections with influential publications such as In 1857, Del Mar began writing Del Mar's views on monetary economics were founded in numerous empirical studies that he undertook on his own during the Civil War and while at the Bureau of Statistics. “Money,” he proposed, “is a measure whose limits can only be adjusted by the State” Del Mar declared that “the [metals-based] monetary systems of the day reflect [the] imperfection of human nature. They are a compromise between a perfect money… and barter… Our present money is a compromise between these two systems; and it is a very vicious compromise at that” Thus, Del Mar perceived that the essence of money to be to serve as a numeraire. The existence of a unit of account establishes the basis for a money economy. In his historical studies, he provided evidence in support of this view by showing that in ancient times, the primary function of money was that of a unit of account. As far back as the 10th century B.C., the ancient “states of Ionia, Byzantium, Sparta, and Athens” created “discs of purposely rotted sheet iron or of bronze, having no value as pieces of metal, but possessing great and definite value of public measure” Del Mar's conception of money and the fundamental importance of the numeraire also bear remarkable resemblance to the views of Keynes. To demonstrate, consider Keynes's conception of money as expressed in his Keynes went on to argue that Del Mar's analytic framework for studying the effects of money on economic activity included both neutrality and non-neutrality propositions. As a long-run proposition, the quantity theory of money is sound—“a doubling of the sum of money will result in a doubling of prices” During the Civil War, Del Mar undertook a series of empirical studies that examined the effects of increases in the money supply on economic activity. While increases in the money supply increased prices, he found that “the prices of commodities instead of being equally raised are unequally raised some taking precedence over others” Del Mar's monetary transmission process is remarkably similar to the transmission mechanisms developed by  Del Mar's observation that the price of labor is the last to advance provided the foundation of his business cycle analysis. He perceived that a fall in the money supply, would result in a fall in profits since “the cost of producing commodities today will not be covered by the prices obtainable for them tomorrow” Del Mar also presented a simple formulation of the view that expectations of price level changes are self-validating—with current expected inflation acting on the future rate—in his first publication in economics, Del Mar linked changes in prices and profits to the market rate of interest, and contrasted the market rate from the “net” rate. His interest rate theory differed from that of the classical economists. For classical writers, the so-called natural rate of interest is the rate that equilibrates saving and investment (Blaug, 1985, pp. 162–63). Del Mar, in contrast, originated the “organic productivity”, or “net”, theory of interest. The “net” rate of interest, he argued, is determined primarily by “the rate at which animals and plants increase and minerals are produced under the hand of man; in other words, the rate at which the means of human substance increase” Although he did not explicitly formulate his views as such, Del Mar's mechanics of monetary expansion suggest the following sequence: Prices rise, not uniformly, but according to the “precession.” The rate of interest declines. Profits increase; investment, manufacturing output, and employment increase. Wages rise with a lag and not enough to offset the rise in prices. Expectations of further increases in profits are enhanced. The rate of interest rises. Velocity of circulation increases. As a result, prices rise further and the process continues. Compare the foregoing sequence with Fisher's description of the “transition period” following a monetary expansion. Fisher's formal presentation Prices rise. Velocities of circulation (V and V′) increase; the rate of interest rises but not sufficiently. Profits increase, loans expand, and the Qs (i.e., the real volume of trade) increase. Deposit currency (M′) expands relative to money (M). Prices continue to rise; that is, phenomenon No. 1 is repeated. Then No. 2 is repeated, and so on. Both If Del Mar's monetary analysis has a modern ring, this is especially so in the case for his monetary policy framework. The orientation of monetary policy in recent years has focused on price stability. This was also Del Mar's orientation. The aim of monetary policy, he argued, should focus on a single principle: As noted above, Del Mar had studied the writings of the English classical economists under the tutelage of Sir Arthur Helps. This English exposure discernibly influenced Del Mar in his treatment of the velocity of circulation of money, his adumbration of the non-neutrality of money, and his emphasis on price stability. The velocity analyses of the classical writers explicitly constituted the basis for Del Mar's treatment of the subject. In Del Mar's stress on the short-term variability of velocity rendered him, as it had several English economists before him, an exponent of the non-neutrality of money in the short run. In this connection, In turn, in setting forth his theory of the precession of prices, Del Mar acknowledged that such writers as Hume and Mill had observed that “ whilst the volume of money might be increased or diminished instantly, the resulting movement of prices would only occur after an interval of time” Emphasis on price-level stability had long tradition among classical writers, beginning with the work of Law. We have noted that in 1866 Del Mar was appointed the first Director of the Bureau of Statistics, which was then part of the US Treasury Department. Prior to his appointment, customs collectors had purchased their own forms and the forms had been accepted and tabulated without analysis. Soon after his appointment, Del Mar undertook a systematic revision of reports by customs collectors and an expansion of the data-gathering activities of the Treasury Department. Within months, he devised new forms for the customs' collectors monthly returns by classifying imports and exports. He centralized the printing and distribution of forms, appointed clerks to examine schedules received from the collectors, implemented measures to eliminate duplication, and returned those forms with gross inaccuracies. Importantly, he initiated the collection of economic data in the Treasury Department; he assembled a group of sources, including real estate assessors, newspaper editors, businessmen, and others who could supply him with data on the US economy. These efforts culminated in the publication of a series of official reports providing detailed economic data of the United States In a study of the development of statistical activities in the United States in the late 18th and the 19th centuries, In light of the foregoing presentation of Del Mar's views, the almost complete absence of any acknowledgement of, and/or reference to, his work by successive generations of American economists is noteworthy. What accounts for this near-total disregard of Del Mar in the United States? We believe the answer lies in the failure of Del Mar's contemporaries to acknowledge his contributions, which led to his neglect by almost all subsequent writers, including authors of textbooks on the history of thought. We now direct our focus to three eminent figures in the history of American economics, David Wells (1828–1898), Francis A. Walker (1840–1897), and Henry George (1839–1897). Each was instrumental in popularizing and shaping the study of political economy in the United States in the late 19th century. None of them ever referred to Del Mar. Unlike subsequent writers, however, it cannot be said that they were unaware of either the man or his work. Each is likely to have had personal reasons for choosing to ignore Del Mar. As noted in In his discussion of Wells, Also unlike Del Mar, Wells considered that the influence of money on the economy is insignificant: Although Del Mar and Wells appear to have never referred to one another in their published writings, each was cognizant of the other's existence. As noted above, from 1866 to 1869 Del Mar served as the director of the Bureau of Statistics and was dismissed from this position because of the scale and nature of this statistical work. It was during these years that the careers of Del Mar and Wells crossed paths. In 1866, Wells was appointed Special Commissioner of the Revenue. This position included direct supervision of Del Mar, who was Wells's deputy  Walker defined money as “that which passes freely from hand to hand throughout the community, in final discharge of debt and full payments for commodities” In Both Del Mar and Walker published papers on bimetallism in a 1885 symposium in the Unlike Del Mar's contributions, which remain highly relevant today, Walker's monetary writings have not withstood the test of time. As Del Mar initially set forth his theory of the net rate of interest in two 1865 articles, “The Rate of Interest in Great Britain and Elsewhere” The charge of plagiarism is most serious. Del Mar was on firm footing. On February 11, 1879, Del Mar had presented an essay, “Usury and the Jews”, before the Pacific Social Science Association in San Francisco The foregoing discussion has made a case that the neglect of Del Mar's contributions by 20th century economists is, at least in part, either the result of the failure of his contemporaries to take account of his ideas and/or the result of plagiarism his ideas. In the cases of Wells and Walker, two economists who wrote on monetary issues, there were fundamental differences about the nature of money and the role of money in the economy; the development of monetary thought and the evolution of the international and domestic monetary systems have shown that it was Del Mar's views that were prescient and profound while those of Wells and Walker lacked depth and foresight. Additionally, the events of the late 1860s suggest that there may have been personal tensions between Del Mar and Wells and Walker, and these may have contributed to the failure of the latter two writers to refer to Del Mar. With regard to the economics community in general (including Wells, Walker, and George), several other observations are in order. First, at no single decisive point in his voluminous publications did Del Mar provide a cohesive and systematic exposition of the interconnection among his varied contributions to monetary economics. Second, Del Mar occasionally hurled invectives at the establishment. Consider the following excerpt from Money and Civilization Such invectives would not have endeared him to the academic community. The preceding discussion focuses on the first reason why Del Mar was excluded from recognition when he wrote, which is that he expressed dissenting views, and was not always polite in criticizing the establishment. We would be remiss not to confront and explore a second reason. Del Mar was a Jew, and moreover, he was unashamedly and openly so. His writings include descriptions of the maltreatment of Jews (and other ethnic groups) throughout history. Consider, for example, his Numerous similar passages in If, Del Mar were excluded from the US academic community because of prejudice based on his ethnic background, the exclusion would not have been a special case. As Walker, who was the first president of the American Economic Association, is on record as expressing racial prejudice. Walker became more conservative in his later years Walker believed that immigrants replaced the native population: “immigrants of the former time [who] came almost exclusively from western or northern Europe” Walker identified these “degraded” people as “the immigrants from southern Italy, Hungary, Austria, and Russia” Given the sensitivity of the subject matter of our discussion, some observations are in order. First, Walker's bigoted attitudes against Russian Jews and other ethnic groups paralleled views of Jews who had emigrated to the United States from western Europe towards Jewish immigrants from eastern European, who had less secular education and tended more to adhere to Jewish traditions. Second, it also does not necessarily follow that the prejudice expressed by Walker carried over to his decision not to ignore Del Mar's intellectual contributions. His decision may have been entirely due to professional and personal differences. We now address these issues. As noted above, the source of Walker's commentary on Russian Jews was an 1896 article “Restriction of Immigration.” The 1896 date of publication is crucial in light of a symposium on Russian Jews that had appeared 5 years earlier, in 1891, in Geffcken, who taught international law at the University of Strasbourg, contributed the first article, titled “Russian Finance: A Bad Investment.” Although Geffcken came out again US official loans to the Russian government on the ground that they would not be paid back, he was nevertheless sympathetic to the plight of Russian Jews. He wrote of The second article in the symposium was by Hourwitch and was titled “The Persecution of the Jews.” The biographical notes accompanying the symposium indicate that Hourwitch was a Russian Jew who had been admitted to the Russian bar, but had subsequently avoided political exile to Siberia by escaping to the United States. His article was an historical account of the origins of laws in various European states, including France, Lithuania, and Poland, which discriminated against Jews. By demonstrating how Jews were historically the subject of discrimination in these European states, Hourwitch sought to show the origins of anti-Semitism in late 19th century Russia. Thus, while his article dealt directly with the plight of Russian Jews, Hourwitch connected that plight with the situation facing Jews in European countries. Regarding conditions confronting Russian Jews, he noted: The third article in the symposium was by Baron De Hirsch, identified in the biographical notes as a “Hebrew philanthropist [who] has given large sums for the relief of his co-religionists in Russia, including $2,400,000 known as the Baron De Hirsch fund, for the benefit of Russian Hebrew immigrants to this country” As noted above, the symposium consisted of four articles, with three of the authors—Geffcken, Hourwitch, and De Hirsch—sympathetic to allowing Russian Jews into the United States. The fourth and final article opposed immigration. Its author was none other than Walker. In his article titled “Immigration and Degradation,” Walker argued strenuously against allowing “the utterest failures of civilization, the worst defects in the struggle for existence, the lowest degradation of human nature, into the United States” We have addressed Walker's prejudice and bigotry and demonstrated that Walker was aware that his remarks about Russian Jews were part of the broader context of anti-Semitism. It does not necessarily follow, however, that Walker's prejudices underlay his exclusion of Del Mar's intellectual contributions. It is one thing to establish attitudes; it is another matter to prove that attitudes translate into behavior. To examine the anti-Semitic issue further, we studied the faculty appointments at MIT during Walker's tenure as president of that institution in order to estimate the number of Jewish faculty appointments. The MIT faculty and staff register contains the following entry: “Brandeis, Louis D., Economics, 1892–1894.” The name Louis D. Brandeis is that of the famous US Supreme Court Justice who was from Boston. We were able to confirm, using biographical sources A second example of our procedure of identification by name is Otto Heller, who was in the Department of Modern Languages in 1892–1894. Otto Heller was listed in Our investigation of MIT faculty and staff appointments yielded the following results. During the period 1881–98 there were 290 faculty and staff appointments at MIT. The case of Louis D. Brandeis aside, there were eight appointees who conceivably could have by their names been Jewish. The profession has been almost completely silent with respect to Del Mar. With the exception of an anthology edited by Yet Del Mar's contributions foreshadowed twentieth century monetary economics in a number of important areas. His views that (1) the essence of money is to measure value, (2) a money economy is distinguishable from a barter economy once a numeraire comes into existence, and (3) money is that which the state declares to be money, are strikingly similar to the views of Keynes, and foreshadow thinking by Meltzer, Tobin, and others. Del Mar's emphasis on the information role of money was an unmistakable anticipation of the information problem in economics developed by Brunner and Meltzer. Del Mar's precession of prices was a 19th century anticipation of the broad monetary transmission processes developed by Friedman, Brunner and Meltzer, Tobin, and others. His business cycle analysis was in many respects similar to Fishers' analysis. His view of long-run monetary neutrality and his conception of a short-run dynamic monetary adjustment process during which money is non-neutral correspond to current mainstream analysis. Del Mar's “cardinal principal” of monetary policy, namely that the price level should be kept stable so that intertemporal exchange can take place “upon a more or less assured and enduring basis”, was a century ahead of its time. His money supply growth-rate rule was the first numerical exposition of the rule commonly identified with Friedman and others, and Del Mar's quantitative estimate of the annual growth rate of the money supply required to maintain price-level stability was right on the mark. Although Del Mar's intellectual contributions were prescient and profound, he has been denied his deserved place in the history of economic thought. The evidence shows that the contemporary arbiters and judges of intellectual merit were aware of Del Mar and his writings but that Del Mar was nonetheless excluded from contemporary reference and recognition. We have considered two explanations for the intellectual exclusion of Del Mar. The first is based on Del Mar's opposition to the views of the leaders of the profession, and also in the case of Henry George on the reluctance to acknowledge the writings of the author whose ideas have been plagiarized. The second explanation rests on prejudice and bigotry. While Del Mar's expressions of opposition to the mainstream views often used exotic language and could be blunt, we might doubt that the means of expression would be a reason for exclusion (or might rather be a response to the exclusion). This paper has gone some way to unearth the underlying issues and enigmas. We have benefited from helpful comments by Warren Young, Mauro Boianovsky, Max Corden, William Darity Jr., Milton Friedman, Lawrence Klein, Alan Meltzer, Bob Mundell, Paul Samuelson, Robert Solow, Meike Werner, and John Whitaker. Special thanks are due to Elizabeth Andrews, the Archivist at MIT, for her help in leading us through the intricacies of the names of MIT faculty and staff. The views expressed are the authors' own and do not necessarily reflect those of their respective institutions.