Three-dimensional discrete element method (DEM) simulations were developed for the Mars Exploration Rover (MER) mission to investigate: (1) rover wheel interactions with martian regolith; and (2) regolith deformation in a geotechnical triaxial strength cell (GTSC). These DEM models were developed to improve interpretations of laboratory and in situ rover data, and can simulate complicated regolith conditions. A DEM simulation was created of a laboratory experiment that involved a MER wheel digging into lunar regolith simulant. Sinkage and torques measured in the experiment were compared with those predicted numerically using simulated particles of increasing shape complexity (spheres, ellipsoids, and poly-ellipsoids). GTSC simulations, using the same model regolith used in the MER simulations, indicate a peak friction angle of approximately 37–38° compared to internal friction angles of 36.5–37.7° determined from the wheel digging experiments. Density of the DEM regolith was 1820kg/m3 compared to 1660kg/m3 for the lunar simulant used in the wheel digging experiment indicating that the number of grain contacts and grain contact resistance determined bulk strength in the DEM simulations, not density. An improved correspondence of DEM and actual test regolith densities is needed to simulate the evolution of regolith properties as density changes.In situ characterization of lunar and martian regolith physical and mechanical properties has provided information about the history of surface changes and regolith geotechnical properties since the first Surveyor series of robotic lunar landers. Regolith can record the most recent history of physical and chemical processes modifying an extraterrestrial surface. On the Moon, lunar regolith right at the surface reflects the most recent effects of a complex suite of processes associated with meteorite impacts, including comminution of debris, and deposition of agglutinates, impact melt, and impactor fragments. On Mars, regolith mechanical properties (e.g., bearing strength) sampled by landers and traversed by rovers exhibit values that range from materials similar to regolith found on lunar intercrater plains in cratered terrain, but ranging from very weak loose sandy material to regolith with significant load-bearing crusts We developed a three-dimensional computer simulation of a MER wheel interacting with regolith using the discrete element method (DEM) in order to improve interpretations of rover wheel interactions with martian regolith during the MER mission. These numerical experiments incorporate the essential morphological characteristics of the MER rover wheel and also allow variation of grain-scale regolith properties such as grain size, shape and interparticle friction. In addition, the effects of reduced gravity can be explored (challenging to do in terrestrial laboratory experiments) as well as specific regolith conditions such as compaction, and layering of regolith with different properties. We also developed a geotechnical triaxial strength cell (GTSC) DEM model to relate grain-scale regolith properties derived from DEM wheel digging simulations to more commonly used bulk strength properties (such as internal friction, and density as a function of regolith deformation). Actual GTSC laboratory experiments are modeled by applying confining pressure to the outer surface of a cylindrical regolith sample and then applying a constant rate of displacement, or load, to the cylindrical ends to produce deformation/load curves for several different confinement pressures The ability to simulate both machine/regolith interactions and GTSC experiments provides powerful tools for predicting bulk regolith mechanical properties, or predicting machine performance in regolith by using known regolith properties from actual GTSC test results. For example, by combining the results of DEM simulations of MER wheel digging tests with GTSC DEM simulations, improved estimates of martian bulk regolith properties can be made. Conversely, data from actual bulk regolith GTSC measurements can be used to define the regolith properties used in DEM simulations of machine/regolith interactions for purposes of design, predicting machine performance, and mission mobility analysis. A flow chart of how regolith property measurements are combined with DEM simulations to determine bulk and DEM grain-to-grain regolith parameters is shown in The process shown in In situ studies of martian surface physical properties (such as grain characteristics, cohesion, bulk density, adhesion, grain size, and angle of internal friction) began with the landings of the Viking spacecraft in 1976 Specialized instruments designed to measure regolith properties (such as density, strength, and deformation response to load) have not been deployed on Mars missions due to mass and power constraints guided by other exploration priorities. Instead, procedures with available spaceflight hardware, such as wheels or arm-mounted scoops, have been developed to estimate forces and torques associated with pushing or digging activities We use a discrete element approach to model the regolith grains, the MER rover wheel and the GTSC. In a DEM model, individual grains and the forces between them are modeled explicitly. Each particle is defined by its shape, size, position, velocity and orientation at all times in the simulation. Most large-scale DEM simulations use spherical grains for efficiency, however, spheres poorly represent the irregular grains found in most regolith. The chief drawbacks to spherical grains are their inability to interlock and that they are free to rotate without dilating the surrounding regolith. More realistic alternatives may be the use of poly-ellipsoidal grain shapes Discovery of contact between particle surfaces is an important, and computationally intensive, component of DEM simulations. The contact detection algorithm for ellipsoids A Hertzian contact force model, similar to the one used by Lin and Ng Coulombic frictional forces act between each grain pair. For the loading part the frictional contact force, The tangential force is also damped. Once the frictional force reaches the Coulomb limit sliding begins. For the sliding part of the friction model the following limit is applied to After the contact and body forces on each regolith particle are found, the equations of motion are solved for new particle positions and velocities and time advanced one step. The equations that define translational and rotational motion are standard central difference equations. The matrix that defines the orientation of each particle and the wheel is calculated from quaternions using the approach of Evans and Murad The simulations are compared with physical experiments performed at Cornell University The DEM MER wheel shown in Three types of model regolith were used in the simulations: uniform spherical particles; a bimodal size distribution of ellipsoids; and uniformly sized poly-ellipsoids ( The regolith sample was constructed by dropping particles into a 100 As the wheel rotates, the cleats, and especially the MER wheel attachment point, excavate the regolith beneath the wheel. The torque on the wheel depends on the depth of the excavation so it tends to increase with sinkage. The simulation results show that the model regolith composed of spherical particles had a much higher excavation rate leading to greater sinkage and higher torque ( After comparing the simulation to the physical experiments, further simulations using spherical particles at lunar and Mars gravity were run and the results compared to those obtained at Earth gravity. The torque (after 5 The DEM simulation of the GTSC is shown in Through axial compression at a strain rate of −0.02 The principal stresses ( The 37–38° peak friction angle found here, for a bulk density of 1820 The similar internal friction angles determined from experimental wheel digging tests and simulation of those tests, even though the density of material for the two tests was different, is due to the nature of how regolith bulk strength depends on grain-scale interactions. The bulk strength of regolith is the result of the ability of grains to interlock, the resistance to displacement between grains that are in contact caused by grain-to-grain friction or cohesion, and the number of grains in contact with each other. For a given DEM simulation, DEM parameters that include particle shape (grain interlocking), particle contact mechanics (contact resistance to displacement), and particle size (number of contacts per grain) can be adjusted to optimize simulation accuracy. This can be done at any density, which is why the DEM simulation of the wheel digging experiment can provide accurate results using a different density DEM regolith compared to the actual regolith simulant. To simulate the evolution of regolith properties as the regolith is compacted requires that we also develop the correct DEM regolith densities to further constrain DEM parameters. This will require further investigation. In particular, a variety of densities should be simulated to see if we capture the range, if not the exact values. Another area to explore would be the effect of the particle shape and whether more extreme poly-ellipsoids, or polyhedra, better represent the actual JSC-1a triaxial results. A three-dimensional computer simulation of the MER wheel interacting with regolith was developed using the discrete element method (DEM), to improve interpretations of rover wheel interactions with martian regolith during the MER mission. The rover vehicles that landed on Mars, though not designed to do more than transport cameras and instruments over a wide area, have been able to complete some basic tests that allow us to attempt to infer martian regolith properties In this work, the DEM rover wheel digging simulation using poly-ellipsoid particles agreed well, in torque and sinkage measurements, with laboratory experiments using an actual MER wheel and lunar simulant JSC-1a. Additional simulations were done on spherical particles under the influence of martian and lunar gravity that confirmed the deviation from the linearity scaling of torque with gravity occurs at Earth gravity and is consistent with results from Muthuswamy and Tordesillas The GTSC simulations using the regolith sample with the best fit between the rover wheel simulation and experiment produced an internal friction value of, 38°, only 1° higher than estimated values in the wheel digging tests which had a lower density. Actual triaxial tests, completed on JSC-1a samples of similar density to that tested in the GTSC DEM simulation, have reported peak internal friction angles approximately 10° greater than simulation results. The good agreement of internal friction between simulation and measurement for the digging experiments, though test and DEM regolith densities differ, implies that the number of grain contacts and grain contact resistance determined bulk strength in the DEM simulations, not density. In situations, where regolith compaction is important, then the ability to match internal friction at a specific density using DEM regolith will become important. This may be possible by using more radical particle shapes, such as polyhedra, and devising ways to control initial DEM regolith density. This is the focus of ongoing work. This work was supported by the NASA Lunar Science Institute supported project “Scientific Exploration Potential of the Lunar Poles”, NASA’s Kennedy Space Center Technology Development project “Lunar regolith mechanical properties, the NASA’s Mars Fundamental Research Program project “The relationship between the physical and mechanical properties of Mars soils and their simulation”, and the NASA Mars Exploration Rover Program-NNH05ZDA001N-MERPS project “Physical and geologic Investigations of the surface materials along the MER traverses.