Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) is a useful method for characterizing fuels. In the past it has been applied to the study of refuse derived fuel (RDF) and related materials. However, the heterogeneity of RDF makes the preparation of small representative samples very difficult and this difficulty has limited the effectiveness of TGA for characterization of RDF. A TGA method was applied to a variety of materials prepared from a commercially available RDF using a variety of procedures. Applicability of TGA method to the determination of the renewable content of RDF was considered. Cryogenic ball milling was found to be an effective means of preparing RDF samples for TGA. When combined with an effective sample preparation, TGA could be used as an alternative method for assessing the renewable content of RDF.Refuse derived fuel (RDF) is solid fuel manufactured from mixed waste streams. The purpose of RDF is to divert material from landfills. Municipal solid waste (MSW) and solid recovered fuel (SRF) are related terms. MSW refers to solid waste materials collected by municipal waste management services, which are more or less mixed upon collection. RDF is manufactured from MSW by application of a combination of processes ( Energy may be recovered from MSW by directly combusting the material using established technologies such as a grate furnace. This practice is problematic because valuable materials escape recovery and because MSW may contain high concentrations of materials which foul and corrode process equipment ( In addition to reducing the amount of material entering landfills, the production of RDF may reduce the overall production of greenhouse gases by displacing conventional fossil fuels. The extent to which use of RDF reduces overall emissions of greenhouse gases depends heavily on what fraction of the fuel is composed of petroleum derived materials ( When a dry RDF sample is subjected to a temperature ramp under a flow of inert gas two major mass loss steps are evident. The first of these steps is attributed to cellulosic materials and generally finishes at a temperature lower than 400     Selective dissolution works by decomposing the biogenic fraction of RDF in a solution of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide then filtering the solution to obtain the fossil fraction ( Small, milligram scale, samples are employed for TGA. Elder considered small sample sizes to be an advantage when the sample availability is limited ( TGA has been widely employed for the analysis of RDF and MSW since the proximate analysis technique of Argawal was presented. When TGA is performed on RDF or MSW the focus is usually the determination of kinetic parameters. In some works, samples were ground to 100 mesh and mixed overnight on a rotating riffler ( Despite acknowledged problems with the heterogeneity of RDF and MSW, repeatability is not usually addressed and most procedures seem to be substantially un-validated. When repeatability is addressed, it is usually addressed without reference to variance or standard deviation. Average results from three ( Any application of TGA to the analysis of RDF or MSW requires the production of fine representative samples. To better understand the effect of sample preparation on TGA of RDF and MSW, in this work a method adapted from Refuse derived fuel pellets were obtained from WastAway®. The fuel is produced from MSW by a series of shredding and sorting processes followed by hygienization under steam pressure. After hygienization, the RDF is dried and formed into 16 The RDF pellets were prepared for the TGA analysis in several different ways. The comminution techniques included knife milling with sieving, rotary grinding with sieving, and cryo-milling. Materials termed Coarse, Medium, and Fine were produced by knife milling a specimen of RDF pellets, splitting the milled material by coning and quartering and sieving the smaller sub-sample with a 1.7 Rotary grinding and sieving was used to produce a material termed 300UM, for 300 A Retsch™ CryoMill was used to produce materials termed RCM1, RCM2, and RCM3, from three individual fuel pellets. The mill works by shaking the sample and a 20 Materials termed RS1, RS2, and RS3, for representative sample, were produced by representative sampling of the whole lot of RDF. The 1045 Analyses were performed fifteen times to ensure the reliability of measured standard deviations. Assuming that errors in the average determinations are normally distributed it is possible to calculate a confidence interval on the measured standard deviations, since, in that case, the square of the standard deviation follows a chi squared distribution. For fifteen determinations the upper limit of a 99% confidence interval on the measured standard deviation is 1.85 times the measured standard deviation. TGA experiments were performed on 10 Extrapolated onset and endset temperatures were determined for the mass loss processes observed during the ramp stage of the TGA program to aid in determining temperature intervals for the proximate analysis. To find the onset and endset points for a mass loss process, a tangent line is drawn at the point in the TGA curve where the rate of mass loss reaches a maximum. The onset temperature is the temperature where the tangent line crosses the TGA baseline prior to the mass loss step and the endset temperature is the temperature at the point where the tangent line crosses the baseline after the mass loss step. An average TGA curve representing the results of the 45 determinations made on the RS materials was used for determination of the onset and endset temperatures. Three mass loss steps are evident in the curve ( At the beginning of the TGA curve the baseline was assumed to have a slope of zero. The baseline between the first and second mass loss steps was tangent to the mass loss curve at 376.5 Onset and endset temperatures were used for determination of the mass loss intervals during the temperature ramp. As shown in Mass losses occurring during the first isothermal stage were termed primary moisture content. Mass losses occurring in the first four minutes of the ramp were termed secondary moisture content. The sample mass four minutes into the ramp at a temperature of 180 Twelve materials prepared by various methods were examined by TGA with results presented in The standard deviations and relative standard errors provide measures of the repeatability of the determinations made on the different materials. Leaving aside the moisture content, the samples which were milled cryogenically had the lowest standard deviations and relative standard errors. The Coarse, Medium, and 300UM samples had much higher standard deviations and relative standard errors than the cryogenically milled samples. The 80UM and Retained materials, made using an ultra-centrifugal, and the Fine material yielded determinations with moderate standard deviations and relative standard errors ( The results from the RS1, RS2, and RS3 materials were averaged providing an estimate of the composition of the parent material ( As can be seen in The ratio of the fixed carbon determination to the cellulosic determination was not constant for the different materials ( If it is assumed that the fraction of material determined as cellulosic by TGA is an accurate representation of the biogenic fraction of the RDF and the material determined as plastic by TGA is an accurate representation of the fossil fraction of the RDF then the TGA method may be used to approximate the renewable content of RDF. Renewable content is typically expressed on either a mass of carbon or an energy basis. Translating the TGA data into either of these bases requires assumptions about the carbon and energy contents of the biogenic and fossil fractions of RDF. These assumptions are also required by other methods such as the selective dissolution method or methods based on elementary analysis. To translate the results of the TGA analysis into a measure of renewable content, it has been assumed that the biogenic fraction has a heating value of 20 The ratio of biogenic heating value to fossil heating value, 0.53, is very similar to the ratio of biogenic carbon mass fraction to fossil carbon mass fraction, 0.62, so the two bases provide similar results. There is a difference of 30% between the materials with the highest and lowest renewable content ( Results from the analysis of the Coarse, Medium and Fine samples clearly illustrate the influence that grinding and sieving had on the composition of the RDF. The Coarse material had the greatest plastic content of the sieved fractions while the Fine material had the lowest plastic content ( The Medium material had the smallest mass of the three sieved fractions. Most material was either retained on the 1.7 The average composition of the 300UM material closely resembles the average composition of the Fine material ( The appearance of the 300UM material was very similar to that of the Fine material. Both were composed of matted fibers. Closer examination of the 300UM material revealed the presence of a layer of non-fibrous material hidden under the matted fiber. The Fine material did not appear to contain such a layer. This stratification may explain the high standard deviations associated with analysis of the 300UM material since the results of any individual experiment would depend heavily on how the 10 The composition of the 80UM material was very close to the estimated composition of the parent material ( The RCM1, RCM2, and RCM3 materials had compositions which were very close to the estimated composition of the parent material. Analysis of these materials yielded very small standard deviations and relative standard errors. The greatest uncertainties, leaving aside moisture content, were in the ash content of the samples. The average of the RCM1, RCM2, and RCM3 materials was similar to the average of the RS1, RS2, and RS3 materials which was used to estimate the composition of the parent material ( Standard deviations for the averages of results on the RCM materials were not much different from those for the RS material ( For the TGA determinations to be of any use it must be possible to distinguish between materials which have different average compositions with a reasonable measure of certainty. High standard deviations make comparison between average results quite uncertain. Uncertainty may be addressed by averaging the results of a greater number of determinations or it may be addressed by increasing the sample size. The number of determinations required to exclude a 5% average difference in cellulosic content from a 95% confidence interval was calculated for each of the materials ( It is well known that variances associated with determinations made on particulate samples are inversely proportional to sample mass. The idea is encapsulated in Gy’s formula for the fundamental sampling error ( The Coarse, Medium, and 300UM materials are not appropriate for TGA. The uncertainty in the results from these materials is so great that the average determinations could only be of use if a very large number of determinations were made or if the sample sizes were increased to a size that would be inappropriate for most TGA equipment. The Fine, Retained, and 80UM samples might be appropriate for TGA analysis. These materials were all produced using sieves or screens so it is likely that their compositions were altered during sample preparation, so while reasonably significant results might be obtainable they would only apply to the composition of the prepared material rather than the parent material. Results from the Coarse, Medium, and Fine materials and results from the 80UM and Retained materials indicate that sieves and screens are capable of causing large changes in the composition of RDF ( Very fine samples are required for repeatability. The 300UM material was not fine enough to admit reasonable analysis. Matting of fibers in the sample seemed to cause stratification which inhibited TGA analysis. The 80UM material provided much better results. Unfortunately the ultra-centrifugal mill used to produce to 80UM material relies on a screen. Plastic materials appear to be held up behind the screen which means that the composition of the 80UM material was changed by the ultra-centrifugal milling. The issue could be addressed by passing a greater quantity of material through the mill, so that the proportion of sample mass held up in the mill becomes insignificant, but the screen becomes clogged very quickly. In practice only about two grams of material could be milled before the screen needed to be removed and cleaned. Mills equipped with cyclones have been recommended as a means of fine grinding RDF without resorting to cryogenic milling ( Cryogenic ball milling was found to provide repeatable results. The cryogenic temperatures achieved during the grinding process allow for extremely fine grinding of all the materials in the RDF. The process does not make use of sieves and screens and recoveries are very high ( The ability of TGA to distinguish between cellulosic and petroleum derived materials is long standing and generally accepted. A TGA method could be used to provide a measure of the renewable content of RDF by dividing the combustible fraction of the fuel into cellulosic and petroleum derived materials. The apparent renewable content could then be reported on energy or a carbon basis by making assumptions about the energy or carbon content of the cellulosic and plastic fractions. The indirectness of the TGA method compared to TGA is a much more accessible analysis method than Though the ability of TGA to distinguish between the biogenic and fossil derived fractions of RDF is generally accepted more effort would have to be applied to the validation of the method before it could be accepted as a standardized method. Funding for this work was provided in part by the Program for Energy R&D (PERD) Bio-Energy Science and Technology (BEST) project “Combined Heat and Power for Northern and Remote Communities”. In addition, the financial assistance from the