Maize stover was ozonolyzed to improve the enzymatic digestibility. The interactive effect of sample particle size and moisture content on ozonolysis was studied. After ozonolysis, both lignin and xylan decreased while cellulose was only slightly affected in all experiments. It was also found that the smaller particle size is better for ozonolysis. The similar water activity of the different optimum moisture contents for ozonolysis reveals that the free and bound water ratio is a key factor of ozonolysis. The best result of ozonolysis was obtained at the mesh of −300 and the moisture of 60%, where up to 75% lignin was removed. The glucose yield after enzymatic hydrolysis increased from 18.5% to 80%. Water washing had low impact on glucose yield (less than 10% increases), but significantly reduced xylose yield (up to 42% decreases). The result indicates that ozonolysis leads to xylan solubilization.In recent years, biorefinery technologies have attracted significant attention due to the worldwide growing problems including oil shortage, pollution and excessive population. Unlike the first generation biofuel made of cereals, the second generation biofuel made from lignocellulosic materials has greater environmental benefits and sustainability ( Maize is one of the world’s widest planted crops. It has also become the largest crop in China since 2012. Compared to other types of lignocellulosic material, maize stover has low lignification and high carbohydrate content making it an abundant and valuable agricultural residue. However, maize stover is currently underexploited. In China, only less than 10% of maize stover get in the pathway of high added-value processing while almost 40% is left in the field or burned, causing severe waste and pollution. Other crop straws are dealt with the same way. The Chinese government had taken measures to change this situation. According to the document ( However, there are several limits that challenge biorefinery industrialization. The most crucial one is the low efficiency of enzymatic hydrolysis of structural polysaccharide. Several factors have been proven to account for this, including particle size, cellulose crystallinity, degree of polymerization, and lignin content ( Various pretreatment technologies have been investigated, including physical, chemical and biological approaches ( Comminution is an essential step before other processes. It aims to increase the specific surface area and reduce the bulk volume. Studies have shown that individual application of comminution in a specific range of meshes hardly improves hydrolysis ( In this study, the interactive effect of sample moisture content and particle size on ozonolysis of maize stover was investigated from the perspectives of reaction dynamics, compositional variation and hydrolysis yield. A series of samples with a wide range of particle sizes and moisture contents were ozonolyzed in a fixed bed reactor under fixed conditions. The untreated sample (raw) and completely delignified sample (CDL) were set as blank control and positive control, respectively. To each experimental test, the breakthrough ozone concentration versus reaction time was measured, which revealed a dynamic profile of the ozonolysis reaction. The major components, such as lignin and structural carbohydrates, and enzymatic hydrolysis yield were analyzed to monitor the impact of ozone oxidation on samples. Water activity ( Maize stover was collected in Liaoning province, China. It was sundried and stored at 4 Complete delignified samples (CDL) were prepared using 20/40, 80/150 and −300 raw samples. Acid chlorite was used to remove lignin in the raw samples ( The ozonolysis reaction was performed in a glass column reactor (6 The samples of 20/40, 80/150 and −300 was used in the treatment. Each of the samples was adjusted to the moisture contents of 30%, 45%, 60% and 75% by adding distilled water before ozonolysis. The reactor was loaded with 10 The moisture content was measured by a moisture analyzer (Ohaus MB23). The water extractives were determined by gravimetric analysis before and after water wash. After water wash, insoluble components such as cellulose, xylan and lignin were determined following the NREL LAP “Determination of Structural Carbohydrates and Lignin in Biomass” ( Enzymatic hydrolysis was performed on both raw and pretreated maize stover, with or without washing, to verify the differences of enzymatic degradation. The hydrolysis was performed in 20 The water activity of all samples under adjusted moistures before ozonolysis was measured by a water activity meter (GBX Fat-lab). The sample bed for ozonolysis contains certain amount of water, which forms water films on the surface of the sample particles. The gaseous ozone flows through the pore channels while part of the gaseous ozone transfers into the water films through the gas–water interface. Ozone decomposition may occurs in water phase, however, the decomposition rate is very low compared to the direct reaction of ozone with organic matters when pH For the reaction control stage, Eq. Eq. The ozonolysis process of the whole bed can be regarded as countless differential longitudinal sections that undergo the above-mentioned process and are stacked in series. -Based on this presumption, the model was theoretically deduced to describe the distribution of ozone concentration and consumption along with the bed height. The bed is cylindrical. Its upward axial direction was set as The ozone mass inflow and outflow rates of the control volume are The expression is a first-order linear partial differential equation. After solving it by the characteristics method, the results is: Since exp( Consumed ozone concentration ( From the above, As previously discussed, exp( Compositional analysis was performed on each ozonolysis samples to determine how ozonolysis impacted on the compositions ( To clearly reveal the relation between the extent of ozonolysis and lignin/xylan variation, three parameters were defined. The first one is ozone consumption, which is calculated by dividing total ozone consumption (obtained through integration of curves in Section For samples with different particle size, the optimum moisture contents of ozone consumption were not the same. Specifically, the optimum moisture content for delignification rate was 60% for −300 samples and 45% for others. This fact indicates that moisture and particle size have an interactive effect on ozonolysis. For samples of different particle sizes but at the same moisture content, the state of water may be different. The water in samples can be divided into two groups: the bound water and free water ( With the composition results of all the tests, the relation between ozone consumption (OC) and lignin/xylan variation was investigated. Here, the amount (grams) of lignin and xylan decreased during ozonolysis was used, as lignin removal amount (LRA) and xylan removal amount (XRA), to evaluate their change. It was found that samples with their Enzymatic hydrolysis was performed on all ozonolysis samples, before and after water washing, raw samples and complete delignified samples (CDL) of the three particle sizes (20/40, 80/150 and −300). The hydrolysates were analyzed by HPLC to determine the amount of glucose and xylose. The glucose or xylose yield was calculated as a ratio of the amount of glucan or xylan that hydrolyzed into monomers to the original amount of glucan or xylan presented in the samples. CDL was obtained by treating the raw samples with sodium chlorite solution overnight. The treatment caused complete delignification while the structural carbohydrates were slightly affected. Since these effects improve the enzymatic hydrolysis greatly, CDL is the goal to be achieved through ozonolysis in this research. The sugar yields of raw and CDL after hydrolysis were used as controls. The ozonolysis samples were divided into three groups by their particle size. In each groups, the samples got different DLR through ozonolysis under different moisture contents. The relationship between glucose yield and DLR in each group was shown in This study shows that both particle size and moisture have significant effects on the ozonolysis process, specifically on the ozone transfer rate and reaction extent. The interactive effect of particle size and moisture reveals that the free and bound water ratio is a key factor of ozonolysis. The optimum water activity and particle size is about 0.775 and −300, respectively. The removed lignin and xylan both linearly correlate with ozone consumption. The compositional analysis and enzymatic hydrolysis shows that glucose yield positively correlates with delignification rate in an almost linear manner. This work was funded by the