The regrinding of some streams within flotation circuits, to liberate valuable mineral attached to gangue, is a common practice. However, the methodologies proposed for flotation circuit design based on optimization, usually, do not consider regrinding. This work analyzes the effect of the uncertainty in flotation and regrinding stages on the design of flotation circuits via mathematical optimization. We postulate that there are few optimal circuit structures when regrinding is included in the design problem under uncertainty. Two methods of proof are used to confirm the postulated hypothesis: proof by construction and proof by exhaustion. Results obtained allow us to confirm the hypothesis, which allows separating the design of the flotation circuits into two steps. First, a set of optimal structures are determined. Second, the equipment design parameters and operating conditions are determined through simulation and laboratory tests.Although flotation dates back more than 140 years since the first patent in 1877 ( The superstructure of processes should represent all possible process alternatives for which evaluation is required. A superstructure includes the type and number of flotation stages in the process, the possibility of regrinding stages, the interconnections of these stages, and the technologies (e.g., the use of cells or columns). Defining a good superstructure is important since it outlines the number of alternatives and, with this information, the size of the problem to be solved (   Although the design of flotation circuits has been studied since the mid-1970s, the possibility of including regrind circuits has been rarely addressed ( There are models based on size reduction phenomena to describe the grinding operation; however, they are of little help for predicting the liberation in regrinding mills. As it is well known, particle liberation plays a critical role in flotation processes as proven by several studies, for example by comparison of kinetic parameters for liberated or locked particles ( The hypothesis postulated is that few structures exist that are optimal for a wide range of values in the performance of the process units. The performance of process units is given by the recoveries for flotation stages and “conversion” from one particle class to another particle class in regrinding units. The uncertainty analysis corresponds to quantifying the variability of the output as a result of the variability of inputs. Uncertainty can be divided into stochastic and epistemic ( To demonstrate that there are few optimal structures when there is uncertainty in process units, an a priori approach or first principles are used. Two methods of proof are used: proof by construction and proof by exhaustion (see For representing the set of circuit alternatives a superstructure of flotation stages and regrinding units is used. For the development of the mathematical model, a mixer is used at the feed of each flotation stage and regrinding unit. A splitter is used for the concentrate and tail of each flotation unit. Also, a splitter is used for the output stream from the regrinding units. These mixers and splitters allow the interconnection between the flotation stages and regrinding units. The mathematical model is based on mass balances in mixers and splitters. This type of representation of circuit alternatives is a common approach in the literature ( Each flotation stage is modeled using the recovery as a known value. This latter is determined by sampling, via the Monte Carlo method, the uniform distribution function representing the recovery for a specific species in a specific flotation stage. Similarly, each regrinding unit is modeled using conversion fractions determined by sampling the uniform distribution representing the conversion fraction for a specific size in a specific regrinding unit. The objective function is represented by the profit maximization ( This example considers the concentration of copper ore. Nine species were considered to represent the ore, including three components (9 t/h of chalcopyrite (CPY) with 33% of copper, 12 t/h of mixed mineral (MIX) with 17% of copper, and 350 t/h of gangue (SC)) and three particle sizes (f1, f2 and f3). Therefore, the nine species are the combination of components and sizes; for example, species CPY.f1 is chalcopyrite of size f1. The superstructure considers three flotation stages and one regrinding unit, representing twelve alternatives for the process structure. These twelve process structure alternatives include six circuit structures without regrinding units. The recovery in flotation stages and conversion in regrinding units were represented by uniform distribution functions. The values are shown in The design problem was coded in GAMS, which is a high-level modeling system for mathematical programming. In this example, three scenarios were studied. The first scenario considers uncertainty both in flotation stages and regrinding units, the second scenario considers only uncertainty in the regrinding, and the third scenario considers only uncertainty in the flotation stages. The code was evaluated 30,000 times for each scenario. In all scenarios, only one optimal structure was obtained, which is shown in An analysis of secondary structures provided by the code indicates that structures using regrinding units provide better metallurgical performance than structures that do not include regrinding units. Evidently, these results are related to the liberation of the valuable mineral by the regrinding unit. This result is correlated to the evidence from plant practice. The optimal structure recirculates the cleaner tail and the scavenger concentrate to the rougher feed, which was expected because this configuration allows reprocessing of particles more times; however, overloading of the flotation circuit may result. In this example, two copper prices were considered, and the characteristics of the design problem are given below. The feed is composed of nine species, including three main components (9 t/h of chalcopyrite with 33% of copper, 23 t/h of mixed mineral with 17% of copper, and 350 t/h of gangue) and three particles sizes. The superstructure considers six flotation stages and two regrinding units: Rougher (R), Cleaner1 (C1), Cleaner2 (C2), Scavenger1 (S1), Scavenger2 (S2), Cleaner-Scavenger (CS), Regrinding1 (Gr1) and Regrinding2 (Gr2). In addition, P represents the final concentrate and W represents the final tail. Similarly to example 1, in this sub-example, three scenarios were studied. The first scenario considers uncertainty both in flotation stages and regrinding stages, the second scenario considers uncertainty in regrinding stages, and the third scenario considers uncertainty in flotation stages. The code was evaluated 30,000 times for each scenario, and results are shown in  Similarly to the previous example, three scenarios were considered in this sub-example, and results are shown in It is important to comment that in all the examples, the postulation of the superstructure and the formulation of the mathematical programming model for the example of a flotation circuit with regrinding was generated using the procedure described by As mentioned earlier, the conclusion is established by dividing the scenario-problem into a finite number of cases and proving each one separately. Here, the performance of operating units and the “conversion” from one particle class to another particle class are represented by uniform distribution functions from which a sample formed by random values is obtained. The optimal design is obtained for all the values in the sample. For each example of proof by construction, three uncertainty scenarios were considered, and each scenario was resolved 30,000 times. In the first scenario, uniform distributions were given to the recovery by stages and regrinding conversions. In the second scenario, uniform distributions were given to the recovery by stages, and regrinding conversions were not varied. Finally, in the third scenario, uniform distributions were given to the regrinding conversions and stage recoveries were not varied. It is important to comment that only, to corroborate the postulated hypothesis, we also considered structures that were not obtained by construction. Results provided by code corroborated that there are few optimal structures for a design problem under uncertainty in flotation and regrinding units. At this point, the following question ir raised: which input variables (flotation stage, recoveries and regrinding conversions) has more effect or is the predominant factor on the profit of the flotation circuit? This question can be answered by global sensitivity analysis (GSA). GSA allows studying how the uncertainty in the output of a mathematical model or system can be distributed to the uncertainty in each input variable over a range of interest. This analysis has already been used in mineral processing, see The flotation circuit structure shown in In In all the examples studied from an economic point of view, it was observed that few structures are optimal for a wide range of values in the performance of the flotation stages and the regrinding conversions. Two methods of proof were used to confirm the postulated hypothesis: proof by construction and proof by exhaustion. Nine examples, including their scenarios, were used in the proof by construction, and a total of 270,000 combinations of flotation stage recoveries and regrinding conversion were utilized in the proof by exhaustion. The effect of copper price was analyzed, and as was expected, the copper price affected the optimal flotation circuit structure. Besides, the GSA was utilized to demonstrate that the uncertainties in flotation stage recoveries had more effect than regrinding conversion uncertainties in profit. This conclusion can allow separating the design of the flotation circuits in two steps. First, a set of optimal flowsheet processes can be identified using uniform distribution functions to represent the unit operation performance and the regrinding conversions. Then, after selecting a set of optimal processes, the equipment design parameters and operating conditions can be defined based on simulation and laboratory tests.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support from