Introduction
                  Displaced middle third clavicle fractures were treated conservatively with figure of ‘8’ harness in the past. Current management trend in treating displaced clavicle fractures with internal fixation provide rigid immobilization and pain relief avoiding non-union, shortening and deformity. This study prospectively evaluates the functional outcome of 25 patients with clavicle fractures treated surgically.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  25 patients with displaced mid third clavicle fractures were included in the study. Open reduction and internal fixation with clavicular locking plate placed superiorly was done. Patients were followed up on 3, 6, 8, and 12 weeks. Functional outcome was assessed using DASH scores and Simple Shoulder Test (SST). Statistical analysis was done using One-way ANOVA.
               
                  Results
                  Out of the 26 clavicles operated (one patient had bilateral fracture), 6 were comminuted (23%) and the rest were 2 part displaced fractures. Interfragmentary screws were used in 3 cases with butterfly fragment. All fractures united (mean = 6.8 weeks). The DASH scores reduced to a significant negligible level by 8 weeks in all but 4 cases with comminution where it took longer than 8 weeks to reach negligible levels. The SST showed significant improvement in all cases by 8 weeks after surgery. All patients were satisfied with the outcome. 84% of patients returned to their work by 6 weeks.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Primary plating of displaced mid third clavicle fractures with superiorly placed locking plate avoids complications of non-operative management and leads to early return to pre injury activities.For years, displaced mid shaft clavicle fractures were treated conservatively with figure of ‘8’ harnesses and sling. In 1960, Neer reported a non-union rate just 0.1% with non-operative treatment and discouraged operative fixation as it resulted in non union and infection. 25 patients with clavicle fractures between June 2010 and July 2012, satisfying the inclusion criteria were included in the study. The inclusion criteria were: closed displaced (≥2 cm) mid third clavicle fracture within a week of trauma, fractures tenting the skin (impending open fracture), and comminuted fractures. Patients with open fractures, pathological fractures, skin abrasions over the fracture segment, fractures more than a week's duration were excluded from the study. All patients were evaluated in the casualty with antero-posterior radiograph of the involved shoulder, after a thorough clinical examination ( All 25 patients were operated under general anaesthesia. Surgery was performed with the patient in beach chair position with a bolster in the interscapular area. The affected extremity was draped free for mobilization. Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis was given with cefaperazone + sulbactum at the time of induction. A longitudinal skin incision was made along the axis of clavicle superiorly. The fracture was exposed after meticulous soft tissue dissection and minimal periosteal stripping. The subcutaneous tissue and the platysma muscle were taken as a single unit. Larger branches of supraclavicular nerve if encountered were preserved. The myofascial layer over the clavicle was elevated as a single flap. Reduction stabilized with 3.5 mm clavicular locking compression plate placed superiorly ( Patients were started on shoulder pendulum exercises on day 1. Antibiotic prophylaxis was continued for 2 days post-operatively and stopped. Wound was inspected on day 4. Patients were discharged on day 4 with the advice of pendulum exercises and to continue arm sling. Review was done on the 3rd post-operative week and patients were examined clinically for fracture tenderness. Arm sling was discontinued and gentle shoulder range of motion exercises started ( Functional outcome was assessed using Quick Disability of the Arm Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scores and the Simple Shoulder Test (SST). Statistical analysis was done using the One-way ANOVA test. Out of 25 patients operated for clavicle fractures, 20 were men (80%) and 5 women (20%), the mean age being 32.5 years (range 20–45 years). The right clavicle was fractured in 18 cases (72%) and the left in 6 cases (24%). One patient had bilateral clavicle fracture. 6 cases were comminuted (23%) and the rest were 2 part displaced fractures (77%). 2 patients had associated rib fractures, 1 patient had metacarpal fracture and 1 had a displaced distal radius fracture on the same side as the clavicle fracture. No patient had any neurovascular impairment or pulmonary injury due to the operative procedure. All cases were fixed with superiorly placed clavicular locking plates. Interfragmentary screws were used in 3 cases with butterfly fragment ( DASH score was assessed at 3, 6, 8, and 12 weeks. The mean DASH score at 3 weeks was 13.37 (range 2.5–50.83). Fractures with comminution and patients with associated injuries had higher scores at 3 weeks. The mean DASH score at 6 weeks was 7.02 (range 3.25–31.5). 21 cases had their scores dropped to 3.25 from their scores at 3 weeks. 4 cases who showed scores >3.25, nevertheless lower than their corresponding scores at 3 weeks. DASH score dropped to a mean 1.85 at 8 weeks (range 0–13.33) and 0 in all patients at 12 weeks ( Except 2 patients, rest were able to lie on the affected side by 3 weeks. The subjective shoulder strength of all patients progressively improved from 3 weeks post-surgery. 21 patients returned to their work by 6 weeks; however 4 manual labourers required 8 weeks to return to their job. None of the patients had shoulder stiffness and none had complaints of shoulder droop post-operatively. All patients were able to wear shoulder straps without difficulty. Good results with excellent union and low complication rates were seen in numerous studies done on primary fixation of clavicle fractures negating the pessimism that surrounded prior studies where a poor understanding of soft tissue handling, selection bias of patients and inadequate implants combined to produce inferior results. Displaced fractures of clavicle can never be treated the same way as undisplaced or minimally displaced fractures for the deforming pull of sternocleidomastoid is too great and that the deformity recurs shortly after figure of eight bandage. Reconstruction plates used for clavicle fixation are low profile and can be contoured to fit the anatomical curves of the clavicle. Though they are successful in speeding the healing by increasing the load sharing across the fracture site, antero-inferior plating is insufficient for fracture fixation as they plastically deformed at a load that could be seen in routine activity. Superiorly placed locked compression plate was found to be biomechanically stable especially in cantilever bending where the plate is loaded in tension and the fracture fragments are compressed. All 25 patients in our study were treated with superiorly placed clavicular locking plates within 3 days of trauma. Most of the fractures in our series were 2 part fractures (76%). No neurovascular injury was encountered during the procedure or in the post-operative period. None of our cases got infected. The union rate was 100% in our study and 76% of the fractures united by 6 weeks. Prominence of plate was seen in one patient due to implant failure. The fracture united with slight malunion in this case. Implant removal was advised but the patient refused. Statistical analysis (One-way ANOVA) showed that there was a significant improvement in the functional outcome of patients treated surgically. The DASH scores reduced to a significant negligible level by 8 weeks in all but 4 cases with comminution where it took longer than 8 weeks to reach negligible levels. The SST showed significant improvement in all cases by 8 weeks after surgery. Cosmetically none had complaints about the scar probably owing to the subcuticular sutures we had used in every case. All patients were satisfied with the outcome. No patient had difficulty carrying back packs and 84% of patients returned to their work by 6 weeks. While there is increased enthusiasm in treating clavicle fractures operatively, it is imperative to remember that most fractures can be treated non-operatively and the paradigm of clavicle fracture management should be individualized to the patient. The functional expectations of each patient and the fracture characteristics should be taken into account for a pragmatic approach to clavicle fracture management. Operative treatment is beneficial to a subset of patients where surgery rapidly restores anatomy and provides stable fixation facilitating early mobilization. Adequate counselling regarding the risks, benefits and results of operative intervention should be discussed with the patient prior to the surgery to help patients make an optimal decision. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. Nil.