The procedure described by Bond (1960) is as follows. The Bond Ball Mill Work Index determination is carried out in a standard test mill and under standard conditions. The test mill has an internal diameter of 305 The ball charge consists of a specified number of balls, weighing approximately 20.1 The circuit being simulated is shown below; A detailed description of the test procedure follows: The dry feed is crushed to -3360 Add the crushed ore, -3.36 Calculate the Ideal Period Product (IPP) assuming a 250% circulating load (the mass of circulating material is 2.5 IPP = M/3.5 Determine the sieve analysis of the feed. Ensure that the test screen size is one of the screens used in the size analysis.  Place the feed charge, M Run the mill for N revolutions where N is between 50 (coarse test screen sizes) and 100 or more (fine test screen sizes) for material of average hardness. At the end of the grind, dump the charge onto a heavy duty screen to separate the balls from the ore. Inspect the mill and ball coatings and remove any if present. Return the balls to the mill. Screen the mill discharge at the test screen size. Weigh and record the total screen oversize, R. Calculate and record the mass of test screen undersize (product), m. Weigh the actual undersize as a check. m = M Calculate the amount of product size material in the feed using the feed sieve analysis and the amount of new feed present in the mill charge at the beginning of the period. amount of product size material in the feed = (1 − r where r Calculate the net grams of product which is the mass of product minus the mass of product size material in the feed. net grams of product = m – (1 – r Calculate the net grams produced per revolution, G, by dividing the net grams of product by the number of revolutions in the period. G = [m – (1 – r Add a representative amount of new feed to the test screen oversize to bring the combined mass up to the mill charge, M. Calculate the mass which should be ground in the next period in order to obtain the desired circulating load. This amount is the ideal period product (step 3) minus the amount of product size material in the mill feed (step 12). mass which should be ground in the next period = IPP – (1 – r Calculate the number of revolutions, N, for the next period. This is the amount of material which should be ground (step 16) divided by the net grams per revolution of the preceding period (step 14). N = r  The net grams per revolution should approach an equilibrium value, where the net grams per revolution becomes constant for at least three periods, or the net grams per revolution shows a reversal in trend. Take an average of the net grams per revolution of the last two or three periods, G Determine the size distribution of the test screen undersize (product). Determine the 80% passing sizes of the product, P Calculate the laboratory Work Index from the following equation: The Bond formula applies specifically to wet, closed-circuit grinding in a ball mill with an internal diameter of 2.44 To relate the calculations to other mills requires the use of a number of empirical efficiency factors. A spreadsheet,