The present work describes studies concerning a new adsorption technique based on the use of adsorbent flocs in an expanded/fluidised bed reactor for the removal of pollutants from aqueous solutions. The technique, based on flocculation of aqueous suspensions of powdered adsorbent materials, when conducted in an expanded/fluidised bed reactor takes advantage of conducting adsorption and solid–liquid separation in one single stage. Studies were performed using flocculated powdered activated carbon and natural zeolites, alone and in mixtures, for phenol and ammonia adsorption. A reactor with cylindrical–conical geometry was used for the pollutants adsorption in flocs beds (pure and mixed), as well as the regeneration/recycle of the exhausted adsorbents. Results proved the high adsorption efficiency of powdered natural zeolites and activated carbon flocs for the uptake of ammonia (11mg NH3–Ng−1) and phenol (132mgg−1), at 38 and 19mh−1 loading rates, respectively. Regeneration/recycle of the pollutant-saturated beds was possible for the ammonia/natural zeolites adsorption case, using sodium sulphate as regenerator. Use of mixed flocs beds was efficient, showing advantages such as multiple-pollutants adsorption in one single stage, higher loading rates when using light materials (activated carbon) combined with heavier ones (natural zeolites) and use of small adsorbent concentrations (not possible otherwise). Economical and environmental issues regarding the technique are also discussed in the paper. The new technique shows great potential as an alternative physicochemical adsorption process for pollutant removal from aqueous solutions using low-cost and highly-available powdered adsorbent materials.Powdered adsorption materials show adsorption properties (capacity and kinetics) similar or greater than their correspondent materials in the granular, coarser form. Yet, its use for the adsorption of aqueous pollutants, is usually performed in batch-runs like continuous stirred tanks (CSTR) which commonly requires further solid–liquid separation stages or simply the adsorbent is wasted ( The new technique consists on the use of water-soluble polymers for the flocculation of aqueous suspensions of powdered adsorbent materials (flocculant molecules act as “bridges” between individual particles; The investigation on new properties and advantages of such use in expanded/fluidised bed reactors is of great importance for the new technique development. In addition, it is also important to study the feasibility of regenerating the spent/saturated flocs bed (and its potential recycling) for a better technical, economical and environmental evaluation of the technique. Besides, this regeneration of the adsorbing flocs would make the technique more competitive for advanced wastewater and water treatment applications. Furthermore, the new technique proposed has potential value to applications in environmental and recovery issues, in particular for the mining and metallurgical industry. Ammonia is a commonly used reagent in hydrometallurgical processes such as leaching ( Activated carbon and natural zeolites are adsorbent materials commonly used for the removal of phenol, one of the greatest industrial organic pollutants, and ammonia (ammoniacal nitrogen), potential pollutant agent and contaminant for industrial water plants, respectively. Moreover, the study of the effects of mixing different adsorbent materials in mixed flocs beds for possible advantages as synergism in multiple-pollutants adsorption and use in a single reactor is of great importance, since little experimental work related is reported in the literature ( Both phenol and ammonia will be referred herein as pollutants and the uptake mechanism of these compounds from aqueous solutions as adsorption. The latter is due to the fact that there is a certain confusion on the limits of adsorption and ionic exchange; the latter being the actual mechanism for the case of ammonia—ammonium ion—uptake by natural zeolites ( Therefore, the main objective of this work is to describe the use of adsorbing polymeric flocs in expanded/fluidised bed reactor looking at the use of mixed flocs and flocs regeneration. The model is the adsorption/desorption of phenol and ammonia in powdered activated carbon and natural zeolites flocs (pure and mixed). A powdered Chilean natural zeolite sample, previously described and characterized by Synthetic ammonia and phenol solutions were prepared with ammonium sulphate ((NH Aqueous solutions (500 Ammonia concentration was determined using a titrimetric method, with preliminary distillation step. Phenol concentration was analysed using a photometer (Merck™ 118) at 500 The particle size distribution of the powdered activated carbon sample was determined (duplicate measurement) using a laser diffraction equipment (CILAS™ 1064). The specific surface area of the material was measured by nitrogen gas adsorption method, using automated equipment (Autosorb 1—Quantachrome Instruments™), employing multipoint BET isotherm data fitting. Zeta potential measurements (duplicate) for the activated carbon, as a function of medium pH, were determined using a Zeta Plus™ equipment (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation). Suspensions (0.01% v/v) of the sample, previously sieved below 37 Specific gravity values for the adsorbent materials, expressed in g Adsorption experiments of the pollutants in powdered adsorbent flocs using an expanded/fluidised bed reactor consisted in the upflow passage of a synthetic pollutant solution (100 The experimental apparatus was composed of two glass–fibres tanks (500 The pollutant solutions (synthetic effluents) were directly prepared in the tanks (addition of proper mass of soluble reagent to tap water) and the mixing was provided by pneumatic aeration. The powdered adsorbent mass ( The total mass of adsorbed pollutant ( Experiments of the simultaneous pollutant adsorption (feed solution with 100 Regeneration studies for the pollutant-saturated beds of adsorbent flocs were done similarly to the adsorption studies above described (breakthrough curves). For the ammonia-natural zeolites case, an upflow of a regenerator feed, made of sodium sulphate solution (3.1 A method of thermal regeneration of the phenol-loaded activated carbon flocs bed was studied. The exhausted bed was filtered after the phenol adsorption experiment with the activated carbon flocs bed (Adsorption 1) and was heated (90–110 Mass-balance calculations were conducted to obtain adsorption and regeneration efficiencies. Adsorption efficiency was defined as the ratio of the amount of adsorbed pollutant and the total amount of pollutant present in the effluent (synthetic solution). Regeneration efficiency was calculated as the ratio of the amount of desorbed pollutant during the regeneration process and the amount of pollutant adsorbed in the previous adsorption stage. The results obtained for particle size distribution of the powdered materials are presented in A mean particle diameter (volumetric) value of 12 The specific surface area of the activated carbon sample, determined by nitrogen gas adsorption (BET model), was found to be 702 Zeta potential measurements obtained for the powdered activated carbon as a function of medium pH are shown in According to the results shown in The specific gravity values obtained for the activated carbon and natural zeolites samples were 1.4 and 2.1 Breakthrough and elution curves obtained for ammonia adsorption/desorption onto natural zeolites flocs bed, with the use of the expanded/fluidised bed reactor, are shown in  Breakthrough curves obtained for phenol adsorption/desorption onto activated carbon flocs bed (virgin and regenerated), with the use of the expanded/fluidised bed reactor, are shown in According to Breakthrough curves for the simultaneous adsorption of ammonia and phenol onto mixed adsorbent flocs bed, using the expanded/fluidised bed reactor, are shown in As can be seen in Breakthrough curves with similar exhaustion points for both pollutants were obtained considering a designed mass ratio of the adsorbent materials (with known adsorption capacity data obtained from the pure beds experiments for each pollutant–adsorbent system) for the flocs bed formation. The results are shown in  An estimate of the operational costs of the use of powdered adsorbent flocs in the adsorption of pollutants was done, and are shown in The ballpark values of From the estimates shown in Regarding environmental considerations, the new technique for pollutant adsorption using single (pure) adsorbent flocs in a expanded/fluidised bed reactor shows effectiveness, since both alternatives of proper discard or regeneration of the exhausted flocs beds are possible (for the phenol-loaded activated carbon flocs bed, further studies of regeneration still must be conducted). However, for the ammonia–zeolite system, the regeneration alternative would also have to be compared in detail to the case of loaded adsorbent discard for a proper industrial application of the new technique. In the first case, ammonia regeneration liquor (with approximately 1/5 of the treated effluent volume) would need further treatment (air stripping) or destination (i.e. fertiliser in agricultural needs). The use of adsorbent mixtures shows the drawback of complex regeneration, as the separation of the mixture is somewhat difficult because the regeneration processes are different (solution-based for ammonia–zeolite and thermal-based for phenol-activated carbon). Nevertheless, for special pollutants (i.e. very hazardous) a final destination on a discard basis of the loaded adsorbents might be a feasible alternative as powdered adsorbents exhibit low-cost and are highly-available ( A new technique for pollutant adsorption onto powdered adsorbent flocs, obtained by flocculation of aqueous suspensions of powdered adsorbent materials, utilising an expanded/fluidised bed reactor was validated by studying the adsorption of ammonia and phenol onto natural zeolites and activated carbon. High adsorption efficiency of powdered natural zeolites and activated carbon flocs in the uptake of ammonia (11 Authors thank all colleagues for the friendly atmosphere at the LTM and to all institutions supporting research in Brazil (FAPERGS, CAPES, CNPq, UFRGS). Special thanks to Mariela Formas, from Minera Formas™, for the zeolite sample.