This paper describes a study of the separation of zinc and copper from the leach liquor generated in the treatment of the zinc residue (29.6g/L Zn and 37.4g/L Cu) by liquid–liquid extraction. In it, the influence of the extractant type and concentration, aqueous phase acidity, contact time and stripping agent concentration were investigated. Organophosphorus extractants (D2EHPA, IONQUEST®801 and CYANEX®272) and the chelating extractants (LIX®63, LIX®984N and LIX®612N-LV) were also investigated. The organophosphorus reagents are selective for zinc, while the chelating extractants are selective for copper. In the experiment, D2EHPA was found to be the best extractant. A sulfuric acid solution was used in the stripping study. Five continuous experiments were carried out until an optimal condition for the separation of the metals Zn and Cu was achieved. Experiment 5 was carried out in three extraction steps, three scrubbing stages and five stripping stages. In this experiment, a pregnant strip solution containing 125g/L Zn and 0.01g/L Cu was obtained and the concentration of the metals in the raffinate was 28.3g/L Cu and 0.49g/L Zn.Metallurgical Extraction is employed to obtain pure metals from ores or byproducts. Metallic zinc production from sulfide zinc concentrate comprises roast, leach and electrowinning steps. In the leaching step, metals with lower concentration such as cadmium, nickel and cobalt are leached with zinc. The liquor purification, typically carried out through cementation, produces a residue containing high levels of zinc, cadmium, and copper. Generally, the treatment of this residue in the recovery of zinc produces other residues that are stockpiled, therefore resulting in an environmental liability. The recovery of metals from such secondary source reduces the environmental impact and could bring a financial return to the metal producers ( A solid residue containing 26.9% Zn, 36.9% Cu, 1.9% Cd, 0.18% Co and 0.21% Ni was obtained from a hydrometallurgical zinc facility. This residue was leached with a sulfuric acid solution resulting in a sulfuric liquor containing 29.6 Zinc and copper can be separated from sulfuric liquors by cementation or liquid–liquid extraction. In the former, the high copper content of the solution consumes an undesirably high amount of reagent (  In the present study, the organophosphorus extractants (D2EHPA, IONQUEST®801 and CYANEX®272) and the chelating extractants (LIX®63, LIX®984N and LIX®612N-LV) were investigated for Zn/Cu separation. The following process variables: aqueous phase acidity, D2EHPA concentration, contact time and stripping agent concentration (sulfuric acid) were tested using D2EHPA as the extractant. Five continuous experiments were conduced until an optimal condition for the separation of the metals Zn and Cu was achieved. Di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), 97 LIX®63, LIX®984 and LIX®612N-LV are manufactured by Cognis and were supplied by Cognis do Brasil Ltda. LIX®63 is 5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxydodecane-6-oxime (2.27 Exxsol®D-100 (purified kerosene), used as diluent, was supplied by Exxson Química. The sulfuric acid (H The sulfuric liquor containing 29.6 Extraction and stripping experiments were carried out in an agitated reactor (150 Five continuous experiments were carried out until an optimal condition for the separation of the metals Zn and Cu was achieved. The continuous experiments were carried out by using D2EHPA as the extractant, in mixer–settler polycarbonate units, with mixers of 70 The experiments from 1 to 4 were carried out with a solution, prepared in a laboratory, simulating the actual industrial liquor. These experiments were carried out in three extraction stages, three scrubbing stages and five stripping stages. Experiment 5, was done with the industrial liquor in the same conditions as those of that in Experiment 4, but presenting better results. Peristaltic pumps were use to feed the zinc and organic solutions, the scrubbing solution (H Six cationic extraction agents were investigated: three organophosphorus acids (D2EHPA, IONQUEST®801 and CYANEX®272) and three chelating acids with oximes functional groups (LIX®63, LIX®612N-LV and LIX 984®N). The concentration of the organophosphorus extractants was 1 D2EHPA, IONQUEST®801 and CYANEX®272 are selective for zinc, while LIX®63, LIX®612N-LV and LIX 984®N are selective for copper. In metals separation, the separation factor is more important than the extraction coefficient itself. Experiments showed that the coalescence time for organophosphorus extractants was lower than the coalescence time for chelating extractants (<30 The aqueous and organic contact time adopted was between 10 and 15 After choosing the desired extractant, the influence of the aqueous phase acidity on the metals separation was investigated. The effect of the equilibrium pH was investigated between 0.70 (without NH The effect of the concentration of the extractant in the Zn/Cu separation was investigated between 0.25 The stripping experiments were carried out with a sulfuric acid solution having its concentration investigated from 0.01 As shown in Using lab test results, extraction and stripping isotherms (equilibrium curves) were constructed and McCabe–Thiele Diagrams were drawn to determine the theoretical number of stages and the volumetric feed ratio of the liquor and solvent for the continuous experiments. The equilibrium curves were drawn according to the successive contact technique using phase ratio 1. The McCabe–Thiele diagrams are shown in  The batch experiments indicated that zinc is more easily extracted than copper. Therefore, the objective of the continuous experiments was to lead zinc to the organic phase, while the other metals are kept in the raffinate. Five continuous experiments were carried out until an optimal condition for the separation of the metals Zn and Cu was achieved. The experimental set-up comprised three steps: extraction, scrubbing and stripping having their variables continuously adjusted in consecutive runs until the desired yields and grades were achieved. Experiment 1 was carried out in two extraction stages, two scrubbing stages and five stripping stages for 30 Experiments 3–5 comprised three extraction stages, three scrubbing stages and five stripping stages ( Experiment 5 was carried out with the industrial liquor mentioned previously, in the same condition set for Experiment 4 ( The zinc present in the loaded organic phase, after passing through the scrubbing stage, was fed into the stripping step, stages 7–11. The stripping solution (2.0 A high efficiency of the proposed separation process is observed in The profiles of the zinc and copper content in the aqueous and organic phases of the extraction, scrubbing and stripping steps are shown in The mass balance for Experiment 5 is presented below. The nomenclature used is also defined. [M [M [M [M [M [M [M A O Sc St R M The mass balance for the metals results in:  where  [Zn [Cu  Mass balance for Cu: 4.4 164.6 [Cu  where  [Zn [Cu  Mass balance for Cu: 7.3 0.146 [Cu  [Zn [Cu A quantitative analysis of the outcome of Experiment 5 and the mass balance established in order to check the efficiency of the process is depicted in The mass balance indicated results similar to those obtained analytically for Zn. For Cu the figures obtained through mass balance, were higher than those obtained analytically. This occurs given the sensitivity of the methodology employed. The content of Cu in the raffinate used in the mass balance was 28.35 The extractants of the LIX group (LIX®63, LIX®612N-LV and LIX 984®N) extract preferentially copper, while organophosphorus extractants are selective for zinc. Organophosphorus extractants (D2EHPA, IONQUEST®801 and CYANEX®272) presented higher Zn/Cu separation factors when compared with the chelating extractants investigated. For D2EHPA, IONQUEST®801 and CYANEX®272 Zn/Cu separation factors of about 296, 323 and 361, respectively, were obtained. For the chelating extractants, the separation factor was about 62 for LIX®63, 94 for LIX®612N-LV and 37 for LIX®984N. Further investigations carried out with D2EHPA indicated an ideal equilibrium pH of about 2. The stripping experiments using sulfuric acid as the stripping agent indicated that the stripping of copper outdid the stripping of zinc, indicating that the co-extracted copper can be removed from the organic phase in the scrubbing step using diluted sulfuric acid whereas zinc can be stripped with a more concentrated sulfuric acid solution. After the optimization of the process of separation of zinc and copper from the sulfuric liquor through solvent extraction, the continuous experiment comprised three extraction stages, three scrubbing stages and five stripping stages. A pregnant stripping solution containing 125 The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to CNPq and FAPEMIG for financial support, as well as to the CDTN’s technicians who were involved in the project, mainly Luiz C. da Silva, Liliane P. Tavares, Marcos A. Evangelista and Eugênio M. Oliveira.