Precipitation of monosodium aluminate hydrate (MAH) from concentrated sodium aluminate solution in the hydro-chemical process of alumina production was carried out in a continuously operated crystallizer. Crystal size distribution and morphology of MAH crystals were greatly influenced by parameters in the crystallization process, including mean residence time, supersaturation, temperature and agitation. Spherical MAH crystals with uniform size were successfully obtained. A condition of the mean residence time of 50 min, the temperature of 60 °C, the supersaturation of 5.3 and the agitation speed of 300 rpm was preferred in the precipitation of MAH crystals.Sodium aluminate and aluminum hydroxide like gibbsite and boehmite are generally precipitated from sodium aluminate solution ( In order to produce coarse particles, it is important to avoid the formation of uncontrollable spontaneous nucleation with its enormously high nuclei production leading to highly fine particles. Supersaturation maintained at a level is essential in producing crystals with desired size and morphology. The control of the supersaturation is easily attained in a continuous process. A continuously mixed-suspension mixed-product-removal (MSMPR) crystallizer can operate at a constant supersaturation, which is favorable to produce the desired coarse crystal particles. The MSMPR crystallizer has been widely applied in producing inorganic chemicals ( Crystallization parameters generally have a great effect on the product quality such as particle size and crystal shape ( Synthetic sodium aluminate solutions were used to model the leaching liquor of bauxite in the hydro-chemical process. Synthetic sodium aluminate solutions were made by NaOH (AR) and Al(OH) The CSD of the dried MAH crystals was measured using a Malvern Mastersizer Hydro 2000MU instrument with anhydrous ethanol as the dispersion agent. Measurements were repeated at least three times with good consistency of CSD curves. The crystal phase was identified by X-ray diffractometer (XRD, X'Pert Pro MPD, Panalytical Co.), and the crystal morphology was observed by scanning electron microscopy (JEOL JSM-6700F). The span of distribution curves was used to characterize the spread of CSD. The span is expressed as Steady state operation is essential in an MSMPR crystallizer. At steady state, the crystallizer is fully mixed, and there are no differences of concentration, temperature, supersaturation, suspension density and CSD within the MSMPR crystallizer. CSD of MAH crystals was measured to verify whether the steady state was achieved. As shown in The mean residence time Where The CSDs of MAH at various conditions are shown in Experiments are carried out at same concentration of sodium aluminate solution with C MAH crystals obtained from the batch crystallizer are flakes, octagonal platelets, truncated quadrangular orthopyramid, or the twin/composite truncated pyramid crystals ( As the driving force of the crystallization process, the supersaturation is an important parameter that affects the crystallization rate and the CSD ( A high agitation speed can provide full solid-liquid mixing in the MSMPR crystallizer, and probably also has an influence on the crystal size due to the agglomeration or breakup of crystals caused by agitation ( A higher agitation speed means that a higher mechanical is loaded on the crystals and secondary nucleation rate is increased ( MAH was precipitated from concentrated sodium aluminate solution in the hydro-chemical process of alumina production in a continuously operated MSMPR crystallizer. It was found that parameters including mean residence time, supersaturation, temperature and agitation significantly influenced the CSD and crystal morphology of MAH. The resultant MAH crystals were uniform spherical particles with unimodal CSD. A preferred condition for the precipitation of MAH was the mean residence time of 50 min, the temperature of 60 °C, the supersaturation of 5.3 and the agitation speed of 300 rpm. This work was financially supported by the