In this paper, the possibility of extending the Kolmogoroff's model of multi-scale turbulence structure to dense slurry flows in pipelines is explored. The analysis is based on experimental data of slurry behavior as a Newtonian liquid with some equivalent density and viscosity. A connection is made between the turbulence structure and the head losses in the pipeline that can be calculated by the known engineering methods. The latter, the total loss, is considered as comprising of viscous and turbulent components, and the turbulent component is associated with the turbulence structure. In this paper, the lower turbulence scale for the dense slurries is estimated. For the simulation of turbulence in stratified flows, a modified application of the known two-layer model of slurry flow is proposed.Slurry hydrotransport in a turbulent regime with high solids volumetric concentrations It was shown in  The above successful applications of the Kolmogoroff's model for simulations of medium density two-phase flows give us some confidence that it can be adapted for modeling of turbulence in dense two-phase flows, and thus allow to define the micro properties of turbulence in dense slurries. The key parameter of the Kolmogoroff's model is the turbulent energy dissipation rate, which is defined as the total dissipation rate (pipeline head loss) minus the viscous component of energy loss. To determine the viscous component of total energy dissipation, we relied on the experimentally validated model of dense slurry flow in a pipeline ( Let us assume that slurry contains monodispersed particles (see The limiting concentration for spherical particles is estimated to be equal to According to the data in Our estimation of the Bagnold number for a slurry made out of fine particles with An analysis of The Kolmogoroff's model of isotropic turbulence is often used for simulations of turbulent flows in various applications ( There are two key equations characterizing the Kolmogoroff's model of turbulence. One is the equation for spectral energy density of energetic eddies, which is written as ( The second equation defines the eddy velocity as a function of its size ( According to some experimental data, mainly in mixing tanks ( Batchelor derived the ratio between the coefficients Let us determine now the average velocity of turbulent fluctuations. By integrating Note that for a pure liquid According to experimental data ( Our estimations based on the model of slurry flow presented below (see Then, taking into account Since we consider an isotropic turbulence, any spatial component of the root-mean-square velocity has the meaning of an average (  The average eddy velocity does not have to be equal to the mean-square one. For the case of a dense slurry ( In According to Kolmogoroff, eddies with scales smaller then There is some uncertainty in determining the minimum scale, which, however, can often be neglected in practical applications because the kinetic energy associated with these scales is small. The corresponding kinetic energy is estimated using Because eddies associated with this energy do not obey the Kolmogoroff's model, it is necessary to estimate when they can be ignored in calculations of the root-mean-square eddy velocity The energy of turbulent eddies is associated with the hydraulic losses in a pipeline. In the case of a pure liquid (or diluted slurry), it is usually assumed that the hydraulic energy loss is fully transformed into the turbulence energy. Our purpose here is not an accurate prediction of the turbulent flow parameters, but rather developing an understanding of the mechanism of energy dissipation in the dense slurry flow in order to obtain reliable estimations for the kinetic energy of turbulent eddies. There are a lot of researches on simulations of turbulent liquid–solid flows (for example, Among many models of dense slurry flows, the one developed by In our description of the turbulence fluctuations, we are not attempting to predict the distribution of slurry velocities and concentrations across the pipe diameter. Moreover, we assume that these distributions are uniform across the diameter, but they must satisfy the energy losses associated with the turbulence in a pipeline cross-section. From the uniform concentration distribution, the axisymmetrical velocity distribution follows, which allows us to reduce the problem to a one-dimensional one. It will be shown below (see A steady-state axisymmetrical turbulent slurry flow in a pipeline is described by the one-dimensional Navier–Stokes equation (  In order to assess the validity of our model, we compared the calculated pressure gradients ( The total rate of energy dissipation per unit mass is calculated as a headloss power per mass unity: The total dissipation rate We obtained the rate of viscous energy dissipation in the pipeline cross-section from the well-known dissipation energy equation (for example, The turbulence dissipation rate is found (see A numerical estimation of the fraction of the turbulent component in the total dissipation energy rate was done for sand Thus, as one can see, the turbulent fraction of the dissipation energy rate is always larger than 60% of the total rate. For large industrial pipelines (most important practical case) with significant wall roughness, the ratio As it has been shown above, slurry might be considered as a Newtonian liquid with some equivalent viscosity. As long as slurry can be treated as a Newtonian liquid, we assume that the Kolmogoroff's model is applicable. An indirect proof that turbulent dispersion in slurry and pure liquid is in agreement with the Kolmogoroff's model can be obtained by analyzing the distribution of Prandtl's mixing lengths as function of solids concentration. The Prandtl hypothesis about the turbulent shear stress is valid for Newtonian liquids ( The radial distributions of turbulent shear stresses We performed a number of computations of the radial distributions of mixing lengths at various solids concentrations, and pipe diameters. It turned out that mixing length distributions do not depend on slurry concentration. In Since the distribution of Prandtl mixing lengths is the reliable indicator of the turbulence structure, its independence on solids concentration shows that the turbulence models applicable to a flow of pure liquid may be employed for simulation of slurry flows. This gives us more confidence in applicability of the Kolmogoroff equation ( Note that, since our model is intended for studying slurry flows with high solids concentration, we can neglect effects caused by interactions of solid particles and turbulence eddies with each other ( If the non-uniformity of solids concentration in a slurry flow is fairly high, then a granular layer (bed) moving along the pipeline wall may be formed. This granular layer consists mainly of largest particles of the solid phase. A particle concentration in the granular bed is approximately equal to the packing limit of solids particles ( The first important step is determining the thickness of a granular bed by the empirical correlation. Note that, if this thickness is much smaller than the pipeline radius, then it is possible to consider the flow as homogenous ( Using the two-layer model, we have determined the average velocities of each layer, the average solid concentrations in both layers, and the pressure gradient in a pipeline. If the pressure gradient is known, then the total rate of energy dissipation is also known ( Since the turbulent diffusivity in a liquid with solids concentration equal to the packing limit is close to zero ( The equivalent perimeter is shorter than the real perimeter because the shear stresses acting on the moving interface are lower than those applied to the cylindrical wall. Applying the resultant friction force acting on the real perimeter to a circular perimeter, we come up with the equation for calculating the equivalent circular perimeter: Since in applications the hydrotransport velocities are rather high The calculations of energy dissipation for an equivalent flow in the upper layer with an equivalent diameter show that, in practical cases (large pipe diameters Using the same methodology as above for the homogenous slurry flows (see Note that the slurry volumetric concentration in the upper layer has to be high enough ( The approach proposed in this paper can be directly applied to the analysis of the behavior of solid particles as well as bubbles and droplets dispersed in dense turbulent slurry flow. For example, the mean particle oscillation velocity can be calculated on the basis of the equation expressing the dissipation energy rate balance: From Another example of practical application of the approach presented is calculating the collisional frequencies of droplets and/or bubbles in a turbulent slurry flow. On the one hand, In this paper, the possibility of extending the Kolmogoroff's model of multi-scale turbulence structure to dense slurry flows in pipelines was investigated. The analysis was based on experimental and theoretical data of slurry behavior as a Newtonian liquid with some equivalent viscosity. A connection was made between the turbulence structure and the head losses in the pipeline that might be calculated by the known semi-empirical methods. The latter, the total loss, was considered as comprising of viscous and turbulent components, and the turbulent component was associated with the turbulence structure. In the paper, the lower turbulence scale for the dense slurries was estimated. It was also shown that the radial distribution of Prandtl's mixing lengths did not depend on solids concentration, a fact, which should further justify the applicability of the Kolmogoroff's spectral energy density of turbulence to slurry flow. For the simulation of turbulence in stratified flows, the modified application of a known two-layer model of slurry flow was proposed. The extension of the Kolmogoroff”s model to dense slurry flows allows its application in simulation of technological processes taking place, for example, in bitumen extraction during oil sands hydrotransport.