Sorption of hydrochloric and perchloric acids and their sodium salts was studied by Cl− and ClO4
                     − forms of ion exchanger Dowex 1×8 in the concentration range of the external electrolyte 0.25–4 mol/l. Sorption of water and the total amount of the solution were also studied. Sorption of the acid appeared markedly higher than that of the respective salts. A mathematical modeling and computer simulation of the processes were performed. The overall sorption was represented as a superposition of the Donnan membrane distribution and formation associates type RAn·(AnKt)
                        i
                     
                     ·(H2O)
                        n
                      in the homogeneous resin phase. The model expresses non-ideality of the resin phase in explicit form as formation of the above associates characterized by the constants of their formation. A good agreement between the experimental and calculated sorption in the whole concentration range was obtained in the assumption of two associates with i=1, 2 and n=1–3. The same factors control sorption of the acids and the salts and the difference in their behavior has a quantitative character. The main introduction into the overall sorption of the salts makes the Donnan distribution up to concentration of the external electrolyte 4 M, while the main part of the absorbed acids is contained in the associates.Literature data on non-exchange sorption of strong electrolytes by ion exchangers are somewhat contradictory. Gustafson The idea of heterogeneity or non-uniformity of internal structure of ion exchange resins seems to be reasonable in application to macro-porous resins or resins of low or very high cross-linkage. At the same time resins with moderate cross-linkage were proved to be remarkably homogeneous It is the aim of this paper to obtain additional experimental data on sorption of four simple electrolytes with well-known properties by a high quality mono-functional anion exchanger with a moderate cross-linkage, whose structure can be supposed closest to truly homogeneous one. Two of these electrolytes are acids; the two others are their sodium salts. If the effect of heterogeneity controls the sorption, it should be similar for the acid and the relative salt. Another aim was developing a model based on the idea of homogeneous swollen ion exchanger which accounts for complexity of real ion exchange system and expressing their non-ideality in explicit form by accounting ionic association and hydration in the resin phase. Super-equivalent sorption of electrolytes by ion exchangers was never used as a basis for large-scale technologies. In traditional ion exchange it was always accounted a factor disturbing the main process. Nevertheless, technologies of separation of acids and their salts based on their superequivalent sorption were described. They utilize acid retardation Knowledge of regularities of molecular sorption of electrolytes is necessary for understanding ion exchange in concentrated solutions. They obtain increasing importance in processing of brines, pickling solutions, concentrates of seawater and in hydrometallurgy. Promising results were obtained in our laboratory on application of impregnats of ion exchange resins by concentrated electrolyte solutions in catalysis and gaseous sorption. Therefore accumulation of new experimental data on superequivalent sorption as well as development of models for its reliable description obtains practical meaning. Ion exchanger Dowex 1×8 in Cl All chemicals used in the experiment (HCl, NaCl, HClO Sorption equilibria of the mentioned electrolytes were studied at their concentration 0.25–4 mol/l. The total mass of absorbed solution was determined as well as the amounts of the electrolyte and the water. The following procedure was applied. A specimen of the air-dry resin in Cl Concentration of the acids was determined by titration of the aliquots with standard alkali solution. Concentration of NaCl was determined by Mohr titration (AgNO The amounts of the absorbed by the sample electrolytes were calculated from these data. They were related to the unit mass of the matrix of the resin. Estimation of different sources of errors in the sorption values has shown that the resulting error may not exceed 5%. Exchange capacity per gram of matrix was calculate as The experimental data obtained are presented in  Sorption of the chlorides is higher than that of the perchlorates. Sorption of the acids is always substantially higher than that of the relative sodium salts. The water sorption decreases with increasing external concentration of the electrolytes. The mass (volume) of the absorbed solution remains practically constant with changing concentration of the external electrolyte. The water sorption is smaller from the acid solution than from the solutions of their salts. Non-exchange sorption of hydrochloric acid from 4 M solutions reaches the same values as the exchange one and has a clear tendency for a further rise. In difference with that sorption of perchloric acid is rather low ( If the electrolyte distribution between the ion exchanger and the solution had been controlled by Donnan distribution for ideal solutions then dependencies of sorption versus concentration in the solution was the same for all electrolytes of the same valent type. The difference observed usually assigned to non-ideality of the solution in the ion exchanger and in the solution. In spite of its obvious correctness such statement does not explain physical reasons for different behavior of different electrolytes. Our systems are concentrated electrolyte solutions and as such are wittingly substantially non-ideal. For their correct description knowledge of the activity coefficients of distributing components is required. At the same time at present there are no methods for determination of the activity coefficients of the components in the ion exchanger. Moreover, such knowledge would not clarify physical phenomena responsible for the regularities of the sorption. It is commonly recognized that there are two main reasons for deviation of electrolyte solution from the ideal behavior: association of ions with formation of ionic pairs, triplets and larger associates; hydration of ions, leading to increasing effective concentration of kinetically active particles in the solution. In the model described below we account for these phenomena in an explicit form. It is obvious from the obtained experimental results that sorption of electrolytes is a complex process. Our attempts to describe it as a single phenomenon such as Donnan or Nernst distribution, or as sorption of the electrolytes on the active centers in the resin appeared unsuccessful. Finally we came to the model accounting for the following phenomena in the phase of ion exchanger: (a) Donnan membrane distribution and (b) formation in the ion exchanger of hydrated ionic associates including counterion An      A computer program for fitting of parameters The model allows also calculating separately amounts of electrolytes absorbed due to the Donnan distribution and formation of associates of the both kinds (RAn  The both phases of our systems are concentrated electrolyte solutions with strong deviation from the ideality. The model suggested accounts for that by considering in the explicit form the processes causing these deviations. They are formation of two types of associates including in average It appeared that Donnan distribution makes the most important introduction into the overall sorption process of NaCl and NaClO The situation appeared substantially different for sorption of the acids. As seen from We wish to emphasize importance of accounting for the water activity in the external solution and the hydration number of the ionic associates in the phase of ion exchanger. Attempts to avoid using one of these factors or both of them led to complete disagreement of the model with the experimental data. The results of calculations are highly sensitive to the values of each of these quantities, which is in agreement with usual idea of their importance in determining properties of concentration electrolyte systems. In the conclusion we can state that molecular sorption of HCl, HClO This work was carried out with financial support of Belarus Foundation for Fundamental Research within joint project with the Russian scientists from the Moscow State University, Grant No. X02P–083.