The classification of science into disciplines is at the heart of bibliometric analyses. While most classifications systems are implemented at the journal level, their accuracy has been questioned, and paper-level classifications have been considered by many to be more precise. However, few studies investigated the difference between journal and the paper classification systems. This study addresses this gap by comparing the journal- and paper-level classifications for the same set of papers and journals. This isolates the effects of classification precision (i.e., journal- or paper-level) to reveal the extent of paper misclassification. Results show almost half of papers could be misclassified in journal classification systems. Given their importance in the construction and analysis of bibliometric indicators, more attention should be given to the robustness and accuracy of these disciplinary classifications schemes.Classification systems of science plays an important role in bibliometrics( Classification systems of science are widely used in bibliometric studies, not only for retrieval of papers, but also as a critical variable to normalize scientific evaluations and indicators across the different research practices of the various disciplines. Normalizing citation impact based on journal classification systems has become an established practice in evaluative bibliometrics ( Most classification systems of science are established at journal level, which has been adopted by major bibliographic databases such as WoS and Scopus. Using such classification systems, all papers published in a given journal are classified in the same discipline (or set of disciplines). On the other hand, Chinese bibliographic databases classify science at the paper-level using the Chinese Library Classification Scheme, which allows for a greater level of classification specificity since papers published in the same journal can be classified into different disciplines. The most well-known journal classification system is the WoS Categories that assigns indexed journals to about 250 categories representing the full spectrum of scientific research ( There are other journal classification systems in addition to WoS and Scopus. The US National Science Foundation (NSF) classification system is also a 2-level journal classification system consisting of 14 broad fields and 144 fin. fields, but it assigns each individual journal into only one single field ( Already in 1975, Library classifications also groups scientific literature in books and monographs, but it is rarely applied at the journal level or paper-level. Although the U.S. Library of Congress classification (LCC) The Chinese Library Classification (CLC) is the national library classification scheme of China CLC is analogic to Library of Congress Classification (LCC) in the United States, in that it also provides a tree structure consisting of small group of top categories (22 in the case of CLC) and their sub-categories. Each category or sub-category is represented by its name or label, as well as, an alpha-numeric CLC Code (i.e., letters in Latin alphabet and Arabic numbers). The CLC code is composed of one or two uppercase letters and an Arabic whole number of up to three digits (1–999) that can have decimal extensions. A hyphen can be used to represent further discipline specificity. The 22 top categories are denoted by single capital letters, and a combination of letters and numbers to express sub-categories. In China, CLC is used to classify all academic journals, but also legal publications, books, and newspapers. A Chinese Serial Number (CN) is legally required for each academic journal published in China  The CLC code is also applied to each journal article. This is generally done by asking authors to provide the CLC code when submitting their manuscript. Authors are meant to self-identify the major topic of the manuscript and assign the appropriate CLC code based on the CLC instructions. In some cases, the editor may modify the CLC code provided by the authors if she or he believes this improves the classification. Assigning CLC codes at the paper-level is a normal practice in China’s academic publishing process, and the CLC codes are assumed to represent the paper topic’s discipline(s).  CLC codes provide a classification system of science at both the journal- and the paper-level, for the same set of bibliographic records. It is noteworthy that all Chinese citation databases classify at the paper-level, which is in sharp contrast with major international citation databases, such as WoS and Scopus, who classify at the journal-level. Paper-level CLCs classify individual papers into author-specified disciplines that can differ from the CLCs of their publishing journals. This means that two papers published in one journal may belong to different disciplines, and papers within the same discipline may be published by journals from different disciplines. Paper-level CLCs has the potential to produce a more specific and representative description of the structure of science. Journal/Paper classification is also offered by the Chinese Science Citation Database (CSCD), which was developed by the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 1989. It covers more than one thousand core journals in the natural sciences, engineering and medical sciences; including mathematics, physics, chemistry, life science, earth science, agricultural science, medicine, industrial technology, and environmental sciences. It offers information retrieval features, journal selection and academic performance evaluation that are comparable to Science Citation Index (SCI) ( There are two paper classification systems in CSCD. The original one is based on the paper’s CLC code and, therefore, each paper can be assigned different disciplines; these papers also could be grouped into different WoS SUs using a conversion table (provided by Clarivate Analytics) that matches CLC codes to their corresponding WoS SU(s). CSCD users can strictly access data classified by WoS SU while the CLC-based paper classification system is only for internal reference. In addition to the CLC-based paper classification system, a CLC-based journal classification system is also internally used for journal selection and evaluation in CSCD. This provides an opportunity to compare the paper classification system with the journal classification system from the same data set. According to the WoS SUs is a subject classification scheme that is shared by all WoS product databases. As a result, users can identify, retrieve and analyze documents from multiple databases that pertain to the same subject. For example, journals covered by the WoS Core Collection are assigned at least one WoS category, and each WoS category can be mapped to one WoS SU. WoS SUs include 151 research areas that are classified into five major research domains: Since both the paper classification system and the journal classification system are available in CSCD, each CSCD indexed paper can be assigned to the corresponding discipline(s) from either classification system. Thus, we can compare the two classification systems and investigate the difference within the same CSCD data set. CSCD is also available from WoS using their own classification (WoS SU), both at the journal- and paper-level. As a result, this study compares journal and paper classification for the same data, across two different classification schemas (i.e., CSCD CLC, and WoS SU). The objective of this paper is to compare journal classification systems and paper classification systems, using a dataset that offers both levels of classification. This study improves our understanding in the specificity of the classification system of science by answering the following research questions: In a journal classification system, what percentage of journal articles, in a given discipline, are contributed to by other disciplines? In a paper classification system, what percentage of papers in a given discipline are published in journals in other disciplines? Do these ratios vary by discipline? Answering these questions will likely reveal the extent of paper misclassification in current journal classification systems, which has never been systematically investigated and may lead to restructuring the classification system of science used in bibliometric studies. The following sections describe the datasets and their treatment, followed by the measures used to answer the research questions. All CSCD data was provided by the National Science Library of the Chinese Academy of Science. The number of journals indexed by CSCD between 2008 and 2015 was 1,480, from which 869 were indexed throughout that period. The raw data analyzed by this study was 1,830,307 CSCD records of papers published in these 869 journals between 2008 and 2015, of which 0.1% (2,035/1,830,307) were excluded because their CLC codes were not available. Note that 6.2% of these papers (113,917/1,830,307) contained multiple CLC codes; this means that those papers might be classified into multiple disciplines in the paper classification system. The 869 journals were assigned to 12 level-1 disciplines and 66 level-2 disciplines as shown in Based on the CLC-codes, each paper is assigned to the corresponding discipline(s) from the paper classification system. For journal classification, each paper is assigned to the same discipline(s) of its journal, which is compared to the higher specificity offered by paper-level classification to reveal differences and similarities. As described above, all journals, as well as their papers, were assigned to 12 level-1 disciplines and 66 level-2 disciplines in the journal classification system. The less controlled nature of paper-level classification, that is performed by authors, is highlighted by the fact that there is no requirement for author(s) to provide CLC-codes at a specific CLC level of abstraction. Indeed, paper CLC codes abstraction levels vary: among the 1,830,307 papers investigated, 24.1% (441,383) contain a CLC code representing a level-1 or level-2 CLC level, while 75.9% (1,388,924) include a CLC code at level 3 or below. To compare journal- and paper-level classification, the same structure of the CSCD journal classification system (12 level-1 disciplines and 66 level-2 disciplines) was adopted to build the paper-level classification. As a first step, papers with a CLC code at level 3 or more were re-assigned to their parent or grandparent level-2 CLC disciplines; for example, a paper with a CLC code G301 was assigned to the level-2 discipline As a result, papers classified at the journal- or paper-levels were modified to fit in the same structure of 12 level-1 disciplines and 66 level-2 disciplines. The outcome of the data treatment is the same set of papers assigned to the same disciplines in two different ways: the paper-level based on their own CLC codes, and the journal-level based on the publishing journals’ CLC codes. Since the paper CLC codes provided by authors represent authors’ self-identification of the paper’s discipline(s), it is assumed that the paper level classification is more accurate than the journal level classification in terms of the discipline(s) assignment. Since the CLC categories can be converted to the corresponding WoS SUs via the conversion table (see the sample as Using the conversion table, 869 journals were assigned to 42 WoS SUs in the journal classification system, while 1,830,307 papers were assigned to 86 WoS SUs in the paper classification system, except for 51 papers which CLC-codes were not convertible. Lastly, 41 WoS SUs were found in both the classification systems. Three journals were assigned to A modification was made to keep the same structure in both classification systems for the comparison. First, these 309,361 papers were re-assigned to WoS SUs included in both classification systems based on their CLC codes at upper level(s). For example, a paper with a CLC code of TU4 was originally assigned to Papers could be classified into a given discipline in either the journal classification system or the paper classification system and form two corpuses. As shown by the Venn diagram ( Since the size of corpus J, P as well as the overlap O may vary by discipline, two ratios measure the misclassification as shown in Between 2008 and 2015, 1,830,307 papers were published in 869 CSCD indexed journals. The average number of papers per journal is 2,106, ranging from 124 in In the journal classification system, 869 journals as well as their 1,830,307 papers were classified into 12 level-1 disciplines and 66 level-2 disciplines (See Appendix A and Appendix B). These 1,830,307 papers were also assigned to 12 level-1 disciplines and 66 level-2 disciplines in the paper classification system (See Appendix C). Comparing assignments between the journal classification system and the paper classification system shows that 21.3% of journal articles were contributed by other level-1 disciplines (Ratio J) than their journal’s discipline, ranging from 4.4% in Note that papers with general topics might affect the results. For example, 29.1% of papers in Generally, it is assumed that scholars would like to submit their papers to journals within the same discipline or multidisciplinary journals, but we found that 24.5% of papers were published in journals from other Level-1 disciplines (Ratio P), ranging from 6.2% in Similar results were found when all 1,830,307 papers and 869 journals were assigned to WoS SUs in both the journal classification system and the paper classification system using the conversion table (See Appendix D and Appendix E). Among the 39 analysed SUs, A similar Ratio P was found in papers contributed to other SUs: 39.2% of papers were published in journals classified in other SUs ranging from 24.7% in Classifying publications into research areas or disciplines is a core element of bibliometric studies. Traditionally, classifications are based on the journal’s discipline(s) but its accuracy of such classifications has not been systematically investigated. This study shows a classification mismatch between journal and paper classification systems, which raises further questions concerning the accuracy of the dominant classification system of science. It is often assumed that research papers published in the same journal belong to the same discipline. This study shows that 46.0% of journal articles, on average, come from other disciplines than that of their journal’s. This study confirms the question raised by previous studies regarding the inaccuracy of the journal classification system. For example, between 2008 and 2015, 17,701 papers were published in four Journals in some disciplines such as In addition to the CSCD classification system, many journal classification systems (WoS Categories, Scopus All Science Journal Classification, US NSF system, etc.) are available but they vary by their number of disciplines, level of classification, and journal classification methodology. This study reveals that such system settings could influence the accuracy of the journal classification system. Both WoS and Scopus assign journals into one or multiple disciplines while NSF and other systems (e.g. Science-Metrix) exclusively assign each journal to a single discipline. Both assignments are reasonable, but the former may produce more misclassifications. For example, the journal The purpose of inclusive classification is to allow journals to represent more related disciplines. However, since the journal classification system cannot differentiate journal articles by disciplines, inclusively classifying journal articles into two or more disciplines of their journal will produce more paper misclassifications as compared with exclusive classification. The number of classified disciplines varies in different journal classification systems, and this has an effect on the accuracy of the journal classification system. This study made three comparisons between the journal classification system and the paper classification system in CLC Level-1 disciplines, CLC Level-2 disciplines and WoS SUs, which has a different number of disciplines in the classification system. As For another example of the journal Some academic journals cover literature from multiple scientific disciplines. These are either classified into multidisciplinary categories (e.g The Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI) As   It is assumed that the CLC code of a paper represents its major research area (discipline) since it is chosen by their author(s). In practice, some scholars may choose inaccurate or inconsistent CLC codes for their papers since they are not classification experts. For example, In addition, some authors may be influenced by the CLC Code of the journal to which their paper is submitted although they are not required to submit the same CLC code as the journal. Most authors are required to provide only one CLC code for each paper, but this is not adequate to represent the research area(s) of an interdisciplinary research paper. Although the CSCD journal classification system is based on the CLC categories, some disciplines are merged or modified using direct citation analysis and clustering methods that are not detailed. After comparing the classification system of science between the journal-level and the paper-level, based on the same CSCD data, this study revealed the extent of paper misclassification in the journal classification system of science based on the CSCD data. The results of this study indicate that papers are misclassified by a journal classification system since: in the journal classification system, 46.0% of articles were in a paper classification system, 51.1% of papers were not published in journals of the same discipline(s), but the ratio of papers contributed from, or to, other discipline(s) varies by discipline and the methodology constructing the classification system. This study reveals the problem of paper misclassifications in the journal classification system using the CSCD data. This makes it increasingly essential to develop the paper classification system instead of the journal classification system in bibliometric databases. In addition to the CLC that is only used in China, both the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) and the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) could be used to classify papers into disciplines, if authors are required to provide the subject headings. For example, LCSH can better represent research area(s) of interdisciplinary research since multiple subject headings can be assigned to the same publication, each representing at least 20% of the work ( In addition, although it is assumed that the paper level classification is more accurate than the journal level classification considering the authors’ self-identification of the paper’s discipline(s), the accuracy of these two CLC-based classifications has not been evaluated by a third independent relatedness, which is proposed by Overall, this study improves our understanding of the accuracy of the classification system of science and forms a foundation for future studies investigating the difference between the journal classification system and the paper classification system.             