Wearable devices have become one of the most promising modern technologies due to the rapid development of network and sensor systems. Moreover, flexible sensors were researched to be applied in wearable devices. In this paper, we show a low cost and flexible temperature sensor that has high responsivity to temperature. A cylindrical PET monofilament was used as a main substrate and a Ni–Cr thin film was deposited by RF magnetron co-sputtering without a pattern. Various Ni–Cr concentration ratios were applied in this paper by altering the sputtering power of the Cr target. Increasing the concentration of Cr resulted in the variation of several characteristics such as the thickness of the Ni–Cr thin film, crystallinity, and the surface state. In addition, depositing the Ni–Cr thin film on a PET monofilament meant that the device showed resistive behavior when the temperature increased. This was proven by measuring the Temperature Coefficient of Resistance (TCR). The TCR was also measured after both repetitive bending and washing to evaluate its suitability in wearable devices. Overall, TCR showed diverse features for different Ni–Cr concentration ratios with a maximum value of 30×10−3
                     °C−1.Sensor networks and systems have broad utilization and applicability due to their outstanding features, which have been actively researched over the past few decades Temperature sensors were fabricated with various substrates and conducting materials. PET monofilament was used as a substrate due to its high glass transition temperature. Our research group fabricated various electronic devices based on PET monofilaments; thin films were deposited on the PET monofilament and the devices were applied in various sensors In this paper, the Ni and Cr composition was variable while other conditions remained constant. Ni–Cr thin films were deposited by applying RF magnetron co-sputtering. The composition was varied by controlling the sputtering power of the Cr target. Thus, five distinct Ni–Cr composition ratios were employed to demonstrate various characteristics. In addition, bare Ni thin film was deposited on the PET monofilament to compare with the Ni–Cr thin films and prove their superiority. Controlling the Cr composition both affected the total thickness of the Ni–Cr thin film and influenced the structure and surface state, which was further studied by FESEM. EDS and XRD spectroscopy was utilized to determine the Ni–Cr composition and crystallization. The I–V curves were measured in the temperature range 25–95 PET monofilament was used as a substrate in this experiment after several preparation steps. Bare PET monofilament was cut into 60 The Ni–Cr thin films were deposited by RF magnetron co-sputtering on the bare PET monofilament. Two guns of RF magnetron sputter were used spontaneously for the Ni and Cr target. The loading chamber pressure was 3.5 I–V curves were obtained using a I–V source-meter (Keithley 6517A); the voltage range was −0.05–0.05 The surface morphology and structure of the Ni–Cr thin film was investigated by FESEM. In addition, XRD spectroscopy was used to study the growth mechanism of the Ni–Cr thin film. Finally, EDS spectroscopy was utilized to examine the ratio of Ni and Cr in the Ni–Cr thin films. Ni–Cr thin film was thoroughly deposited on bare PET monofilament by RF magnetron co-sputtering. Single PET monofilament which was not woven to other fibers was applied as a substrate. The whole length of PET monofilament was 70   Further study of the TCR of the Ni–Cr thin films was performed through several mechanical experiments, which are plotted in In this work, flexible temperature sensors were fabricated on cylindrical PET monofilaments by depositing Ni–Cr thin film via RF magnetron co-sputtering. Various Cr:Ni ratios were used to demonstrate the alloying effect on TCR and other features. The different deposition rates between Ni and Cr targets was proven by analyzing the sputtering power of both targets when the Cr:Ni ratio was equivalent. Thus, Cr had a higher deposition rate than that of Ni, which influenced the total thickness of the Ni–Cr thin film. The thickness was inclined to increase from 200 The manuscript was written with contributions from all authors. This work was supported by the