The use of secondary fibre in virgin fibre affects the papermaking process in many ways. Machine runnability is negatively affected unless proper measures are taken to address potential problems. Sheet properties, appearance and performance may also be affected. The presence of secondary fibres can increase the dirt count, the number of holes in the sheet and cause picking on the lump-breaker, breaker stacks and calendar depending on the efficiency of the cleaning and screening systems. Recycled fibre sheets also tend to be weaker than virgin fibre paper. Brightness, colour and opacity may also be affected. With proper consideration of the recycled fibre quality and the capabilities of the paper machine, the transition to recycled fibre can be a smooth one, with little negative impact on paper machine runnability. There can be numerous possible causes behind an individual machine break. Even though the causes fundamentally have physical, chemical or microbial background (or a combination of these), the actual break can be related to pitch deposition, various chemical deposits, stickies and other adhesives in recycled paper processes and microbiological slime ( Drainage and pressing taken together are the dewatering steps on a paper machine ( A heavy buildup of suspended solids is also observed. The heavy contaminants escape the centrifugal forward-flow cleaners and settle at the bottom of the chests. These contaminants can cause excessive wear on refiner plates, abrade the electropolished finish on the headbox and even damage the paper machine’s clothing. However, this problem is relatively rare because the efficiency of stock preparation and of most forward-flow cleaners is quite high. If this type of problem occurs, the stock and water chests are emptied and washed out, the cleaners are inspected for wear and replaced if necessary. When the paper machine is started up again, Experience has shown that proper preparation for the use of recycled fibre may help avoid disastrous results. Recycled fibre brings many positive characteristics to the sheet, ranging from improved formation in tissue and fine papers to improved plybond in paperboard. So the recycled fibre is not inherently bad, only the contaminants the furnish contains. There are several types of contaminant. Potentially tacky substances, called stickies, are now the most feared contaminants in recycled fibre pulps ( Unless these interfering substances are continuously removed from the papermaking system in a controlled manner, they will accumulate and eventually lead to deposit and runnability problems ( Detackification Stabilisation Fixation These methods are rarely combined because they may conflict with each other. In detackification, a chemical is used to build a boundary layer of water around the pitch and stickies to decrease depositability. Detackification can be achieved by the addition of pitch adsorbents such as talc and bentonite. However, these adsorbents can end up contributing to the pitch deposit problem if talc/pitch particles are unable to be retained in the paper sheet with surfactants and water-soluble polymers. The interfering substances in papermaking are usually anionic in nature. Removal of anionic trash by reducing cationic demand with a cationic polymer is a way of deposit control through fixation. The advantage of using cationic polymeric coagulants for pitch and stickies control is that the pitch and stickies are removed from the system in the form of microscopic particles dispersed among the fibres in the finished paper product. There is still a need, however, for fixatives with increased pitch and stickies fixation power. Alum, starches and low molecular weight (MW) cationic coagulants conventionally used for deposit control can neutralise anionic trash and detrimental substances (pitch and stickies) and form complexes. However, they may not carry sufficient charge and/or MW to fix pitch and stickies complexes to the fibre. If not strongly fixed to the fibres, the complexes will concentrate in the system and lead to deposition problems. To solve these problems, Ciba Specialty Chemicals has developed several diallyldimethylammonium chloride (DADMAC) homopolymers and copolymers with high fixation power for pitch and stickies control. The new polymers include a high MW, structured polyDADMAC with high fixation power, copolymers of DADMAC with a comonomer capable of boosting the polymer’s fixation power and terpolymers (polymers of DADMAC copolymerised with two comonomers which can provide synergic enhancement of fixation power to the polymer). The stickies that are usually present in recycled fibre pulps do not necessarily need to cause problems. Macroscopic contaminants above a certain size (approximately>150 Some mills have found that a solvent action helps to remove latex, pitch and waxy components. Maintaining a high system temperature during the boilout is also important. Proper washing and rinsing should restore the paper machine to an acceptable degree of cleanliness. The deposition of these materials, including heavy stickies, onto forming fabrics creates troublesome sheet holes. Fabrics can be kept free of stickies by applying a low-concentration aqueous solution of a low MW cationic polymer on the face side of the fabric just ahead of the breast roll. The thoroughly mixed polymer can be applied most effectively using a low-pressure, low-volume fan shower designed to give double coverage. The slightly anionic polyester yarn of the fabric attracts the cationic polymer, which in turn reacts with anionic colloids in the system. Dissolved solids can cause changes in system chemistry on the paper machine. The nature of dissolved solids varies for each source of recycled fibre. Alkaline materials causing pH changes on the paper machine have the greatest impact on operations. Testing the pH and/or anionic or cationic charge of whitewater is the most common way to monitor these materials ( Dissolved solids introduced by secondary fibre can also complicate the wet-end chemical objectives of the papermaker ( Microbial contamination of recycled pulps caused by bacteria and fungi can be the cause of production disturbances and quality problems ( The fibre length distribution of secondary fibre is distinctly different from that of virgin pulp. The fibres in secondary fibre furnishes are also limited in the degree to which they can be swollen, because their previous drying causes some irreversible hydrogen bonding in the amorphous structure of the cell wall and near the surfaces of the crystallites ( Changing the design of the fabric Increasing the vacuum Raising the temperature of the stock in the headbox Using polymeric drainage aids. Fibre strength, bonding potential and drainage rate of the pulp slurry influence paper machine runnability. The application of cellulases on pulp to enhance the freeness has been researched and patented by several research groups ( Enzymatic treatment of recycled pulp enhances drainage and wet-web strength and decreases vacuum requirements without a loss in dry strength. It has been reported Use of secondary fibre to the furnish may affect the sheet properties in following ways: Residual contamination can affect sheet properties. Shorter fibres and higher fines content of re-pulped recovered paper can also affect sheet properties. Screening and cleaning can remove only a few contaminants, and some will move forward to the headbox with the flow of the secondary fibre stock. The dirt count of the sheet will increase if this contamination is in the form of visible suspended particulate materials. The increased dirt detracts from the visual quality of the paper, particularly if it is to be printed. If the dirt contains a lot of stickies, adjacent wraps of a roll can adhere to each other. This will cause breaks in the pressroom, carton manufacturing and other converting operations. If the dirt contains a lot of metal, it can set off metal detectors in inspection lines for food packaging. Several methods have been explored to reduce the number of contaminant particles and their size: Deactivating the surface of dispersed latex-type particles to limit the growth of large particles from collisions of smaller particles. Attaching small particles to the surfaces of fibres and fines via charge modification, usually in conjunction with deactivation, using chemical means to disperse large particles to a size suitable for emulsification. Agglomerating particulate materials into particles large enough to be removed by pressure screens and centrifugal cleaners ( Sheet holes or light spots are caused when hard contaminants are carried with the sheet into the press section, where hydraulic forces, acting in a lateral direction, move fibres away from the solid. Sheet holes are intolerable regardless of their origin and have to be corrected. Wire contamination can be prevented by the following: Aqueous polymer treatments Wire-cleaning systems that use heated chemical solutions Using yarns produced from polymers designed to repel stickies. Sheet holes originating in the press section create a more difficult problem. Solutions include the following: Continuous felt cleaning Continuous treatment of the face side of the felt with an aqueous polymer to prevent stickies from adhering to the yarn. Surface picking results from a buildup of contaminants on lump breakers, centre rolls on binip presses, top press rolls on conventional single felt presses, dryer cans, breaker stack rolls or calender stack rolls. It detracts from the visual quality of the sheet, particularly in printing and writing grades. Surface picking is aggravated by the presence of fines or recycled fibres on the sheet surface, because they are too short to become mechanically entangled in the fibre web. Roll doctors, the aqueous polymer treatment of lump breakers and press rolls, and routine cleaning of dryer fabrics and cans will all mitigate the effects of secondary fibre on picking. Contaminants, such as visible ink specks, reduce brightness and change the shade of newsprint and printing and writing grades. The maximum drop in brightness occurs with very small amounts of small ink particles. The losses are greater with higher initial brightness of the paper. Although a printing ink proportion of 0.1% in a newsprint causes a decrease of 16%, the brightness of a white paper falls by a total of 35%. A doubling of the amount of residual ink therefore results in only minor optical losses ( Larger ink particles affect the optical homogeneity of the recycled fibre pulp and make it appear contaminated. The particles that are visible as specks are due to ink residues as particles or agglomerates detached from the fibres but not removed and due to printing ink still attached to the fibres. Difficult-to-deink printing inks, especially non-impact inks, contribute to a greater speck concentration and impair the optical quality of the finished product. Besides optical effects, residual ink particles can also have a detrimental effect on runnability ( Secondary fibre contaminants also affect sizing. Because the re-pulping stages of many stock preparation systems are alkaline, the conventional sizes used in the original recovered paper are lost and must be replaced. Another sizing effect observed in sheets containing secondary fibre can be attributed directly to contamination with waxy substances. Residual contaminants in paper made from secondary fibre Sheet properties are also affected by fibres and fines. These have the greatest effect on mechanical properties. The contribution of fibre bonding to strength development and the role of fibre swelling in the formation of interfibre bonds has been reported. Swollen fibres collapse and come into intimate contact with adjacent fibres, which promotes the formation of hydrogen bonds. Excluding chemical dispersion, the most highly swollen fibres are found in never-dried pulp furnishes refined under slightly alkaline conditions. Furnishes derived from dried then re-pulped paper produce a sheet with poorer strength properties, because lamellae are brought together as the fibre cell wall loses water in the initial drying process. These lamellae are bonded in planes so tight that some of the regions will not admit water molecules when the fibre is later submerged in liquid water. The macroscopic effect is that the fibre never recovers its original swollen diameter, so it is not as flexible or conformable as before drying. This lack of ability to swell completely and to form intimate contacts with neighbouring fibres, namely to develop tightly bonded crossings, limits the strength of paper and board made from secondary fibre. Sizing is affected by fines and fibres when they bring adsorbed anionics to the system. Chemical changes gradually occur in the fibres during the conversion of paper and board into printed matter, folding cartons, corrugated containers and other products; during the exposure of these products to heat, sunlight and water vapour; and through other conditions related to their end use. Residual alum and acids provide the catalysts for hydrolysis of newsprint. Losses can be expected in tensile strength, edgewise compression strength, interlaminar shear strength, plybond strength and burst strength. The stiffness and modulus of elasticity decrease. To offset losses in strength and stiffness, papermakers have devised several strategies: Chemical swelling in the fibre by using alkaline pulping conditions Fractionating the stock to recover the longer fibres for grades that require higher strength, increasing the refining energy per tonne Increasing the press loading Modifying the forming and pressing areas so they deliver a dried sheet to the first dryer. Although this also increases the sheet density, it is an economical way to restore lost strength properties and has the side benefit of reducing energy cost per tonne for drying. Chemicals can be used selectively that will do the following: Improve drainage Increase retention Fibre bonding Reduce the amount of anionic dissolved solids in the system. The organic and inorganic chemicals added in recovered paper treatment processes are transferred to the paper machine and its whitewater system. Not only do they trigger the formation of deposits, or secondary stickies, on the paper machine, but they also contribute to sheet properties related to surface chemistry. This is especially true with surfactants and soaps of the deinking process ( A large variety of wet-end chemicals are used in modern papermaking. These chemical can remain in the finished products and finally return with the recovered paper to the papermaking system. In particular, cationic polymers are attached to furnish solids, although their exact location and mode of attachment are not known. An interesting question is whether the chemicals added initially stay on fibres in the deinking process and affect the functioning of fresh chemicals added in later papermaking stages. Probably the most common case is the use of cationic wet-end chemicals as fixatives to bind anionic trash to the sheet. Cationic polymers such as starch or alkyl ketene dimer size can often also remain adsorbed on fibres during recycling ( 