Titanium dioxide is an important material with a wide range of applications. Different methods and processes have been introduced and applied to produce pure TiO2 from available titanium ores and mineral sources. This paper describes the production of nano-sized titanium dioxide (TiO2) from ilmenite concentrate provided by the main Iranian Ilmenite processing complex. Ilmenite (FeTiO3) concentrate was decomposed using (70% wt.) potassium hydroxide solution at 220 °C and under air at atmospheric conditions. The decomposed product was leached using hydrochloric acid solution, and Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was applied for chelating and separating iron impurity from the leach solution. Ammonia solution was used for precipitation, and the anatase TiO2 nanoparticles were produced in the following filtration, drying, and calcination processes. The water content of the filtrate solution was evaporated, and it was dried to produce a powdery product. The crystal phases of ilmenite, decomposed ilmenite, and the TiO2 product were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), and the chemical compositions of the ilmenite concentrate, products, and the filtrate were determined using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). The morphological study of the decomposed ilmenite and synthesized-TiO2 was performed using scanning electron microscope (SEM) and field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), respectively. The particle size measurement of the TiO2 product was conducted using dynamic light scattering (DLS) method. The crystal system and lattice parameters were calculated by the Rietveld refinement method. The purity of the produced synthesized-TiO2 was determined to be more than 90% with a mean particle size diameter of around 70 nm. The filtrate solution (as the main byproduct of the process) contained Fe-EDTA chelated complexes, sodium, potassium, and some other constituents that can be used in agricultural fertilizer production.Titanium dioxide (TiO In a novel energy-saving approach, ilmenite concentrates were milled with aluminum powder to produce an agglomerated mixture. The presence of aluminum in the mixture led to production of nascent hydrogen in the system during acid leaching that enhanced the leaching efficiency ( In a solvent extraction route, Fe(III) and Ti(IV) were separated from ilmenite leachate solution in subsequent stages using the Alamnine 800, and PC88A extractant and up to 90% recovery for Ti(IV) was reported ( Recently, the caustic process as a novel method for treating ilmenite has emerged. In this process, ilmenite reacts with potassium hydroxide at 220 °C to produce the decomposed ilmenite (DI) which contains potassium titanate (K In this paper, a modified method for producing TiO Ilmenite concentrate (d A schematic representation of the process is depicted in In the first stage, 12 g ilmenite concentrate, 108 g solid KOH pellets, and 20.5 g deionized water were poured in a stainless steel reactor to facilitate In stage 3, after cooling to room temperature, 100 g of the Na-EDTA powder was poured and dissolved in the leachate solution as the chelating agent. The amount of EDTA was adjusted to molar ratio of EDTA/Fe The filtrate effluent of stage 4 contained Fe(III)-EDTA complexes and some other constituents that was dried at 70 °C to produce dried powder and named (FERTILIZE). A MPD Philips X'pert diffractometer with copper anode (Cu Kα, λ = 1.5406 Å, 2 For determining the loss on ignition (LOI) or gain on ignition (GOI), the samples were first dried at room temperature (about 25 °C) and then ignited up to 1100 °C in an electrical muffle furnace in air atmosphere for 60 min and after desiccating the changes in weight of samples were calculated (ASTM D7348–13). The certainty of chemical analysis was reported about 95%. The particle size distribution of the agglomerated synthesized-TiO The main constituents of the ilmenite concentrate and the DI were determined using ICP-OES analysis and are reported as metal oxide in As presented in The kinetic data of ilmenite decomposition (stage 1) and the DI leaching (stage 2) have been performed previously by other researchers and reported in the references ( The synthesized-TiO The FERTILIZE product contains titanium, iron, calcium, potassium, and sodium. The some of them can be related to the stability constant of metal ion complexes with EDTA presented in In The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum of the ilmenite concentrate, the DI, and the synthesized TiO The Rietveld refinement technique was performed using MAUD software (Materials Analysis using Diffraction) to analyze the crystal parameters of synthesized-TiO The FESEM images of synthesized-TiO 1 μm. These results are consistent with findings of other researchers ( The Dynamic light scattering (DLS) method also showed that the particles of synthesized-TiO The FERTILIZE product contains beneficial constituents such as Fe(III)-EDTA complex, potassium, ammonium, sodium, and chloride ions which are essential elements for effective growth of plants ( This study presents a modified method for producing nano-sized titanium dioxide. The method includes a combination of alkali decomposition of ilmenite and separation of major impurities using EDTA. The purity of the final TiO None. Possible reactions that may occur in the stage 1 (ilmenite decomposition) of the process are presented as follow: Possible reactions that may occur in the stage 2 (acid leaching) of the process are presented as follow: