Expanded polystyrene spheres are spray-coated with a Ti–7Ni-0.5B-binder slurry. The polystyrene core and binder are thermally removed and the resulting Ti-7Ni-0.5B shells are sintered by microwave radiation to produce titanium hollow spheres. Samples sintered at ≤1120°C result in individual hollow spheres with permeable shells, while sintering at higher temperatures lead to an interconnected hollow-sphere structure with solid shells.Porous metallic materials have found wide application in various industries due to their interesting combinations of physical and mechanical properties, such as low density, high specific strength/stiffness and good permeability Hollow-sphere structures of steels with porosity up to 97% can be produced on a commercial scale now. They exhibit excellent energy absorption attributes under compressive loading and have been used as filling materials to strengthen car-pillars. In addition, because of their good damping capacity, HSSs have been used for noise control. Also, steel hollow spheres have the potential to be used as substitutes for solid steel balls in ball bearings and valves for weight savings and therefore improved efficiencies. An emerging development is that hollow metal spheres may find important applications in the new generation of heat exchangers where phase change materials (PCMs) are encapsulated inside the hollow spheres to serve as temperature stabilizers. In this case, hollow spheres with porous shells are desired because the PCMs can fill through the porous shells into the cavity of the spheres, which can subsequently coated to prevent the outflow of the PCMs Microwave (MW) sintering offers fast heating and rapid densification for material systems it works An elemental powder mixture of Ti–7Ni-0.5B (all in wt.%) was blended with commercially pure (CP) hydride-dehydride Ti powder (<30 Cylinder specimens (Ø10×15      An approach has been developed for the fabrication of both individual titanium hollow spheres and titanium hollow sphere structures. Commercially available expanded polystyrene spheres (EPSs) are coated with a Ti–7Ni-0.5B-binder slurry by spray coating. The EPS core and binder are subsequently thermally removed and the resulting hollow Ti–7Ni-0.5B spheres are sintered at different temperatures by microwave (MW) radiation. MW sintering proves to be an effective method for the fast fabrication of titanium hollow spheres arising from their good microwave absorbency, which is determined by the shell thickness of the spheres in relation to the MW skin depth and the large surface area of the hollow spheres. Depending on the MW sintering parameters, both individual titanium hollow spheres and titanium hollow sphere structures can be fabricated by the approach developed. Titanium hollow sphere samples sintered at 1070 This work was funded by the