The article presents the development and construction of a magnetic filter based on the HGMS principle with permanent magnets. It is aimed especially at the assembly of the magnetic circuit using magnets from the material NdFeB. The way of the construction of large magnetic blocks, their magnetization and assembly are described. Further, it contains the measured values of magnetic induction in the middle of the air gap as a function of the width of this gap and of the height of the magnetic blocks in question, as well as the corresponding graphic representation. The high values of the magnetic induction obtained together with favourable price are sufficient reasons for the employment of this type of magnetic circuit in various applications.The practical application of the technology of magnetic separation was at the beginning aimed at the processing of strongly magnetic ores. In the course of the further development, in connection with the possibility of creating stronger and stronger magnetic fields, the sphere of application of this method has further widened. The separation of weakly magnetic minerals of low grain size in a wet process was made possible by the application of the process of the high-gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) which was developed in the second-half of the 20th century and which at present achieves a higher and higher importance. In the two basic respects of the application of HGMS, i.e. the minerals processing with the aim of their enrichment and the elimination of undesirable admixtures from various raw materials, besides the presently used systems of magnetic separators also new solutions are applied from the point of both their function and the creation of the magnetic field. However, besides the basic application mentioned above, also the expansion of the magnetic separation into further domains takes place, e.g. in the treatment of waste waters, in biotechnologies etc. Another prospective application of magnetic separation is also the separation of ballast components (sulphur and ashes) from low-quality coal The magnetic separation is a physical separation process based on the different magnetic properties of the individual components. A particle in a magnetic field is influenced by a number of forces, the resultant force of which determines the trajectory of the particle High values of the gradient of the magnetic field can be achieved in the HGMS process by inserting a ferromagnetic matrix, e.g. of expanded metal, fibres (stainless-steel wool), rods, balls, grooved plates, etc. into a homogeneous magnetic field. On the surface of individual elements of the matrix a magnetic field with a low impact range but with a very high gradient is induced. The homogeneous magnetic field formed in the separation zone in case of classic electromagnetic separators attains values of magnetic induction in the range of 0.3–2 The magnetic field can be also produced by means of permanent ferrite magnets. However, in contrast with previously mentioned medium- and high-intensity magnetic separators, with these ferrite magnets only low values of magnetic induction in the air gap between the magnetic poles are attained. Each pole is in this case (according to the desired capacity of the filter) formed from at least one or more large magnetic blocks consisting of small ferrite blocks. These large magnetic blocks in protecting casings of stainless steel are installed in a closed iron circuit and in the space between them in a separation zone a tank with the removable canister with the matrix is inserted. In the Czech Republic only, more then 200 pieces of simple magnetic filters of this type of various sizes and designs (a scheme of a device with suspension feed from above is presented in Recently we observed a pronounced expansion of permanent magnets of a material on the basis of rare earths, SmCo and especially NdFeB. The high values attained and a further continuous increase in the maximum energy product ( However, with no type of the presented devices with magnets of rare earths a gradient of the magnetic field is produced by inserting a matrix into the magnetic field, as it is in the case with matrix separators operating on the principle of HGMS. However, in this connection the fact must be mentioned that both a separation matrix and permanent magnets are applied in the case of the magnetic separator Ferrous Wheel The achieved magnetic induction of 0.2 These facts led to the intention to apply also in this case magnets based on the rare earths, i.e. in principle to assemble them to large magnetic blocks which (after their installation in a closed iron circuit) would give the possibility of obtaining in the separation zone a magnetic field with substantially higher magnetic induction than it is the case with the application of the presently used large magnetic blocks of ferrites. The technological procedure of the production of large magnetic blocks of ferrites used up to now (the non-magnetized small ferrite blocks are casted in with epoxy resin in a casting mould with the shape of the large block; the resin is then cured and—as the case may be—the whole block is cuted, after that the whole block is magnetized) cannot be used in the case of the material NdFeB. According to the exploration performed up to now no magnetizing device giving the possibility of creating a magnetic field with the necessary high intensity in a sufficiently large space where the whole large block could be installed is at disposal in the Czech Republic and we may assume that even abroad it is not commonly available. According to the data presented by the one producer of NdFeB magnets the recommended magnetic field strength for their magnetization is 2400 The electromagnet, which could be used for the magnetization (and the parameters of which would thus be decisive for the further process) gives the possibility of creating in the middle of the air gap with the width of 38 The system is secured against a possible damage due to acting of strong attractive or repulsive forces in the two following ways. First, each compact plate with 6 pieces of magnets has on its outside perimeter the closed frame with the height of 30 The closed iron circuit into which the magnetic plates were inserted one after another was designed as consisting of two parts, giving the possibility of varying continuously the distance between the casings of the magnetic blocks (i.e. the width of the air gap) in the range of 20–100 In first stage this iron circuit was equipped with two opposite blocks with the same height of 30 In the course of the assemblage of the magnetic system the magnetic induction When these measurements were finished, the remaining procedure was similar to that is the of the already mentioned magnetic filters with ferrite magnets. Into the space between the casings of the magnetic blocks a tank was placed with the external width of 36 The complete magnetic filter ( The measured values of magnetic induction are presented in As with magnetic blocks of ferrites also in this case the magnetic induction does not attain the same value in the whole space of the air gap in question between both magnetic poles. As it has been found by the verification performed for orientation of the homogeneity of the magnetic field in the air gap with a width of 30 By means of permanent magnets of the NdFeB type we succeeded in creating in the space of the air gap a magnetic field whose magnetic induction value is approximately 3.4 times higher than those of ferrite magnets. Moreover, unlike the magnetic field formed on the surface of the drum, roll or rod where the magnetic induction decreases rapidly with the increasing distance from this surface, in this case the magnetic field in the space in question is relatively homogenous (naturally taking into account the already mentioned domain of the border plane). The selected construction system (i.e. the assemblage of the magnetic blocks from the individual plates) gives together with the suitably chosen width and length of the air gap the possibility of designing optimally a magnetic filter respecting the parameters determined on the basis of technological tests of the magnetic filtration of the suspension in question. It is also important that the mentioned high values of magnetic induction in the air gap (obtained up to now only by means of electromagnets) were achieved without high costs. The very satisfactory technical parameters together with the favourable price of this type of magnetic circuit with permanent NdFeB magnets clearly are some good preconditions for its spreading not only present in the field of applications but also in other domains, in laboratories as well as industrial plants. The Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic supported this work, project grant No. S3046004.