Most initial reviews of FERC’s order have offered scathing criticism of its negative policy consequences. Our critique adds two perspectives not represented thus far in the reaction to FERC’s order. First, we explain how the FERC majority got to the point where it felt compelled to take action against state subsidies and why that judgment, although understandable in some respects, is misguided. FERC’s action follows logically from a flawed policy adopted by a Democratic-majority Commission in 2011. Second, we explain why FERC’s order fails to create a mechanism for a just and reasonable price and violates both the Administrative Procedure Act and Federal Power Act. It is therefore likely to be set aside by a court during the judicial review process.On December 19, 2019, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) sent shockwaves through the electricity industry by issuing an order dramatically expanding the Minimum Offer Price Rule in PJM’s capacity market ( Most initial reviews of FERC’s order have offered scathing criticism of its negative policy consequences, especially the adverse effects it will have on renewable energy development. As those commentaries have pointed out, FERC’s order undermines state policies aimed at accomplishing a range of objectives important to states, including helping to navigate the Nation toward a more environmentally sustainable energy future. Citing these consequences, some commentators have suggested that this order is a political favor by the Trump Administration for the fossil fuels industry. Our critique, while not inconsistent with these other commentaries, adds two perspectives not represented thus far in the reaction to FERC’s order. First, even as we are critical of FERC’s conclusions in its order, we explain how the FERC majority got to the point where it felt compelled to take action against state subsidies and why that judgment, although understandable in some respects, is misguided. FERC’s action follows logically from a flawed policy adopted by a Democratic-majority Commission in 2011. Second, we explain why FERC’s order, in addition to creating poor policy consequences, also fails to create a mechanism for a just and reasonable price and violates both the Administrative Procedure Act and Federal Power Act. It is therefore likely to be set aside by a court during the judicial review process. In areas of the country with competitive electricity markets, FERC’s mandate under the Federal Power Act is to ensure that Regional Transmission Organizations (RTOs) operating capacity markets and other wholesale electricity markets are maintaining competitive conditions that are “just and reasonable” (Federal Power Act § 205, 16 U.S.C. § 824d(a)). Maintaining competition is a particularly complicated task in electricity markets, because markets for electricity—and especially capacity markets—are highly centralized administrative creations that involve numerous judgments by RTOs. RTOs must ensure that the myriad transactions that comprise the market support a grid that reliably delivers electricity to customers under rapidly changing conditions. Capacity markets, like other electricity markets, are susceptible to efforts to subvert competition. As capacity markets approach the physical limits of the grid’s ability to deliver power, both supply and demand are relatively price inelastic. This in turn creates opportunities for capacity sellers to influence prices to their advantage. Particularly problematic are some vertically integrated firms, vestiges of traditional monopolist utilities, which include both generators and load-serving entities. A firm that buys more electricity (through its load-serving entities) than it sells (through its generators) may gain an advantage from bidding into the capacity market at below its costs in an effort to drive down the market clearing price. All three northeastern RTOs have adopted buyer market power mitigation policies that set floors on capacity market bids for new generation. In PJM, the policy is known as the Minimum Offer Price Rule (MOPR) ( As the 2000s came to an end, the states of Maryland and New Jersey expressed concern that PJM markets were not inducing enough capacity to meet future demand ( In 2011, a group of generators in PJM filed a complaint with FERC alleging that the new Maryland and New Jersey subsidies were undermining competition in the PJM capacity market ( The 2011 proceeding thus significantly expanded the MOPR beyond its original objective of combatting price suppression strategies by net-buyer sellers so that the rule now addressed “uneconomic entry” more generally. This expansion and reorientation of the MOPR set the agency’s course toward future policies that would target state subsidies much more broadly, including subsidies for renewable energy and nuclear power. PJM generators also sued in federal court to challenge the Maryland and New Jersey subsidies. In 2016, the Supreme Court held that the Federal Power Act preempted the subsidies because the subsidies “operate[d] within” the federally regulated PJM capacity auction by tying compensation under the contract to the price in the PJM auction ( Despite the Supreme Court’s validation of state subsidies not tethered to federally regulated wholesale markets, nonsubsidized generators continued to press FERC to take action against such subsidies. In 2016, a group of generation companies filed an administrative complaint alleging that PJM’s MOPR was unjust and unreasonable, and therefore in violation of the Federal Power Act, for failing “to prevent the artificial suppression of prices in the RPM market by below-cost offers for existing resources whose continued operation is being subsidized by State-approved out-of-market payments” ( After receiving filings from the complainants, PJM, and intervenors, FERC issued an order on June 29, 2018 ( FERC issued a second order in the proceeding on December 19, 2019, directing more significant changes to PJM’s MOPR. Despite having suggested a resource-specific Fixed Resource Requirement in its June 2018 order, FERC now rejected that approach as inadequate ( FERC’s December 2019 order thus continues the agency on a path it set in 2011 when it expanded PJM’s MOPR beyond net-buyer sellers to combat “uneconomic” resources more generally. In broadening its mandate, however, FERC has embroiled itself in a quagmire. Labeling resources “uneconomic” merely because they benefit from public policies implies comparison with a baseline of “economic” resources that receive no policy support. In reality, no such baseline exists. Electricity markets are heavily regulated administrative constructs rife with policy judgments. Further, almost every type of electricity generation benefits from a government subsidy. In attacking policies that permeate the market, FERC has thus forced itself to rely on arbitrary distinctions to limit the scope of its order to a manageable breadth. The result creates indefensible inefficiencies and trammels state regulatory authority. The Federal Power Act directs FERC to ensure that wholesale electricity rates are “just and reasonable” ( FERC’s order fails this standard, because it requires PJM to make changes that will increase prices and quantity in the capacity market even though the capacity market is currently procuring more than enough capacity to meet customer demand for electricity. PJM’s most recent State of the Market Report projects reserve margins in the range of 22%–25% in the next few years ( FERC’s order will force subsidized resources out of the PJM capacity market by requiring them to bid at prices above the market clearing level. This will force the capacity market to procure a quantity of capacity that ignores the existence of the subsidized resources. The result will be to increase retail electricity rates as customers are made to pay for excess capacity that is not needed. Forcing customers to pay unnecessary costs was one of the motivations for FERC to turn to competitive markets in the 1990s. It is ironic that FERC now is using the mantra of competition to force customers to pay unnecessary costs. Higher prices can be just and reasonable if they are necessary to support reliability. The price increases that FERC’s order will cause, however, cannot be justified by reliability concerns. PJM’s administratively created demand curve already essentially ensures that the market-clearing quantity of capacity will be adequate to meet peak demand. If anything, with the capacity market demand curve’s downward slope, state subsidies that reduce capacity prices (shifting the supply curve to the right) increase the market-clearing capacity quantity. Economists have postulated that there is a potential risk of market collapse from a vicious cycle of escalating subsidies as states race to outdo each other in order to keep their generation competitive, with the impact of driving other investment out of the market. FERC expressed a concern about such a race-to-the-bottom in its June 2018 order ( Even if this were a real risk, however, there is a natural brake on such a dynamic. Each state’s citizens bear the costs of subsidies and can protect their interests at the ballot box. Moreover, FERC’s order may well itself induce the collapse of the capacity market. This could occur either if utilities withdraw from the market because the MOPR excludes their resources or if states escalate their generation subsidies to offset the effects of the MOPR expansion. The collapse of the capacity market is the very outcome FERC purports to want to avoid, but FERC’s order threatens to turn it into a self-fulfilling prophecy. Finally, just as FERC’s 2011 decision to expand PJM’s MOPR to new gas-fired generation led to its recent orders expanding the MOPR to all generation resources, FERC’s order will lead the agency to take further drastic actions that will cause additional damage to PJM markets. FERC’s order is limited in application to PJM’s capacity market, but its reasoning applies equally—if not more so—to other electricity markets, including the much larger energy market. Recall the premise underlying FERC’s order: state subsidies are suppressing prices in capacity markets. If that is true for capacity markets, it is certainly also true for other electricity markets. Indeed, many of the state subsidies specifically targeted by FERC’s order, such as Zero Emission Credits for nuclear power and Renewable Portfolio Standards for renewable energy, compensate electricity generation rather than capacity. Thus, the reasoning of FERC’s order, if sustained, will lead the agency to institute similar measures for other PJM markets, causing additional havoc. Under the FERC’s order makes a series of distinctions that are both underinclusive and overinclusive. First, FERC’s order is underinclusive insofar as it applies only to state financial subsidies that specifically target electricity generation, but not to other public policies that influence the costs of constructing and operating a generation resource—for example, state economic development incentives, state corporate income or property tax treatment, and regulatory requirements. Second, FERC’s order is overinclusive in that it targets all state subsidies without regard to whether a subsidy is economically justified—that is, regardless whether a subsidy is aimed at correcting a market failure. Whether a state subsidy is economically justified or not is a controversial question, and one over which many battles are being fought in state legislatures and public utility commissions. FERC reasonably discerns that it lacks a standard and the expertise to decide which state subsidies are justified and which are not, let alone what the proper magnitude of such subsidies are. But recognizing its difficulty in distinguishing between economically justified subsidies and unjustified subsidies does not allow FERC to ignore the difference and simply to presume that all subsidies are uneconomic and harmful to competition. This is the essence of arbitrary and capricious. Faced with state subsidies that may be affecting outcomes in PJM’s capacity market, FERC had a choice between accommodating state policies or attacking them. FERC clearly chose the attack option. Properly understood, however, the Federal Power Act’s allocation of regulatory jurisdiction requires FERC to accommodate state policies regarding generation. As to whether states have the authority to subsidize electricity generation, the Federal Power Act settled that question almost a century ago, reserving to states the authority to make policy regarding generation and retail transactions ( FERC’s order purports to respect state authority to subsidize generation ( Our system of energy federalism is designed to be one of mutual accommodation. States and the federal government each act within their respective spheres of authority, allowing the other to act within its appropriate sphere. FERC’s new MOPR order, by contrast, renders state sovereignty a meaningless formalism, with the federal agency free to take actions deliberately designed to deprive state policies of effect. If state policies are within the legitimate bounds of state authority designated by the Federal Power Act—which FERC does not deny in its order—then FERC must accept those state policies and not subject them to targeted counter action. The Commission’s own reasoning regarding federal subsidies supports the argument against it. FERC reasons that it cannot extend the MOPR to federal subsidies because to do so would “disregard or nullify the effect of federal legislation” ( While other commentators have characterized FERC’s MOPR order as a political favor from the Trump Administration for the fossil fuel industry, we are less cynical of the agency’s motivations—although no less critical of its reasoning and outcome. FERC decided back in 2011 to expand the PJM MOPR beyond net-buyer market power and to target state subsidies. Several years later, this decision put the agency in an impossible position, flying in the face of two unavoidable realities. The first reality is that states have the authority under the Federal Power Act to enact subsidies for generation, as long as the subsidies are not directly tethered to a federally regulated market. FERC thus cannot undo state subsidies. Even if it could retaliate against them, such countermeasures would not solve the problem of subsidies. They would only unproductively escalate the conflict with states and exacerbate inefficiencies in the market. The second reality is that public policies that financially advantage participants in electricity markets are ubiquitous. It is thus impossible to operate an electricity market unaffected by policy subsidies. FERC cannot target everyone, so the agency has arbitrarily limited the scope of its countermeasures to focus on only some subsidies. Until FERC confronts these realities, it will continue to pursue a war that it cannot win—a war that will cause considerable damage to the very markets that FERC purports to be protecting. This is not just and reasonable; this is arbitrary and capricious and contrary to the Federal Power Act.