A study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that the presence of fly ash and other artifactual materials (AMs) significantly increases the toxicity of urban soil and street dust. AMs were distinguished as artifacts (artificial particles > 2 mm in size), and particulate artifacts (≤2 mm in size); street dust was the <63 μm fraction of street sediments. Reference artifacts, street dusts, and topsoils representing different land use types in Detroit, Michigan were analyzed for miscellaneous radionuclides, trace elements, magnetic susceptibility (MS), and acetic acid-extractable (leachable) Pb. Background levels were established using native glacial sediments. Street sediments were found to have a roadside provenance, hence street dusts inherited their contamination primarily from local soils. All soils and dusts had radionuclide concentrations similar to background levels, and radiological hazard indices within the safe range. Artifacts, fly ash-impacted soils and street dusts contained elevated concentrations of toxic trace elements, which varied with land use type, but none produced a significant amount of leachable Pb. It is inferred that toxic elements in AMs are not bioavailable because they are occluded within highly insoluble materials. Hence, these results do not support our hypothesis. Rather, AMs contribute to artificially-elevated total concentrations leading to an overestimation of toxicity. MS increased with increasing total concentration, hence proximal sensing can be used to map contamination level, but the weak correlation between total and leachable Pb suggests that such maps do not necessarily indicate the associated biohazard. Home site soils with total Pb concentrations >500 mg kg−1 were sporadically toxic. Thus, these results argue against street dust as the local cause of seasonally elevated blood-Pb levels in children. Lead-bearing home site soil tracked directly indoors to form house dust is an alternative exposure pathway.Eolian transport of street dust by wind and traffic is widely recognized as a major contributor to particulate air pollution in urban areas ( Artifactual materials (AMs) commonly found in urban soils ( The present investigation was initiated after a previous study suggested that seasonal fluctuations in the blood-Pb levels of inner city children in Detroit, Michigan were attributable to the soil → dust → child exposure pathway ( The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that the presence of fly ash and other AMs significantly increases the toxicity of urban soil and street dust. We studied sites in Detroit city where we first established background concentrations using native glacial sediments. We then analyzed topsoils and street dusts from different land use types for magnetic susceptibility, radionuclide composition, trace elemental composition, and leachable Pb. Because little was known about the trace elemental composition of AMs, we analyzed a set of reference artifacts. We also studied street sediments and dusts using reflected-light and scanning electron microscopy to identify the presence of particulate artifacts, and to establish their provenance. Note that in this study, we avoid making direct comparisons between soil and dust data because soil-sized material is by definition <2000 μm in size, whereas dust is < 63 μm. Detroit city is located on the Detroit River in southeastern Michigan. The city lies in a glaciolacustrine lowland setting, bounded on the west by a morainal upland. Detroit is underlain by Paleozoic sedimentary bedrock overlain by upper Pleistocene glacial drift. The drift sequence is generally comprised of ∼35 m of clayey diamicton deposited as basal till, overlain by ∼6 m of lithologically similar “waterlaid till” that was deposited subaqueously in glacial Lake Maumee ( The urban landscape of Detroit city was classified into six land use types ( Natural parkland soils were known to be contaminated throughout Detroit city ( Sediment, soil and artifact samples were pulverized to <63 μ in size using a carbon-tungsten puck-and-ring mill prior to radiological, chemical and magnetic susceptibility analyses. The analytical methods used were non-destructive, hence the same samples were analyzed sequentially by gamma spectrometry, x-ray fluorescence spectroscopy, and magnetic susceptibility. Radionuclide activity measurements were made using Gamma spectrometry using a high purity Ge well-detector coupled to DSA-LX Multichannel analyzer with GENIE-2000 software. The gamma-ray detector was calibrated with solid standards (RGU-1 for Total concentrations of trace elements were determined using a popular (Niton XL 3t) portable x-ray fluorescence spectrometer (pXRF) calibrated with NIST standards 165a, 2709 and Till-4. Triplicate analyses of the standards showed that relative errors were within ±10% of the reported standard value. Because of its environmental significance, leachable Pb was determined for all 10 artifact types, and five of each of the most heavily contaminated residential home site soils, fly ash-impacted soils, and street dusts. Samples were analyzed in triplicate using 1 g of pulverized material and 20 ml of HOAc (pH 3.2), and shaken for 18 h on a wrist-action shaker. Lead was measured by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry using an Agilent 7700x instrument. Relative standard deviations of the analytical results were ≤15%. The detection limit for Pb was 0.5 μg L Silt-sized and finer street dust grains cannot be identified accurately using light microscopy alone. Hence, particulate artifacts in the sand fraction of street sediments were obtained using a 35 g aliquot of <2 mm fraction, which was first dispersed in 1 N Na The mean concentrations of radionuclides in native glacial sediments are shown in The mean total concentrations of trace elements ( Artifacts had mean Reference artifacts contained a variety of trace elements with variable concentrations ( Residential home site, demolition site, and fly ash-impacted soils had mean concentrations of Urban soils contained much higher total concentrations of trace elements, especially Pb and As, than the average surface sediment ( Street dust samples had mean concentrations of Street dust had mean total concentrations of Pb, As, Cd, Ni, Cr and S that indicate some anthropogenic enrichment relative to the average glacial sediment ( All of the reference artifacts were found to produce extremely low levels of HOAc-extractable Pb, and values for steel-making slag, coal, mortar, concrete, coal ash and cinder block were <0.5 μg L Urban soils had values of MS that were at least five times those of the average surface sediment ( Fly ash was the most common particulate artifact found in street sediments, along with sparse glass, brick and coal ( The widespread geographic distribution of microspheres in residential soils shows that all parts of Detroit have been impacted to varying degrees by airborne deposition of fly ash ( Urban street sediments were produced by roadside erosion, and therefore street dusts have a provenance primarily in nearby neighborhood soils. This is indicated by: 1) field observations of artifacts being actively eroded from roadside soils by running water, 2) the similar geographic distribution and micromorphology of particulate artifacts in street sediments and adjacent fly ash-impacted soils, and 3) highly elevated levels of As noted above, fly ash particulates are one source of contamination. It is well-known that radionuclides and heavy metals are concentrated in coal combustion residuals, and many studies have shown that airborne deposition of fly ash results in elevated values of MS and heavy metal pollutant loading ( The measured activity concentrations of radionuclides in Detroit soils are comparable to urban soils elsewhere ( All of the reference artifacts contained toxic trace elements, some at very high concentrations, which indicates that particulate artifacts certainly contributed to elevated total concentrations. However, HOAc-extractable Pb was negligible (<0.5 μg L In contrast to urban soils, in which Pb and As were the main contaminants, Pb and Cd predominated in street dusts. Cd was not detected in most home site soils. Hence, the abundance of Cd may reflect a provenance in demolition site and fly ash-impacted soils, or direct deposition of auto-related wastes (e.g., oil, tire rubber) onto the street surface. Overall, street dusts contained lower concentrations of toxic elements than soils. Total Pb concentrations were generally <200 mg kg The only soils capable of producing potentially toxic levels of Pb were found at residential home sites, which included the four most heavily polluted soils. Three out of four of these soils yielded HOAc-extractable Pb levels approaching the TCLP trigger value, whereas none of the most heavily contaminated street dusts produced significant concentrations. The EPA’s current SSL for total-Pb is 400 mg kg This study tested the hypothesis that the presence of AMs significantly increases the toxicity of urban soil and street dust. The reference artifacts were indeed found to contain significant concentrations of radionuclides and toxic trace elements, and particulate artifacts were widespread in street sediments and dusts. However, none of the artifacts had radiological hazard indices beyond the safe range, and none of the artifacts, fly ash-impacted soils or street dusts produced a significant amount of leachable Pb. It is inferred that Pb and other toxic trace elements in AMs have negligible bioavailability because they are occluded within highly insoluble materials. This implies that particulate artifacts contribute to artificially-elevated total concentrations, leading to an overestimation of toxicity. MS increased with increasing total concentration, hence soil magnetic susceptibility surveying can be used to map contamination level, but the weak correlation between total and leachable Pb suggests that such maps do not necessarily indicate the associated biohazard. In contrast to street dusts, home site soils with total Pb concentrations >500 mg kg Thanks to Derrick Lingle for the fly ash sample, and Russell Losco for the steel-making slag. Special thanks to the many property owners who allowed us to test their soils, and to Katie Krupp, Max Denny and Ben Gaskevicius for their help in the laboratory, and Brendan Towle for assistance in the field. Thanks to the Lumingen instrument facility at Wayne State University. Funding by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at