The washing cost of coal is usually reduced through optimization study. Increase in plant feed rate without major capital investment would also reduce washing cost. At Tata Steel, dense media (DM) cyclone treats around 80% of the washery feed and, hence, feed rate to the washery can be increased when proper arrangements are made to increase the feed rate to DM cyclone.
                  Published literature reveals that slurry flow rate to the hydrocyclone can be increased by increasing the feed inlet pressure. At enhanced feed inlet pressure, cut size of separation can be maintained through design modifications in the hydrocyclone. However, information related to the effect of increased feed inlet pressure on the DM cyclone performance is limited.
                  The paper discusses in detail the possibility of increasing feed rate to DM cyclone by increasing the feed inlet pressure and required changes in the outlet diameter of the DM cyclone. Effect of increased feed inlet pressure on media behavior of the DM cyclone is also addressed.The Jamadoba washery of Jharia group supplies around 0.5 million tonnes/annum of clean coal to the steel works for the coke-making process. The Jharia group coal is one of the best prime coking coal available in India for conventional coke-making process. However, the overall cost of clean coal is quite high, mainly due to the underground mining method. Hence, improvement in washing method is needed to reduce the cost of clean coal. In this washery, coarse coal (−15+0.5 mm) is treated in dense media (DM) cyclone, and fine coal (−0.5 mm) is treated in flotation cells. About 80% of the feed to the washery reports to DM cyclone, and the remaining 20% to the flotation circuit. The specifications for the washed coal are 17% ash (max.) and 9.5% moisture (max.), respectively. This coal does not respond well to the gravity separation process due to the presence of high near-gravity material (NGM) in the coarse coal feed and, hence, the Ep for the DM cyclone operation is also high (in the range of 0.04–0.06). As per the plant design specification, feed rate to the coarse circuit can not be increased without any design modification, while flotation circuit has the capacity to treat additional fine coal. Increasing the number of DM cyclone can increase feed rate to the coarse circuit. Experimental work by The first option of increasing the number of DM cyclone to increase feed rate to the coarse circuit was not considered since adding more DM cyclones in the coarse circuit would require capital investment and floor space. The second or third option of increasing VF diameter or spigot diameter to increase the feed rate to the coarse circuit was not acceptable since in a washery, VF and spigot diameter of the DM cyclone are selected on the basis of washability characteristics of the raw coal. The fourth option of increasing feed inlet pressure of the DM cyclone to increase feed rate to the coarse circuit was best suited, as it requires minimum modification in the existing process and, hence, the capital investment would be low. Many researchers have studied the effect of process parameters on hydrocyclone performance. As early as 1960s, De Gelder et al. (1952) and Dhalstrom et al. (1954) have shown that the pressure drop in hydrocyclone is linearly related to its throughput. The empirical model of hydrocyclone as proposed by In case of DM cyclone, change in process parameter would effect separation of coal particles and also the media split. A detail study by In the present study, effects of four important process variables viz., feed rate, VF diameter, spigot diameter and feed inlet pressure on DM cyclone performance were studied. On the basis of the tests results, process variables were modified to enhance the feed rate to DM cyclone. The paper discusses in detail the procedure of implementing the idea of increasing DM cyclone throughput by increasing the feed inlet pressure and the VF diameter. An advance statistical method is used to evaluate the benefit from the process improvement. In the laboratory, tests were carried out at controlled conditions following design of experiments to find out the effect of increase in feed inlet pressure on feed rate and performance of DM cyclone. Laboratory experiments were carried out with coal and magnetite sample received from the Jamadoba washery. Coal particles of size less than 2.0 mm were used as feed, and the tests were carried out on 4-in. diameter DM cyclone. The magnetite-to-coal ratio was maintained at 4:1, and the relative density of the feed media was kept at 1.35 following the existing plant condition. DM cyclones of the plant are gravity fed, and the vertical feed inlet is connected to feed distributor as shown in At the Jamadoba washery, coarse coal is treated on four DM cyclones. These DM cyclones are equally distributed in to two streams where each stream contains two DM cyclones. On the basis of the findings from the laboratory tests, feed inlet pressure was increased in DM cyclones of the second stream. Feed inlet pressure for DM cyclones of the second stream was enhanced by increasing the static pressure head and in this process, the height difference between the feed box and DM cyclone was increased. With the available space in the plant, feed inlet pressure could be increased up to 6.4 psi (11d) from the present level of 5.2 psi (9 Chaston (1958) proposed a formula for calculation of approximate capacity of cyclone based on the simple hydraulic theory and the study of published literature. The formula indicates that by increasing feed inlet pressure, slurry flow rate to the cyclone can be increased. Ideally, with increase in flow rate, velocity of the slurry will increase. In laminar flow regime, with increase in slurry velocity, the radial velocity of the particle will also increase, and this would reduce the drag force on each particle as per the equation given below At low drag force, particles will move towards the cyclone wall, i.e., the hypothetical surface of no axial velocity would shift towards the cyclone wall; as a result, volume of the separation zone would increase, and this would facilitate in increasing slurry flow rate to the DM cyclone. At high flow rate, tangential velocity of particles will increase and, hence, centrifugal force on feed particles would also increase, as per  Consequent to high feed inlet pressure, when flow rate to the DM cyclone increases, mass flow rate to DM cyclone overflow and underflow would also increase. For good-quality feed coal, proportion of overflow would be much more than the underflow. To increase mass flow rate in the overflow, options available were either allowing pressure drop to take place along the DM cyclone axis or increasing the VF diameter. In the first case, due to the development of the free vortex along DM cyclone axis, a strong axial velocity will carry magnetite particles to overflow. Therefore, pressure drop would increase relative density difference between overflow and underflow and also the relative density offset between the relative density of the feed media and relative density of separation (RD Increase in the VF diameter would reduce the pressure drop inside the DM cyclone. In this situation, axial velocity will be much less than the previous case and, hence, mass flow of fine coal and magnetite to the overflow stream will be less as compared to the previous case. At higher slurry flow rate, the tangential velocity of the slurry in the DM cyclone will improve separation of fine coal and NGM, thereby clean coal yield would increase.  DM cyclone tests were carried out at different feed inlet pressures in the laboratory. Performance of DM cyclone operation at different feed inlet pressure needs to be measured on an uniform criteria. Over the years, researchers (   In the laboratory tests, magnetite used was finely ground that is 95% below 45 μm. In the plant within the available space, static pressure head was raised from 5.2 to 6.4 psi (i.e., from 9 Suggested modifications are implemented in the DM cyclones of stream 2, and then the process performance of the DM cyclones of streams 1 and 2 were compared. In the preceding section, process performance of streams 1 and 2 were compared on the basis of a few samples collected from the plant. In the plant, process variables are many and their fluctuations are common. Considering the effect of fluctuation in the process variables on the clean coal yield, the performance of the streams 1 and 2 should not be compared only on the basis of few data points. Therefore, a robust statistical method was used for comparing the performance of the DM cyclones from streams 1 and 2. Percentage ash in the feed, clean coal and rejects of the DM cyclones were collected against each data points from streams 1 and 2. The coarse clean coal yield corresponding to each data point was calculated through ash balance method. The process performance of the DM cyclones from streams 1 and 2 are compared on the basis of clean coal yield through detailed plant data analysis using advanced statistical techniques. Noisy data sets were removed using the outlier analysis. Data sets were then compared on the basis of comparison of regression line method to find out the difference in clean coal yield between the DM cyclone from streams 1 and 2. The method involves three major steps: establishing simple linear relationship between clean coal yield and feed ash using data sets collected from streams 1 and 2, fitting of the regression lines using a pooled/mean gradient and then comparing the regression lines from the mean separation value. The simple linear relationship of the clean coal yield and feed ash for DM cyclones of streams 1 and 2 are shown in The Ideally, the yield differences between streams 1 and 2 should be the same all along the regression lines, this being possible only when the gradients for both the regression lines are the same. In the present case, the gradients of both the regression lines are different due to the paucity of sufficient data points in each case. Therefore, fitting of regression lines is essential for attempting a better comparison. The Having met various statistical criteria as discussed, separation between the regression lines was calculated from the difference of intercepts The variance of the difference of the intercepts was calculated A significant Therefore, for the increase in feed inlet pressure from 5.2 to 6.4 psi, feed rate to the DM cyclone can be increased by 15%. The additional flow rate imparts higher tangential velocity to the slurry and this would improve clean coal yield by 0.6–0.7% through better separation of the fine-sized feed coal and the NGM. Increase in feed inlet pressure to increase the feed rate in DM cyclone would create a pressure drop along the DM cyclone axis. The free vortex, thus, formed would increase the axial velocity of the particles. This would adversely effect the media behavior and would cause misplacement of coal particles during separation. Consequent to increase in feed inlet pressure and feed rate, the VF diameter of the DM cyclone should be increased in proportion to the additional slurry flow rate towards the overflow. This modification would reduce the pressure drop along the DM cyclone axis, and it would also reduce the axial velocity of the particles. The additional slurry flow rate in the DM cyclone would increase the tangential velocity of the particles which would help in better separation of the fine-sized coal particles and NGM and, hence, it would improve clean coal yield in the DM cyclone. Therefore, the study indicates, for the increase in feed inlet pressure from 5.2 to 6.4 psi and proportionate increase in VF diameter, the feed rate to the DM cyclone can be increased by 15% and in this process clean coal yield would improve by 0.6%. Area of inlet Cross-sectional area of the particle Percent combustible in the feed Pooled/mean gradient of the regression lines Percent incombustible in the feed Drag coefficient Diameter of a spherical particle (cm) Mean separation between the regression lines Inlet diameter Gravitational acceleration (cm/s Constant log Total number of data points Total number of data points in stream 2 Total number of data points in stream 1 Feed inlet pressure Slurry density Density of the solid Percent solid in the underflow Slurry flow rate (tph) Radius of tangential motion Radial distance from the axis of symmetry in cylindrical coordinates (cm/s) Correlation coefficient Spigot diameter Underflow solid tonnage Radial velocity of the fluid at a point in the cyclone Radial velocity of the particle Volume of the particles Tangential component of the particle Percent combustible in the clean coal Vortex finder diameter Tangential velocity of the fluid (cm/s) Percent combustible in the rejects Variance of the separation between the regression lines Mean feed ash of DM cyclone from stream 2 Mean feed ash of DM cyclone from stream 1 Mean clean coal yield of DM cyclone from stream 2 Mean clean coal yield of DM cyclone from stream 1 The authors express their sincere thanks to Dr. O.N. Mohanty, Chief, Research and Development and Scientific Services Division, Mr. R.S. Singh, GM, Jharia and Mr. N.P. Singh, Head, Jamadoba Washery, for their keen interest and constant encouragement during the course of the work. Authors are also thankful to the Geological Services of Jamadoba Washery for providing necessary data and support to carry out the study.