In the present study, a causticization method combined with alkaline leaching and purification process was used to treat with lead refining slag. In the alkaline leaching process, the effects of alkaline concentration, temperature, liquid to solid ratio, leaching time, and agitating speed were investigated, and the optimized leaching conditions were established: 2 mol/L of NaOH concentration, 2 h of leaching time, 85 °C of temperature, 6 mL/g of liquid-to-solid ratio, 800 r/min of agitating speed. Under these conditions, the leaching rate of Sn reached 92% while the leaching rate of Pb was about 29%. After a purification process, the concentration of lead in the leachate was reduced to 0.0001 g/L. Finally, high-purity calcium stannate (CaSnO3·3H2O) was obtained from the purified solution by the causticization process under the conditions: 5 g of CaO dosage (per 200 mL solution), 85 °C of temperature, 2 h of time and 800 r/min of agitating speed. The precipitation rate of Sn was as high as 99.22%.Lead acid batteries are widely applied in various vehicles and their grids generally contain plenty of tin-lead alloy, thus the used lead acid batteries will be a significant secondary resource for recycling lead. Pyrometallurgical process is the most widely used regeneration method of used lead acid batteries To effectively recover valuable metals from the slag, a number of methods have been developed for the treatment of lead refining slag, which can be summarized as follows: direct carbon reduction The method of direct carbon reduction usually adopts a reduction smelting by reverberatory furnace. Lead, tin and antimony are readily to form alloy in the process and the residual alkali can play a role in maintaining the fluidity of slag system Therefore, it is necessary to explore an economical method to treat the slag, especially for the materials containing high tin. In the process of some solid wastes containing tin, such as waste printed circuit board and tin anode slime, hydrometallurgy method is cleaner and more efficient, and has been extensively applied Inspired by previous studies, a novel technology consisting of alkaline leaching, purification, and causticization processes was developed for the extraction of tin and preparation of calcium stannate from lead refining slag. The effects of NaOH concentration, liquid-to-solid ratio, agitating speed, leaching temperature and time on the extraction of tin from the slag were detailly investigated based on thermodynamic calculations. The effects of CaO dosage, agitating speed, causticization temperature and time on the precipitation rate of Sn from the leachate after the purification process were also studied. Finally, the calcium stannate obtained were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric-differential thermo analysis (TG-DTA), and scanning electron microscopy combined with energy dispersive spectrometry (SEM-EDS). The lead refining slag used in this study was obtained from a pyrometallurgical smelter of waste lead acid batteries in China. Firstly, the sample were dried at 100 °C for 24 h and then were digested by HNO The leaching experiments were conducted in an atmospheric pressure agitating leaching setup, whose schematic was given in our previous reports Metal-H The concentration of NaOH plays an important role in a leaching process It is well-known that leaching temperature is an important factor on a leaching process. Increasing temperature can accelerate reaction rate but consume more energy. To investigate the effect of leaching temperature on the extraction of Sn and Pb, a series of experiments were conducted from 25 °C to 95 °C, and the results are shown in Liquid-to-solid ratio (L/S) is another important factor on the extraction of Sn and Pb  Agitating is also a key factor by reducing the boundary layer diffusion resistance and increase the diffusion rate of reactant on the extractions of Sn and Pb in a hydrometallurgical process According to the above studies, the optimum conditions for the alkaline leaching experiment were established as: 85 °C of leaching temperature, 2.0 mol/L of NaOH concentration, 8 mL/g of liquid-to-solid ratio, 2 h of leaching time, and 800 r/min of agitating speed. In order to confirm the experimental results, two confirmation experiments were preformed, and the results are listed in Based on the different sulfur ion affinity for metal ions in water, a purification process by adding Na A causticization process with CaO powder was performed to obtain calcium stannate product from the leach solution after the purification process. The possible chemical reaction during the causticization process is as follows: It is well-known that CaO dosage plays a crucial role in the causticization process. Hence, the effect of CaO dosage was first investigated under the following conditions: 85 °C of temperature, 2 h of causticization time, and 600r/min of agitating speed. The results are presented in Temperature also plays an important role in a chemical reaction, and the effect of causticization temperature on the precipitation rate of Sn was investigated under the following conditions: 5 g of CaO dosage, 2 h of causticization time, and 600 r/min of agitating speed. The results are presented in Reaction time is another important factor on the causticization process and thus the effect of time on the precipitation rate of Sn was investigated under the following conditions: 5 g of CaO dosage, 85 °C of temperature, and 600 r/min of agitating speed. The results are shown in  Based on the above study, the optimum causticization conditions were established as: 85 °C of temperature, 5 g of CaO dosage per 200 mL leach solution, 2 h of time, and 800 r/min of the stirring speed. Under these conditions, the precipitation rate of Sn could reach 99%. In order to confirm the result, an expand experiment was conducted in a baker of 1 L, and the results are listed in To further confirm the resulting product, the sample obtained was subjected to SEM-EDS and TG-DTA analyses, results of which are presented in Thermodynamic calculation and experimental results indicated that the tin contained in lead refining slag could be effectively extracted by alkaline leaching. The leaching parameters including NaOH concentration, temperature, leaching time, agitating speed and liquid-to-solid ratio have significant effects on the extraction of Sn. The optimized leaching conditions have been established as: 85 °C of leaching temperature, 2.0 mol/L of NaOH concentration, 8 mL/g of liquid-to-solid ratio, 2 h of leaching time, and 800 r/min of agitating speed. Under these conditions, the leaching rate of Sn reached 92.98% while that of Pb was 28.52%. The lead dissolved in the leachate could be effectively removed by a purification process with Na The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the