Following the proposal of deriving statistical entropy maps from multidimensional separation curves, an extension is proposed to allow to compare the separation efficiency of various separation processes. This is achieved by integrating the entropy map weighted by the mass distribution of the particles in the feed. This proposal has several advantages: its straightforward extension to multidimensional partition curves, its scalar value (which allows for a natural ranking of processes), its flexibility to adapt to each and every feed, and its non-parametric character. A typical dynamic air classification process of an iron ore is presented as an example.The multidimensional characterization of separation processes is a key requirement for a profound understanding and a better prediction of particle behavior in the context of mineral processing. For most operations in mineral processing, a variety of particle properties influences the outcome of a certain unit operation, in a complex and non-linear fashion. The detailed understanding of these effects will improve the implementation of particle-based modeling of various operations in a geometallurgical framework ( This is made possible by means of SEM-based image analysis (i.e. Mineral Liberation Analyzer), XCT ( A data base of particle properties was obtained by analyzing input and output streams of a certain process with the SEM based automated mineralogy and image analysis software MLA -Mineral Liberation Analyzer-, with a standard configuration for particle streams. Following the proposal of The KDE is applied for the generation of continuous distributions on the particle population obtained by MLA ( A multidimensional partition curve ( A classification test work is used to illustrate the method proposed. For this test work, an iron ore with a varying moisture content of 0 %, 3 % and 6 % is taken as feed material. The material upper particle size is <230 µm, with quantile sizes The present device is equipped with a rotating wheel with blades (3) supporting the classification effect. The classifier was operated at an air flow rate of 51.8 m For the test with the DAC, the particle size For fine particles with a high density (> 4.5 g/cm The trend of decreasing separation efficiency with increasing moisture content of the feed is confirmed by the global Magnetite, with its high density, exhibits the highest The values of  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We would like to thank the