Introduction
                  There is no consensus on the treatment of proximal humeral fractures. The goal of the present retrospective observational study was to compare functional and radiological results and complications of internal fixation using locking plates versus antegrade nailing in the treatment of non-osteoporotic Neer classification 3- and 4-part fractures after a least 1year of follow-up.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Internal fixation was performed in 67 fractures (1 bilateral): 35 by locking plate (1 lost to follow-up, 1 deceased) and 32 by intramedullary nailing (2 lost to follow-up) between January 1st, 2004 and December 31st, 2010. Thus, the study included 33 plates (21 3-part and 12 4-part fractures) and 30 nails (21 3-part and nine 4-part fractures). Final functional assessment was based on the Oxford, Constant, Relative Constant and QuickDASH scores and percentage of handicap. Radiological follow-up included immediate postoperative, 6weeks, 3months and 1year AP and Lamy lateral views. All complications were recorded prospectively.
               
                  Results
                  Mean Oxford, Constant, Relative Constant and QuickDASH scores and percentage of disability for the plate and nail groups respectively were: 23.8 vs. 23.3, 59.7 vs. 60 6, 73.5 vs 79.3, 20.9 vs 21.0, 22.6 vs 22.6. Multivariate analysis did not show any significant difference in functional scores or quality of reduction: final unsatisfactory reduction on AP view, 30.3 vs. 36.7%; lateral view, 3.2 vs. 10.0%; greater tuberosity, 9.1 vs. 16.7%. Four-part fracture (P
                     <0.05), frontal reduction defect at follow-up (P
                     <0.05) or greater tuberosity defect (P
                     >0.05) had negative impacts on functional scores. The complication rates corresponded to those in the literature and did not differ between the techniques (P
                     =0.1901) except for three infections in the plate group.
               
                  Discussion-Conclusion
                  Internal fixation is the treatment of choice for 3- and 4-part fractures in non-osteoporotic patients. Although no difference was found in the present study between locking plate and intramedullary nailing, the former seems to be less well adapted and more aggressive.
               
                  Type of study
                  Retrospective observational study.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level 4.Although they are common, fractures of the proximal humerus remain an issue because of disagreement on optimal treatment They represent 5% of all fractures and occur in both elderly patients with osteoporosis following low energy falls, and in young patients from high-energy trauma. Three- and four-part fractures occur in 13–16% of these cases Twenty per cent of these fractures are displaced, defined as displacement of more than 1 There are few studies that specifically evaluate the results of 3- and 4-part fractures treated by locking plates or intramedullary antegrade nailing The goal of our study was to compare the functional and radiographic results as well as the postoperative complications of fractures treated by both methods. This is a retrospective comparative multicentre study performed in two orthopedic and traumatology surgery units at the Central University Hospital of Nancy (between January 1st, 2004, and December 31st, 2010) comparing 63 3- or 4-part fractures confirmed by preoperative radiographic evaluation (AP, and lateral Y-views). Patients were included who presented with recent, closed, post-traumatic 3- or 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus on non-pathological or osteoporotic bone (Giannotti cordicomedullary index of > We used the Neer classification Mean follow-up in the locking plate group was 24.7 Before the intervention one patient presented with a supraspinatus tendon tear which was sutured during open surgery during the same operation, two presented with injury to the axillary artery (a lateral wound sutured with separate stitches and thrombosis requiring humeral subclavian bypass), and four presented with neurological sensory loss that regressed within 12 Patients underwent surgery an average of 2.7 Patients presenting with a surgical site infection were included in the study of postoperative and radiographic complications but were excluded from the study of functional outcome scores at the final follow-up. Mean follow-up in the group of patients treated by intramedullary nailing was 42.8 Two patients presented with preoperative neurological sensory loss that regressed after 12 Patients were operated on a mean 1.1 The incision was closed in both groups on a Redon drain, which was left for 48 Patients presenting with early fixation failure and revised by arthroplasty were included in the study of postoperative and radiographic complications but were excluded from the study of functional outcome performed at the final follow-up. Patients underwent clinical and radiographic follow-up at 6 Clinical follow-up to determine the Oxford score Standardized radiological follow-up: AP views (angle α: valgus-varus angle) and Y-view (angle γ: anteversion-retroversion angle). These reference values (α Follow-up of postoperative complications. A simple linear regression coefficient was obtained for quantitative variables. An analysis of variance of a factor was performed if variances were equal. The descriptive analysis results are reported as numbers or percentages for qualitative variables. The Kruskal-Wallis test was performed to study qualitative variables and simple linear regression to study quantitative variables. Factors presenting a significant correlation with a threshold of 0.9 in a bivariate model were candidates for multivariate analysis ( Duration of follow-up, age, the dominant limb and beginning rehabilitation before the 3rd week did not significantly influence functional outcome scores, making our groups comparable ( We studied the following results of locking plates and antegrade nailing. Mean functional scores for the plate and nail groups respectively were 23.8 There was no significant difference in the preoperative radiological evaluation in the plate and nail groups respectively for the type of fracture (3-part: 63.6 vs 70.0% and 4-part: 36.4 vs 30.0%; Postoperatively, there was no significant difference between the two groups for unsatisfactory reduction on initial AP (15.2 vs 16.7%; There was significantly more hardware displacement (backward slipping of the proximal screw) in the intramedullary nailing group (0 vs 26.7%, There was no significant difference in secondary complications ( The overall rate of complications (radiological and clinical) in the 4-part fracture group was 80.9% requiring revision surgery in 33.3% of the cases. In 4-part fractures, malunion on AP radiographic follow-up was a significant negative risk factor on multivariate analysis for Oxford, Constant and Relative Constant score results. Malunion of the greater tuberosity and lateral metaphyseal comminution were also negative risk factors, but only in bivariate analysis ( A four-part fracture was the only significant negative risk factor for quality of life and disability scores on multivariate analysis. On bivariate analysis malunion on AP follow-up X-rays and of the greater tuberosity were also negative risk factors for these scores ( In the antegrade nailing group, a static diaphyseal screw system significantly increased the risk of: hardware failure (slipping back of proximal interlocking screw, There were significantly more cases of unsatisfactory reduction (52.4 vs 23.8%; A 4-part fracture was the only significant risk factor for osteonecrosis ( Finally we evaluated the cost of these techniques. The direct cost of locking plate fixation was 807 We are aware of the limits of this study: the retrospective design, without randomization, the absence of surgical and rehabilitation protocol, the number of surgeons with different levels of experience, the small patient size, the 7-year duration of the study because of the restrictive inclusion criteria (non-osteoporotic fractures), the diversity of implant designs (2 plates, 5 nails), the difference in age between the two groups which could have influenced the functional outcome and the lack of experience with locking plates by mini-invasive lateral approach. The 1998 SOFCOT Symposium We studied the risk factors of failure, and specificities of both techniques. Published studies suggest that numerous factors influence functional outcome: varus fracture reduction malunion Like Cuny Like Gradl and Konrad According to Hertel Certain authors report that anterograde nailing results in rotator cuff tendon injury, secondary proximal protrusion of the nail causing subacromial impingement with slipping back or breakage of the proximal screw, secondary displacement of the fracture or secondary articular protrusion of the interlocking screw Although Rochet identified a visible scar on ultrasound in 62.1% of the cuffs where the nail had crossed, in a functional and ultrasound evaluation of the shoulder after intramedullary nailing, this was not correlated to function because the functional outcome was satisfactory or very satisfactory in 89.6% of cases There was more subacromial impingement in the group of patients treated by nailing (15.2 vs 23.3%; Like Gradl For us antegrade nailing with a rectilinear small diameter nail (7–8 Park Certain authors Atalar The cases of infection and the higher rate of type 1 complex regional pain syndrome observed in the locking plate group ( Based only on the direct cost of the fixation technique, the locking plate was more expensive ( Our evaluation did not show that locking plates resulted in better functional outcome, radiographic results or reduction of postoperative complications, while antegrade nailing seems to be a reproducible, less invasive, internal fixation technique. Four-part fractures are difficult to stabilize and internal fixation of these fractures is associated with an overall risk of complications of 80.9% with revision surgery in 33.3% of these cases. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.  