Injecting CO2 pre-pad into tight reservoirs before hydraulic fracturing is a promising way to improve the productivity of single well. In this method, CO2 should be injected into the formation at a high rate. Also the miscibility of CO2 and oil with the changes of intricate geomechanics during this process are complex. Meanwhile, the geological and operating parameters have a dramatic influence to oil production and is lack of systematic research. In this study, a fluid model of crude oil was established to evaluate the impact of CO2 on oil volume and viscosity. Then, a compositional numerical model coupled miscibility and geomechanics were set up to analyze enhanced oil recovery (EOR) potential under different miscible degree with in-situ stress field. Ultimately, in accordance with multiple nonlinear regression production forecast models, Sobol, FAST (Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test), and DGSM (derivation-based Global Sensitivity Measure) methods were utilized to study the main factors affecting cumulative production. The results shown that CO2 almost has the same effect on the volume of these tight oil and has the most significant effect on the viscosity of crude oil we studied by comparing. The production of miscible flooding is 38.2% and 16.4% higher than that of immiscible and near-miscible flooding, respectively. The formation were compacted during production especially in the early stage, hence the production of the model with geomechanics was 23.3% less than the model of non-geomechanics. The first-order sensitivity indexes of bottom-hole flow pressure, reservoir thickness and fracture conductivity are about 0.808, 0.176 and 0.004 respectively obtained by Sobol method, consistent with two other methods. This result shows that bottom-hole flow pressure, reservoir thickness and fracture conductivity are the most important factors affecting production, and bottom-hole flow pressure has the most significant impact on production. This work investigates how miscibility and geomechanics effect on production as well as clarified the factors affecting production for CO2 pre-pad injection, providing vital insights into operating in tight reservoirs for oil field.Massive hydraulic fracturing using water-based fracturing fluid, such as slick water, can economically and effectively develop unconventional resources. However, it consumes a large amount of water and introduces formation damage and environmental pollution ( EOR is an effective method to extract oil and gas from porous rock after primary production such as CO Chen and Gu et al. (2018) found that it was hard to optimize the parameters of cyclic gas huff-and-puff because of the complicated non-linear relationship between multiple operation parameters and production. They established a numerical model to investigate the relationship between primary depletion period, injection period and production period via sensitivity analysis. This research concluded that ultimate recovery will not reach maximum under a too short or too long primary depletion period, because the proper primary depletion period is connected with the combination of injection and production periods. It is also implied that the sensitivity analysis of CO Previous studies related CO Firstly, coupled with the components of flash oil and flash gas provided by Changqing Oilfield in China Ordos Basin, the density of dead oil was fitted with the WinProp module in CMG (Computer Modelling Group) Software. Then, the density of living oil, in addition to the saturation pressure, viscosity, relative oil volume and compressibility of living oil under different pressures were regressed. The oil used in the phase behavior simulation was Changqing live oil with a density of 0.743 g/cm The interaction mechanism between CO Whether or not the miscibility condition is reached depends on the IFT (interfacial tension) between oil and gas, which subjected to pressure and the interaction between oil and gas. Longeron et al., 1980 investigated the impact of IFT between vapor and liquid on relative permeability by conducting core flooding experiments ( In our model, it is considered as miscibility when the oil and gas IFT Hence, in this model, oil and gas relative permeability and capillary pressure between oil and gas are dependent on the IFT between oil and gas in the model. The intention is to simulate the dynamic process of miscibility mechanism through IFT effect at different temperatures and pressures. The target reservoir simulated in this work is fixed in the horizontal direction and is free to move in the vertical direction. The value of cohesion was calculated through the Mohr-Coulomb Model along with rock mechanical properties( Simulation results revealed that the swelling factor of oil raised by 21.4% (shown as the blue curve in In order to study the effect of CO This consequence exposed that CO2 could let crude oil fully expanded and less viscous, making it feasible to extract more oil and gas trapped inside the porous formation. In order to present how IFT influence on production in the basic model, the production of the model considering the influence of IFT on relative permeability and the model without considering the influence of IFT on relative permeability were compared. The cumulative production of the model considering the influence of IFT on relative permeability is 2216 m To evaluate the EOR potential between miscible, near miscible and immiscible flooding, the Minimum Miscible Pressure (MMP) of the study area was determined through Cell to Cell method, IFT under different pressures and empirical formula( The differences between miscible, near miscible and immiscible flooding are highlighted in Since fluid-solid coupling was taken into consideration into the model, we focus on the change of pressure, CO After producing for two years, the CO The cumulative production of the non-geomechanics and geomechanics models are 2822 m Single-factor sensitivity analysis was carried out for eight geological and operating parameters incorporating reservoir thickness, matrix permeability, porosity, CO The change of cumulative production under different reservoir thicknesses is presented in Cumulative production heightened sharply when CO Cumulative production augmented overall when the CO  Cumulative production that set at different bottom-hole flow pressure was displayed as  Multiple linear regression is a method to find the relationship between multiple independent variables and dependent variables, by using Least Squares Estimation to get the most accurate functional relationship ( Then, mathematical changes are made to the variables that have a severe nonlinear relationship between production, so that they have a linear relationship between production. After that, a nonlinear production forecast model was established through multiple linear regression method. The R-squared value and p value of the multiple nonlinear regression model are 97.8%, p value is 9.0 × 10 For the oil field, determining the key factors affecting production is a major problem, which closely related to operation parameters and adjustment of production pattern. However, as a result of the non-linear relationship between production and geological parameters and operation parameters is complicated, and there is a significant error using regression analysis or orthogonal experiment method to evaluate the factors affecting production. Sobol method of sensitivity analysis is appropriate for dealing with the nonlinear problem with multivariable in sophisticated models such as hydrologic model and reservoir numerical simulation model. Not only can Sobol method qualitatively analyze the degree of sensitivity for the input parameter in the model, but also can it quantitatively calculate the sensitivity indices of each input parameter. Monte Carlo method is used to produce a stochastic number as a sample for every input parameter. The core procedure of Sobol method is that assuming the model Assumed the mathematical model for Sobol method as Then, the total variance of the model was decomposed into： After normalizing equation FAST method of sensitivity analysis is derived from Fourier transform and variance analysis. The first-order sensitivity indices of input parameters are measured by calculating the proportion of variance outputted by specified parameters to the variance of the whole model. On the one hand, FAST method is suitable for non-monotonic and complex models. On the other hand, it has low computational complexity and analyzes the sensitivity of parameter quantifiably ( This paper firstly applied Sobol method to quantitatively assess the influence of 8 parameters on the production, consisting of reservoir thickness, matrix permeability, porosity, CO First-order sensitivity indexes could quantitatively evaluate of the influence of each parameter on production. The first-order sensitivity indexes via Sobol method of bottom-hole flow pressure, reservoir thickness, fracture conductivity, porosity, soak time, matrix permeability, CO It is found that the main factors affecting cumulative production are bottom-hole pressure, reservoir thickness and fracture conductivity, evaluated by the three sensitivity analysis methods. Comprehensive sensitivity analysis outcomes stated clearly that the bottom-hole flow pressure has the most substantial impact on production among the analyzed eight parameters. That is because the working system affects the flowback effect of CO Among the fundamental parameters that affecting production, only bottom-hole flow pressure and fracture conductivity can be manipulated. Therefore, more attention should poll into optimizing of bottom-hole flow pressure and fracture conductivity. According to single factor sensitivity analysis, the best bottom-hole flow pressure is 8 MPa just below bubble point pressure, which can maximize the production and maintain the pressure of reservoir simultaneously. The proper value of fracture conductivity is 100 m·mD. The objective of the current study was to explore how miscibility and geomechanics impact on production and determine the factors affecting production through sensitivity analysis for injecting CO The result show that CO The production of miscible flooding is 38.2% and 16.4% higher than that of immiscible and near-miscible flooding, respectively. Compared miscible flooding with immiscible flooding, it is find that miscible flooding can achieve a much better EOR effect. The simulation result revealed that near miscible flooding can also achieve a relatively better EOR effect compared with miscible flooding. The formation were compacted during production especially in the early stage, hence the production of the model with geomechanics was 23.3% less than the model of non-geomechanics. The single-factor sensitivity analysis shows that the proper CO The first-order sensitivity indexes of bottom-hole flow pressure, reservoir thickness and fracture conductivity are about 0.808, 0.176 and 0.004 respectively obtained by Sobol method, consistent with two other methods. This result shows that bottom-hole flow pressure, reservoir thickness and fracture conductivity are the most important factors affecting production, and bottom-hole flow pressure has the most significant impact on production. The main issues addressed in this paper are: a) evaluated the oil-swelling effect, viscosity reduction potential of crude oil from studied area, b) investigate how miscibility and geomechanics impact on production, c) provided the proper operation parameter for CO We confirm that this work is original and has not been published elsewhere nor is it currently under consideration for publication elsewhere. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The value of MMP is an important parameter to judge whether or not CO Based on fluid model, the MMP was calculated by Multiple Mixing-Cell Method using CMG WinProp module proposed by The IFT between crude oil and CO The IFT between crude oil and CO The MMP of target reservoir was calculated through empirical formula improved by The MMP values calculated by these three methods are relatively close, indicating that the calculation method and the fluid model are greatly reliable. In order to better determine the miscibility, the final MMP value is the average value calculated by these three methods.