The theory of effective stress suggests that the breakdown pressure of a borehole should be a function of ambient stress and strength of the rock, alone. However, experiments on finite-length boreholes indicate that the breakdown pressure is a strong function of fracturing fluid composition and state as well. The reasons for this behavior are explored, including the roles of different fluid types and state in controlling the breakdown process. The interfacial tension of the fracturing fluid is shown to control whether fluid invades pore space at the borehole wall and this in turn changes the local stress regime, hence breakdown pressure. Interfacial tension is modulated by fluid state, as sub- or super-critical, and thus gas type and state influence the breakdown pressure. Expressions are developed for the breakdown pressure in circular section boreholes of both infinite and finite length and applied to rationalize otherwise enigmatic experimental observations. Importantly, the analysis accommodates the influence of fluid infiltration or exclusion into the borehole wall. For the development of a radial hydraulic fracture (longitudinal failure), the solutions show a higher breakdown pressure for impermeable relative to a permeable borehole. A similar difference in breakdown pressure exists for failure on a transverse fracture that is perpendicular to the borehole axis, in this case modulated by a parameter 
                        η
                     , which is a function of Poisson ratio and the Biot coefficient. These solutions are used to rationalize observations for mixed-mode fractures that develop in laboratory experiments containing finite-length boreholes. Predictions agree with the breakdown pressure records recovered for experiments for pressurization by CO2 and Ar – higher interfacial tension for subcritical fluids requires higher critical pressures to invade into the matrix, while supercritical fluid with negligible interfacial tension has less resistance to infiltrate into the matrix and to prompt failure. This new discovery defines mechanisms of failure that although incompletely understood, provisionally link lower breakdown stresses with mechanisms that promote fracture complexity with the potential for improved hydrocarbon recovery.Biot coefficient, dimensionless Poisson ratio, dimensionless fluid pressure, MPa Young׳s modulus, MPa rock tensile strength, MPa tangential stress around wellbore, MPa radial stress, MPa longitudinal stress, MPa permeability, m fluid viscosity, Pa fluid density, kg/m grain bulk modulus, MPa solid bulk modulus, MPa fluid bulk modulus, MPa wellbore radius, m critical invasion pressure, MPa porosity, dimensionless breakdown pressure, MPa displacement from solid deformation, m The breakdown pressure is the critical pressure where failure occurs during borehole pressurization. Numerous attempts have been made to forecast the magnitude of breakdown pressure by analytical, semi-analytical and numerical approaches ( Initial attempts focused on an analytical formula to predict the breakdown pressure in impermeable rocks ( This approach provides a pathway to explore pressurization rate effect on the breakdown process. Experimental approaches have shown that at higher pressurization rates, the breakdown pressure is also elevated ( All these approaches rely on Terzaghi׳s theory of effective stress ( Fracturing experiments are reported on homogeneous cubes of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA; Six different fracturing fluids are injected in separate experiments and the borehole is pressurized to failure. The fluids used are helium (He), nitrogen (N The following observations are apparent from the experimental results: The maximum breakdown pressure is obtained for CO The breakdown pressure for helium and nitrogen is approximately half of this tensile strength. From these observations, we hypothesize that (1) the factor-of-two differential in the breakdown stresses results from infiltration versus exclusion of fluids from the borehole wall and (2) the different behaviors of infiltration versus exclusion result from the state of the fluid, super-critical versus sub-critical. This hypothesis is explored by first identifying the difference in breakdown pressure for infiltrating versus non-infiltrating fluids and is then related to the propensity for infiltration Consider a finite radius For the longitudinal hydraulic fracture, breakdown occurs when the effective tangential stress is equal to the tensile strength. When the matrix is impermeable, there is no poroelastic effect and the solution is the Hubbert–Willis (H–W) ( When the porous medium is permeable, the Biot coefficient The total stresses at the wellbore boundary are obtained by superposition of the stress fields from the Haimson–Fairhurst (H–F) solution ( The effective tangential stress at the wellbore Correspondingly, the breakdown pressure is This gives the appropriate breakdown pressures for cases where fluid is either excluded from the borehole wall (impermeable, Eq. Where the fracture is transverse to the borehole then breakdown occurs when the longitudinal stress exceeds the tensile strength. The longitudinal stress However, for the condition of fluid infiltration, the longitudinal stress change is finite. The radial stress is defined as The stress–strain relationship is defined from Hooke׳s law as Since the longitudinal strain Therefore, the breakdown pressure in terms of longitudinal stress is equal to Comparing Eqs. The above expressions define the breakdown pressures for boreholes in infinite media. However the laboratory experiments are for blind and finite boreholes in cubic specimens. Therefore a finite element model is used to simulate the coupled process of fluid–solid interaction in geometries similar to the experiments. First, 2-D problems are explored to validate the model and then 3-D geometries are used to replicate the experiments and then to interpret the experimental observations. A 2-D poro-mechanical model is used to represent the behavior with a central borehole within a square contour. The governing equations and boundary conditions are as follows. Two governing equations represent separately the fluid flow and solid deformation processes. A Darcy flow model is applied to represent fluid flow with the Biot–Willis coefficient defined as The flow equation is The solid deformation equation is The 2-D plane strain model geometry comprises a slice-cut across a section (see The 2-D simulation results are used to validate the model for the two forms of fractures – longitudinal versus transverse – evaluated previously. The likelihood of either failure model is controlled by either the tangential effective stress (longitudinal failure) or the longitudinal effective stress (transverse failure). Failure occurs when the tangential effective stresses reach the tensile strength at a critical location. The blue curve in   The proportionality of the longitudinal effective stress to the Biot coefficient for a transverse fracture is shown in The failure conditions for a finite length borehole are now explored. The stress accumulation at the end of the borehole will be a combination of the modes represented in the longitudinal and transverse failure modes. The experimental configuration is for a finite-length end-capped borehole that terminates in the center of the block. We represent this geometry (see For the finite borehole condition, the induced stresses may be shown to be a combination of the applied confining stress and fluid pressure. The exact functional dependence may be obtained by the superposition of the confining stress field and the influence of fluid pressure in a simplified model. Assuming the wellbore radius is equal to Then the top equation gives Since the borehole boundary at At the borehole wall If the borehole is now pressurized by fluid, then the additional stresses are Adding these two modes of solid stress and fluid pressure give the resulting longitudinal effective stress,  Eqs. From the preceding analyses, congruent with two broad sets of experimental data, breakdown pressure is reduced by half where fluid infiltration can occur into the borehole wall. The numerical experiments are employed to demonstrate the effect of fluid infiltration or exclusion into the borehole wall and its corresponding influence on breakdown pressure magnitude. A hypothesis consistent with these observations is that fluid interfacial tension controls whether fluid invades the pore space at the borehole wall and this in turn changes the local stress regime, hence breakdown pressure. Interfacial tension is modulated by fluid state, as sub- or super-critical, and thus gas type and state would be expected to influence the breakdown pressure. A mixture of supercritical fluids is by definition miscible and will not be excluded from the pore space in the borehole wall by capillarity. Correspondingly, the breakdown pressure for a supercritical fluid should correspond to the permeable solution, whereas the response of a subcritical fluid should correspond to that of the impermeable solution. Eqs. The concept of invasion pressure is invoked to represent the response in the borehole wall. If the fluid pressure in the borehole exceeds the critical invasion pressure  When the invasion pressure is lower than the breakdown pressure for the permeable solution, then both supercritical and subcritical fluids have the same breakdown pressure magnitude (see When the invasion pressure is intermediate between the breakdown pressure for permeable and impermeable solutions, then the subcritical fluid invades and failure occurs at the critical pressure. In this case, supercritical fluids would result in failure at a pressure lower than the invasion pressure (see When the invasion pressure is larger than the breakdown pressure for both permeable and impermeable solutions, then the supercritical fluid causes failure at a lower pressure than for the subcritical fluid (see Considering that for invasion in any given material of defined permeability and porosity, the ratio of invasion pressure to interfacial tension should be constant as Then Expressions are developed based on Biot effective stress theory to predict breakdown pressure for longitudinal and transverse fracture on finite length boreholes. These relationships are used to explore the physical dependencies of fracture breakdown pressures and show that an approximate factor of two exists in the breakdown stress where fluids either invade or are excluded from the borehole wall. These relationships are extended for finite length boreholes to replicate conditions for fracturing experiments in finite-volume samples. These solutions are then used to explain observations of variable breakdown stresses in experiments where all conditions are maintained constant except the composition and state of the fracturing fluids. The difference in failure response is matched to the state of the fluid – supercritical versus subcritical. Observations suggest that fluid state controls interfacial properties and thereby governs fluid invasion into the matrix and the following breakdown process. The negligible interfacial tension in supercritical fluids allow easy invasion into the matrix, while the subcritical fluid with larger interfacial tension requires a higher pressure to invade and cause subsequent breakdown of the borehole. For samples of equivalent permeability and porosity, the ratio of breakdown pressure to interfacial tension is constant for subcritical fluids – identifying the controlling influence on capillary behavior. Where fluids are supercritical, no similar relationship exists. To the contrary, where the fluid is supercritical, the breakdown pressures are uniformly those predicted where infiltration occurs into the borehole wall – approximately half of the tensile strength of the sample ( This work is the result of support from the