The present study focused on the bioaccumulation and cytotoxicities of Cd2+, CdSe quantum dots (QDs) and CdSe/ZnS QDs in Escherichia coli (E. coli, represents prokaryotic system) and Phanerochaete chrysosporium (P. chrysosporium, represents eukaryotic system), respectively. Two types of QDs were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and dynamic light scattering. The inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer results showed that the bioaccumulation amounts of CdSe QDs by E. coli and P. chrysosporium were larger than those of CdSe/ZnS QDs due to the smaller particle size and less negative surface charges of CdSe QDs. Confocal microscopy and TEM results showed that there was an interaction between QDs and cells, and QDs have entered into the cells eventually, leading to the change of cell morphology. Plasma membrane fluidities and membrane H+-ATPase activities of E. coli and P. chrysosporium decreased gradually with the increasing concentrations of Cd2+, CdSe and CdSe/ZnS QDs. Results of the cell viabilities and intracellular reactive oxygen species levels indicated that the induced cytotoxicities were decreased as follows: CdSe QDs > CdSe/ZnS QDs > Cd2+. These findings suggested that the cytotoxicity of QDs was not only attributed to their heavy metal components, but also related to their nanosize effects which could induce particle-specific toxicity. The above results offer valuable information for exploring the cytotoxicity mechanism of QDs in prokaryote and eukaryote.Nanomaterials are promising candidates for various important biological and biomedical applications, such as cellular imaging ( QDs are usually composed of CdS, CdSe, or CdTe as a semiconductor core. There are also some types of QDs which are coated with a ZnS shell to improve their optical and electronic properties and decrease core metal leaching ( The cytotoxicity of uncoated QDs was deemed to be related to the liberation of Cd Cytotoxic effects of QD nanoparticles have been reported in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems ( Two different types of QDs (CdSe and CdSe/ZnS) were purchased from Wuhan Jiayuan Quantum Dots Company (  According to the previous studies (   The plasma membrane fluidity was inversely proportional to fluorescence intensity, which was measured using a fluorescence spectrometer (LS 50B) ( The amount of phosphate ( Cell viabilities of The various physicochemical parameters of QDs, such as particle size and surface coating, were responsible to their cytotoxicities ( The cellular uptake process plays an important role in the toxicity of Cd To visualize the internalization of QDs and the morphology change of QDs treated cells, confocal microscopy images and TEM images of CdSe and CdSe/ZnS QDs treated The membrane fluidities of As shown in The cytotoxicity of QDs depends on its multiple physicochemical properties such as particle size, surface charges, and outer coating ( It has been known that QDs could induce the generation of ROS and result in metabolic dysfunction, DNA nicking, and even apoptosis ( In summary, the bioaccumulation and cytotoxicities of Cd The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This article dose not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by the authors. This work was financially supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at