The objective of this paper is the investigation of the abrasive wear behavior of tempering steel by the analysis of its deformation behavior and dominant abrasion micro mechanisms under controlled single scratch testing. We analyzed single scratches induced by a sphero-conical diamond tip with constant and progressively increasing load in tempering steel with varying carbon content in the as quenched condition. Among scratch and hardness testing the analysis and characterization included the optical determination of the deformation behavior (SEM, CLSM, AFM). The results show that the deformation behavior strongly depends on applied normal load and strength (yield stress, ultimate tensile strength) as it varies with carbon content. It was shown that an increasing load leads to the transition of predominant abrasion micro mechanisms from ideal micro ploughing to wedge and chip formation. The scratch resistance increased with increasing carbon content until for higher carbon contents a saturation tendency due to the presence of retained austenite is observed. An increasing carbon content also shifted the aforementioned transition of dominant micro mechanisms not only to higher applied normal loads, but also to higher scratch depths.Machinery and their components e.g. used in mining industry or mineral processing are often faced to abrasive wear limiting their lifetime and causing service and maintenance costs According to Zum Gahr there are four main micro abrasion mechanisms, namely micro ploughing, micro cutting, micro fatigue and micro cracking For the analysis of wear, the characterization of the micro mechanisms and the transition between the different micro mechanisms (e.g. the transition from ideal micro ploughing to micro cutting) is crucial One method for the systematic investigation of the deformation behavior and the active micro mechanisms is controlled single scratching with simultaneous measurement of scratch depth as well as normal and tangential force. In the case of a conical indenter, the attack angle (angle between material surface and indenter) has significant influence on the deformation behavior and the active micro mechanisms This study investigates the abrasive wear behavior of tempering steel by the analysis of its deformation behavior and dominant abrasion micro mechanisms. Single scratch testing with constant and progressively increasing load was conducted to analyze the influence of carbon content of tempering steel in the as hardened conditions on scratch resistance and the occurring deformation behavior; in particular the dominating micro mechanisms. Focus is set on the influence of carbon content as well as scratch depth on the transition between these dominating abrasion micro mechanisms. We investigated tempering steel with varying carbon content and nearly constant alloying elements Cr, Ni and Mo. The heat treatment of all specimens consisted of austenitization at 860 °C under argon atmosphere for 20 min followed by oil quenching. The sample preparation included grinding with SiC paper and subsequent polishing with diamond suspension to an average grain size of 1 µm (surface roughness of approximately 0.8 µm). The hardness was measured by Vickers hardness testing (HV10). At least five individual hardness measurements were averaged for each specimen. Scratch experiments were conducted on the polished surface condition with two different test protocols by a scratch tester of the company CSM (module NST) equipped with a sphero-conical diamond tip (tip radius of 10 µm, see The first test protocol is scratching with a constant applied normal load and the second one with a progressively increasing applied normal load. In both test protocols the scratch length is 500 µm. Prior to the scratch tests the topography of the specimens was measured by a prescan with a minimum load of 3 mN to account for local and systematic height differences of the polished surface. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) type Mira 3 of the company Tescan was used to analyze the microstructure of the specimens after etching with Nital. The SEM was also used to investigate the deformation behavior of the induced scratches. Additionally, the topography of the scratches was measured by a confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) of the company Keyence (type VK-X). Evaluation of the CLSM measurements were conducted with the software MultiFileAnalyzer (version 1.3.1.120). The CLSM data was used to determine the residual scratch depth, the scratch groove volume, surface profiles and to visualize the deformation behavior. Supplementary, we measured with an atomic force microscope of the company Bruker (type nanos) in contact mode high-resolution topography images. We conducted retained austenite quantification by means of x-ray diffraction (XRD) using a portable x-ray analyzer of the company Pulsetec, type    As apparent, the deformation behavior and micro mechanisms change as function of carbon content. This becomes also visible in the topography images given in The scratch groove volume as a function of carbon content as well as hardness is given in Another important aspect concerns the active micro mechanisms and deformation behavior that is very sensitive to the scratch depth which is influenced by both, the material strength (dependent on carbon content) and by the applied normal load. For this reason, scratch tests with progressively increasing load were conducted. The SEM images of the scratches with progressively increasing load are displayed in Generally, mechanisms change as a function of depth and strength for the given indenter geometry and there is no discrete transition depth. The local deformation behavior including the active micro mechanisms play a decisive role in the understanding of the abrasive wear behavior. Especially, the transition between active mechanisms such as micro ploughing, wedge formation and micro cutting are important for the analysis of the abrasive wear behavior and its interpretation and prediction. The results presented before show that the carbon content of tempering steel in combination with the scratch depth of the given indenter geometry control the scratch resistance and the predominating micro mechanisms. In this context, the strength and microstructure of the materials as well as the role of indenter geometry and its scratch depth are discussed in the following. During scratching with constant applied normal load, the deformation behavior after hardening strongly depends on the carbon content. As the carbon content increases, the hardness of the martensitic microstructure increases leading to a higher material strength (such as hardness, yield stress and ultimate tensile strength). Equal applied normal loads result in a decrease of scratch depth that is observed for all specimens. However, hardness as well as scratch depth show a saturation for the highest carbon contents. Since hardness is defined as the resistance to penetration, it explains the decrease in scratch depth with increasing strength. This effectively decreases wear as long as the dominating micro mechanisms remain unchanged. The saturation of hardness and scratch depth is caused by an increasing amount of retained austenite. Higher amounts of carbon, as we increased it from 0.18 to 0.72 mass%, stabilize the austenite, which can lead to a drop of martensite finish temperature below room temperature. Consequently, higher amounts of retained austenite are present in the microstructure after hardening. The retained austenite has lower strength with higher ductility and strain hardening behavior. This explains the saturation of hardness, especially seen for the specimens 54CrNiMo7-6, 60CrNiMo7-6 and 72CrNiMo7-6. The role of retained austenite during abrasive wear is differently and controversy discussed in the literature and depends on the analyzed tribological system In despite of the presence of retained austenite, there is a clear correlation between scratch depth and deformation behavior to the hardness of the investigated steels during constant load scratching. The specimens with the lowest carbon contents and lowest hardness (18CrNiMo7-6 and 25CrNiMo7-6), respectively, show higher amounts of plasticity with active mechanisms micro ploughing and wedge formation. Only these specimens have clear indications of debris formation (see The formation of wedges and chips is also indirectly visible in the scratch depth curves by fluctuations due to the repeated change of local contact conditions during scratching (see With increasing scratch depth of the sphero-conical indenter the plastic strain in the material is increased and thus micro cutting is provoked. The mechanism changes from micro ploughing to wedge formation and micro cutting. Though, a specific transition depth cannot clearly be identified. Depending on the ductility of the material for a specific induced strain, a change in the active micro mechanisms can occur. It is a superimposition of induced strain field and ductility of the material. As given in With increasing carbon content and hardness, respectively, the transition from pure elasto-plastic deformation in terms of micro ploughing to the formation of detached and separated chips is shifted not only to higher normal loads, but also shifted to higher scratch depths (see From the analysis of deformation behavior and dominating abrasion micro mechanisms in tempering steel with varying carbon content, the following conclusions can be drawn: The deformation behavior and active micro mechanisms strongly depend on the strength of the material and the resulting scratch depth of the sphero-conical indenter. The scratch depth was found to predominantly influence the deformation behavior, in particular the pile-up formation and the mechanisms micro ploughing and micro cutting with wedge and even chip formation. Thus, it has a significant influence on the transition between the active abrasion micro mechanisms (transition from micro ploughing to micro cutting). With increasing strength of the martensitic microstructures (as quenched condition), as it increases with carbon content, the scratch resistance significantly increases until for higher carbon contents ( With increasing applied normal load and scratch depth the deformation behavior changes from ideal micro ploughing to wedge and chip formation with less plastic deformation. The transition between the deformation regimes is a function of scratch depth and strength (that changes with varying carbon content). In the case of a constant scratch depth a higher material strength can reduce the induced plastic strain, so that a transition from micro ploughing to micro cutting can be shifted to a larger scratch depth. The authors wish to thank Mrs. Cornelia Hasenfratz for the conduction of topography CLSM measurements and their evaluation.