Interest in amorphous metal alloys has grown dramatically in the last few years. Recently, a novel composition known as structurally amorphous metal 7 (SAM7) with a composition of Fe48Mo14Cr15Y2C15B6 was developed. Determination of its density and sintering behavior, with and without Y2O3 nanoparticle additions, was undertaken in this study using spark plasma sintering. It was found that the pure SAM7 material has a theoretical density of 7.75 g/cm3 and can be sintered to full density (ρ
                     experimental
                     =7.76 g/cm3) at 600 °C for 10 min without loss of amorphous character. The SAM7 powder with the addition of ~2.5 wt.% of Y2O3 nanoparticles has a theoretical density of 7.67 g/cm3 and can be sintered to full density (ρ
                     experimental
                     =7.30 g/cm3) at the same temperature and time as for pure SAM7.Metallic glasses are amorphous alloys that contain atoms of significantly different sizes, leading to low free volume and higher viscosities than typical metals and alloys in the molten state. The viscosity prevents the atoms from diffusing in order to form an ordered lattice, resulting in low shrinkage during cooling and resistance to plastic deformation. The absence of grain boundaries, which are usually considered areas of weakness in crystalline materials, leads to better resistance to wear and corrosion of these materials. In addition, metallic glasses are much tougher and less brittle than oxide glasses and ceramics. As a result, amorphous alloys have been commercialized for use in sports equipment and medical devices, among other applications Recently, several alloy compositions of Fe-based metallic glasses with outstanding corrosion resistance have been produced and characterized by Farmer, et al. The use of rapid sintering methods can allow the formation of fully-dense metallic glass compacts without losing their amorphous character. One particular rapid sintering technique is spark plasma sintering (SPS). SPS can sinter materials to full density at relatively low temperatures and in shorter times as compared to conventional sintering methods The objective of this study was the fast preparation, via spark plasma sintering, of fully-dense SAM7 specimens with and without Y The characterization techniques used on the SAM7 powders and sintered specimens included X-ray powder diffraction on a Philips 3100 instrument using CuKα radiation and scanning electron microscopy on a Hitachi S-4700 instrument. The sintering experiments were performed on an SPS unit using graphite dies. The sintered specimens were disk-shaped with a diameter of 19 mm and a thickness of 5–6 mm. The sintering conditions were the following: (1) sintering cycle: 10 min from room temperature to 600 °C, hold at 600 °C for 10 min, air cool to room temperature (approximately 5 min), (2) applied force: 30 kN, and (3) vacuum pressure: 0.1 torr. The preparation of the SAM7 powders with addition of 2.5 wt.% Y The Y  The volume of SAM7 was estimated by assuming that the bcc form of a solid solution having the SAM7 composition can be calculated using Vegard's law. The atomic volumes of Cr, Mo, B and Y were assumed to be 7.23, 9.39, 4.62, and 19.89 cm The agreement between the experimental density of the SAM7 specimen and the theoretical value is quite remarkable. It can be concluded that the SAM7 sintered specimen has a relative density of 100%. However, the specimen with Y X-ray diffraction results ( Spark plasma sintering of pure SAM7 (Fe The authors acknowledge financial support from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) with Leo Christodoulou as program manager, and the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management (OCRWM) with Jef Walker as program manager. This project was undertaken at the University of Nevada, Reno under subcontract No. B529267 from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. The assistance of Zuhair Munir in the sintering of the specimens at the University of California—Davis is gratefully acknowledged.