Zinc–carbon batteries, which contain around 20% zinc, 35% manganese oxides and 10% steel, are currently disposed after use as land fill or reprocessed to recover metals or oxides. Crushed material is subjected to magnetic separation followed by hydrometallurgical treatment of the non-magnetic material to recover zinc metal and manganese oxides. The leaching with 2M sulfuric acid in the presence of hydrogen peroxide recovers 93% Zn and 82% Mn at 25°C. Alkaline leaching with 6M NaOH recovers 80% zinc. The present study shows that over 90% zinc and manganese can be leached in 20–30min at 30°C using 0.1–1.0M sulfuric acid in the presence of sulfur dioxide. The iron extraction is sensitive to both acid concentration and sulfur dioxide flow rate. The effect of reagent concentration and particle size on the extraction of zinc, manganese and iron are reported. It is shown that the iron and manganese leaching follow a shrinking core kinetic model due to the formation of insoluble metal salts/oxides on the solid surface. This is supported by (i) the decrease in iron and manganese extraction from synthetic Fe(III)–Mn(IV)–Zn(II) oxide mixtures with increase in acid concentration from 1M to 2M, and (ii) the low iron dissolution and re-precipitation of dissolved manganese and zinc during prolonged leaching of battery scrap with low sulfur dioxide.Zinc–carbon batteries have a carbon rod cathode in contact with a moist paste of MnO Large quantities of both metallic and ionic zinc and manganese are contained in the batteries and proper landfill disposal or a suitable recovery process The researchers in KIGAM (Dong-Jin Kim, Jae-Chun Lee and Jeong-Soo Sohn, unpublished data) have carried out the leaching of zinc–carbon battery scrap in: sulfuric acid media (0.25–2 sodium hydroxide media (2–6 sulfuric acid media (0.5–4 The results obtained in sulfuric acid leaching in the absence of a reducing agent showed low percent dissolution of both metals with no significant improvement at high acid concentrations or high temperatures (>60 The battery material (503 Leaching was carried out using a 170 Sulfur dioxide was introduced into the system either as a blanket or by sparging through the pulp. Blanket introduction of sulfur dioxide occurred when the gas inlet was placed above the liquid; care was taken to flush the reactor vessel of air and allow gas–liquid equilibrium to be established before addition of the battery material. After each batch of 25 Synthetic mixtures were made up using iron(III)–zinc(II)–manganese(IV) oxides. The ratio of these three components matched that of the non-magnetic fraction analyzed by KIGAM. These were sampled and analyzed in the same manner as above.  Although sulfur dioxide reacts with water according to Eq.  A comparison between The leaching behavior of manganese in different size fractions was studied using a standard pulp density of 50 The effect of particle size fits well to what was expected ( Previous studies showed that the reductive leaching of manganese dioxide and iron oxides follows a shrinking sphere model described by Eq. The shrinking sphere model given by Eq.   Future work will include the separation and electrolytic recovery of zinc and manganese dioxide, which have been successfully tested by previous researchers  The preliminary results obtained with synthetic mixtures of Zn(II)–Mn(IV)–Fe(III) oxides of the same composition as the zinc–carbon battery scrap provided by KIGAM show similar trends in leaching of these three metals by SO The leaching rates depended upon the sulfur dioxide flow rates, particle size, acid concentration and agitation. Both Mn and Zn dissolution with 0.1 Thus, the SO Low sulfur dioxide is likely to re-precipitate some of the dissolved metal ions on prolonged leaching. This was confirmed by the fact that the leaching of manganese demonstrates a shrinking core model indicating that the diffusion of reactants or products through an insoluble product layer is the rate controlling step. The authors wish to thank the International Science Linkages Program of the Department of Education, Science and Technology, and the Parker Centre for the provision of funding for RC to undertake this project. The Parker Centre is supported through the Commonwealth Government Cooperative Research Centre's Program. We are also grateful to the Korean Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources for the provision of spent battery material for the experimental work and for the interest shown in the project by Dr. Dong-Jin Kim, Dr. Jae-Chun Lee and Dr. Jeong-Soo Sohn.