The optimal profile of the accelerating nozzle of a jet mill is computed to provide a maximum particle velocity at the nozzle outlet. To describe one-dimensional monodispersed flow in the nozzle, the well-known set of differential equations is employed. The influence of both particle size and solids/gas mass flow rate on the optimal nozzle profile is studied. Computations show that an employment of optimized nozzles is beneficial for relatively low solids loading. An increase in particle velocities at the optimized nozzle outlet reaches 25% compared to those in a conical nozzle if the solids/gas mass flow ratio equals unity.The acceleration of solids to be fragmented in the jet mill consists of two stages: (1) the mixing of solids with gas; (2) the acceleration of gas–solids flow in the nozzle. The problem of the nozzle optimization is most important for jet mills equipped with efficient pressure head devices for gas–solids mixing at high pressure ( We discovered the only investigation ( In order to exclude an influence of the particle-size distribution that can be very different for various powders, we limit the computational analysis to monodispersed gas–particle flows. We accept usual assumptions (for example, The set of equations is written as: We limited our consideration to nozzles shorter than 23 initial diameters, because our estimations of particle-nozzle wall friction losses by the method of To perform the numerical optimization we presented the pressure distribution as a set of Thus, the problem of optimization was reduced to determining the pressure in To analyze features of optimized nozzles we performed a number of computations. The nozzle profiles for different solids/gas mass flow ratios In For smaller particles and the higher The advantage obtained from the optimized nozzle implementation may be very significant and reach an approximately 25% increase in particle velocities at the nozzle outlet at fairly low solids/gas mass flow ratios ( The method of numerical optimization of a jet mill nozzle was developed. Influence of both the solids/gas mass flow ratio and the particle size on the optimum profile has been studied. Comparison of the efficiency of optimized nozzles with that of optimal conical nozzles has been performed. The employment of optimized nozzles is justified at fairly low particle concentrations ( On the basis of numerous computation results it is possible to make important practical recommendations for jet mill designers. If a jet mill is intended for milling soft solids at relatively low particle velocities (