Purpose
                  Despite a sizable amount of literature, the optimal management of thoracolumbar fractures remains controversial and many authors assume the existence of disc lesions in Magerl type A fractures. The purpose of the study was to assess the intervertebral discs in these fractures at the time of trauma. The hypothesis was that there was no change in shape and signal intensity of the discs initially.
               
                  Methods
                  Fifty-one patients diagnosed with 87 types A1 and A3 thoracolumbar fractures were enrolled in a prospective study. MRI analysis involved evaluation of disc signal, height and morphological modifications according to Oner's classification.
               
                  Results
                  No signal intensity modification was identified on MRI. Disc morphology was either normal or altered with creeping of discal tissue in the vertebral endplate depression. Overall, 98% of the discs were either type 1 or type 3. Mean disc height on MRI was 1.03±0.36 initially.
               
                  Conclusions
                  In this study, MRI showed that no loss of height occurred in discs adjacent to fractured vertebra and that there was no major alteration of the disc in terms of signal intensity and morphology. Therefore, the intervertebral disc should not be removed in Magerl type A fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, therapeutic case series.Thoracolumbar spine fractures are frequent and may lead to poor functional outcome especially in case of neurological compromise. Although a large number of papers have been published, the optimal management remains controversial We know that mid-term follow-up shows cyphotic evolution. Both disc degeneration and body collapsus are involved in this process Several classification systems have been proposed in order to provide a morphological pattern of those fractures and therapeutic guidelines A prospective non randomized non comparative study was carried out in order to analyze disc signal and morphological modifications and to measure intervertebral disc heights. One hundred and two patients were diagnosed with thoracolumbar fractures in our department between February 2008 and July 2010. The inclusion criteria were: patients aged from 18 to 65 Radiological evaluation consisted of performing MRI initially before treatment. T1-weighted (TR 400; TE 11), T2-weighted (TR 2500; TE 50) and Fast Spin Echo (FSE) images were obtained with a 1.5 Sagittal T2-weighted MRI was performed for the evaluation of disc signal, height and morphology modifications. Intervertebral disc heights adjacent to the fracture were measured in millimeters on midline sagittal images. Overall disc height was calculated as the average of anterior, middle and posterior disc heights. Disc height index was defined as the ratio between cranial and caudal disc heights. Disc signal and morphological modifications were analyzed according to Oner's classification Prior to study measurements, both observers participated in training sessions using 5 MRIs from an independent collective of patients managed prior to the study. In this session, the observers were instructed about measurements and classifications used in the present study. Measurements were performed at two different times. Interobserver reliability was evaluated in the first measurement. Intraobserver reliability was evaluated from the mean results of the first and second measurement. MRI parameters were measured twice at 2-week intervals. In order to assess inter- and intraobserver reliability, the data sets of both observers were compared and mean values were analyzed. Calculations and the statistical analysis were done using Microsoft Excel 2010 (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA). The intra- and interobserver reliability values were calculated using Cohen's weighted kappa and interpretation of strength of agreement was done according to the criteria of Landis and Koch Informed consent was obtained from all patients. Described 1 research adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. The IRB considered this study as “standard care” and did not require further reviews. Of the one hundred and two patients with thoracolumbar fractures, fifty-six patients were excluded from the study. Thus, sixty-nine fractures in forty-six patients (24 male and 22 female patients) were included allowing the analysis of 138 intervertebral discs. The median age of patients was 43.4 (range 19–60). Falls from a height (  The overall inter- and intraobserver variabilities of Oner's classification were assessed with kappa values of 0.60 and 0.77, respectively, delineating good agreement. Distribution of the disc types according to Oner are summarized in No loss of height occurred in discs adjacent to types A1 and A3 fractured vertebra ( The main finding of this study was that no loss of height occurred in discs adjacent to type A1 and A3 fractured vertebra; there was even an increase in height corresponding to a creeping of the disc inside the vertebral endplate depression space. Furthermore no major alteration of the intervertebral disc in terms of signal intensity and morphology was noted. In the literature, only a few previous studies focused on disco-vertebral height measurement in thoracolumbar type A fractures. Most were based on conventional radiographs and, quite frequently, the cohorts represented a variety of fracture types without further differentiation. Mixed series included types B and C fractures involving predominant disco-ligamentous lesions, which may have influenced the outcome and left the reported results partially inconclusive Considering type A fractures only, our results seem to be consistent with several previous studies. Oner et al. presented a prospective series of 70 patients (100 fractures) with MRI performed initially Fürderer and Eysel reported in a MRI study with 20 patients with A3 and B1 fractures treated surgically that initially 81% of the discs had preserved signal and morphology whereas the remaining 19% had an alteration of signal intensity In a prospective series of 15 patients with thoracolumbar burst fractures, Alanay also reported changes on MRI in the shape of the discs with no change in the signal intensity in most of the discs Several investigators reported a loss of height in the intervertebral disc of type A thoracolumbar fractures Defino et al. reviewed their series of 20 patients with type A3 fractures who underwent posterior fixation. Disc and vertebral heights were measured on plain radiographs before treatment, in the immediate postoperative period and at final follow-up (2 In a retrospective series of 20 patients with A3 fractures, Müller et al. also reported that the loss of height of the suprajacent and subjacent discs were respectively of 70% and 40% on plain radiographs Eysel first reported in a radiographic study a loss of correction related to the destruction of the intervertebral disc in two thirds of the cases and to the destruction of the vertebral endplate in the remaining third of the cases Those results differ from ours, which may partly be explained by the fact that these studies were based on conventional radiographs measuring discal height as a 2D projection of a 3D structure. In our opinion, the narrowing of the radiological disc space on X-rays could be responsible for an underestimation of the anatomic disc height. Indeed, due to the compression mechanism, the suprajacent disc seems to disappear on plain X-rays giving the impression of a loss of height described by those authors. There were only a few previous studies analyzing thoracolumbar fractures with MRI, of which most of them were retrospective. Rudig et al. reported the results of a retrospective MRI study of unstable thoracolumbar fractures performed after implant removal with a minimum follow-up of 20 Oner et al. assessed MRI changes of the intervertebral discs in a retrospective study of 63 patients (75 thoracolumbar fractures) Recently Verlaan et al. and Wang et al. analyzed discs degeneration of thoracolumbar fractures after pedicle screw removal on MRI. They suggested that endplate fractures were associated with disc degeneration and that the surgical restoration of the endplate fracture could prevent it Sander et al. also presented a grading system based on morphologic changes and signal alterations of the adjacent discs of thoracolumbar fractures. Disks were divided according to their signals into four categories from grade 0 to grade 3 The present study has some strong points. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first prospective study that investigates thoracolumbar fractures of a single type only (Type A) with MRI assessment of initial disc height, signal and morphology. It also has some limitations: the absence of a control group and the relatively small number of cases does not allow firm conclusions. The selection of radiological parameters, which should be considered in evaluating thoracolumbar injuries, is still not straightforward. The clinical relevance of this study lies in the observation that the initial analysis of the intervertebral discs on MRI could influence the choice of the surgical technique in thoracolumbar fractures. MRI showed no major alteration of the intervertebral disc in terms of signal intensity and morphology. This is strongly suggestive that the intervertebral disc should not be removed in Magerl type A fractures. Following fracture reduction and initial reconstitution of spinal alignment, loss of correction over time is frequently observed after posterior instrumentation. Therefore, we might set the assumption that recyphosis after removal of corset or fixator could be related to the initial lack of reduction of vertebral body endplate depression and to the recurrence of discal tissue creeping in the empty space left. The radiological intervertebral space narrowing would therefore be a result of the creeping of the discal tissue into the endplate depression. Therefore the main effort at reduction should be focused on the superior endplate depression. In conclusion, our study provided detailed information about the intervertebral discs adjacent to thoracolumbar vertebral fractures, as well as it offered a better understanding of the radiological disc space narrowing. Decision-making factors in thoracolumbar fractures should include the evaluation of intervertebral disc integrity as well as an accurate analysis of vertebral endplate depression in order to restore it. Finally, our study concurs with several investigators to emphasize that disc structural integrity is preserved in type A fractures and that morphological changes most likely correspond to a creeping of the discal tissue in the vertebral endplate depression. This study also confirms that MRI should be considered as the imaging technique of choice for the exploration of thoracolumbar fractures. It is an effective tool for diagnosis and decision-making in the therapeutic management of thoracolumbar fractures, which should be taken into consideration in further studies. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. Grateful acknowledgment is made to Karine Debbasch (Unité INSERM U 738, Hôtel Dieu Hospital, Paris, France) for her valuable comments on this manuscript.