Magnetic separation of weakly magnetic iron mineral fines in the form of flocs, which is termed Floc Magnetic Separation (FMS) process, has been studied in the present work, in order to find a substitution for high-intensity or high-gradient magnetic separators to treat the ores with weakly magnetic iron minerals in the fine size range. This study was performed on a hematite ore and a limonite ore that were finely ground to be micron particles, through the hydrophobic flocculation induced by sodium oleate and kerosene to make flocs. The experimental results have shown that the FMS process is effective to recover hematite and limonite fines at a middle magnetic field intensity, greatly increased the separation efficiency, compared with the conventional magnetic separation at the same conditions. By applying the process to the fine hematite ore containing 30.5% Fe, a concentrate assaying 64% Fe with 82% recovery has been produced. It has been found that the separation efficiency of the FMS process closely correlates with the main parameters of hydrophobic flocculation such as sodium oleate addition, conditioning time and kerosene addition. This finding suggests that the high efficiency achieved by the FMS process might be attributed to the considerable increase of the magnetic force on the iron mineral fines in the form of hydrophobic flocs in a magnetic field, thus the fines can be held by the separation plates in a magnetic separator and then be collected as magnetic concentrates.In a magnetic separation system, the force on a particle toward increasing field intensity ( According to There is little information on the magnetic separation of weakly magnetic mineral fines as aggregates, while high-gradient and superconducting magnetic separation have been attracted great attentions. However, numerous investigations have been carried out on the froth flotation of mineral fines as hydrophobic flocs. For instance, carrier flotation was early and commercially applied to the purification of kaolin to remove anatase fines, which is based on the adhesion of anatase fines on coarse calcite through hydrophobic flocculation, followed by the flotation of the coated calcite ( In the present work, magnetic separation of weakly magnetic mineral fines as hydrophobic flocs at a middle field intensity was studied in order to find a substitution for high-intensity or high-gradient magnetic separations to treat weakly magnetic ores in the fine size range. This process is termed As is well known, there are several methods to aggregate mineral fines in aqueous suspensions such as electrolytic coagulation, polymer flocculation, electro-coagulation, hydrophobic flocculation, and magnetic flocculation, etc. Compared with the others, hydrophobic flocculation is characterized by more compact flocs and greater ability against floc-rupturing forces. These characteristics are really needed by the FMS process because flocs on separation plates in a magnetic separator have to sustain strong floc-rupturing forces from feeding flows and washing water before leaving magnetic fields. Loose flocs such as polymer flocs might be broken up in this step and then drop from the separation plates in magnetic fields, collected as tailings. Accordingly, hydrophobic flocculation was utilized to selectively aggregate weakly magnetic mineral fines in the FMS process. In this study, the FMS process was tested on a hematite ore and a limonite ore from China. The objective is to investigate the possibility of the FMS process applied to the beneficiation of weakly magnetic minerals in the fine size range, which might be a substitution for high-gradient and high-intensity magnetic separations in fine mineral processing. In addition, the effects of surfactant and non-polar oil addition and slurry conditioning that are main parameters of hydrophobic flocculation on the efficiency of the FMS process were studied, in order to obtain a better understanding of the process. Two typical weakly magnetic iron ores in China, namely East Anshan (EA) hematite ore and Tiekeng (TK) limonite ore, were used in this work. They were obtained from the East Anshan iron mine located in Liaoling province, and the Tiekeng iron mine in Jiangxi province, respectively. Both of them were collected from the feeds for the primary ball mills of the corresponding concentration plants. Then, they were crushed by using a jaw crusher to be −2 mm in our laboratory. The EA iron ore was characterized by poor iron (30.5% Fe) and rich silica, and the TK iron ore was assayed to contain 38.11% Fe. The main mineral compositions of the ore samples are given in In this work, sodium silicate and sodium hydroxide with chemical purity from Beijing Chemical Reagent of China were used as a dispersant and pH regulating agent, respectively. Sodium oleate with chemical purity from Wuhan Chemical of China was used as the surfactant to selectively render iron minerals hydrophobic. Kerosene used in this work was purified by distillation at 220 °C in our laboratory, which was determined to consist of C The iron ore samples (200 g) were first finely ground by using a wet ball mill in the presence of sodium silicate of 0.9 kg/ton for the EA iron ore and 1.0 kg/ton for the TK iron ore, respectively. Not only particle size reduction, but also slurry dispersion were achieved in this step. The size distributions of the products are shown in The ground ore slurries were diluted to a given solid concentration, and transferred to a mixing tank of 14 cm inner diameter with four 1 cm width baffles. The stirring shaft was equipped with a cross-shape impellor of 7 cm diameter and 1 cm height. The slurry was first adjusted for pH using sodium hydroxide solution, and then was strongly conditioned at 1200 rev/min for a given time while sodium oleate or kerosene emulsion was added, leading to the formation of hydrophobic flocs of iron minerals. After the conditioning, the slurry was fed to a laboratory Jones magnetic separator in 500 ml/min flow rate and 15% solid concentration. The separation box of the separator was equipped with four grooved plates of 6 cm height and 0.8 cm width. The field intensity can be adjusted through 0.5–1.4 T. 200 ml washing water in 200 ml/min flow rate was used as soon as the slurry feeding was terminated. From this operation, one concentrate (magnetic product) and one tailing (non-magnetic product) were produced. In addition, conventional magnetic separation was also performed on the fine iron ores for a comparison, which was carried out at the same test conditions as the FMS process, including pH, dispersion, field-intensity and washing water, etc. except for hydrophobic flocculation processing. Our previous papers ( Accordingly, the FMS process in which the hydrophobic flocculation of hematite fines was induced by sodium oleate and kerosene was tested on the fine EA iron ore at 1.0 T field intensity. As already stated, in the FMS process the heart is selective hydrophobic flocculation of weakly magnetic mineral fines. The foremost parameters for a hydrophobic flocculation of fine particles in aqueous suspensions are particle hydrophobicity, kinetic energy input and non-polar oil addition ( The separation efficiency of the FMS process applied to the fine EA iron ore as a function of kerosene addition is shown in Non-polar oil enhancement of hydrophobic flocculation of fine particles in aqueous suspensions was early attracted great attentions. See the reviews in this regard made by The effect of stirring time in the hydrophobic flocculation step on the separation efficiency of the FMS process applied to the fine EA iron ore is shown in Generally, hydrophobic flocculation degree is dominated by the three parameters (  As is shown in the aforementioned results, one pass through the magnetic separator after the hydrophobic flocculation could only produce a concentrate assaying less than 60% Fe from the fine EA iron ore, which might be due to the poor iron grade of the ore sample. In order to produce a qualified iron concentrate, accordingly, one-step desliming just after the hydrophobic flocculation was tested to upgrade the feed for magnetic separation. The flowsheet is illustrated in The FMS process was also tested on the fine TK iron ore in our laboratory in order to see the possibility of its applying to other type of weakly magnetic minerals. In the hydrophobic flocculation step, the slurry with 20% solid at pH 9.2 was conditioned at 1200 rev/min for 10 min while 1.5 kg/ton sodium oleate and 3.0 kg/ton kerosene were added, and in the magnetic separation 1.1 T field intensity was used. The results of the beneficiation are given in Currently, magnetic separation of weakly magnetic minerals in the fine size range is realized at a high field intensity or/and a high field gradient, which have been commercially used to remove weakly magnetic impurities and to recover weakly magnetic iron mineral fines. However, high-intensity and high-gradient magnetic separators feature much higher capital and installation costs, much higher energy consumption and lower capacity, compared with middle-intensity magnetic separators. Therefore, there is a big interest to lower magnetic field intensity and gradient in magnetic separations of weakly magnetic mineral fines. The experimental results from this work have shown that an efficient magnetic separation of hematite and limonite (weakly magnetic minerals) in the fine size range can be achieved at a middle-intensity if the mineral fines are selectively and strongly aggregated, leading to a great decrease at field intensity and gradient. In general, the savings on capital and operating costs from the decrease would be much larger than the costs for achieving a selective hydrophobic flocculation. From the viewpoint of economic benefits, therefore, the FMS process might be a good substitution for high-intensity or high-gradient magnetic separations to beneficiate weakly magnetic mineral values from finely disseminated ores or to remove fine weakly magnetic impurities efficiently if a strong hydrophobic flocculation can be selectively applied to weakly magnetic fines. 1. From the experimental results, the present work has shown that the magnetic separation of hematite and limonite fines from iron ores can be considerably improved by selectively aggregating the fines through the hydrophobic flocculation induced by sodium oleate, kerosene and a sufficient kinetic energy input. The improvement might be attributed to the great increase of magnetic force on the iron mineral fines in a magnetic field because of the formation of hydrophobic flocs, leading the fines to be held by the separation plates in a magnetic separator. In the some cases of that weakly magnetic mineral fines can be selectively and strongly flocculated, the FMS process might be a good substitution for high-intensity or high-gradient magnetic separations to beneficiate weakly magnetic minerals from finely disseminated ores or to remove fine weakly magnetic impurities. 2. It has been found that less kinetic energy input is needed to achieve the maximum aggregation degree in a hydrophobic flocculation system if a higher solid concentration is used in the slurry conditioning. This finding might allow large savings at capital and installation costs and energy consumption if hydrophobic flocculation is commercially used. 3. In the hydrophobic flocculation of hematite fines, a small amount of kerosene addition could substitute for a major dosage of sodium oleate to achieve a good separation efficiency when the FMS process was applied to the beneficiation of the fine hematite ore, allowing a large saving at the reagent cost. The financial supports to this work from the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (CONACyT) of Mexico under the grant # 485100-5-38214-U and the Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosı́ under the grant # C00-FAI-11-9.72 are gratefully acknowledged.