Whole-wheat bread is commonly consumed all over the world, in part because of its high nutritional content. These breads have high levels of phytic acid, which can chelate divalent minerals. In this study, lactic acid bacteria (LAB) were isolated from sourdoughs to screen for extracellular phytase activity and to determine the strains showing the highest activity for use in sourdough preparation. Phytase-active LAB strains were identified by 16S rRNA sequencing. The highest extracellular phytase activities were determined to be 803.95 U/mL and 797.88 U/mL, observed with Lactobacillus brevis HEB33 and Lactobacillus plantarum ELB78, respectively. Sourdough fermentation was performed at 25, 30 and 35 °C in order to determine the optimum temperature for the degradation of phytate. To investigate the temperature and strain effects on bread quality parameters, specific volume, texture, color and sensory analyses were performed along with analyses of the phytic acid and mineral contents. The highest phytate degradation was found in sourdough bread prepared with both Lactobacillus brevis HEB33 and Lactobacillus plantarum ELB78 fermented at 25 °C. The addition of spontaneously fermented sourdough at all tested temperatures, as well as the fermentation of sourdoughs at 35 °C, had negative effects on the quality parameters and sensory evaluation of the bread samples.Sourdough bread is a traditional product, known since ancient times, that is produced by fermentation by using lactic acid bacteria (LAB) and yeast ( The phytase activity of LAB strains isolated from different sources including sourdough has been demonstrated in previous studies ( Five sourdoughs were collected from bakeries in Istanbul, Turkey, while two sourdoughs were produced in laboratory conditions. Whole-wheat flour was provided by Erisler Food Ind. (Istanbul, Turkey) and contained 72.57% carbohydrates, 13.7% protein, 1.87% fat, and 1.2% ash. Refined iodized salt was purchased from a local market. Tap water was used in sourdough and bread production. Lactic acid bacteria were isolated from the seven sourdoughs used in the study. Two different sourdoughs were produced in the laboratory, with either 25% chickpea flour in wheat flour or 100% wheat flour. Sourdough was generated according to the method described by The isolated strains were preliminarily inoculated in MRS broth and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. To determine the phytase activity, 5 μL LAB was spotted onto medium with sodium phytate and incubated at 30 °C for 48 h. This medium contained To determine the phytase activity of the LAB isolates, they were grown in MRS broth at 37 °C for 24 h. After incubation, 0.1 mL of broth containing the LAB isolates was transferred to 4.9 mL fresh medium containing 0.1% Na-phytate and 0.2% glucose and incubated at 30 °C for 24 h. Following the incubation, the medium was centrifuged at 9000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min 250 μL cell-free supernatant was mixed with 250 μL of reaction substrate (2 mmol/L Na-phytate (Sigma) in 0.1 mol/L sodium acetate-acetic acid solution) and incubated at 50 °C for 15 min. To stop the reaction, 500 μL of a 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) solution was added. For detection, the sample was mixed with 1 mL color reagent prepared freshly by mixing four volumes of 2.5% (w/v) ammonium molybdate in a 5.5% (v/v) sulfuric acid solution and one volume of 2.5% (w/v) ferrous sulfate solution. The absorbance values were measured at 700 nm. Phytase activity was determined using a calibration curve that was generated using phosphorus at different concentrations ( Phytase-active LAB isolates were anaerobically cultivated on All Purpose Tween agar (APT) at 34 °C for 24 h. Cells were suspended in 100 μL distilled water. 25 μL of each suspension was transferred onto the ZnSe table and dried at 40 °C. The spectral measurements were taken with a Tensor 27 spectrometer (Bruker Optic GmbH, Germany) equipped with an HTS-XT unit in the range of 600–4000 cm For DNA extraction, the GF-1 nucleic acid extraction kit (Vivantis, Malaysia) was used according to the manufacturer's protocol. The 16S rDNA gene was amplified by PCR using the primers PEU7 (5P-GCA AAC AGG ATT AGA TAC CC-3P) and DG74 (5P-AGG AGG TGA TCC AAC CGC-3P). PCR was completed in a final volume of 25 μL, containing 15 μL 2X Taq Master Mix (Vivantis, containing Taq DNA polymerase (0.05 U/μL), PCR buffer (2X Vibuffer A containing 100 mmol/L KCl, 20 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 0.02% Triton™ X-100), 0.4 mmol/L dNTPs and 3.0 mM MgCl Two LAB isolates ( Whole-wheat flour was mixed with tap water; the resultant dough was previously characterized by farinograph (60.3%) and salt (1.5% of dry matter) analyses. The sourdough samples were added to comprise 30% of the dough weight. All ingredients were kneaded in a mixer (Kitchen Aid, USA) for 5 min at the 4th speed. After resting for 20 min at room temperature, the dough was fermented at 30 °C and 85% relative humidity for 3 h in a proofing cabinet (Nuve TK252, Turkey). The dough was baked in an electrical oven (Fimak, Turkey) for 30 min at 190 °C top temperature and 195 °C bottom temperature. The breads were cooled at room temperature for 2 h before analysis. To determine the presence of LAB and yeast, 10 g of sourdough was homogenized with 90 mL sterile peptone water and serially diluted. Saboraud dextrose agar (Merck, Germany) and MRS agar (Merck, Germany) were used to determine yeast and LAB contents, respectively. For the pH and total titratable acidity measurements, 10 g of sourdough sample was homogenized with 90 mL distilled water. The pH of the sourdough samples was determined with a pH meter (HANNA, Germany). The samples were titrated with 0.1 mol/L NaOH to a final pH of 8.5, and the results were expressed as the amount of 0.1 N NaOH consumed in milliliters. The hardness value was determined using a texture analyzer (TA.XT2 Plus, UK) equipped with a 5 kg load cell and 36 mm diameter cylindrical compression probe. The bread loaves were cut into 1.25 mm slices, and two slices were subjected to texture analysis with the following settings: pretest speed 5.0 mm/s; test speed 1 mm/s; posttest speed 5.0 mm/s; 30% compression; trigger type auto force 5 g; wait time between first and second compression cycles of 5 s. The experiments were carried out in five replicates. The rapeseed displacement method was used for the determination of the volume of bread samples. The Sensory analysis of the bread samples was conducted using a hedonic scale for crust and crumb color, pore structure, flavor, smell, chewiness, and overall acceptability. Twelve untrained panelists (7 women, 5 men), who were informed about the samples, conducted the sensory analysis and evaluated samples from 1 (extremely bad) to 7 (excellent). For conducting the sensory analysis, two slices of each sample were served and labeled with three-digit codes. The panelists cleaned their palates with spring water before testing subsequent samples. The phytic acid content of the bread samples was measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Prior to HPLC analysis, all bread samples were freeze-dried and ground. Then, 40 mg of each sample was extracted overnight with 1.6 mL of 0.4 mol/L HCl and centrifuged at 5000 x The mineral contents (Zn, Fe, Mg, Ca and K) of the freeze-dried and ground bread samples were determined by Shimadzu ICPE-9000 Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometer (Japan). For each bread sample, 0.5 g was weighed into a Teflon vessel, and 7 mL of 65% HNO The effects of fermentation temperature and combination of strains used in sourdough production on the quality parameters of breads, mineral content, and phytic acid content were analyzed by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using JMP 5.0.1. The values are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. The level of significance was selected to be 0.05. In total, ninety-three lactic acid bacteria species isolated from sourdough were screened for phytase activity on medium supplemented with Na-phytate, and sixty-four isolates were determined as phytase-positive. These LAB isolates were first subjected to FTIR analysis and clustered in order to select for genotypic identification ( Extracellular phytase activity was determined for the phytase-positive isolates to identify the isolates showing the highest activity ( The pH and TTA values were determined both at the beginning and at the end of fermentation. As seen from The yeast and LAB counts of the sourdough samples were determined at the beginning and after 20 h of fermentation. As shown in Volume, specific volume, hardness value, and color properties of the sourdough bread samples are presented in The results of sensory analyses of the bread samples are presented in The degradation ratio of phytic acid in bread, based on the phytic acid content of whole-wheat flour, is presented in The mineral contents of the sourdough breads are given in In the present study, lactic acid bacteria isolated from sourdough were screened to determine the phytase activity.