The preparation of Nd-enriched particles from NdFeB sintered magnets using no acid or basic solution is reported. The combination of a hydrogenated–disproportionated alloy with a H2O2 solution at room temperature allows that Nd(OH)3 be obtained as major phase whilst Fe concentration is reduced 27 times compared to the starting material. The chemical reactions which take place in the system during the reaction are proposed based on X-ray diffraction results. After an oxidizing heat treatment a mixture of neodymium oxides is achieved.Throughout the last three decades the NdFeB-based magnetic compound became indispensable in several strategic areas for human society such as power generation and communications. Magnets production has increased continuously, achieving 80,000 The NdFeB-based compound reprocessing might have, in principle, two distinct aims: (i) the preparation of new engineering products and (ii) the elements’ recovery. Regarding the former, the possibility in obtaining electromagnetic radiation absorbers, magnets or nanoparticles to be used for magnetic hyperthermia has been shown NdFeB alloys possess high chemical affinity with H Commercially available NdFeB-based sintered magnets (grade N42) were used as starting material. The parts were demagnetized in air at 723 Next, twenty grams of each powder were separately immersed in 200 The solid–liquid phase separation was carried out magnetically and the liquid was evaporated in air at 383 Structural characterization of the starting material and obtained powders were carried out by X-ray diffraction (Co Kα radiation, scanning rate 0.005° The starting HD and disproportionated materials are visually similar to each other from HRSEM images with low magnification (irregular particles with flat surfaces due mainly to cleavage) as shown in The HD powder can be considered as a set of particles almost fully constituted by Nd   At this point it is worth mentioning that although Fe(OH) It is known from the literature that Fe For this reason, the mixture of powder and H   On the other hand, the starting disproportionated powder is constituted by three phases mixed at nanometric scale, possessing their respective contact area with the liquid and reacting chemically with the solution in a different way. The XRD pattern of the reaction product is presented in In order to check the influence of a heat treatment in the structure of the Nd-rich material, As a first approach to explain the products obtained from the disproportionated material, a possible sequence of reactions is:    At last, it is worth mentioning that there are still uncertainties concerning the stability of different polymorphs of neodymium oxide (and hydroxide) since it is influenced by the presence of water, impurities, temperature and pressure In summary, the preparation feasibility of a Nd-enriched powder from a disproportionated NdFeB alloy chemically reacted with a (H The authors thank IPT for their facilities. M.F. de Campos acknowledges CNPq.