Simultaneous ipsilateral fractures involving radial head and distal end of radius are uncommon. We present our thoughts on which fracture should be addressed first. A 68-year-old lady sustained an ipsilateral fracture of the right radial head and distal end of radius following a fall. Clinically her right elbow was posteriorly dislocated and right wrist was deformed. Plain radiographs showed an intraarticular fracture of the distal end of radius and a comminution radial head fracture with a proximally migrated radius. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no significant ligament injuries. We addressed her distal radius first with an anatomical locking plate followed by her radial head with a radial head replacement. Our rationale to treat the distal end radius: first was to obtain a correct alignment of Lister's tubercle and correct the distal radius height. Lister's tubercle was used to guide for the correct rotation of the radial head prosthesis. Correcting the distal end fracture radial height helped us with length selection of the radial head prosthesis and address the proximally migrated radial shaft and neck. Postoperative radiographs showed an acceptable reduction. The Cooney score was 75 at 3 months postoperatively, which was equivalent to a fair functional outcome.Fractures of only the proximal radius or the distal radius are common injuries of the forearm account for 14% and 17% of all adult extremities in casualty. A 68-year-old lady presented with right elbow and wrist pain associated with limited motion and deformity following a fall down a flight of stairs. Clinically the right elbow was dislocated with deformity over both elbow and wrist joint. Neurovascular status of the affected limb was intact. Plain radiographs showed posterior dislocation of the right elbow with a comminution fracture of the right radial head and ipsilateral fracture of the distal end of the right radius ( Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of the distal radius fracture was performed via a modified Henry's approach. An anatomical locking plate was used. Subsequently, we proceeded with radial head replacement utilising the Kocher posterolateral approach. Intraoperatively the lateral collateral ligament of the elbow was noted to be intact. There was a partial tear of less than 25% to the annular ligament. Seven mm radial head prosthesis was chosen and provided good stability to the elbow joint ( Unstable posterior elbow dislocations with ipsilateral comminution radial head fractures and distal end radius fractures without concomitant ligamentous injuries are an uncommon injury of the elbow. The injury usually results from a strong axial force when the patient falls on an outstretched hand with the elbow in a hyperextended position. The sequence of injury has been postulated to be the distal radius fracture occurring first causing the elbow to be forced into valgus, leading the radial head to impact on the humeri causing secondary fractures of the radial head and or radial neck. Often the resultant stretching force also causes injury to the ulnar collateral ligament. It is interesting to note that the carrying angle of the elbow further predisposes it to increased valgus stress upon radiocapitellar impaction following the fall. We postulate that the instability of the elbow joint following this type of injury could be due to the loss of one of the static stabilizers provided by the concavity-convexity of the articulation of the radial head and capitellum. Whilst managing the distal end radius fracture was straightforward, we felt that the best option for treating the severely comminution radial head fracture was limited to radial head replacement. Radial head replacement surgery has been associated with complications like rotational malpositioning and postoperative proximal migration of the radius. We addressed ORIF for the distal end of radius first to restore the radial height and obtain an anatomical reduction of the intraarticular fragments. Restoring the distal end radial height helped us decide on the radial head prosthesis length size. Too short a length would have an inadequate offset at the elbow joint leading to instability of the joint and radiocapitellar instability whereas too long a length would have led to overstuffing. Anatomical reduction of the fragments allowed us to get a correct alignment of Lister's tubercle which was vital for us to use to get the correct rotation of the radial head prosthesis.  Except for one case in Agarwal's series who suffered a radial head avascular necrosis, all the cases had acceptable to good function. Our patient had a Cooney score of 75 at 3 months which is equivalent to a fair functional outcome. In conclusion, ipsilateral distal end radius and proximal end radius fractures are uncommon injuries. If surgery is indicated, we suggest fixing the distal end radius first followed by the proximal radius. If performing the radial head replacement, landmarks for correct prosthesis rotation and tensioning at the elbow joint are vital for good clinical outcomes. Nil. Informed consent has been obtained from the patient or relatives. There are no conflicts of interest associated with this article. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at