The extraction of titanium(IV) from sulphate, chloride and nitrate solutions has been investigated using 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHEHPA) in kerosene. The kinetics of extraction was slow, requiring 60 min for the complete extraction of titanium and was improved with the increase of the extractant concentration in the organic phase. When the acid concentration in the aqueous feed phase was varied from 0.5 M to 4 M, the distribution ratios of titanium showed minimal values at 1–2 M acid. The effect of the initial concentration of titanium on extraction was found to be negligible, indicating the presence of mononuclear species in the aqueous phase. The stripping of titanium was studied using H2SO4, H2SO4+H2O2 and Na2CO3. The kinetics of the stripping was very slow when sulphuric acid was used, but was improved with complex forming stripping agents (H2SO4+H2O2 and Na2CO3). The extraction and stripping of titanium were 100% using an aqueous nitrate medium and sodium carbonate strip. Hence, results generated would be applicable to separate titanium from secondary sources such as fly ash originated from incinerators of Municipal Solid Waste.Titanium and its alloys, due to their excellent characteristics as industrial materials, are used for various purposes in industry. In particular, titanium has been widely used in the aerospace industry while titanium dioxide finds application as pigment in the paint industry. Moreover a larger-scale output of lower-cost titanium and titanium alloy products for use in automotive parts and buildings is increasing. The recovery of titanium from secondary sources such as fly ash generated from the Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) incineration could minimise landfill disposal and the waste of natural resources. Generally a medium size incineration plant (170 tons/day of MSW) annually produce about 80 tons of fly ash which contain 7000–12 Many reagents have been tested for the extraction of titanium(IV) from aqueous solutions. It is recognised that neutral organo-phosphorous compounds are effective extractants for tetravalent metals, particularly for titanium(IV). Among these, tri- In this paper the solvent extraction of titanium(IV) from HCl, HNO The extractant 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHEHPA) was supplied by Albright and Wilson (now Rhodia), and was used without further purification. As small amounts of di-acid, such as 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid, are usually present in this commercial extractant, EHEHPA was titrated by KOH in a 70% (v/v) aqueous/acetone solution and its content was found to be 96.4%. Low odour kerosene (Aldrich) with a boiling fraction: 180–250 °C was used as a diluent due to the high extraction efficiency observed when kerosene was employed ( Titanium(IV) stock solution was prepared by leaching titanium dioxide in concentrated H A typical MSW leaching solution contains Ti, Fe, Zn, Al and Pb; therefore three simulated solutions containing 0.5 g/L for each metal were prepared in HCl, H Extraction and stripping were determined by shaking equal volumes of aqueous and organic phases for 60 min in sealed bottles using a mechanical shaker at room temperature; phase separation occurred within 5 min. EHEHPA concentrations of 0.2 M and 0.5 M were used throughout the experiments. The titanium concentration was varied from 0.006 M to 0.02M, while the effect of acid concentration was examined within the 0.5–4 M range. The concentrations of the titanium in the aqueous feed and strip solutions were determined spectrophotometrically (Model: UV–VIS DMS-200 Varian) by complexing with hydrogen peroxide in acidic medium (  1 M aqueous solutions of H From these data, moreover, it can be seen that titanium extraction from a nitrate medium presents higher distribution coefficient values than sulphate and chloride media. It may be due to the difference in the activity of Ti(IV) and ion-pairing nature of these anions. Sulphuric acid is mainly used for the leaching of titanium oxide and its ores ( Many authors studied extraction of titanium from acidic chloride solutions, where Ti(IV) forms a variety of complexes.   Based on the percentage metal extraction obtained with synthetic leaching solutions, selective titanium separation can be done efficiently at 1 M acid concentration ( The effect of stripping agents and their concentration on titanium recovery from a loaded organic phase consisting of 0.5 M EHEHPA and 0.01 M Ti(IV) has been investigated. A single stage experiment with 3 M sulphuric, hydrochloric and nitric acid shows that the titanium stripping kinetics is very slow (>180 min). The maximum percentage of stripping was found to be about 5% because of the strong Ti–EHEHPA complex. Other stripping agents such as HClO  A further interesting breakthrough was achieved when sodium carbonate was used as a stripping agent. The stripping of titanium was very fast and the yield was 100% ( The stripping of a loaded organic phase that also contained iron, using 1 M Na Liquid–liquid extraction of titanium(IV) was investigated in order to examine the effect of different acid media, over the concentration range of 0.5–4 M on the recovery by using 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester. EHEHPA is shown to be a very effective extractant for titanium(IV) from acidic medium. However, the kinetics of extraction is very slow, within 60–120 min, according to the acidic media. The extraction of titanium is independent of the initial metal ion concentration indicating presence of mononuclear species up to 0.02 M Ti(IV). The highest distribution value is observed for 1 M nitric acid. The distribution values of titanium depend on the sulphuric and nitric acid concentration in the aqueous phase, while it is slightly dependent on the hydrochloric acid medium. However most extractants have poor efficiency with an acidity between 0.5–3 M, probably due to the strong hydration of the dominant [TiO] The extraction mechanism appears to change from cation exchange to solvation with an increase in the acid concentration. It is believed that the [TiO] From the practical point of view, the results of this study suggest that the extraction of titanium can be performed using EHEHPA with each acidic solution. In particular an extraction scheme can be designed for titanium recovery from a sulphuric acid leach that is being considered for the fly ash. Regarding competition among impurity metal ions, iron(III) seems to be the most competitive ion with 20–67% co-extracted, depending upon the acid medium. Authors thank M.R. Montereali and S. Giacco for their help during the research work. Moreover one of the authors, Prashant Kulkarni, wishes to thank ENEA for the postdoctoral fellowship.