In the last two years, the rapidly rising demand for lithium has exceeded supply, resulting in a sharp increase in the price of the metal. Conventional electric driven membrane processes can separate Li+ from divalent cations, but there is virtually no commercial membrane that can efficiently and selectively extract Li+ from a solution containing chemically similar ions such as Na+ and K+. Here, we show that the different movement behavior of Li+ ion within the sub-nanometre channel leads to Li+ ion-selectivity and high transport rate. Using inexpensive negatively charged 2D subnanometer hydrous phyllosilicate channels with interlayer space of 0.43 nm in a membrane-like morphology, we observed that for an interlayer spacing of below 1 nm, Li+ ions move along the length of the channel by jumping between its two walls. However, for above 1 nm spacing, the ions used only one channel wall to jump and travel. Molecular dynamic (MD) simulation also revealed that ions within the nanochannel exhibit acceleration-deceleration behavior. Experimental results showed that the nanochannels could selectively transport monovalent ions of Li+> Na+> and K+ while excluding other ions such as Cl− and Ca2+, with the selectivity ratios of 1.26, 1.59 and 1.36 for Li+/Na+, Li+/K+, and Na+/K+ respectively, which far exceed the mobility ratios in traditional porous ion exchange membranes. The findings of this work provide researchers with not only a new understanding of ions movement behavior within subnanometer confined areas but also make a platform for the future design of ion-selective membranes.It is predicted that the supply of the energy-critical element of lithium will soon fall below its continuously increasing demand, which will render it a strategically influential element ( Extraction of Li For the design of a Li For a neutral nanochannel, the channel dimension must be smaller than the Li Playing with the design above parameters, recently researchers examined a range of building blocks to prepare Li Although the proposed Li As mentioned ion transportation mechanisms inside nanochannels have been well-studied. However, the mechanisms by which Li The concept of this work is to exploit 2D nanofluidic vermiculite (VCT) channels into a morphology which can be used to control ion transportation across the membrane selectively. Here, VCT is selected because it has significant advantages compared with GO and other two-dimensional structures. VCT with its extraordinary chemical and thermal stability is much more readily available and much less costly ( Recently, The outcomes of this work provide researchers with a new understanding of Li Vermiculite (VCT) (CAS No.: 0001318009) Calcium chloride (CaCl Details of VCT membrane preparation, nanofluidic device fabrication, membrane monovalent cations conductivity measurement and analysis of desalination performance of VCT membranes are presented in “Methods” in Supporting Information. A variety of techniques, i.e. AFM, SEM, TEM, BET, and XRD were used to characterize the membranes (see Supporting Information for more details). In this work, the exfoliation of VCTs followed the approaches used by The nanofluidic membrane can be readily prepared by reassembly of the exfoliated VCT layers using different approaches, including filtration, dip-coating, spraying and solvent evaporation ( Following Sessile drop technique used in our previous works The water uptake and swelling ratio were measured following our previous works with some amendments ( The electric-field-driven ion transport in VCT nanochannel was analyzed by linear sweep voltammetry (L.S·V) using LiCl, NaCl, KCl, CaCl It should be noted that in the applied potential range (−0.1–0.3 V), electrolysis of water molecules cannot occur. So any change in the I–V curve is due to the transportation of the corresponding cations. The figure also shows that the ion conductivity increases as the ion sizes reduce, such that H Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is the most common AC technique used to characterize electrochemical properties (ion conductivity) of the membrane [2, 3]. In this technique, the ohmic resistance of the cell can be extracted by applying an alternating current (or voltage) driving force and measuring the magnitude and phase of the cell voltage (or current) to determine the complex impedance of the system. As can be seen in Currently, there is no commercial synthetic membrane with atomic-sized pores that can efficiently separate monatomic ions (for instance Li It is well-proven that ion conductivity normally increases with temperature. The effect of electrolyte temperature (up to 90 °C) on the VCT membranes’ performance was studied in During the selective transportation of ions, there is a chance that some Li Li concentration in different sources varies from 0.1 to 0.2 ppm for seawater ( The proton conductivity of the VCT membrane was measured using the L.S·V technique and apparatus which was shown in  MD simulation was performed to understand the effect of VCT nanochannel dimensions and external electric field density on the Li Studies using density functional theory revealed that strong electric fields have a significant impact on the structure and energetics of small Li It is well-proven that saline water expels its salt content upon freezing ( Our MD simulation revealed that Li The Li This phenomenon can also be explained based on the Lennard-Jones potential (1924). In the presence of an external electric field, Li Figure S10is the results of our MD simulation to investigate the effect of change in power water density on the diffusion coefficient and ion flux of cations in the VCT membrane with 0.4 and 0.8 nm interlayer spacing. As can be seen, increasing the power density enhanced not only the Li The Li The industry is urgently seeking new and efficient membranes to extract Li Authors acknowledge Munirah Mohammad for her contribution to this work. The authors are grateful to the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at