A study was made of the dissolution kinetics of enargite, Cu3AsS4, with chlorine generated in solution by the reaction between sodium hypochlorite and hydrochloric acid. The effects of stirring speed, initial chlorine concentration, particle size, and temperature were investigated. The kinetics of the dissolution were characterized by two sequential stages: relatively fast reaction initially, while later the reaction became very slow. In the first stage, the fraction of copper extracted varied linearly with time according to α=k
                     1
                     t, whereas in the second stage, the dissolution was well represented by the shrinking core model controlled by diffusion through a porous product layer with kinetic equation: 1−3(1−α)2/3+2(1−α)=k
                     2
                     t. The S0 product layer acts as a diffusion barrier. The calculated activation energies were 15.0 kJ mol−1 (3.5 kcal/mol) for the first stage and 21.0 kJ mol−1 (5.0 kcal/mol) for the second.
                  For the first stage, an apparent reaction order of 1.0 was found with respect to the chlorine concentration; for the second stage, an apparent reaction order of 1.8 was obtained.Copper concentrates with an arsenic content of 0.5% or more have no commercial value. Arsenic-contaminated copper concentrates have been processed to remove As using different techniques including: (a) selective flotation The enargite used in the kinetic experiments was obtained from the processing plant of the El Indio Mine, La Serena, Chile; it was ground using a porcelain mortar, hand classified and screened to obtain small size fractions. Most of the experiments were carried out using the 0.149–0.210-mm fraction (mean diameter 0.177 mm, radius All the reagents used to prepare the leaching solutions were analytical grade chemicals, except sodium hypochlorite, which was commercial grade. Leaching experiments were carried out in a spherical glass reactor using the method previously described by The kinetic models applied in the present study to the two steps of the leaching curves have been extensively discussed in the literature The effect of stirring on the kinetics of dissolution of enargite was investigated and the results are shown graphically in The influence of chlorine concentration on the leaching of enargite is shown in A straight line with a slope of 1.0 was obtained when values of log Due to the speed of the first stage, only one experimental point was available for the determination of In the case of the second stage, a straight line with a slope of 1.8 was obtained for a plot of log Kinetic data for the temperature effects on enargite dissolution are shown in These results suggest that temperature had no significant effect on enargite dissolution. According to the Arrhenius plots given in The values obtained for the activation energy confirm the hypothesis of a first stage controlled by diffusion in a liquid boundary layer and a second stage by diffusion through a solid product layer. The effect of particle size on enargite dissolution is shown in Explanations for the slow dissolution of the enargite were sought by carrying out additional leaching tests, after which the residues were characterized by different methods. For this study, small amounts of museum grade enargite from Huencavélica (Peru) were used. The chemical composition of this sample was: 46.0% Cu, 31.0% S, 17% As, 1.8% Sb and 4.2% insoluble. The molar ratios were Cu/As=3.2 and Cu/(As+Sb)=3.0. Leaching tests were carried out according to conditions presented in The SEM/EDS and XRD results on the leach residues, indicate: (a) The solid reaction product was amorphous elemental sulfur, independent of the degree of attack of the chlorine on the enargite. (b) Sulfur forms a gummy layer which tends to agglomerate the enargite particles (c) The degree of attack on the enargite was strongly affected by particle size. With fine particles, attack was practically complete, as long as there was a large excess of chlorine present. With larger particles, attack was incomplete and slow, even in the presence of excess chlorine. Two experiments were carried out under the following conditions: In Thus, the overall stoichiometry of the process is of the following type:  For coarse enargite (50–75 μm) the extraction was rapid during the first instants, followed by a ceasing of the reaction, with extraction of only 5% over 40 min. Taking into account the initial moles of the chlorine and the stoichiometry of the reaction, the maximum extraction should be about 12%. This suggested that for coarse grain size, the sulfur coating acted as a barrier to diffusion. From the study of the general stoichiometry of the reaction of enargite in acid media with Cl This first step would generate a copper and arsenic deficient sulfide intermediate, Cu In order to justify the appearance of about 50% of the enargite sulfur as elemental S in the final product, a subsequent step of atomic reordering is proposed: Electrochemical studies of In accord with the coefficients (1) Dissolution kinetics of enargite in aqueous solutions of substoichiometric Cl (2) The kinetics of dissolution of enargite appear to be mass transport controlled in the first stage with an activation energy of 14.8 kJ mol (3.54 kcal/mol). The second stage of the reaction appears to be controlled by diffusion through a product layer, with an activation energy of 20.9 kJ mol (3) Leaching rates exhibit an apparent order of 1 with respect to the chlorine concentration for the first stage. Thus this reagent makes possible the dissolution of enargite. (4) The first stage reaction rates are determined essentially by the concentration of chlorine and particle size, rather than by temperature. (5) The general stoichiometry of the enargite reaction with acid solutions of Cl (6) The elemental sulfur produces a non-crystalline agglomerated coating. (7) The size of the particle has an important influence on the leaching rate. For particles below 15 μm in size, the reaction is quasi-instantaneous, with rapid consumption of Cl The authors would like to thank the National Commission of Scientific and Technological Investigation, CONICYT, for providing the financial resources to carry out the present work FONDECYT (Project 1000217). They are also grateful to the Technical and Scientific Services of the University of Barcelona for assistance with the characterization of the materials and El Indio Mine for the enargite sample (Mr. Elliot Cohen).