A new polymer inclusion membrane (PIM) has been developed for the extraction of thiocyanate from weakly alkaline aqueous solutions. The composition of this membrane in mass percent (m/m) is 20% (m/m) Aliquat 336 as carrier, 10% (m/m) 1-tetradecanol as modifier and 70% (m/m) PVC as the base-polymer. This composition has been arrived at after extensive screening of a large number of CTA and PVC-based membranes using various plasticizers and modifiers. This membrane is homogeneous, flexible and transparent and extracts thiocyanate from weakly alkaline solutions with considerable speed for a PIM with an initial flux value of 7.86×10−6
                     molm−2
                     s−1. Quantitative back extraction is achieved using 1M NaNO3.
                  The membrane has been cycled 10 times through extraction and back extraction without loss of performance. Its use in the extraction of thiocyanate from wastewater from the cyanide leaching of low grade gold ores has been successfully tested.The use of cyanide as the lixiviant is almost universal in the recovery of gold from low grade ores The degradation of thiocyanate by microbiological oxidation has been reported Polymer inclusion membranes (PIMs) offer an attractive alternative to solvent extraction by mimicking this technique but without the use of a large inventory of diluents This paper reports on a study designed to provide a stable polymer inclusion membrane specifically for the extraction of thiocyanate from industrial wastewaters and in particular, from those arising from the cyanide processing of low grade gold ores. Aliquat 336 (Aldrich), 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether (2-NPOE) (Aldrich), tributylphosphate (TBP) (Unilab, Australia), dibutyl butyl phosphonate (DBBP) (Fluka), 1-hexanol (Sigma), 1-heptanol (ICN Biomedicals), 1-octanol (Fluka), 1-nonanol (Fluka), 1-decanol (Aldrich), 1-dodecanol (Aldrich), and 1-tetradecanol (Aldrich) were used as received. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) (HPLC grade, Merck, 99.9%, Scharlau, Spain), dichloromethane (DCM) (Merck), high molecular weight poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) (Fluka), and cellulose triacetate (CTA) (Fluka) were used in the preparation of PIMs. Other chemicals used in this study were hydrochloric acid (Merck), sodium hydroxide (Merck), potassium thiocyanate (BDH, Australia), sodium nitrate (Chem-supply, Australia), ferric chloride (BDH, Australia), pH 4, 7, and 10 calibration standards (Merck). Deionized water (Synergy185 Millipore, 18.2 A flow injection (FI) system ( Samples were injected into a carrier stream containing deionized water (flow rate, 1.02 The limit of detection of the FI procedure, determined as 3 times the standard deviation of the baseline, was 0.17 Membrane thickness measurements were made using a Motic SMZ-140 stereo microscope (Motic, China) with 60 times magnification in combination with a MotiCam 1000 microscope camera (Motic, China). An Ionode IJ-44 pH electrode connected to a smartCHEM analyser (TPS, Australia) was used for pH measurements. A gas chromatograph (Model GC 2010, Shimadzu) equipped with an EC-Wax capillary column (30 The extractant Aliquat 336, a plasticizer or modifier and either PVC or CTA in varying proportions were weighed into a Pyrex beaker and dissolved in 15 The thickness of circular membrane segments was measured along their diameters using a digital image of the membrane cross section taken through an optical microscope and compared against a calibration slide with markings of known dimensions. Measurements were taken in triplicate at several points along the membrane cross-section. Membranes were evaluated for their mechanical strength, flexibility and homogeneity All membrane compositions are quoted in mass percentages. Extraction studies were carried out by immersing a 65 The influence of pH on the extraction was investigated by immersing membrane segments in 250 Back extraction was studied using thiocyanate loaded membrane segments immersed in 250 A thiocyanate solution with initial concentration of 40 The leaching of long chain alkyl alcohols, used as modifiers, from the membrane into the aqueous phase during PIM extraction of thiocyanate was studied. After completing the membrane extraction process, any modifier in the aqueous phase (250 Gold mine tailings water was obtained from a gold processing plant in the State of Victoria (Australia). The tailings water was at pH 8 and contained 1054 Twenty-eight PVC and CTA membrane compositions including Aliquat 336 as the extractant and 2-NPOE, TBP, DBBP or 1-dodecanol as modifier ( The circular segments of the successful membranes were exposed to 250 The extraction performance of the PIMs listed in The possibility of back-extracting thiocyanate from a PIM consisting of 20% Aliquat 336, 20% 1-dodecanol and 60% PVC was studied using NaCl or NaNO It should be noted that the concentration of thiocyanate in the absence of a membrane in deionized water and in 0.5 and 1.0 The effect of the 1-dodecanol concentration on the PIM extraction efficiency was studied by maintaining the concentration of Aliquat 336 at 20% while varying the concentration of 1-dodecanol between 0 and 20%. The extraction curves shown in It was assumed that similarly to 1-dodecanol, other long alkyl chain alcohols could act as suitable modifiers and might even improve further the performance of the Aliquat 336/PVC PIM. A range of such alcohols with C The composition of the 1-tetradecanol PIM was optimized and the results presented in The initial flux values ( It can be seen in The long-term stability of PIMs incorporating 1-dodecanol and 1-tetradecanol as modifier was studied by conducting 10 consecutive cycles of extraction and back-extraction of thiocyanate. Since the back-extracting reagent was 1.0 The gradual leaching of the modifier resulted in a decrease in the amount of thiocyanate extracted during each subsequent cycle thus suggesting that the loss of modifier was accompanied by loss of extractant. The dependence of the extraction of thiocyanate on the solution pH was studied for the pH range from 7 to 10 which was considered as relevant to tailings waters in the gold mining industry. These experiments were carried out under a nitrogen atmosphere to exclude CO A preliminary study was carried out to assess the potential of the PIM with optimal composition (20% Aliquat 336, 10% 1-tetradecanol and 70% PVC) to extract thiocyanate from a 10-fold diluted tailings water. It was expected that competition from other anions present, and in particular cyanide, would be very low and that thiocyanate would be selectively extracted as reported by Sodaye et al. As mentioned at the start of this paper the main aim of this research is to develop a PIM specifically for the extraction of thiocyanate from industrial wastewaters and in particular, from those arising from the cyanide processing of low grade gold ores. These preliminary results show considerable promise and work is now in progress on a detailed study which will include the transfer of the PIM system to a pilot plant scale. Extensive screening of various CTA and PVC-based PIM compositions containing Aliquat 336 for their potential to extract thiocyanate from weakly alkaline aqueous solutions has been conducted. A number of plasticizers/modifiers have been studied including a range of long alkyl chain alcohols. The extraction of thiocyanate and the membrane stability have been found to be crucially dependent on the membrane composition. The minimization of the leaching of the modifier to the aqueous phase has been one major aim of the research. This has been achieved using 1-tetradecanol as the modifier. The optimal membrane composition has been established to be 20% Aliquat 336, 10% 1-tetradecanol and 70% PVC. This membrane is homogeneous, flexible, transparent and stable in weakly alkaline solutions. The extraction of thiocyanate is fast and the membrane has been used for 10 consecutive cycles of extraction and back extraction without appreciable deterioration in performance. Quantitative back extraction has been achieved using 1.0 The solution pH has been shown to have no effect on the extraction of thiocyanate over the range of pH 7–10. This is the pH range expected for tailings waters arising from the cyanide processing of low grade gold ores and a preliminary study has shown that the PIM can efficiently extract thiocyanate from such waters. We are grateful to