Simulations are conducted using five new artificial neural networks developed herein to demonstrate and investigate the behavior of rock material under polyaxial loading. The effects of the intermediate principal stress on the intact rock strength are investigated and compared with laboratory results from the literature. To normalize differences in laboratory testing conditions, the stress state is used as the objective parameter in the artificial neural network model predictions. The variations of major principal stress of rock material with intermediate principal stress, minor principal stress and stress state are investigated. The artificial neural network simulations show that for the rock types examined, none were independent of intermediate principal stress effects. In addition, the results of the artificial neural network models, in general agreement with observations made by others, show (a) a general trend of strength increasing and reaching a peak at some intermediate stress state factor, followed by a decline in strength for most rock types; (b) a post-peak strength behavior dependent on the minor principal stress, with respect to rock type; (c) sensitivity to the stress state, and to the interaction between the stress state and uniaxial compressive strength of the test data by the artificial neural networks models (two-way analysis of variance; 95% confidence interval). Artificial neural network modeling, a self-learning approach to polyaxial stress simulation, can thus complement the commonly observed difficult task of conducting true triaxial laboratory tests, and/or other methods that attempt to improve two-dimensional (2D) failure criteria by incorporating intermediate principal stress effects.The case for the significance of the intermediate principal stress, To compensate for these deficiencies, some efforts have been redirected to place emphasis on the effect of only the relationship of the major principal stress, Interestingly, some more recent studies ( In terms of mechanism, some studies attribute intermediate principal stress effects to extended evolution of localized deformation that ultimately needs significant additional strain for failure ( The challenge remains, therefore, to enhance current understanding on the effects of the intermediate principal stress on brittle/ductile rock behavior through more laboratory testing. It is therefore imperative to explore/develop new avenues to complement laboratory experiments, such as analytical approaches or computer modeling techniques ( In summary, the main objectives of this study are: To develop new artificial neural network (ANN) models which predict stress state factors, To show that the output from the new ANN models can act as tools to investigate/substantiate the major effects of The characteristic that as In certain cases there is no clear trend toward an eventual decrease in strength at higher The observation that in certain cases a steady state is reached when the level of confining stress The observation that for some rock types the intermediate principal stress hardly affects strength at certain values of The suggestion that the stress factor The theoretical background for ANNs can be found in several sources (e.g. An ANN consists of a mesh of computing nodes and connections ( A search for the global optimum of connection weights that yields the result with minimum error is conducted. For each iteration, the accuracy of an ANN can be assessed by the mean squared difference between actual and predicted or output values (root mean squared error, RMSE): In supervised ANN learning, input/output pairs must be provided via a training file before the model can be tested or utilized. Inputs are factors influencing the target output. When selecting input/out pairs, it is necessary to have some insight into the system dynamics of the problem to set constraints or boundaries for the problem. An input/output suite in the training set constitutes a training pattern. There is a fixed number of training patterns in the training file. The training file is developed such that the patterns are statistically similar (i.e. mean, standard deviation and range) to the actual system being modeled. The ability to learn complex relationships among supplied data sets, and then apply this knowledge to a fresh dataset is a major advantageous feature of ANN over purely analytical/empirical models. As explained above, and because information about the physical parameters of the system is not required, an ANN does not rely upon the physical laws of the system it is modeling. However, being completely dependent on data sets is in a sense a big disadvantage of ANNs, because any errors present in the data are inherited by the ANN model possibly leading ANN models to be in contradiction to physical laws and reality. It is therefore imperative to understand the source and limits of available data sets. In summary, the steps for supervised ANN learning and testing are: Select and prepare input and output parameters from raw data and create a training file. Create ANN model architecture. Input training file into the model. Initiate training by implementing the BP algorithm. Continue ANN training until errors are minimized. Test model on new data for validation. Refine model if necessary. Model ready for use. Despite their usefulness in many situations, ANNs have been found to be limited in the amount of extractable knowledge they provide concerning their mechanics, limited in their ability to generalize/extrapolate beyond the range of the data used for model training, and limited in dealing with data uncertainty ( The application of ANNs to rock mechanics is not new. For example, The ANN modeling reported herein utilized guidelines from the literature to select appropriate parameters used in the models. Prior to model construction, real field or laboratory data are required to train and validate the models. An additional important heuristic in ANN architecture is the number of hidden layers, plus their associated number of nodes (i.e. processing elements). Although there is substantial debate in the literature, it has been shown that one hidden layer is sufficient to approximate any continuous function provided that sufficient connection weights/processing elements are given, and the appropriate activation function is used ( For single hidden layer networks, the optimal number of nodes may be obtained using several guidelines (e.g. The main criteria used to evaluate the prediction performance of ANN models are the coefficient of correlation,    The As stated in Section In this study, the data sets described in Section The analyses were conducted using the BP algorithm as discussed in Section The ANN test results are summarized in Based on the results shown in When compared with published studies, the ANNs simulate the intermediate principal stress effects on rock strength quite reasonably as indicated in For instance, for KTBA and WG, the peak strength occurs at a stress state factor (i.e. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), used to statistically test parameter independence and interaction, was also conducted by the ANNs with respect to the UCS and the stress state factor Several previous studies have demonstrated that the influence of the intermediate principal stress in rock mechanics and rock engineering is without question. However the nature and character of this influence have not been comprehensively studied primarily due to a dearth of empirical data, even though laboratory results can be very reliable. In addition, the design and conduction of polyaxial or true triaxial laboratory experiments are not trivial. It is therefore imperative to explore/develop new avenues to compliment laboratory experiments. In this study, a self-learning approach via ANN modeling is employed to investigate the influence of the intermediate principal stress on the rock strength. To normalize differences such as different laboratory testing conditions and natural variations within rock types, the intermediate principal stress In addition, the results discussed in this study have important implications for 2D failure criteria in rock engineering. Despite their success and popularity, conventional 2D strength criteria have been known to fall short when applied to 3D problems (such as in situations of multiple failure modes) because 2D strength criteria typically ignore the effects of the intermediate principal stress The author wishes to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. Comments from the reviewers that helped improve the quality of this manuscript are hereby acknowledged.