The work hardening behaviour of Cu–3Ti–1Cd and Cu–4Ti–1Cd alloys has been studied by conducting tensile tests at room temperature in solution treated, peak aged and overaged conditions. The flow behaviour has been analyzed using various true stress–true strain relationships. The Ludwigson relationship provides the best fit for the true stress–strain data of the two alloys at 298K in all the conditions studied. The Hollomon equation as well as Ludwik equation fits the experimental σ–ɛ data for both the alloys reasonably well in highly overaged condition. While both the alloys exhibit transient flow behaviour at lower strains in solution treated condition, Cu–3Ti–1Cd alloy only exhibits this behaviour in peak aged condition. No such transition was observed in overaged condition of both the alloys. Further, these alloys display higher flow stress and strain hardening rates in peak aged condition than that in solution treated condition. Cu–3Ti–1Cd alloy shows higher flow stress and lower strain hardening rates in overaged condition than in the solution treated condition. On the other hand, Cu–4Ti–1Cd alloy exhibits lower flow stress as well as lower strain hardening rates in overaged condition when compared to that in solution treated condition. The observed behaviour in Cu–4Ti–1Cd alloy is related to the modulated structure with fine precipitates of Cu4Ti present in solution treated condition as compared to coarse and diffuse lamellar structure in overaged condition.A knowledge of the strain hardening behaviour of metals and alloys is essential to understand their forming characteristics. The analysis of strain hardening behaviour of metallic materials is facilitated by the flow curve (obtained from a tensile/compression test) that signifies macroscopic plastic deformation behaviour. Several flow relationships proposed in the past such as Holloman There have been several studies The Cu–4Ti–1Cd (alloy-A) and Cu–3Ti–1Cd (alloy-B) alloys were prepared by melting in stokes vacuum induction melting (VIM) furnace and cast as 30 Cylindrical threaded-head tensile samples as per ASTM E8M-97 standards having a gauge diameter of 6 Optical metallographic examination was carried out on mechanically polished and etched samples with the etchant being a mixture of 10 Optical micrographs of Cu–3Ti–1Cd alloy in solution treated as well as aged conditions are shown in   Of the other four flow relationships (Ludwik, Ludwigson, Swift and Voce), the Ludwigson relationship provides the best fit of the The applicability of various flow relations to true stress–true strain data of both the alloys for various heat treatment conditions is summarized in The prominent observation of the present study is that both Cu–Ti–Cd alloys in solution treated condition exhibit transient flow behaviour at lower strains. Such behaviour has been reported earlier in pure copper and other FCC materials Further, it is interesting to note that Cu–3Ti–1Cd alloy even in peak aged condition exhibit transient flow behaviour at lower strains. This is because the precipitates in peak aged condition being coherent, promote precipitate shearing at the onset of deformation to result in planar slip. This postulation is consistent with the behaviour reported earlier in peak aged condition of alloy Cu–2Al–0.5Cr On the other hand, both the Cu–Ti–Cd alloys studied do not exhibit any transition in flow behaviour in the overaged condition ( It is also interesting to note that the flow curve ( The original C–J (Crussard and Jaoul) plots The following conclusions have been drawn on the flow behaviour of age hardenable Cu–Ti–Cd alloys. The Ludwigson relationship provides the best fit of the true stress–true plastic strain curves of Cu–3Ti–1Cd and Cu–4Ti–1Cd alloys at 298 Both the alloys exhibit a transient flow behaviour at lower strains in solution treated as well as peak aged conditions. No such transition was observed in overaged condition. The alloys exhibit higher flow stress and strain hardening rates in peak aged condition than the solution treated one. The microstructural effects on strain hardening are more clearly discernible in d Cu–3Ti–1Cd alloy has higher flow stress and lower strain hardening rates in the overaged condition than the solution treated condition (similar to peak aged condition). However, Cu–4Ti–1Cd alloy exhibits lower flow stress as well as lower strain hardening rates in overaged condition when compared to that in solution treated condition. The observed behaviour is related to the modulated structure with fine precipitates of Cu The authors greatly acknowledge the Head, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, IT, BHU, Varanasi, for providing laboratory facilities. The authors are thankful to the Defence Research and Development Organization, New Delhi, for financial support. The authors wish to thank Director, Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Hyderabad for permission to publish this paper. One of the authors (R.M.) is thankful to Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad for granting leave under QIP.