The main purpose of this work is to validate a water quality model for the Ria de Aveiro, in order to better use it as a predictive tool in the study of the main water quality processes in the lagoon. Ria de Aveiro is a very shallow lagoon, dominated by tidal currents, presenting a very complex network structure, composed by several sub-systems and dominated by tidal asymmetries, resulting in areas of ebb and flood dominance and weak gravitational circulation. Tidal currents are the main forcing in the dissolved oxygen distribution (DO). The DO concentrations inside the main areas of the lagoon remain quite high, around 8mg O2/L, during great part of the year. The model sensitivity analysis shows that the ocean remains the main source of oxygen as well as the main factor controlling the DO distribution throughout the main lagoon areas, due to the exchanges between the ocean and the lagoon. This exchanges results from the good connection between them, which assure a tidal transport of oxygen and a constant renewal of the dissolved oxygen within the lagoon. As sea waters flows into the main lagoon channels, it increases, progressively, the oxygen concentration of the lagoon inner areas, to levels very comparable to the ocean level. This feature is responsible for the relatively high values of the DO concentrations found at the lagoon main areas, (varying within the range of 8 to 9mg O2/L). The occurrence of some episodic hypoxia situation at the very far and shallow areas, namely during summer and neap tides, when the oxygen consumption related processes are dominant, is nevertheless possible. Indeed, at the intertidal areas and at areas situated at the far end of the lagoon, under the influence of weak tidal currents, the dissolved oxygen concentrations may become very low, if the phytoplankton concentration and metabolism are low. Furthermore, as the depth is reduced at those areas, if the air temperature increase, the DO lost to the atmosphere is enhanced. The sensitivity analysis shows, as well, that the primary production and the phytoplankton respiration are the main factors affecting the oxygen budget in the water column, where changes in the primary production, resulting from changes of the phytoplankton abundance or metabolism, may influence the oxygen concentrations in the water column. This study shows that the model is able to realistically simulate the water quality of the lagoon constituting, therefore, a tool for the study and management of the Ria de Aveiro ecosystem.Water quality models are essential tools for the assessment of the impact of estuarine ecosystems changes in response to variables inputs, as well as the interactions occurring within the system. They also have been to be important tools for the effective management of estuarine systems and for the design and optimisation of discharge regimes. On the other hand, they may be used to establish surveillance procedures, help the decision making process, so that environmental objectives can be met and define adequate safety margins at a realistic cost. Estuary water quality models are needed to address both the problem of allowing discharges which are variable by nature ( Nowadays, most of the models are focused on the dissolved oxygen balance in the estuary ( The difficulty in integrating conceptual models of biogeochemical processes into a more holistic system is that all too often the advective processes, either from the sea or from the river and other catchments drainage, e.g. storm water flows, dominate the influence of the biogeochemical processes ( One of the major concerns of water quality studies has been the concentration of the dissolved oxygen, which is controlled by the rate of production of oxygen by algae, the nitrogen cycle, and other biochemical processes ( In general, oxygen may be removed from or added to water, by various physical, chemical or biological reactions. When the oxygen concentration falls below the saturation level, the deficit is made up by the transfer of gas from the atmosphere, through the surface, whereas when the oxygen concentration is greater than the saturation level, the super-saturation is reduced by the transfer from the water column to the air. Such interactions are driven by the partial pressure gradient in the gas phase and the concentration gradient in the liquid phase. The oxygen transfer in natural waters depends on: internal mixing and turbulence due to the velocity gradients and fluctuations, temperature, wind mixing, waterfalls, dams, rapids and surface films. A model calibration may be defined ( A water quality model has been setup and implemented for the Ria de Aveiro ( Ria de Aveiro ( Tides, which are semi-diurnal, are the main forcings of the circulation in the Ria de Aveiro lagoon. The hydrodynamic pattern of the lagoon is therefore imposed by the tide. Extreme conditions of strong winds may induce particular circulation patterns mainly in shallow areas and wide channels ( The most important channels are the S. Jacinto and the Espinheiro channels. They are directly connected to the lagoon mouth and have the strongest currents, reaching values of about 2 The hydrodynamic and the transport models used in this study solve the classical two-dimensional vertically integrated hydrodynamic and transport equations ( The time step for the hydrodynamic model has been chosen small, 20 The hydrodynamic and the transport model used in this work was calibrated and validated for the Ria de Aveiro by The water quality model solves the system of differential equations that describes the chemical and biological state of the coastal waters. The variables of the model are the following: dissolved The water quality model is coupled to the hydrodynamic model, through the transport equation, and it is integrated in the water quality module ( The Dissolved Oxygen (DO) is the amount of oxygen that is dissolved in the water column. The biochemical degradation of organic mater consumes dissolved oxygen and it is represented by the term The term Photosynthesis and respiration involve exchanges of dissolved oxygen with the water column and are represented by the terms Finally the term The calibration of the water quality model involves adjusting parameter rates so that the model output (dissolved oxygen,  The comparison between measurements and the model predictions was performed with the help of the estimated deviation between the observed and predicted values for a given variable:  It is worth to emphasize that the  As for the calibration, the The most important processes influencing the oxygen concentration in the water column are the phytoplankton respiration and production. Ammonia related processes are also included, as they consume as well important amount of oxygen. Due to the important number of the model parameters, it was found convenient to select the number of processes as well as their associated parameters. The methodology of the sensitivity tests consisted in comparing the model outputs for the calibration and the sensitivity test in order to assess the sensitivity of the main parameters, for variations of their values within a range of 20–50%. For high sensitive parameters the accuracy of the model calibration may greatly depend on this assessment. The major source of The actual respiration rate in the water column is the sum of the respiration by plants, bacteria and animals. Respiration rates, including phytoplankton, bacteria and plants have been measured for several rivers and costal ecosystems. The respiration considered here corresponds to the autotrophic respiration, that is the phytoplankton respiration, and it is assumed to follow an Arrhenius temperature law. This process is oxygen consuming and it is described by a Michaelis–Menten law, with respect to the dissolved oxygen, corresponding to a maximum respiration rate when the dissolved oxygen concentration is high and no respiration when the oxygen is depleted.  The value of the respiration rate used in the model calibration was 1.5 The chlorophyll The same value has been used by The Nitrification it is a process consisting basically in the oxidation of ammonia into nitrite and subsequently nitrates, resulting in oxygen consumption. Nitrifying bacteria (like The value of the The sensitivity analysis, presented in the previous chapter, which is based on the main oxygen related processes, allows a better knowledge of the model functioning relatively to its main sensitive parameters, as well as to achieve a better model validation. These parameters have proven to be the main parameter for the model calibration. The results confirm the role of the primary production, associated to situations of phytoplankton bloom or post bloom, in the oxygen budget in the lagoon and show that it is the main process responsible for the The sensitivity analysis has shown that increasing the phytoplankton respiration have some effects on the oxygen concentration levels, in general, contributing to some reduction of the oxygen concentration in the water column. In the far end of the lagoon, the oxygen consumed by the phytoplankton respiration may play an important role in the oxygen budget in the water column. Nevertheless, this process plays a secondary role on the oxygen budget in the main area of the lagoon. Sensitivity tests concerning the nitrification related processes show that, although The results presented here show that the model is able to reproduce both data values and trends, even though, concerning nutrients some discrepancies and deviation between data and simulations have been found. This have largely related to the small temporal resolution as well as due to the important tidal amplitude variations of the simulated concentrations. The results confirm that the model constitutes a tool for the study of the lagoon ecosystem. Nevertheless, in order to improve the accurately validate the water quality and ecological models for the Ria de Aveiro, an important multidisciplinary monitoring effort is needed, aimed to obtain data with appropriate spatial and temporal resolution, that is covering inter-tidal, seasonal as well as year periods. Also, a lot fundamental studies needed to be performed in the biological, chemical and geophysical fields in order not only to support and comfort the modelling works, as well as to increase the knowledge of the water quality and the ecology of the lagoon. This research was supported by the FCT through the project Simclave.