Heterogeneity in cleats and pore size distribution within coal macrolithotypes (bright, semi-bright, semi-dull, and dull coals, determined from the overall relative luster and percentage of bright components) impact coalbed methane (CBM) extraction. However, few studies have investigated the characteristics of macrolithotypes across multiple length scales. Here, the macrolithotype description was performed for the No. 3, 5, and 11 coal seams in the Hancheng Block of Ordos Basin. The cleats were characterized by optical microscopy and X-ray computed tomography (CT) while pores and their connectivity were determined from mercury intrusion porosimetry, N2 and CO2 adsorption, and low field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) of water saturated cores evaluated both cleats and pores. The CH4 adsorption capacity of coal samples scraped from the surface of the macrolithotype layers was also determined. Dull lithotypes (semi-dull and dull) were dominant, followed by bright lithotypes (bright and semi-bright) in these seams. The bright lithotype coal has a higher microfracture density (averaging 339 microcleats per 9cm2, μm–mm), better connectivity, and a larger fractal dimension (averaging 1.7) from optical microscopy. The dull lithotype has a lower average microfracture density (272 microcleats per 9cm2) and a smaller fractal dimension (~1.6). This higher connectivity observation was consistent with X-ray CT observations and low field NMR of the water saturated cores (and the transition upon water removal from the fractures and larger pores). Also the ease of mercury injection from cores also supported higher connectivity in the bright lithotypes. Both the semi-bright and semi-dull lithotypes have equivalent pore proportions micro- to macropores and good apparent connectivity at the nm–μm scale; despite mineral occlusions. Based on the CH4 adsorption capacities of the macrolithotypes, the bright coal has the greatest gas adsorption capacity, due to the largest smaller micropores (<2nm) and a higher specific surface area. These observations aid in understanding the complex behavior observed in CBM extraction and evaluating the impacts of heterogeneity and scale on the degassing behavior.Coalbed methane (CBM) supplements the conventional natural gas supply in the United States, Canada, and Australia ( Compared to conventional carbonate and sandstone reservoirs, the pore size of coal reservoirs is much smaller (nm) ( In comparison to conventional gas reservoirs, coal seams can be extensively naturally fractured (cleated) ( Coal reservoir characterization is directly affected by pore and fracture distribution ( While literature on the porosity and fracture networks of coal is extensive, the majority has focused on the whole coal and has omitted the heterogeneity of the macrolithotypes (e.g. The Hancheng Block is located on the eastern margin of the Ordos Basin in the Shaanxi province, China ( A 5E-MAC III infrared fast coal analyzer was used to determine moisture, volatile matter, ash yield, and fixed carbon for the macrolithotypes. Tests were performed in accordance with standard procedures ( Microfracture analysis was performed using an optical microscope. Coal blocks were prepared as 3 Here, the MIP analysis was used for the quantification of seepage pores, including the mercury injection and withdrawal processes. Analysis was performed on crushed and sieved samples from the coal blocks using a Micrometics 9310 porosimeter. The N Low field NMR defines the pore size from the transverse relaxation (T The different coal macrolithotypes on the CH Visual observations in the Xiangshan Mine show that the coal macrolithotypes are mainly of dull lithotype coal (semi-dull and dull) with a small amount of bright lithotype coal (semi-bright and bright). The thicknesses of the No. 3, 5, and 11 coals are 2.7 Among the various factors influencing the properties and development of CBM reservoirs, the maceral composition influences the gas adsorption capacity and gas content (  Diffusion of CBM from the coal matrix to the fracture network is involved in the overall gas flow process. The fracture network provides the main gas flow paths, and is a key factor controlling reservoir permeability though the genesis and morphology of microfractures vary among seams and are also often heterogeneous within a seam ( Fracture fractal dimension in coal is an important parameter for characterization of fracture connectivity ( Pore size distributions, pore and fracture 3D characteristics impact gas storage capacity and flow (  The mercury intrusion data can be directly converted into the corresponding pore throat size using the Washburn equation ( From Here micropores primarily define the CBM adsorption capacity ( By analyzing water-saturated cores (the T  Using X-ray CT technology, the pore and fracture spatial distribution of coal can be determined ( Langmuir volume and Langmuir pressure are often used to evaluate the CBM adsorption properties of coal reservoirs ( Since CBM storage is mainly determined from the micropore contribution, the specific surface area of these adsorption pores directly determines the gas adsorption capacity of the coal. From physical adsorption, the material adsorption capacity is proportional to the specific surface area at that scale ( The BET theory was established on multilayer physisorption and mainly used to measure the micro- and mesopore rather than the smaller micropore (<  From visual observations in the Hancheng Block, the dull lithotype (semi-dull and dull) coal is dominant followed by the bright lithotype (bright and semi-bright). From bright to dull coal the density and ash yield increase while the vitrinite content deceases. The bright lithotype coal has well-developed cleats and is easily broken into fragments with conchoidal fracture, while the dull coal usually has a banded texture and block structure as well as high hardness and density. Some stratified calcite and pyrite fillings are preserved in parts of the semi-dull coal microfractures. At the microfracture scale (μm–mm), the bright lithotype had a higher microfracture density (averaging 339 microcleats per 9 From the bright to the dull coal, both the smaller micropore (< This work was financially supported by the