The effects of the addition of nano TiN on the surface morphology, deposition rate, hardness and corrosion properties of Ni–P electroless coatings were studied. Heat treatment was conducted to compare the corrosion and hardness behavior of the coatings before and after heat treatment. It was observed that the incorporation of TiN particles into the coating has an adverse effect on the corrosion properties of the specimens. The hardness of the specimens increased dramatically by adding TiN. Furthermore, the hardness of the specimens increased after conducting the heat treatment. The corrosion and hardness behavior of the Ni–P system after heat treatment largely depended on the temperature of heat treatment. The heat treatment temperatures at which the desired corrosion and hardness properties were expected were determined.Electroless nickel–phosphorous coatings are widely used in chemical, mechanical and electronic industries because of their properties such as corrosion resistance and uniformity of deposit Electroless nickel composite coating was deposited on low carbon steel disks with a diameter of 20 TiN nano powder obtained from Hefei Kaier Nanometer Energy & technology with an average particle size of approximately 20 The coating thickness was determined by analyzing a cross-section of the coated plate by SEM and then the deposition rate of coatings for a given coating time was calculated. The morphology of the coating was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The weight percentage of embedded TiN particles in the deposits was determined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The crystal structure of the coatings was determined using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips, X’pert, The Netherlands), by scanning in the 2   The hardness values of the specimens before and after heat treatment are presented in  Heat treatment of the Ni–P specimen at 200 The results obtained from the polarization curves of the specimens are also confirmed by the Nyquist plots (  Ni–P/TiN nano-composite electroless coating was prepared from a basic electroless solution containing 1 The addition of TiN nanoparticles to the Ni–P matrix created a nodular surface with a uniform distribution of the TiN nanoparticles. The deposition rate decreased with the embedment of TiN nanoparticles in the Ni–P matrix since the surface coverage of the surfactant and the TiN particles on the substrate would act as a barrier for the Ni–P codeposition. The hardness of the specimens improved by the incorporation of TiN nanoparticles in the matrix. Heat treatment at 400 The Ni–P/TiN system displayed very weak corrosion properties due to the high electric conductivity of TiN and the rough surface of the Ni–P/TiN specimen. In addition, since the potential of the TiN nanoparticles differ from that of the Ni–P matrix, a galvanic couple is set up in which TiN and nickel are the cathode and the anode, respectively. This matter adversely affects the corrosion properties. Heat treatment at 200