The Vajont landslide is a well-known, reservoir-induced slope failure that occurred on 9 October 1963 and was characterized by an ‘en masse’ sliding motion that triggered various large waves, determining catastrophic consequences for the nearby territory and adjacent villages. During the Vajont dam construction, and especially after the disaster, some researchers identified widespread field evidence of heavy rock mass damage involving the presumed prehistoric rockslide and/or the 1963 failed mass. This paper describes evidence of heavy gravitational damage, including (i) folding, (ii) fracturing, (iii) faulting, and (iv) intact rock disintegration. The gravity-induced rock mass damage (GRMD) characterizes the remnants of the basal shear zone, still resting on the large detachment surface, and the 1963 failed rock mass. The comprehensive geological study of the 1963 Vajont landslide, based on the recently performed geomechanical survey (2006–present) and on the critical analysis of the past photographic documentation (1959–1964), allows us to recognize that most GRMD evidence is related to the prehistoric multistage Mt. Toc rockslide. The 1963 catastrophic en masse remobilization induced an increase to the prehistoric damage, reworking preexisting structures and creating additional gravity-driven features (folds, fractures, faults, and rock fragmentation). The gravity-induced damage was formed during the slope instability phases that preceded the collapse (static or quasi-static GRMD) and also as a consequence of the sliding motion and of the devastating impact between the failed blocks (dynamic GRMD). Gravitational damage originated various types of small drag folds such as flexures, concentric folds, chevron, and kink-box folds, all having a radius of 1–5m. Large buckle folds (radius of 10–50m) are related to the dynamic damage and were formed during the en masse motion as a consequence of deceleration and impact processes that involved the sliding mass. Prior to failure, unstable rock slopes can be affected by diffuse newly formed gravity-driven joints that are absent in the surrounding area and within the underlying bedrock, as the Vajont case history demonstrates (joint sets J9 and J10). These fractures, caused by critical tensile and shear stresses, represent an important mechanical clue to recognizing, on a geological basis, the instability condition of a rock slope under investigation. Owing to its complex geological evolution, the Vajont landslide is an outstanding example to help learn about cumulative GRMD effects that can accumulate over time when an ancient rockslide is further remobilized by a sudden en masse sliding motion.Many large rockslides, in massive and in closely stratified rock masses, are characterized by a general degradation of strength properties caused by the progressive occurrence of rock mass damage, including folding, fracturing, faulting, and intact rock disintegration or rock comminution. Generally speaking, the term ‘rock mass damage’ is used to indicate the degradation of strength properties of intact rock and rock masses caused by the development of weakness surfaces (such as microfractures, cracks, tensile and shear fractures, faults) independently from the specific triggering process: tectonic, creep, fatigue, thermal, blasting, etc. ( This paper focuses on the rock mass damage caused by gravitational forces as a consequence of long-lasting geological processes (in the order of 5000–50,000 In the Alps, rock mass creep is considered a long-lasting geological process that started about 15,000 Slope deformation processes and rock mass damage are strongly influenced by a number of geological and mechanical factors, including size and geometry of unstable rock masses, confining pressure, attitude of stratification, schistosity or foliation, bed thickness, massive or multilayer structure, occurrence of clay layers or soft joint infill, rock mass anisotropy, and competence contrast. For this reason, slope deformations and rock mass damage can strongly vary, depending on the specific geological features of the slope. In this research paper, four main features of ‘gravity-induced rock mass damage’ (GRMD) are considered: (i) folding, (ii) fracturing, (iii) faulting, and (iv) intact rock disintegration or comminution. These principal features of damage can affect creeping rock slopes at shallow–intermediate depths (20–50 In most cases, gravity-induced structures are difficult to identify because of their addition to preexisting tectonic fabric and especially owing to rock mass disintegration that very often follows slope failure and characterizes the translation stage. Large deep-seated rockslides characterized by en masse sliding motion, sometimes defined as ‘block slides’ or ‘block glides’ ( The Vajont case history ( Many authors dealing with the Vajont landslide (sometimes indicated as ‘Vaiont’ landslide) have described some characteristic features associated with GRMD including folding, fracturing, faulting, and rock disintegration ( The recent comprehensive research project on the Vajont slope failure ( This paper presents extensive evidence of GRMD related to the Vajont landslide that has been identified from both fieldwork and analysis of past photographic documentation. The detailed study of GRMD features caused by two consecutive slope collapses allows us to investigate the cumulative effects of damage processes induced by gravity, and finally, to differentiate tectonic damage from the gravitational damage caused by large, deep-seated rock slope instabilities. Recent case studies testify to the presence of various gravity-driven structures characterizing large unstable rock slopes. Folds, fractures, faults, and shear zones (with thicknesses varying from a few decimeters up to tens of meters) are common features, especially at the base of large failed rock masses. Cataclasites, pulverized rocks, and/or breccias were frequently recognized within basal shear zones or multiple internal shear surfaces from core drilling and from field surveys ( In the past, gravity-driven folds in creeping slopes have been classified as buckle folds, drag folds, and bending folds, as the fold type essentially depends on the attitude of the main discontinuity set (foliation, schistosity, stratification, etc.) in relation to the slope geometry ( On the contrary, buckle folds outcropping on the basal failure surface of the large Chiu-fen-erh-shan rockslide were considered as a gravitational precursory deformation formed sometime before the slope collapse ( Large rock slope failures are frequently determined by tectonic structures delimiting the unstable masses (e.g., The progressive destruction of intact rock (rock progressive fracturing) is caused by different factors, including (i) progressive slope displacements (surface and internal displacements); (ii) local stress concentrations acting on resisting intact rock; and also (iii) changes in the slope stress field caused by external geological processes (glacial debuttressing, fluvial erosion, slope failures, etc.). The three-dimensional failure surface is formed partially through the rupture of intact rock and partially along preexisting geological discontinuities ( The DSGSDs develop largely through the propagation of newly formed fractures or microfractures ( Gravity-driven fracturing of rock masses is an important precursory sign of large unstable slopes, and the related mechanical process is often referred to as brittle fracture propagation ( In general, there is scarce information about geometrical patterns of newly formed gravity-induced discontinuities involving rock masses as the progressive damage process increases. Sedimentary rock masses are usually subdivided by a number of rock discontinuities including stratification joints and fractures caused by tectonic processes. For alpine geological structures, the number of tectonic joint sets typically varies from 3–4 to 7–8, whereas a conventional mechanical approach considers 3–4 fracture sets in most cases. In addition, large rock slope failures can be characterized by considerable gravity-driven fracturing that affects unstable rock masses before final collapse. For this reason, the detailed structural analysis of rock joint assemblage is a necessary condition to identify and differentiate gravity-induced fracturing from tectonic-induced jointing. The previously described research project on the Vajont landslide is mainly based on new geological and structural data recently acquired from the field (2006–present), investigating the 1963 detachment surface and the failed rock mass ( During the field survey some outcrops of the bedrock have been analyzed in detail, describing the lithology and measuring the thickness of individual rock layers and soft interbeds. A number of samples, including rocks and soils, have been collected at some specific outcrops located on the detachment surface ( The structures of the prehistoric rockslide and of the 1963 landslide were reconstructed in detail by analyzing the rich photographic documentation taken by Edoardo Semenza and Daniele Rossi ( It is important to note here that, despite the fact that the 1963 Vajont slide is without doubt one of the most investigated landslides in the world, very little rock joint data reported in literature has been acquired in situ, immediately after the disaster as well as in recent years. In addition, very little structural data has been measured on folds and striated surfaces. This lack or scarcity of field data has also recently been emphasized, justifying it with a presumed inaccessibility of a large part of the detachment surface ( This paper presents a large amount of rock joint data on the Vajont landslide recently acquired from the field. These orientation measurements represent a considerable data set from a statistical viewpoint ( The three-dimensional geometry and kinematics of large rockslides are strongly influenced by geological factors such as layering attitude and large tectonic structures (folds and faults). The detailed characterization of the geological setting of the Vajont landslide area plays a key role in adequately differentiating tectonic features from those induced by gravity. In the following part, the main geological data of the Vajont area will be presented and discussed. The Vajont landslide occurred in an Alpine valley affected by a complex tectonic framework. This is caused by the presence of many structures related to different regional tectonic phases. Some faults were decisive for the occurrence of this large landslide, especially for the prehistoric event ( The ‘Col Tramontin’ fault (CTF) and the ‘Col delle Erghene’ fault (CEF) have large continuity (length Another tectonic line, the ‘Vajont valley’ fault (VVF), has also been recently identified ( The Vajont valley fault is well recognizable on the steep rock slopes facing the left side of the Piave valley, immediately downstream of the confluence with the Vajont gorge. The natural cross section visible from the Piave valley ( This notable geological evidence also helps in solving another debated question about the structural setting of the Vajont landslide. In the past, some authors considered the bottom failure surface of the 1963 Vajont slide as corresponding to the southern limb of the so-called ‘Erto syncline’ (ES). This large syncline clearly outcrops in the middle part of the Vajont valley ( This contrasting structural interpretation of the Erto syncline is also confirmed by the field orientation data reported in this paper and by the geological cross section from the Piave valley previously described ( The bedrock of the Vajont landslide is formed by the Fonzaso Formation (middle–upper Jurassic; The multilayer sequence forming the bedrock of the Vajont landslide shows a quite constant attitude of stratification joints. Limestone layers uniformly dip northward with a mean dip angle of 40° ( Joint orientation data characterizing the bedrock has been acquired from the exposed detachment surface of the 1963 Vajont landslide, as well as from its surrounding areas for comparison purposes. The bedrock is generally slightly fractured, and rock joints are commonly unfilled and very closed (rock to rock contact). The rock mass appears to be generally undeformed and well interlocked ( Fracture joints measured within the bedrock of the Vajont landslide can be compared with those collected on other stable rock masses occurring in adjacent areas of the Vajont valley. An interesting comparison with the tectonic joint sets characterizing the bedrock of the Pineda rockslide can be made. This rockslide is a prehistoric slope failure located on the opposite side of the valley, northeastward of the Vajont landslide ( The attitude of measured fractures is also consistent with the master-joints identified on analysis of various orthophotos of the detachment surface taken at different times ( When studying large rockslides, the reconstruction of the geometry and internal structure of the rock masses involved in the rupture allows for better knowledge of the deformation processes that affect unstable rock slopes. In this case, the comparison with the structural pattern of exclusively tectonic origin that characterizes the bedrock is decisive in identifying some geological features (folding, fracturing, faulting, presence of cataclastic rocks, etc.) that can be related to damage induced by gravity. For geomechanical purposes, the rock masses involved in the Vajont landslide have been differentiated by considering three main structural–mechanical units: (i) the upper part of the bedrock outcropping on the detachment surface; (ii) the fractured and displaced rock masses incorporated in the prehistoric basal shear zone and still resting on the 1963 failure plane; and (iii) the upper failed rock mass that slid on 9 October 1963. The upper part (thickness: 1–5 Heavily folded rock strata outcrop on the eastern lateral scarp, involving the thin-stratified sequence of red marls and marly limestone at the base of the Biancone Fm. ( Some small scarps (steps) that developed on the detachment surface exhibit the internal structure of the bedrock, showing an increase in fracturing from the deepest limestone layers up to the basal failure surface. Two fracture sets that are absent in the underlying bedrock have been identified within this damaged rock mass. These fracture sets, coded as J9 and J10 ( The displaced rock masses included in the prehistoric basal shear zone of the Vajont landslide were sheared-off from the underlying bedrock. These rock blocks show a variable degree of fracturing, but preserve most primary structures such as the stratification ( The displaced rock blocks are heavily damaged, being characterized by heavy fracturing and folding. The rock layers often exhibit folding such as small flexures, concentric folds, chevron folds, or kink-box folds, all having a wavelength of 1–3 The displaced rock masses are characterized by a degree of fracturing varying from moderate ( The orientation of rock discontinuities has been measured within several displaced rock masses still resting on the western part of the exposed detachment surface. It is important to note here that rock discontinuities affecting folded strata have not been included in the data set, as their orientation can be significantly changed in relation to the original attitude. This data has been compared with the joint orientation that characterizes the bedrock in order to evaluate possible differences in the measured discontinuity sets. Orientation data of stratification highlights, on the whole, a rotation of the displaced blocks toward the east (clockwise rotation) in relation to the bedrock outcropping on the western sliding surface (ST1-W: dashed circle in Orientation data of fractures ( To reconstruct the original joint attitude, the geometrical data of measured discontinuities has been corrected with variable reorientation angles ( Rotated data of fracture orientations measured within the displaced rock masses confirms the presence of the eight joint sets of tectonic origin previously recognized within the bedrock. In fact, the same peaks of relative frequency are clearly visible ( The en masse motion of 9 October 1963 involved an enormous rock block (mean thickness: 100–120 The upper 1963 failed block is characterized by a Cretaceous limestone sequence formed by distinct lithostratigraphical units (from The 1963 failed mass is affected by heavy damage mainly characterized by (i) segmented folds of different type and size, (ii) large fractures, (iii) internal shear surfaces, and (iv) wide shear bands with cataclastic rocks. Some alternate synclines and anticlines, which have radii and amplitudes of 10–40 Several very long (10–30 A number of wide oblique shear bands (width: 5–20 Joint orientations have been measured on the two large rock blocks that failed as a consequence of the prehistoric ruptures and were remobilized as a single slab by the 1963 catastrophic event. Owing to the rotation toward the NE of the 1963 failed rock mass and to its partial rising onto the opposite valley side, measured rock discontinuities exhibit remarkable rotation in azimuth and in dip angles if compared to the original attitude that characterizes the bedrock. In fact, stratification data is much more variable, and three marked peaks of frequency are clearly shown ( The orientation of stratification joints reflects the structural arrangement of the secondary blocks. Strata belonging to set ST5 characterize the distal part of the PTB (including the Castelletto relief) and the front of the PPB. The frontal part of the 1963 failed mass rose onto the opposite side of the valley (north), and this fact determined its southward-dipping stratification ( The pattern of fracture poles characterizing the failed rock mass ( Rotated data of the fractures measured within the upper failed rock mass, despite some small differences, indicates the presence of the eight joint sets of tectonic origin ( As described in previous sections, extensive geological evidence of GRMD has been ascertained on the northern toe of the Mt. Toc slope, as a consequence of the oldest slope rupture (the prehistoric Mt. Toc rockslide) as well as of the catastrophic remobilization induced by the Vajont reservoir (the 9 October 1963 Vajont landslide). The occurrence of two well-differentiated landslide events makes the Mt. Toc slope failures an important case history to investigate the cumulative effects of GRMD caused by two consecutive slope collapses. This considerable cumulated rock mass damage was caused by pre-failure processes as well as by dynamic phenomena related to the sliding phases of the failed blocks ( The Mt. Toc prehistoric rockslide occurred in a time period that can be estimated within the interval of about 15,000–5000 The deep-seated sequence was formed by the heavily stratified layers (1–10 During the prehistoric slope deformation stage, several features of GRMD developed, such as ( The prehistoric rockslide was characterized by a multistage slope failure, as supported by recently acquired geological data ( Considerable dynamic damage was caused by the translation of the blocks, their stopping condition being strongly influenced by the preexisting valley topography and, especially, by the impact of the second block against the previously failed rock mass that also determined a partial block superimposition ( Residual limbs of the basal shear zone currently constitute an irregular thin cover (1–10 The joint sets J9 and J10 were formed during the progressive fracturing that involved the unstable rock slope during prehistoric times. The orientation and the spatial distribution of these fractures are strictly related to the three-dimensional geometry of the prehistoric unstable rock mass and to the preexisting geological features (bed thickness, competence contrast of the multilayer sequence, tectonic joints, faults, etc.). Gravity-driven fractures have a close relationship with the prehistoric sliding motion toward the NNE (N010E: first rock wedge failure characterized by a constrained sliding motion). Some variability in the sliding direction (from N340E to N040E) was caused by localized conditions influenced by secondary blocks subdividing the original unstable rock mass. Fractures belonging to sets J9 and J10 have an orthogonal and a parallel azimuth, respectively, if we consider the ancient sliding direction ( The gravity-induced fractures were added to preexisting joints as a result of the localized rupture of intact rock and rock bridges. Gravity-driven joints were formed during major phases of the prehistoric slope instability through coalescence with preexisting rock discontinuities, thus providing a fully developed three-dimensional rupture surface and enabling the kinematic release of the ancient unstable mass. The step-path morphology of the basal rupture surface was formed through the linkage of limestone bedding planes with preexisting tectonic joints and with the gravity-driven fractures that crossed over the rock strata. The progressive fracturing mechanism required a certain amount of time to occur and this could have determined a time delay between the initial slope deformation The geomechanical survey performed on the upper 1963 failure surface and on the eastern lateral scarp has made the identification of various mechanical facies possible on the basis of different types of rock mass damage ( The small-sized folds identified within the shear zone testify to a prevailing ductile behavior of the rock mass that can be related to a significant deformation stage of the Mt. Toc toe during early prehistoric instability and before the slope collapse. Diffuse folding can be interpreted as drag folds that originated during quasi-static conditions and were induced by the relative movement of the overlying unstable rock mass. Most mechanical facies with predominant brittle damage can be essentially attributed to the dynamic damage occurring at the base of the deep-seated shear zone as a consequence of the prehistoric mobilization of the failed blocks. The translation of the two blocks determined the heavy disintegration of the intact rock located within the underlying shear zone ( Other dynamic GRMD was formed during the impact and the superimposition phase that characterized the two-stage prehistoric failure. The first failed block slid onto the valley bottom and stopped in the preexisting Vajont valley. The presence of a rather wide fluvial trough favored the stopping condition of the first collapsed block and the subsequent slab compression caused by inertial forces. In particular, the stopping of the first collapsed block determined the formation of a typical fracture wedge characterized by multiple, high-angle, shear surfaces ( Dynamic compressive phenomena caused several folds within the upper blocks that are significantly larger than folds that originated within the basal shear zone. From a genetic point of view, these folds can be interpreted as buckle folds caused by deceleration and impact processes. Moreover, drag folds (chevron, cuspate, or kink-box folds) could have been formed as a consequence of localized shear slips involving the most thinly stratified layers of the limestone sequence. Strata folding was also accompanied by strong faulting and fracturing characterized by listric master-joints and wide, steep (60–80°) shear bands. On the whole, static GRMD characterized by a ductile–brittle behavior occurred during the early slope deformation stage and was responsible for the formation of drag folds in specifically localized shear bands ( The severe damage experienced by the large rock block mobilized by the 1963 catastrophic reactivation can be considered as one of the most remarkable examples in the world of dynamic damage that can be observed in the field after a catastrophic en masse sliding. Gravitational rock mass damage caused by the 1963 remobilization ( The disastrous collapse that occurred on 9 October 1963 (peak velocity of 15–30 This first overall slope reactivation occurred in autumn 1960 and caused a sudden surface displacement of the slope that can be estimated in the range of 30–60 Major instability phases of the slope that were activated by the three distinct reservoir fillings ( The catastrophic 1963 landslide mobilized the two, previously failed, prehistoric blocks as a single, unitary, large slab ( The field evidence surveyed and photographed immediately after the catastrophe shows, in a spectacular way, the landslide-induced damage suffered by the failed rock mass ( Another characteristic damage phenomenon of the 1963 event was the increase in disintegration and the removal of the shear zone debris caused by the basal sliding movement ( The presence of the Vajont reservoir (reservoir level The exposed Vajont case history is an excellent example to learn about the complex geological structures and the articulated damage evolution of large deep-seated rockslides, especially when a remobilization of a past multistage failure occurred. The main geological peculiarity of the Vajont landslide is without doubt the en masse sliding motion of the large rock slab above a deep-seated and very thick shear zone (40–50 This means that deformation in unstable rock slopes tends to be localized during pre-failure instability within weaker units, and especially at the slope toe where shear displacement reaches the highest values. In these circumstances, the location of the deformed and damaged zones is substantially controlled by the lithostratigraphical features of the unstable rock slope and may contribute to isolating an upper rock mass that has a more rigid behavior if compared to the deep-seated damaged zones. The upper block can move downslope above the underlying damaged zone, thus favoring the progressive formation of a future shear zone. The complex dynamic damage that characterized the prehistoric Mt. Toc slope failure rarely occurs in large rockslides. The characteristic en masse motion of the failed blocks ( The analysis of the gravitational fracture damage requires a detailed knowledge of the tectonic framework characterizing the bedrock, and in Alpine regions this picture is very often more complicated than usually hypothesized, as this study shows (at least eight tectonic joint sets affect the rock masses occurring in the Vajont valley). When considering large unstable rock slopes, the presence of gravity-driven fractures can represent important geomechanical field evidence indicating that the rock mass has suffered considerable gravity damage, highlighting a possible future slope collapse. The Vajont case history, with its complex geological evolution, demonstrates the importance of reconstructing the structure of past rockslides before facing large rock slope stability problems or initiating complex slope stability analyses and/or more sophisticated numerical modeling ( The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their help in improving this paper. A special thank to the Editor-in-Chief Prof. Richard Marston for his willingness and valuable suggestions.