Up to now, carbon gas fluxes from urban lakes in the boreal zone have seldom been studied. In summer 2005 we investigated fluxes from an urban boreal lake basin in southern Finland with long history of eutrophication and anoxia. Hypolimnetic CO2 and CH4 concentrations were high compared to other boreal lakes. During the open-water period, the lake basin acted as a source of CO2 and CH4 with fluxes of 2.10 mol m−2 and 0.04 mol m−2, respectively. Despite the high oxidation rate (83%), CH4 flux was higher than in other lakes and CH4 contributed 60% to Global Warming Potential. The ratio of carbon emission to accumulation was 4, i.e. emissions were an important route for carbon departure but less so than in rural lakes. Since the lake oxygen conditions affected nutrient availability, there was a positive feedback from hypolimnion to carbon uptake, which was reflected in gas concentrations.Urbanization is the prevailing demographic trend worldwide and nowadays over 50% of humans live in urban areas ( In aquatic ecosystems during stratification, decomposition of organic matter in bottom sediments and hypolimnion may lead to hypoxia with oxygen concentration <4 mg l Lacustrine fluxes of carbon gases have been intensively studied throughout the temperate and boreal zones, but mostly in rural lakes surrounded by forests and peatlands ( The study focused on deepest point (33 m) of the Enonselkä lake basin at the south end of Lake Vesijärvi (61°05′N, 25°35′E) consisting of several distinctive basins ( We sampled the deepest point once a week from 18 May, before the lake was stratified, until 18 October when the lake was fully mixing; one point sampling was regarded as sufficient on the basis of For surface CO The global warming potential (GWP) of the fluxes was calculated in CO CH Stratification of water temperature (°C) and dissolved oxygen (mg L Concentrations of total phosphorus (TP), nitrogen (TN) and iron (TFe) were determined from samples integrated over 0–5 m (surface) and 25–29 m (bottom) and collected into 500 ml high-density polyethylene bottles. TP and TN were analyzed with a FIA system (QuikChem Samples for measurements of primary (PP) and bacterial production (BP) in the euphotic zone were taken from 0, 1, 2, 4 and 6 m. PP was measured by BP was measured using the The summer 2005 was warm and dry and the highest daily mean and maximum air temperatures in the study area were 24.3 °C and 29.4 °C in July, respectively. August was rainy with precipitation of 121 mm (long-term average for the period 1971–2000 ca. 80 mm), i.e. half the summer’s total precipitation of 236 mm. Ice break-up took place on 28 April and the water temperature in early May during spring turnover was 5 °C ( Epilimnetic concentrations of TN, TP and TFe were usually lower than hypolimnetic concentrations, with the mean TN in the hypolimnion being twofold higher compared to epilimnion ( On average there was 22 times more TFe in the hypolimnion than epilimnion and a negative correlation was found between TFe and the hypolimnetic oxygen concentration ( During thermal stratification there was also a clear stratification in gas concentrations ( The surface water concentrations of carbon gases were above the equilibrium; the only exception was CO The Enonselkä lake basin was an atmospheric source of CO The daily primary productivity (PP) ranged from 6.50 to 32.7 mmol m The turbulent diffusion coefficiencies In hypoxic and anoxic conditions, microbial activity and the resulting decomposition proceeds to form sediment layers where the availability of electron acceptors regulates the carbon degradation pathways ( The Enonselkä lake basin was a steady atmospheric source of CO In oxic conditions CH Usually the maximum CH Primary production was high in spring and summer and along with phosphorus was possibly affected by nitrogen and the supply of iron as well ( The carbon accumulation rate in the Enonselkä lake basin is 6.5 g C m As a result of urbanization and related activities the hypolimnetic CO This study was supported by the NECC and REBECCA projects funded by the Nordic Council and the University of Helsinki Research Unit (HERU). We thank the Lammi Biological Station and the Department of Environmental Sciences at the University of Helsinki for facilities, Tuukka Ryyänen and Jussi Huotari for assistance in the fieldwork and in the laboratory, and John Gage for language revision.