During chewing the meat sample is fragmented by compressive and shear bite forces while saliva is incorporated. At the end of this process meat is transformed into a bolus with specific properties, which elicit deglutition. This study aims to analyze the mechanical properties of the boli and juice–saliva interactions in different chewing contexts. Two groups of subjects with different chewing efficiencies participated in the study: healthy dentate (n
                     =9) and denture wearers (n
                     =7). Meat boli were obtained from two beef samples exhibiting different textures obtained by varying aging time and cooking temperature.
                  Variables linked to saliva–food matrix interactions (boli volume and weight, dry matter content) were not dependent on muscle fiber disorganization evaluated using shear tests. No texture effect was observed from the mechanical properties of the boli, whatever the chewing context. Denture wearers swallowed less disorganized boli but with a similar water content as dentate. Between subjects variability was the highest for saliva–food interactions and the lowest for mechanical properties. The variations obtained in meat boli characteristics could have consequences on sensory properties perception and on the digestion process.During consumption, meat acceptability is mainly determined by perception of texture, more specifically of tenderness and juiciness ( A better understanding of texture perception requires identifying the relationship between meat texture before chewing and the properties of the food bolus ready to be swallowed. Beyond its consequence on acceptability, identification of textural properties of the food bolus could contribute to improving knowledge on human nutrition, as mastication is the first step of the digestion process and the interactions between chewing efficiency and digestion need to be clarified ( Mechanical measurements to describe raw or cooked meat texture are widely documented ( In contrast, for fibrous and cohesive food like meat, food bolus properties required before swallowing are only poorly documented and the relationship between the initial meat texture and the characteristics of the bolus at swallow are unknown ( This study aims: (1) to validate the objective texture measurements of meat boli and to quantify juice–saliva and boli interactions, and (2) to analyze the effect of a severe chewing impairment on meat boli properties. For that purpose the properties of food boli obtained with two different bovine meat textures were compared for two groups of subjects known to have very different chewing efficiencies: healthy dentate subjects versus denture wearers. Sixteen healthy elderly subjects participated in this study, nine dentate (5 male, 4 female, 66.7 Two different textures of beef were obtained from the Subjects were asked to chew as usual a cold meat sample (5.1 In the following results cooked meat designates meat prior to any chewing and meat bolus refers to chewed meat samples. For each texture the volumes of frozen boli were determined on four boli, two of them being then dedicated to mechanical measurements. In addition, a fifth bolus was used for dry matter measurement and a sixth for additional biochemical analysis (not shown in this article). After the determination of their volume, all boli were thawed at room temperature. Meat samples were weighed before and after chewing to determine saliva impregnation. Weight increase was expressed as a percentage of cooked meat weight. However, weight variation did not allow respective identification of meat juice lost during bite force application and saliva incorporation. Dry matter content was calculated to characterize: (1) the water contained in boli prior to swallowing and, (2) the possible loss of food matrix. It was expressed as percentage of meat boli weight. To identify possible losses due to non-voluntary partial swallows, total dry matter of each bolus was compared to total dry matter of initial samples, calculated from cooked meat dry matter content and initial sample weight. As saliva contains 99% of water, we assumed that all the dry matter came only from meat; therefore, lower amounts of dry matter in boli than in cooked meat reflected meat loss. Each bolus weight was recalculated from its dry matter value by integrating the loss. For dry matter determination, samples were weighed before and after being placed for 24 h in a 110 °C oven. Meat boli volumes were difficult to measure, as boli surface area was non-measurable. A water immersion method was developed to evaluate boli volume. In contrast to other analyses, volume measurements were performed on frozen samples. Frozen samples were dipped in a known volume of water and the change in volume was read on a graduated pipette. This procedure was repeated twice. To validate the method five measurements of two different cubes of modeling clay of known volume (2.2 and 8.4 ml) were performed. Volumes measured from this method were 2.3 Increase in volume between cooked meat and meat boli was expressed as a percentage of cooked meat initial volume. Cutting tests were performed using an Instron Universal Machine (model 4302) at a displacement speed of 60 mm/min, using a double-bladed shear cell ( The maximum shear force was calculated from the force-distance curves and expressed as stress relative to the initial sample section area. On cooked meat, measurements were performed with the shear plane perpendicular to the fiber axis, samples had a section of 10 Statistical analyses were carried out with SAS Analyst (SAS software, version 8.01, 1999 – SAS Institute Inc., NC, USA). Variance analyses were performed to study the effect of meat texture and dental status on saliva–food interactions and rheological variables using the mixed procedure. The model included dental status, texture, and interaction dental status Mechanical resistance and dry matter of cooked meat are reported in Influence of meat texture on bolus characteristics when ready to be swallowed is summarized in Total dry matter was determined in order to identify possible losses due to unexpected partial swallows. A significant effect of texture was found on meat losses during chewing; they varied from 5.6% to 12% of the initial sample weight for tender meat and tough meat, respectively. The losses were not significantly different between the two groups of subjects. In addition, dry matter content was expressed as a percentage of meat boli weight in order to quantify juice and saliva contained in boli prior to swallow. A significant effect of texture was observed on the boli dry matter content for dentate subjects: the boli from tough meat contained more dry matter (i.e., less juice and saliva) than those from tender meat. Such effects were not observed with the denture wearers. Furthermore, a highly significant effect of texture was found for weight and volume increases. For both groups of subjects more saliva was incorporated in the tough meat, and the volume of the corresponding boli was larger. Weight and volume increases were highly correlated (dentate subjects, Whatever the dental status, no effect of texture was observed on boli shear stress. In addition, the coefficient of variation (SD/mean No correlation was obtained between food matrix–saliva interactions (volume and weight increase, dry matter content) and mechanical properties (shear tests) for both groups of subjects. Although, a significant correlation was observed between dry matter content and shear stress ( Influence of dental status on the characteristics of the boli at swallow is summarized in The major differences between both groups of subjects were observed for the mechanical tests. The boli displayed significantly higher shear values for denture wearers than for dentate. It was observed during the shear stress measurements that the lower shear stress values were usually obtained from parts of the boli where fibers were already broken under biting forces. Conversely, high values were obtained when muscle fibers were still intact or only slightly comminuted, or when perimysium collagen fibers were accumulated. Shear stress coefficient of variation was higher for denture wearers than for dentate subjects suggesting that boli from denture wearers were more heterogeneous than those from dentate. Dental status has no effect on volume and weight increase. Not surprisingly, dry matter percentage was equivalent for both groups of subjects as they chewed similar meat samples with a similar amount of saliva incorporation. Between subjects variability was more important in the group of denture wearers than those of dentate subjects ( Meat undergoes important structural changes during chewing (breakdown of fibers and saliva incorporation). During this transformation meat sensory qualities (texture and flavor) are perceived. When ready to be swallowed boli properties certainly play an important role in overall meat acceptability. It is therefore relevant to characterize these changes by identifying the cooked meat texture before and after chewing in order to get consumer-oriented clues in the understanding of meat acceptability. Cooked meat texture before chewing has been widely investigated and many mechanical measurements have been validated for its evaluation ( In a previous study meat boli were characterized by shear stress measurements and incorporated saliva in boli was evaluated from weight sample increase after chewing ( Two aspects of boli properties were analyzed: the relationship between saliva and food matrix, and the level of fibers degradation. It is interesting to notice that variables linked to saliva–food matrix interactions (volume, weight increase, dry matter content) were independent of muscle fiber disorganization (evaluated by shear tests). All boli collected showed a gain in weight after chewing. This weight increase due to saliva incorporation, can be underestimated because of possible loss of food matrix during chewing. To evaluate the respective incidences of these two phenomena, total dry matter variations in samples before and after chewing were determined. This method allowed determination of losses which were not identified in the previous study ( Dry matter measurements also allowed us to obtain information on the boli water content before swallowing. According to Shear test is very sensitive to fiber orientation in meat. Myofibrillar structure is mainly characterized when the shear plane is perpendicular to the muscle fibers. When the shear plane is parallel to the fiber axis, shear stress then reflects connective tissue characteristics ( Meat is an interesting model to study bolus formation because of its unique cohesive structure, which offers the possibility to evaluate saliva incorporation. Mastication reduces initial meat texture variability. From two different cooked meat textures, no texture effect was observed after mastication, considering either an elderly dentate or denture population. However, in young subjects a slight texture effect was still observed: the tougher meat giving the tougher boli ( The protocol of the present study was designed to evaluate the consequences of chewing efficiency on bolus formation. For this purpose, two groups of subjects were considered, similar in age, but having very different dental status: one group of dentate subjects with a good natural dentition and another group of complete denture wearers, known to have a poor chewing efficiency ( Changes on chewing efficiency have a direct consequence on the dynamics of meat bolus formation. Denture wearers swallow less disorganized boli but with a similar humidity as dentate. This could have consequences on: (1) sensory properties perception, and (2) digestion efficiency. In a complementary experiment we have shown that denture wearers presented a reduced amino-acid release in plasma contraction after meat consumption in comparison to dentate subjects (