Particle size is a very important variable in semi-autogenous grinding processes. It is desirable to measure the variable efficiently or even predict its variations in advance. In this paper, the time delay neural network model is developed to predict the feed particle size of a semi-autogenous grinding mill, and the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm is used to train the network. Results show that the model predicted values fit well with the industrial operating data. The proposed model can predict the particle size in advance and allow adequate time to take corrective actions during abnormal operations, and therefore provide a great advantage in monitoring and control of the industrial processes.A neural network has been used to address complex and irregular features of nonlinear systems, and has been applied to expert systems in various fields with proven advantages and improved predictions in many applications Grinding is one of the most important operations in a mineral processing plant For on-line monitoring, measurement efficiency very often plays a critical role so that precautious action can be taken timely to maintain a stable and optimal operation. It would be even more advantageous if some variations of variables can be predicted in advance to gain adequate time and avoid and correct any faulty operations. In SAG mills, feed particle size represents an important disturbance variable and the product particle size indicates one of the product quality variables. Predicting particle size variation in advance generates significant benefits for stable operation and effective process control in SAG mills. Examining the deviation between the predicted value and measured value can also provide an additional tool in fault diagnosis. In this work, the TDNN technique is used to predict variations of particle size. A nonlinear autoregressive exogenous (NARX) model is employed to forecast the time-series model in networks. In order to find the most compatible network condition, training was carried out with 300, 350, 400, 450, and 500 iterations. The performance of the TDNN model was evaluated in terms of mean absolute percentage error and compared with a time series, moving average model. The results indicate that the proposed TDNN model for the particle size of a SAG mill exhibits good prediction and that the neural network can be utilized to forecast the time series variations. Use of this technology in an industrial SAG operation could lead to reduced operational variability and increased process stability due to early detection of ore variations. In a SAG mill operation (as in In an industrial operation, variables are measured by a real-time monitoring system at small sampling time intervals, but the operating data are often compressed and recorded at a much larger sampling time intervals. In this study, neural networks were trained to predict the passing percentage of a particle size of 0.5, 2, and 4 Through TDNN modeling, particle size can be predicted in advance based on current measurement so that corrective measure can be taken in advance when needed. The strategies of neural network modeling, the TDNN based modeling for predicting particle size variations are described in this section. A neural network is able to learn complex relationships between related variables and therefore has been widely used as a tool for process modeling. It consists of many simple parallel processing units (called “neurons”), which can resemble the architecture of the human brain, and thus is capable of learning arbitrary nonlinear mappings between noisy sets of input and output factors. Neurons in the network are interconnected such that the knowledge is stored in the weighted connections between them. Networks consist of several layers of neurons that receive, process, and transmit critical information regarding the relationships between the input variables and corresponding responses (as in The neural network structure of 1-10-10-1 (1 input layer, 2 hidden layers, and 1 output layer) is employed to model a Single-Input-Single-Output (SISO) system. A tangent hyperbolic function is used in each node of hidden layers as the transfer function, and the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm (LM) algorithm Combining the gradient and the Gauss–Newton method, an updating weight can be computed from A time series model is a form of expressing a sequence of data points at time intervals and it can forecast a future event based on the past performances. An autoregressive (AR) model and a moving average model are the classical time-series models for stochastic processes. The moving average model can be written as To improve prediction of the models, a nonlinear autoregressive with exogenous inputs (NARX) model, an extended form of AR with an “X” for exogenous input, was developed A TDNN system uses time-series data containing the delayed information with input signals in the network. A feed forward neural network is trained for a time series prediction, e.g., particle size prediction in this work. The output of the network is the present output value obtained using the past inputs data. Network training will be completed when the number of training iterations reached. The schematic and architecture of TDNN are illustrated in For particle size prediction, NARX modelling is carried out in network training as time series approaches, the architecture of Series-Parallel is used, and tapped-delay time is set at 4 In TDNN, in order to predict the third data point in the 2nd day, both the previous day's data and the first two data points from the 2nd day are used, and the previous day's data are provided as inputs that are trained with the weight and bias in the network. Once the prediction is completed, the prediction process moves from left to right on the data set to forecast the next data point, as shown in In contrast to the moving average modelling, since the previous day's data are used, the TDNN model provides a good reflection on the variation pattern of particle size, and comparison of the predicted value from the TDNN model with the measured value can detect abnormal particle size variation. For the data used in this work, the TDNN based modelling provides at least 2 The TDNN model described in the last section is applied to the feed particle size of a SAG mill. To evaluate the performance of the TDNN model, the mean absolute percents error (MAPE) was used for the passing percentage of ore particle size of 0.5, 2, and 4 The TDNN model predicted passing percentages for particle sizes of 0.5  For the passing percentage of particle size of 4 The number of iterations in the TDNN modelling plays an important role in the model accuracy. The MAPEs for the moving average model and the TDNN model are illustrated as a function of iterations in The prediction accuracy the TDNN model with different numbers of iterations can also be evaluated using the relative improvement (or the MAPE decrement) over the moving average model. Particle size is important for grinding processes and it would provide a great benefit for monitoring and control to predict its value in advance and detect any abnormal or irregular variations. In this work, TDNN modelling is applied to feed particle size for a continuous SAG operation. The LM algorithm is used in training the neural networks and an NARX model employed for forecasting. The TDNN models were obtained for the passing percentages of particle sizes of 0.5 In addition to using the modelling results in detecting abnormal patterns or peaks, the proposed TDNN model for particle sizes can be employed in Statistical Process Control (SPC) and process control chart be implemented based on the TDNN model. The results in this paper were obtained using the operating data of the feed particle sizes of a SAG mill, but they should be applicable to the particle sizes in other processes in a variety of industrial sectors. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by