This work evaluated the feasibility of using biogenic H2S and NaOH to selectively precipitate molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co) and vanadium (V) from synthetic spent refinery catalyst leach liquor. A lactate-fed sulfate-reducing anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) was operated at room temperature to generate the required H2S. The average sulfate reduction rate in the ABR was 130mgL−1
                     d−1 and the average dissolved sulfide concentration was 190mgL−1. Biogenic H2S facilitated the selective precipitation of Mo at pH2 with recoveries of 36–72%. Vanadium precipitation of 64–70% was achieved with NaOH at pH6. The purity indices of Mo and V precipitates were 0.97 and 0.90 at pH2 and pH6, respectively. Percent Ni and Co precipitations were only up to 23 and 16%, respectively at pH3.5, and the purity indices of these metals were low due to their simultaneous precipitation. After the optimization of the Ni and Co precipitations, the mixed Ni–Co sulfide solids could be sold to smelters or hydrometallurgical processing to recover the metals. Moreover, using biogenic H2S to selectively precipitate Mo at pH2 as sulfide and NaOH to precipitate V at pH6 as hydroxide/oxide could be a viable option for recovering these metals from spent catalysts leachate.Hydro-desulfurization (HDS) and hydro-demetallization (HDM) catalysts are used in hydro cracking petroleum processes. Catalytic hydro processing is designed to reduce the size of molecules via hydro cracking (HC) and to remove heteroatoms (any atoms that are not carbon or hydrogen) by HDS and HDM. During the process, the sulfides and metals contained in the feedstock are deposited on the surface of HDS and HDM catalyst causing their poisoning. Once poisoned, the spent catalysts need to be regenerated and eventually when their activity is compromised they need to be replaced. The spent refinery catalysts contain a high concentration of metals, such as molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co) and vanadium (V) and therefore have been classified as hazardous waste by the US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). A number of studies have evaluated the possibility of leaching metals from spent catalysts. For instance, ( From a hazardous waste management standpoint, it is important not only to solubilize the metals from spent catalysts but also to develop means to recover them. The recovery of metals from the leach liquors can be achieved through various methods ( In the last 20 Precipitation of metals with H Previous authors studied the precipitation of selected metals from single or mixed metal solutions with biogenic H The sulfate reducing ABR had four chambers and a total liquid volume of 28 The influent solution was divided into two containers: one of which contained sodium lactate solution and the other the modified Postgate B medium. The reactor was operated in continuous mode to produce H The H According to the chemical equilibrium diagram obtained with Medusa software 32 ( Three different synthetic metal solutions were used ( Solution pH was measured in unfiltered samples using a pH electrode (pH 330i Merck PTY, SEN TIX H) and redox potential by SEN TIX ORP electrode (Ag/AgCl reference). Sulfate concentrations were determined by ion chromatography (Dionex ICS-3000). The samples for sulfate analysis were centrifuged to remove particulate matter, filtered (0.45 Aliquots of the metal precipitates from pH Medusa software 32 was used to simulate the chemical speciation of the metals investigated (Mo, Ni, Co and V) in the presence of dissolved sulfide (H The performance of the ABR is shown in Effluent DOC concentration of the ABR increased from 64 The dissolved sulfide concentrations in the ABR effluent fluctuated in the range of 50–425 Influent pH of 5 was neutralized in the ABR as a result of sulfidogenic lactate oxidation and effluent pH varied between 6 and 8 ( As the focus of the present study was in evaluating the feasibility of using biogenic H Cumulative percent metal precipitation at the three different pH values for solutions 1, 2 and 3 are shown in  The purity of metal precipitates was investigated by calculating purity indices for each of the four metals ( Selective precipitation was not possible for Ni and Co because their solubility products are very similar: 3 The precipitates obtained at pH Although a number of previous studies have reported the precipitation of selected metals using biogenic H This work was supported by the