The management of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures is challenging. A lateral locking plate offers an alternative method to traditional dual plating to avoid further stripping of soft tissue. Nevertheless, the rate of malreduction and fixation loss remains high. From 2007 to 2009, we performed open reduction and fixation with unilateral locked plating to directly reduce the fracture in 15 patients with bicondylar plateau fracture. The average follow-up duration was 16.2 months (range: 12–30 months), and the average age of the patients was 43 years (range: 19–64 years). All fractures were Orthopaedic Trauma Association type 41-C. Postoperative radiographic alignment was evaluated immediately and at 2–4 weeks, 8–12 weeks, 5–7 months, and 11–13 months. Both Oxford knee score and Hospital for Special Surgery knee score were used to evaluate functional outcomes. The average duration within which union was achieved was 4.8 months (range: 2–10 months). One patient incurred wound dehiscence; however, there was no case of deep infection. Malreduction occurred in one patient (6.7%) while fixation loss occurred in three patients (20%) with subsidence of the posteromedial fragment and varus malalignment. Despite the malreduction rate being lower in our study than in previous studies involving unilateral locked plating, a high rate of fixation loss was recorded. Per our limited experience, we believe that unilateral locked plating may have limitations in patients with selective patterns of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures.Bicondylar tibial plateau fractures usually occur in a bimodal age distribution. In young patients, high-energy trauma results in comminuted fractures and severe soft tissue damage, whereas in older patients, comminution and soft tissue injury arise mainly from poor bone quality and thin skin. Surgical fixation of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures is challenging because of geographic complexity and compromise of the soft tissue envelope. Treatment goals include preservation of soft tissues, restoration of articular congruity, and correction of anatomic alignment in the lower extremities. Adequate fixation and early achievement of postoperative range of motion are important for a good prognosis and adequate postoperative functioning. Buttressing of both the medial and lateral compartments with conventional double plating is the gold standard for managing bicondylar fractures because this may provide sufficiently rigid fixation to prevent medial collapse and subsequent varus deformity. However, this may require excessive dissection through injured soft tissue, leading to wound complications or compromised osteosynthesis Introduction of advanced instrumentation, such as locking plate systems, and techniques for internal fixation, such as minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO), have changed the nature of treatment for these fractures over the last decade In this study, we used open reduction and fixation with unilateral locked screw plating to treat bicondylar tibial plateau fractures and evaluated the rates of malreduction, fixation loss, and other complications. Comparing the findings of our study with those of previous studies on LISS may further address the clinical effectiveness of unilateral locked plating in the management of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. From 2007 to 2009, 65 patients with 65 tibial plateau fractures were operated on at Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital. Of these, the records of 15 patients [15 fractures (7 males and 8 females); mean age: 43 years (range: 19–64 years)] were retrospectively reviewed after applying the following inclusion criteria: the presence of an acute high-energy bicondylar tibial plateau fracture classified as Schatzker V or VI, age >18 years, use of a unilateral locking plate, and completion of a minimum 1-year follow-up. Patients with a history of prior tibial infection were excluded. All fractures were Orthopaedic Trauma Association type 41-C. Four patients had open fractures (26.7%), including three Gustilo type IIIC fractures and one Gustilo type IIIB fracture. Four patients had multiple fractures. The demographic data of the patients are presented in Open reduction and definite fixation was performed within 12 hours of injury or after soft tissue swelling had subsided. A tourniquet (300 mmHg pressure) was used. The unilateral anterolateral approach was employed for all patients. Reduction of the lateral articular surface was directly assessed by elevating the lateral meniscus from the anterior horn. Intraoperative fluoroscopy was used for assessment of the medial joint surface and alignment of the reduction throughout surgery. Depression of the joint surface was addressed by impacting subchondral bone through the created bony window or fracture gap. Temporary pin fixation was applied to maintain the joint surface, and this acted as a guide for plate placement. Bone defects were filled with allogenous cancellous bone graft or graft substitute. A unilateral locking plate was placed over the lateral aspect of the tibia for fixation. Additional lag screws for fixation or buttressing at the medial condyle were placed for large medial fragments via small incisions. Medial buttress plating was not used in order to prevent excessive stripping of soft tissue. The surgical details are shown in Postoperative long-leg splinting was maintained for 2 weeks. Rehabilitation began during hospitalization using continuous passive motion devices twice daily with temporary removal of the splint. A shift to long-leg casting or hinged-knee bracing was then suggested for knee immobilization in full extension for another 2 weeks. Isometric muscle exercises and ankle pumping were also encouraged. Active range of motion was initiated 4 weeks after surgery. Partial weight-bearing was forbidden until callus formation was radiographically observed (usually 2–3 months after surgery). Radiographs were obtained at each follow-up visit at 2–4 weeks, 8–12 weeks, 5–7 months, and 11–13 months. Wound status was also clinically assessed at each follow-up. All radiographic images were reviewed and analyzed by the picture archiving and communication system. Anteroposterior radiographs were used to measure the medial proximal tibial angle (MPTA) in the coronal plane (normal range: 82°–92°). In the sagittal plane, we measured the posterior proximal tibial angle (PPTA; normal range: 4°–14°) using a lateral view of the knee. These angles were measured according to Freedman and Johnson ( We used the new Oxford knee scoring system The average predefined surgery stay was 5.3 days (range: 0–16 days). Three patients (20%) had compartment syndrome and required urgent fasciotomy. The average delay in definite fixation after fasciotomy was 8.3 days (range: 6–12 days). Four patients with open fracture were initially managed with debridement. The average delay in definite surgery was 10.8 days (range: 0–16 days) for these patients so that open wounds could be managed until infection was brought under control. One patient had subdural hemorrhage and underwent preoperative intensive care, followed by observation for 15 days until vital signs were stable. During surgery, the bone defects were filled with allogenous bone graft in eight patients (53.3%) and artificial bone graft in one patient (6.7%). Lag screws were used in six patients (40%). The average surgical duration was 3.3 hours (range: 1.8–6.6 hours). The average intraoperative blood loss was 145 mL, mainly from hematoma around the fracture site. Malreduction occurred in only one patient (#7; 6.7%); MPTA and PPTA were outside the normal range in this patient because of inadequate reduction of the posteromedial fragment ( After follow-up for an average of 16.2 months (range: 12–30 months), it was observed that all patients had achieved union within an average duration of 4.8 months (range: 2–10 months). One patient (#8) achieved radiographic union only at the 10th month, albeit without secondary procedures. If this patient was excluded, the average union time was 4.4 months. One patient (#11) incurred the complication of wound dehiscence that required secondary closure; however, deep infection was not recorded in any patients. The mean knee extension was 3.9° (range: 0°–10°), whereas the mean knee flexion was 136.3° (range: 125°–145°) at the most recent follow-up. According to Oxford knee scoring, five patients (33.3%) were classified as excellent (>41) while the remaining 10 (66.7%) were classified as good (34–41). The average HSS score was 89.6 (range: 78–96; During follow-up, fixation loss was observed in three patients (#1, 8, 11; 20%; The rationale for using a unilateral locking plate for bicondylar tibial plateau fractures includes prevention of a second incision wound, reduced stripping of the medial periosteum, and provision of sufficient stability for certain fracture patterns. Although Egol et al. proposed in a biomechanical study that the LISS plating system can provide stability equal to that of double plating In order to assess articular step-off easily, we used the open reduction method to achieve adequate exposure of the fragments and articular surface. A portable radiological unit was used to recheck gross alignment during surgery, and we believe that the use of this device and the open method were helpful in lowering the incidence of malreduction. To the best of our knowledge, no series has investigated the efficiency of open reduction with unilateral locked plating for bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Compared with previous studies using minimally invasive techniques, we successfully decreased the rate of postoperative malalignment, as observed on postoperative radiographs ( It was unfortunate that the incidence rate of fixation loss was still high in our study (20%), despite the relatively low initial malreduction rate. We suggest several possible reasons. First, unilateral locked plating may not allow sufficient stability in all bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Locking plates are designed as fixed-angle internal fixation constructs, and their limited ability to alter the angle of the screw makes it difficult to fix fragments with certain geographic variations. With regard to fracture morphology in our patients with fixation loss, the medial component or posteromedial fragment was the most commonly displaced fragment with varus alignment ( Before definite fixation, patient #1 underwent debridement for a Gustilo type II open fracture and patient #8 underwent fasciotomy for compartment syndrome. Case #11 had a postoperative wound complication that required secondary closure. All the three patients had suffered considerable damage to their soft tissues. Initial severe soft tissue damage or intraoperative overstripping may result in a loss of vascular supply and increase the rates of infection or poor healing. Careful and staged management of plateau fractures with soft tissue damage is of great importance. In our series, staged treatment was arranged to observe and manage the condition of the soft tissues. Although there was no deep infection in the patients with fixation loss, delayed union still occurred. A comminuted fracture pattern and bony defects are key factors in delayed union. Bone graft substitutes are commonly used to augment bone healing and reconstruct skeletal defects. We used allografts in the patients with fixation loss to decrease the gap between fragments. Although the use of allografts can avoid donor-site morbidity, the use of autogenous cancellous bone grafts remains the gold standard because of the latter's ability to induce osteogenesis, osteoinduction, and osteoconduction. The use of autografts may accelerate the process of bone healing and prevent delayed union and fixation loss. The timing of weight-bearing after surgical fixation of fractures may also affect the maintenance of reduction. Per our protocol, weight-bearing is not permitted until radiographic proof of callus formation is obtained. However, patient noncompliance and incorrect radiographic interpretation can lead to inappropriate loading before the fracture is adequately healed. We believe that prolonged nonweight-bearing may be necessary for patients whose fracture gap exists with a comminuted pattern or patients whose soft tissue status is unfavorable. The limitation of this study was that the number of patients was insufficient to demonstrate statistical significance. Because of the inferior results obtained for unilateral locked plating in patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, we no longer use this method. Although the minimally invasive method of locked plating has become popular for managing osteopenic, comminuted, or periarticular fractures, limitations still exist. The LISS technique may decrease the amount of stripping of the soft tissue envelope, but there is a learning curve involved in the use of this technique to reduce fractures with limited fragment exposure. In our series, we used the open reduction method to keep the malreduction rate to the minimum, and functional outcome was comparable with that of LISS. However, the incidence of fixation loss remained high, especially in patients with posteromedial fragments. According to our experience with the limited number of patients in this study, we consider that locked plating has its limitations with regard to certain patterns of bicondylar tibial plateau fracture, especially in the presence of medial metaphyseal comminution of the posteromedial fragment. Supplementary medial buttress plating may be necessary in such cases. The authors would like to thank Simon White for the English language review.