The extraction of Au(I) from a polysulfide solution with TBP, amine alkyl extractants and their mixture was studied. The results show that Au(I) could be extracted with TBP or amine alkyl extractants, under the same condition, the extraction capacity of primary alkyl amine is better than that of tertiary alkyl amines. A mixture of N1923-TBP showed a synergistic effect. Separation of gold and copper from the polysulfide solution was readily achieved using 0.5 mol/L N1923–0.5 mol/L TBP/n-octane as the organic phase at pH<8 or pH>11 and the extraction rate of gold is very high.Treating refractory gold ores with polysulfide solvent has many advantages. However, there is little work reported on the recovery of gold from gold-containing polysulfide leaching solutions ( The enrichment and recovery of gold from the solution is an important stage of production. Gold is usually associated with other noble metals, such as silver, and other base metals, such as copper and iron. These metals will enter the leaching solution with gold when gold is leached, so the separation of gold and these other metals has to be considered during the recovery of gold from the leaching solution. The selectivity of gold recovery by solvent-extraction is better than that of the metal replacement method, and the solution needs no further treatment. The recovery of the extraction agent is easy after the loaded organic phase is back extracted, the temperature and high pressure in operation are not high, and the energy consumed is lower than that of the activated carbon elution and regeneration. In the meantime, the extraction efficiency of gold from an organic solvent that is mixed sufficiently is high and it solves the problem on the loss of active carbon, powder carbon and resin that results in a loss of metal. This paper examines the recovery of gold from polysulfide solutions by solvent extraction. The extraction reagents used in this work were (C The gold-containing polysulfide solution used in this work was prepared by adding alkaline solution to a standard solution of gold, and then polysulfide was added to change gold into AuS The equilibrium aqueous phase pH was measured by precision pH test paper. Gold concentration in aqueous phase was analyzed by spectrophotometry and gold in the organic phase was obtained by difference. Some samples were measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry, and the analytical error was < Neither the initial aqueous gold concentration nor the operating temperatures of 15–45 °C had any significant effect on the extraction, although higher temperatures may result in the decomposition of the polysulfide. The effect of aqueous phase pH on gold extraction is shown in It was found that the extraction rate was highest using The leaching process was also enhanced by the addition of ammonia when a gold-bearing flotation concentrate was leached using polysulfide solution, so NH Gold was extracted by using different concentrations of TBP/ Gold was extracted using 1.83 mol/L TBP/ Similar extraction experiments were performed using N The diluent had some effect on the extraction of gold, with kerosene exhibiting the worst effect. One possible reason was that an amine attached to a long chain alkane associated by hydrogen bond was disadvantageous to extraction. The extractant concentration in the organic phase also has a great effect on extraction.  The effect of the initial Au(I) and S The back extraction experiment of loaded organic phase for gold-containing N In the research on gold extraction from cyanide solution, Miller considered that using phosphorus oxides could change the pH and selectivity of extractant ( Firstly, the effect of TMK, MIBK, TBP, TOA and CHCl The effect of the concentration of primary amine N The effect of TBP concentration on the extraction of Au(I) by N From Copper extraction by N A polysulfide solution containing 28.9 mg/L gold and 17.6 mg/L copper was prepared. Gold and copper were extracted and separated by 0.5 mol/L N The separation factor TBP can extract gold from polysulfide solution at pH 11–12 with Amine extractants can extract Au(I) from alkaline polysulfide solution, and the extractive ability declines with increasing pH. Under the same conditions, primary amines were better than tertiary amines. Polysulfide concentration and initial Au(I) concentration have little effect on the extraction. The extraction process was not affected by the presence of ammonia in the aqueous phase, but the organic phase composition is important with extraction increasing with the concentration of extractant. Temperature has a definite effect on extraction. The gold could be recovered from loaded N Different extractants have different effects on the extraction of Au(I) by amine extractant from polysulfide noble solution. TBP has a synergic effect on the extraction of gold by N N