Anthropogenic impacts and associated climate change are anticipated to change nutrient availability in wetlands. Changes in nutrient availability can affect major biogeochemical reactions (i.e., methanogenesis, denitrification) which impact greenhouse gas emissions and trophic status of ecosystems. However, the modulating role of nutrients in C and N cycles, and their resulting effects on interactions between methanogenesis and denitrification are poorly understood. Here, anaerobic slurry incubations were carried out to test the sole and combined effects of C, N and P on methanogenesis and denitrification in wetland sediments. Three levels of N (as KNO3) were added, and three levels of P (as KH2PO4), either with or without C (as CH3COOH) additions during laboratory slurry incubations. We investigated potential CH4 production, denitrification, physico-chemical properties of sediment and pore water and abundances of methanogens and denitrifiers by using functional genes (mcrA and nirS). N addition significantly inhibited CH4 production (Mean 8.6±10.8μmolg−1 d.w) compared to the treatment without N addition (Mean 28.2±18.1μmolg−1 d.w) during incubation, irrespective of C addition. P addition did not directly influence methanogenesis. However, combined N and P addition decreased CH4 production (Mean 7.2±10.2μmolg−1 d.w) to a larger extent than sole N addition (Mean 11.3±11.9μmolg−1 d.w) due to increased substrate competition with denitrifiers. Interestingly, N and P addition in combination with C addition led to inhibition of CH4 production as well as denitrification. Combined with increasing ammonium and accumulating nitrite (NO2
                     −), the observed inhibition suggests that a change of electron flow towards dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium (DNRA) consumed more electron donors (i.e., acetate) in the process, reducing methanogenesis and denitrification. Our result suggests that P, especially in combination with other substrates, should be considered as an important modulating factor in greenhouse gas emissions (in particular CH4 and N2O) from wetlands.Methane (CH Methanogenesis can be regulated by various factors including temperature ( Besides N, also phosphorus (P) can be an important regulating factor of methanogenesis. For example, in Dutch drainage ditches, the water column PO Anthropogenic impacts on natural ecosystems have been increasing and largely influencing the balance of essential nutrients such as C, N and P for decades ( The aim of this study was to investigate effects and possible interactions of N and P additions on CH The sediment samples were collected from the top layer (0–5 Anaerobic slurries were prepared (10 Note that although added nutrients were in the high range of drainage ditch water column concentrations ( A control set of bottles ( Methane concentrations were measured every day. Before sampling the headspace and pore water, bottles were shaken vigorously to homogenize the sediment slurries. Gas samples (200 After the methanogenic incubations, denitrification potential measurements were conducted using the acetylene inhibition method ( After incubation, DNA was extracted from 0.10 Statistical analyses were conducted using R studio software (ver.2.6.0). Determination of differences between parameters was performed through three-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) including N, P and C additions and their interactions. C, N, P and their interaction all significantly affected CH Denitrification potential was on average 28.2 NO C addition decreased the pH of the sediment slurries, but during incubation pH in these slurries neutralized again (Fig. S2). P addition also acidified the slurries, with lower pH in P10 slurries (ca. 6.30) than in P0 and P1 slurries (ca. 6.73), and these effects remained after incubation. The abundances of the P additions (P1 and P10) without added N showed similar patterns as the control without added P, and did not influence CH We hypothesized that sole and combined effects of N and P on methanogenesis and denitrification in wetlands sediments act through competition for C. Experiments were carried out with and without added C to measure CH Our study showed that CH N additions inhibited CH  Our study showed that CH C addition may have shifted the competitive balance of different nitrate respiring and C degrading communities. Possibly, communities carrying out DNRA (dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium) may have been better competitors for acetate under N and P addition, suppressing the abundance of Interestingly, combined C and P addition seems to enhance initial ammonification and DNRA, suggesting that these steps of the N cycle are P limited in this sediment. Clearly, further studies are needed to test P-limitation of ammonification, DNRA, and denitrification and consequently its implications for CH We have summarized the main findings of this study in a conceptual scheme depicted in This work was supported a grant (  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at