Low intensity wet magnetic separation is not very effective for particles less than 10μm. The magnitude of the fluid drag force exceeds the magnetic force exerted on such particles. Thus, fine magnetic particles are usually not picked up effectively by magnetic separators, resulting in the loss of valuable minerals. Magnetic separation applied to ultrafine magnetite particles after size enlargement by polymer flocculation were found to be effective in reducing loss of fine magnetite particles.Wet low intensity magnetic separators are widely used for treating fine ferromagnetic or some strongly paramagnetic minerals. The forces acting upon particles in a magnetic separator are magnetic, gravity, hydrodynamic drag, friction, inertia and centrifugal. Relative importance of each force varies with separator design. However, magnetic, gravity and hydrodynamic drag forces are the major forces that govern the overall behavior of mineral particles in a magnetic separator Iron making industries demand increasingly high grade raw materials to improve quality and reduce cost. Availability of high grade natural ores is limited and enrichment of lower grade ores is necessary to meet the demand. Enrichment of low grade ores always involves comminution for mineral liberation. Particle size distribution of the ground ore depends on the grade, the grain size and the distribution of the minerals in the ore. Iron ore fines varying in quantity from ore to ore are generated as a result. Ultrafines and slimes are difficult to concentrate by conventional methods such as gravity, flotation, magnetic, etc. and are either separated prior to the concentration and treated separately Magnetic separation is unquestionably the most effective way of the concentration of magnetic ores. However, the necessity to grind the ores to increasingly finer sizes and the generation of ultrafines thereby and the difficulty to efficiently recover such particles make it necessary to find means to effectively apply magnetic concentration to ultrafine particles. Reverse flotation of silica in a magnetic field has been suggested as an alternative The aim of this work is to investigate the effect of a proper size enlargement process on the recovery of ultrafine particles in wet low intensity magnetic separation. Polymer flocculation using a natural corn starch which is known for its selectivity for iron minerals was selected as the size enlargement processes. First, the effect of particle size of magnetite on the magnetic separation was determined. Then, the effect of the addition of the flocculant to the pulp containing a given size fraction of magnetite was studied. Lastly, artificial mixtures of magnetite and quartz were subjected to magnetic separation tests in the absence and the presence of the flocculant to determine the separation efficiency for such systems. Magnetite sample was obtained from Divrigi Iron Ore Concentration Plant (Turkey) in the form of magnetite concentrate 85% −45 Quartz sample, used in the artificial mixture of magnetite and quartz for magnetic concentration tests, was prepared from hand picked clear quartz crystals. It was crushed and wet ground in a pebble mill followed by wet screening at 53, 45 and 38 A food grade corn starch of Cargill, Turkey, was used as the flocculant. The starch solution was prepared by dispersing 1 Magnetic concentration tests were carried out using a Davis tube tester with a 30 All tests were performed using distilled water and at the natural pH of the pulp. In order to investigate the effect of particle size on the recovery of magnetite particles in a low intensity magnetic separator, different size fractions of magnetite, alone and mixed with the same size quartz particles at a 0.5–0.5 ratio were subjected to magnetic separation tests in a Davis tube tester. The results are given in It was thought that the drop in the recovery of fine magnetite particles in a magnetic separator can be prevented by a proper size enlargement process. Flocculation is commonly used in mineral industries for particle aggregation. Aggregation by flocculation is accomplished by the bridging of many mineral particles together by an organic polymer, flocculant Loss of valuable minerals during the concentration of ultrafine magnetite particles have been reported to be significant. Such losses are expected to increase in tonnage in the future as the need to treat lower grade magnetite ores increase and/or as the iron making industries demand cleaner concentrates both requiring finer grinds. Size enlargement of ultrafine magnetite particles followed by magnetic separation may be a remedy for the losses.