A new laboratory fluidised bed tribo-electrostatic separator has been assembled and the beneficiation potential of thermal non-coking coal from Hingula block of Talcher coal field, India, is examined on this separator. The uniqueness of the separator originates from the efficient tribo-electrification of coal material in the cylindrical fluidised bed with internal baffle system. The collecting bins of the material underneath the copper plate electrodes are designed to function as Faraday cups such that the charge polarity and magnitude of particles in each bin can be measured directly. The liberation attributes of coal material is assessed by sink and float analysis of various size fractions. The mineral and maceral composition is determined by XRD and petrographic analysis.
                  The separation tests were conducted at different tribo-charging and applied voltage conditions. The material collected in bins close to positive and negative electrodes show an ash content of 61% and 8% respectively, illustrating differential charge acquisition of mineral rich and coal rich particles during tribo-electrification. The charge results are in good agreement with the ash content of the coal material collected in the bins. The results showed that a clean coal of about 15% ash can be obtained from a coal containing 30% ash with about 70% yield. A better separation results can be achieved by recycling the material. The ash content in the clean coal is however limited by the liberation characteristics of the coal, which is evidenced by the SEM analysis of the particles in different bins. Thus, the tribo-electrostatic method observed to be a promising dry coal preparation technique.Coal being the abundant and cheapest fuel, it will remain as major resource for power generation. Coal fired power stations use about 60% of the coal produced in the world. Conventional thermal power stations of those that burn fossil fuels – prevail in the 25 EU countries accounting for 58% of installed capacity in 2004 In recent years dry beneficiation techniques are achieving eloquent interest among the researchers throughout the world for coal preparation. Dry beneficiation technique has several advantages in comparison to wet process in terms of water pollution, coal dewatering, water demands and energy requirements Among the known electrical beneficiation methods, the tribo-electric separation process is most suitable for finer materials and minerals with relatively similar and varying electro-physical properties and involves the following guiding principles Charging the minerals by contact and/or friction with other materials and the separation of minerals in an electric field are the two underlying steps in tribo-electric separation process. When two materials are in contact, electrons move until the energy of electrons in each material at the interface is equalised. The material with the lower affinity loses electrons and charges positively. A measure of the relative affinity for electrons of the materials is the work function, which is the energy to move an electron from surface to infinity. The transfer of the charges (e.g., electrons) between minerals and tribo-charger media, and between coal and tribo-charger media allow to attain different polarities and magnitude of the charges by the participating mineral and coal particulates. The acquisition of the charges by the minerals depends on several parameters such as the position of the energetic levels between the minerals and tribo-charger medium, temperature, humidity, surface contamination and impurities, crystal lattice defects, etc. Consequently the electro-physical behaviour and the response of the charged mineral particles in the electric field of the separating device can be modified by the thermal, irradiation, doping, humidity and other pre-treatment methods. The maceral and minerals will be charged with opposing polarity on contact or friction with a material having work function in between the two, and when the material fall freely in the electric field, the particles get deflected towards electrodes according to the sign of their charge and get separated. Mazumder et al. High ash non-coking coal sample from seam VIII Hingula block of Talcher coal field, Orissa, India was used for their characterisation and subsequent beneficiation studies with the tribo-electrostatic separator. The coal was ground and screened to different size fractions of −75 The typical characteristic of Hingula coal is that the −1 The experimental set-up for tribo-electrostatic separation of ash-forming minerals from coal maceral is shown in The bottom conical end of fluidised bed tribo-charger is connected to the nitrogen gas cylinder. The volumetric gas flow rate of nitrogen through the pipe can be regulated by the rotameter (RM) and gate valve V The rectangular Perspex box has the dimensions of 1 The electrode A was connected to +ve supply source, while electrode B was connected to −ve supply source. The electrodes were charged with a high DC voltage power supply. There were six collecting bins in the form of Faraday cups below the electrode plates to collect the material after passing through the electric field and the polarity and charge magnitude of the particles collected in each bin can be measured. All the Faraday cups placed on the Teflon surface. The dimensions of outer shield of Faraday cup is 0.365 In the present beneficiation tests, a coal sample of −300 The minerals inclusion in the particles collected at positive and negative electrode plates was studied using a Philips XL 30 SEM equipped with energy dispersive spectra (EDS) analysis for chemical mapping. In the present investigation, back scattered electron (BSE) and EDS were used to characterize the mineral rich and carbon rich coal particles collected at positive and negative electrode plates. A representative sample of coal particles was sprinkled onto the double sided carbon tape mounted on a SEM stub to determine the particle morphology, external surface structure and elemental distribution of coal particles. The proximate analysis of Hingula bulk coal indicates that the coal contains 39.39% ash, 27.21% volatile matter and 33.40% fixed carbon. The proximate analysis of different size distributions suggests that −1 Coal samples of seam VIII of Hingula block, Talcher coalfield are dull grey in colour. All the lithotypes i.e., vitrain, clarain, durain and fusain are found in the coal. Four lithotypes are found in the coal samples with decreasing order of durain, clarain, vitrain, and fusain. All three groups of macerals viz. vitrinite, liptinite (exinite) and inertinite are found in Hingula coal samples with dominance of vitrinite group of maceral. In the present study “mineral matter” is considered as all the forms of inorganic material associated with coal. They were identified by megascopically, microscopically and X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD). These are mostly adventitious type and more discrete inorganics. Major mineral components are found in cleat and bedding planes of the coal and are commonly seen with the naked eye. In order of abundance of minerals present in the coal are clay mineral (aluminosilicates viz. illite, and kaolinite), silica (predominant quartz), carbonates (siderite, dolomite and calcite) and sulphide (pyrite). Clay minerals are identified by XRD and also observed under microscope. Clay is intimately associated with maceral even in pure vitrinite band. Limonite, goethite, siderite are found either in cleat or bedding plane and readily identifiable in naked eye. Quartz always dominates either in lithotype or bulk coal but not visible in naked eye. However, in −1 Goethite, limonite, hematite, pyrite, chalcopyrite, magnetite etc. are detected microscopically but of minor constituents. Grains of apatite, barite, beryl of gem variety, biotite, calcite, chalcedony, kyanite, dolomite, epidote, garnet, gypsum, hematite, ilemenite, limonite, magnetite, muscovite, orthoclase, pyrite, pyroxene, quartz of different colour, rutile, siderite, tourmaline, zircon, etc. are identified by heavy media liquid separation of sink fraction of seam VIII of Hingula block. The −300 The effect of applied voltage on the weight percentage of material collected at different bins at 30 and 60 The effect of applied voltage on the size distribution of coal particles collected at different bins at 30 and 60 A typical ash percentage of coal collected at different bins and plates at different applied voltages and at 30  SEM EDS mapping were also carried out with particles collected at positive and negative plates and are shown in The cumulative recovery of combustible matter and cumulative yield as a function of cumulative ash of particles collected from negative plate to positive plate were studied to evaluate the performance of the tribo-electrostatic separator. The beneficiation results at 30 and 60 s tribo-charging time are shown in  All three groups of vitrinite, liptinite and inertinite macerals are found in the Hingula coal where vitrinite is predominant. The mineral matter in the coal mainly contains quartz, kaolinite, illite, siderite, dolomite, calcite and pyrite. The clay minerals are intimately associated with macerals. The washability and petrography studies demonstrate poor liberation characteristics of the coal. The typical characteristics of Hingula coal is that the −1 In the present investigation, a novel tribo-electrostatic separator with fluidised bed tribo-charger with internal baffle systems was designed and fabricated. The system is designed in such a manner that it can operate in a wide range of variables for different types of coal beneficiation. The collecting bins are in the form of Faraday cups connected to Keithley electrometer through scanner card which enable to measure the charge polarity and magnitude of particles collected at different bins. Experimental results and analysis reveal that it is possible to achieve 15.6% ash clean coal from 25% ash coal with 69% yield at 15 KV applied voltage and 30 SEM analysis reveals the carbon inclusion within the minerals in the mineral rich coal particles collected at positive plate and poor liberation characteristics with the present −300 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Swedish International Development cooperation agency (SIDA/SAREC) and Kempestiftelsen, Sweden. The authors thank Mr. P.S.R. Reddy and Dr. S. K. Biswal of IMMT Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India for helpful discussions. Special thanks to Dr. S. K. Misra (retired) of IMMT Bhubaneswar for helping to carry out the coal petrography analysis.