The preceding nine years have seen significant changes in the way that copper metal is produced. The most important change is the continuing high price of copper. It has been some time since the industry as a whole has enjoyed such success. This has led to an expansion of the industry, and the list of mines and production facilities is considerably changed from the previous edition. Technology changes have occurred as well. The most notable of these include: The continuing adoption of high-intensity bath smelting for both primary concentrates and secondary materials; Significant increase in the use of hydrometallurgical processing technology for sulfide concentrates; New technology to mitigate the environmental impact of copper ore mining and processing. These changes are reflected in this edition, along with expanded coverage of byproduct recovery (important when gold prices are US $1400/oz!) and secondary copper recovery and processing. The continuing search for a replacement for the Peirce–Smith converter is also featured. The day is getting closer when this venerable device will belong to the past! There has also been a change in the group of conspirators behind this book. We welcome to the group Dr. Kathryn C. Sole from South Africa. Kathy specializes in hydrometallurgical process development, and the addition of her expertise is important to three old-fashioned pyrometallurgists. She improves the diversity of the group in more ways than one! As with previous efforts, this edition of Peter Amelunxen and Roger Amelunxen (Amelunxen Mineral Engineering) Mike Bernard (Terra Nova Technologies) Elizabeth Bowes, Shingefei Gan, Ursula Mostert, Sandip Naik, Ian Ralston, Bernardo Soto, and Gabriel Zárate (Anglo American) Alistair Burrows (ISASMELT) Leszek Byszyński (KGHM) Connie Callahan, James Davis III, David Jones, Steve Koski, Michael Lam, John Quinn, and Cory Stevens (Freeport-McMoRan) John Joven S. Chiong (PASAR) Felix Conrad (Aurubis AG) Frank Crundwell (Crundwell Management Solutions) Angus Feather (BASF, formerly Cognis) Phil Donaldson (Xstrata Technologies) Jim Finch (McGill University) Mark Firestein (Bateman-Litwin) David George-Kennedy, Art Johnston, David Kripner, and Mark Taylor (Rio Tinto) Tom Gonzalez (Hatch) J. Brent Hiskey (University of Arizona) Nicholas Hogan (Incitec Pivot) Kun Huang (Chinese Academy of Sciences) John Hugens (Fives North American Combustion) Cyrus Kets (Moonshine Advertising) Hannu Laitala, Robert Matusewicz, Lauri Palmu, and Markus Reuter (Outotec Oyj) Pascal Larouche (Xstrata Copper) Theo Lehner (Boliden Mineral AB) Pierre Louis (PEL Consulting) Guangsheng Luo (Tsinghua University) Phil Mackey (P.J. Mackey Technology) Dennis Marschall (Kazakhmys PLC) Michael Nicol (Murdoch University) Jan W. Matousek (Chlumsky, Armbrust and Meyer) Graeme Miller (Miller Metallurgical Services) Michael Moats (University of Utah) Tony Moore (MMG Sepon) Enock Mponda and Charles Shonongo (Konkola Copper Mines) Keith Mathole and Tlengelani Muhlare (Palabora Mining) V. Ramachandran (RAM Consultants) Tim Robinson (Republic Alternative Technologies) Helge Rosenberg (Haldor Topsøe) Stefan Salzmann (Bamag) Heguri Shinichi (Sumitomo) Edwin Slonim (Turbulent Technologies) Matthew Soderstrom and Owen Tinkler (Cytec Industries) Gary Spence (Encore Wire) Nathan Stubina (Barrick) Ilya Terentiev (Consultant) Mark Vancas (Bateman Engineering) Craig van der Merwe (First Quantum Minerals) Rob West (BHP Billiton) Yutaka Yasuda (Hibi Kyodo Smelting) Roe-Hoan Yoon (Virginia Polytechnic Institute) The fifth edition of