Two novel diglycolthioamides, 2-(2-(dioctylamino)-2-thioxoethoxy)-N,N-dioctylacetamide (mono-TODGTA) and 2,2′-oxybis(N,N-dioctylethanethioamide) (di-TODGTA), were synthesized and characterized by MS and 1H NMR. Their solvent extraction behaviors for Pd(II) in nitric acid solutions were investigated by using kerosene as diluent. Effects of concentration of nitric acid and extractants on the extraction percentage of Pd(II) were examined. Both of the two extractants show high extraction efficiency and selectivity for Pd(II). By comparison, di-TODGTA exhibits higher selectivity than mono-TODGTA. By means of mole ratio method and Job's method, Pd(II) was found to be extracted as mono-solvated and semi-solvated species for mono-TODGTA and di-TODGTA, respectively. The extraction equilibrium constants for mono-TODGA and di-TODGTA are K
                     
                        ex,mono
                     
                     =1.39×108 and K
                     
                        ex,di
                     
                     =3.95×1014, separately. Complete back extraction of palladium can be achieved by thiourea.Palladium is widely used in chemical, electronic and petroleum industries because of its specific physical and chemical properties, such as high melting, corrosion resistance behavior and extraordinarily catalytic properties ( In the process of hydrometallurgy and nuclear fuel reprocessing, solvent extraction is one of the most commonly used separation methods. A variety of extractants have been investigated for the extraction of palladium, such as tertiary and quaternary amines ( In recent years, a diamide extractant, In previous work, thiodiglycolamide was synthesized by introducing a sulfur atom into diglycolamide to substitute the oxygen atom in the ether linkage for extraction of Pd(II) ( The organic reagents used in the syntheses were purchased from Energy Chemical, China. The products obtained were characterized by MS and  A solution of TODGA (11.62 A solution of TODGA (11.62 Extraction performance of metal ions between organic and aqueous phases with diglycolthioamides was quantified by measuring the concentration of metal ions in aqueous phase and determining the concentration of metal ions in organic phase by mass balance at equilibrium. Diglycolthioamides dissolved in kerosene were employed as the organic phase. The solutions of 1 Effect of contact time on the extraction percentage of Pd(II) was evaluated from 0.1 TODGTA belongs to neutral complex extractant. In the range of HNO Under the given experimental conditions, the extraction equilibrium constant And the distribution ratio of Pd(II) is expressed as: Taking logarithm on both the sides of above equation and rearranging gives: By means of mole ratio method and Job's method, the composition of extracted species and the value of Keeping the concentration of Pd(II) as a constant of 1 Job's method was also used to ensure the species formed between Pd(II) and TODGTA in nitric acid. The sum of the initial Pd(II) concentration in the aqueous phase and the concentration of TODGTA in the organic phase is maintained as a constant of 1 Therefore, the following equations of the palladium extraction process with TODGTA can be proposed: Loading test was performed by keeping the initial concentration of extractant at 1.0 Construction of the extraction isotherms of the extraction process requires a constant amount of the extractant at 1.0 In Eq. Introducing this substitution in Eq. In a similar way for The definition of distribution ratio In Eq. The effect of nitric acid concentration on the extraction percentage of Pd(II) is shown in The extraction of Pd(II), U(VI), Th(IV), La(III), Ce(III), Nd(III), Eu(III), Er(III) and Sr(II) by TODGTA in kerosene was investigated and the results are illustrated in The back extraction of Pd(II) from the loaded organic phase of 0.05 Two novel neutral multidentate sulfur-containing ligands The authors are very grateful for the financial support by the