Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have shown promising potential for many applications in field of engineering due to their unusual significant properties. A major challenge for the industrial applications of CNTs is the large-quantity production. In this field, one new method for CNT production is annealing the ball milled graphite powder. The annealing process should be done in high temperature (1200–1400°C) and needs time more than 6h. The novel process introduced in this paper is elimination the annealing stage thorough a thermite reaction. The necessity heat for the conversion of milling products to CNTs was generated in the milling chamber by an exothermic reaction. In addition, the reaction products acted as catalysts to the CNT formation process. The adiabatic temperatures of 1809, 2000 and 2325K were selected according to balancing graphite and thermite mixture (Aluminum+Iron oxide powders) for exothermic reaction. The results of thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA) test proved that CNT formation strongly depends on adiabatic temperature. The results of microscopic evaluation done by transition electron microscope (TEM) showed that at higher adiabatic temperature CNTs could be produced.Since the time of discovery by Iijima, many researchers have devoted their efforts to studying Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) due to their important applications Crystalline graphite powder with a high purity (>99.9%) was used as the starting carbonaceous material. Thermite powder mixture (Aluminum These calculations were based on the total change in enthalpy during the chemical reaction that will raise the temperature of the product in the adiabatic condition. The released energy from thermite reaction was considered to provide the needed heat for increasing the temperature of products up to The milling runs were interrupted for 0.5 It is well known that different structural forms of carbon have different oxidation behaviors. In other words, they exhibit different reactivity with oxygen which is dependent on the available reactive sites. As a result, TGA and DTG (differential thermo gravimetric) studies have been found to be useful to understand the nature and structure of carbons present in the carbonaceous material. Amorphous carbons tend to oxidize at lower temperature because of their lower activation energies for oxidation and/or due to the presence of large number of active sites as well as dangling bonds. It leads the system to increasing specific surface area to over 600 In The results are verified by TEM micrographs, which will be presented in the following. It maybe concluded that the adiabatic temperature has a significant influence on nanotube formation during milling process. Moreover, it is well known that iron has a catalytic effect on carbon nanotubes formation The percentages of CNTs produced during each experiment calculated from the weight loss occurred around 600 It is clear from TGA graphs and TEM micrographs ( Understanding the role of reactive milling is critical for the CNT formation mechanisms. Collisions between steel balls or balls and vial mill, may cause trap some particles of (C In the current research, a novel experimental approach that utilizes an exothermic reaction simultaneously ball milling of graphite as the starting carbonaceous material for the formation of carbon nanotubes has been investigated. The achieved results are remarked as below: The whole process of nucleation and growth of carbon nanotubes occurs during ball milling step because of the presence of exothermic agent. The heat released from exothermic reaction leads the system to be formed as carbon nanotube. This is because the growth of carbon nanotube depends strongly on carbon diffusion into the nanocatalyst (in the current study, iron particles achieved from byproduct of thermite reaction and somehow the abrasion of balls and vial). Milling assists to reduce the size of graphite particles as well as increasing the strain of their lattice and makes them to be disordered. These reasons cause them to become much more active for diffusion.