Stockpiling ore within a storage facility located between the mine and the concentrator can help damp production fluctuations originating from either the mining operation or the ore processing operation. To increase ore production rates, additional equipment is often installed within concentrators and mines. However, ore storage facilities may create bottlenecks in the production chain, if they are not properly redesigned. This paper proposes a mine-to-mill simulation method to determine the limitations of existing ore storage facilities and help their resizing in a context of production expansion. The modeling method combines three simulators to evaluate the production losses attributed to ore storage facilities: (1) a dynamic simulator of the 2D distribution of a storage facility filling profile, (2) a dynamic logistic model to simulate mine production and (3) a Monte Carlo simulator to emulate mine and concentrator equipment downtimes. The resulting overall simulator is able to provide answers to a very practical and critical industrial question: is an existing ore storage facility capable of handling increases in the production rate? Results of an application of this simulation technique to an iron ore processing plant helped reorient the plant expansion prefeasibility studies.In planning to expand the production of an existing ore processing plant, significant efforts are deployed in identifying the possible causes of bottlenecks (i.e. limiting equipment or sectors) in the production chain. Undersized buffer tanks and/or ore storage facilities, often disregarded as potential bottlenecks, can lead to important production losses. The objective of the study is to show how dynamic simulation of the overall plant behavior can provide insight on potential problems related to ore storage between the mine and concentrator and help to explore redesign avenues. The proposed methodology is based on linking an ore storage facility simulator to mine and concentrator simulators in order to evaluate an ore storage capacity. An application is documented in the context of a planned increased production for an iron ore mining and concentrating complex. One difficult part of the problem is related to the ore storage upstream and downstream flowrates fluctuations. For instance, Section The current study was motivated by a logistic problem currently occurring at an Iron Ore Mine and Processing Plant, regarding its ore storage between the mine and the plant. The logistic problem becomes more obvious as the mine company, Iron Ore Company of Canada (IOC), subsidiary of Rio Tinto, Canada’s largest Iron ore producer, is exploring ways to increase its current iron concentrate for sale production by approximately 50%.  The ore storage facility is capital in the production chain as it allows to damp production disturbances originating from both the mine and concentrator plant. Upstream disturbances stem from equipment failures (e.g. shovels, trucks, train, loaders, crushers, etc.), weather conditions (e.g. snow storms, pit floods, damaged roads, etc.), planned changes in the production schedule, and human factors (e.g. dispatch mistakes, accidents, etc.), whereas downstream disturbances stem from equipment failures (e.g. mills, conveyors, pumps, etc.), and maintenance. The ore storage facility is fed by three delivering units (shuttles) equipped with movable heads for continuously dispersing the crushed ore along the 170   In comparison, Simulators allowing the study of specific problems in a given industry are often developed independently using various modeling platforms and focussing on different objectives. These independent developments often lead to incompatible tools when it is aimed to look at a broader view of a problem, for instance, an evaluation of an integrated production chain. The strategy proposed in this paper makes use of three independently developed simulators, integrates their particular outputs and inputs, and assesses a problem for which none of the simulator was originally designed for. The mine simulator was originally developed for assessing truck fleet, waiting times and desirable stockpile levels in the mine, independently from the downstream concentrator operations. The ore storage simulator was developed to assess the available storage volume for any given specific scenario (season, equipment availability for distribution and reclaim, etc.). The concentrator simulator was developed in order to assess bottlenecks at the various steps of the concentration processes, without interaction with the upstream elements (ore storage and mine). The integrated strategy uses output of a mine model, design parameters of an ore storage model, and a probabilistic production model of the concentrator in order to predict the capacity of the ore storage to damp both upstream and downstream disturbances. The heart of the simulation study is the ore storage facility which will be first described. The simulators generating the ore mining outputs as well as the concentrator input demands are then briefly presented. Even though the overall capacity of an ore delivery equipment could be sufficiently large in normal operating conditions and under permanent regime, it is still most important to simulate its dynamic behavior under input variations and varying output demands. These sources of variability may question the possibility of continuously feeding ore into an ore storage facility and its effective live capacity according to the season and the available feeding and reclaiming equipment. Live capacity is defined as usable storage volume as opposed to the dead load being the ore stacked under the angle of reclaim, which can therefore never fall in the mill feeder direction. During Winter, channels form over mill feeders when the reclaim angle becomes steeper (illustrated in In order to better understand interaction between the delivering units, the mill feeders, and the ore stockpile, a dynamic simulator was developed in Matlab®, that reproduces the dynamical evolution of the 2D ore stockpile profile, under different feeding and reclaiming scenarios, during both Winter (steep reclaim angles) and Summer (lower reclaim angle) conditions. The reclaim angles are always steeper than the repose angle (37°, see The finite difference method is used to solve the ore stockpile mass balance problem. The whole stockpile surface is discretized into square cells (25 The time is discretized using a 5-min sampling period (this time discretization is to be adapted with the inputs and outputs flowrates), which means that the total inputs and outputs over one time period do not create large variations either of the piles or the holes. However, unrealistic stockpile shapes with overfilled ore prisms under the delivering unit paths and oversized holes at the active feeder locations may occur. This is the result of the computation, at the beginning of each time step, of the cumulated or removed masses in the ore storage cell matrix for the next 5-min operation of the delivering unit discharges or mill feeder outputs. Therefore, a long iteration algorithm takes place in which mass is transferred between contiguous cells according to the height difference between cells until a realistic equilibrium state representing the ore storage surface is found. During one iteration, each cell is visited (there is usually a large number of cells, depending however on the discretization step and ore storage size) in order to compare its content (height) with its adjacent side neighbors ( Depending on the amount of material that was added or subtracted, the convergence to a realistic surface (where no more material is transferred) could be long. To accelerate convergence, while avoiding too large material transfers between cells that might reverse the instability direction, the mass transfer is always made proportional to the difference between the contiguous cells. Between 1500 and 3000 An extra challenge is that the angle defining the ore stability between two adjacent cells, and as a consequence the mass transfer, varies within the stockpile depending on whether the repose angle or the reclaim angle is to be used. A 3D tensor, the elements of which are the stability angles (either the reclaim or the repose angle) is constructed. Its entries ( The objective of the mine simulator is to provide realistic production numbers for a whole year on an hourly basis. In order to simulate the continuous mine production, a detailed mine discrete event model was used. This simulator, developed in the Arena® software, reproduces dynamic mine operation on a continuous basis (event based). This software is well suited to analyze and plan factory flow, plant layouts, inventory control, job routing, or staffing optimization ( The current mine simulator was already available as it was validated in the course of other projects related with mine operation planning, and is assumed sufficiently accurate to simulate the future mine operation, starting at the mine and ending at the ore storage facility. The mine simulator was calibrated using historical data from the mine and was able in the past to correctly forecast ore production for year 2008 and 2010 (slowdown in 2009 could not be accounted in the model). It is however not the purpose of the current paper to describe the simulator content. All important equipment used in the ore supply chain is accounted for and simulated according to its flow capacity, availability, scheduled and unscheduled maintenance, queuing times, buffer capacity, etc. For instance, each hauling truck travels the distance between pits and crushers for the exact duration of its journey and is thereafter assigned to a new task. Every object of the simulator (trucks, trains, shovel, etc.) is programmed with tasks (i.e. transporting material from A to B using the shortest way) and depending on the location of each object, different ore at different rates will be mined and carried to the ore storage. Events such as snowstorms, a broken down train blocking a truck track, and breakdowns affect the mine output as other units are stopped or queued. The mine schedule is used as an information source for the model allowing the prediction of the mine production for several years. The mine plan (mining official design document) for each year provides stripping ratio, ore hardness (for grinding), pit location, etc. The stripping ratio affects the truck availability to carry ore to the delivering units. The material properties are carried, relying on where the material was harvested in the mine, thus providing productivity information from the grinding mills. The simulator predicts hourly production from the various delivering units from the mine, for a full year. The purpose of the concentrator model is to simulate what could be processed by the concentrator, in order to evaluate the potential production that may not be effectively delivered by the ore storage facility. The concentrator model includes all elements (deterministic and stochastic) within the production chain starting from the ore storage output and ending with the spiral lines output. Each mill feeder, conveyor, AG mill and spiral line is modeled, with its intrinsic processing capacity and corresponding scheduled and unscheduled downtimes. The equipment availability (ability to perform work as opposed to equipment in maintenance or broken down) is modeled using MTBF (mean time between failures) and MTTR (mean time to recovery) Weibull distributions that can be calibrated on industrial data ( A mass balance simulator is constructed in order to assess the ore storage facility for various production rates and operating conditions. This model integrates the simulators of the mine outputs, the ore storage facility, and the concentrator as summarized in In practice to accelerate calculations, the mass balance time period is set at 1  In From the simulator output, the Mine annual production capacity can be computed by integrating the flowrate Yearly output The ore storage facility is 40 As a comparison The model made it possible to determine that the usable stockpile live capacity is much less than its total stockpile buffer capacity (approximately 300,000 In the application study, the ore stockpile dynamic simulator is not included in the integrated dynamic simulation loop as it would require too much computational time. Instead, the simulator is used independently to produce results defining the ore storage live capacity for various operational conditions. Then, in the integrated simulation loop the full ore storage model is replaced by a dynamic simulator consisting of a limited number of zones (one per grinding line) operating as tanks with live capacities corresponding to the results obtained by the detailed simulator. This ore storage live capacity relies on: Reclaim angle varying with seasons (as previously illustrated). Available shuttles (the fillable volume decreases when a given shuttle does not bring ore). Available mill feeders (downtime on mill feeders increase the dead load). The concentrator model reproduces coherent data collected during 1 The simulator final output is, for each of the four AG mills, an hourly crude ore demand to the ore storage over 1 The concentrator annual potential production capacity can be computed by integrating the potential mill flowrate Yearly output The mass balance performed in block 5 of The five numbered blocks from The mine discrete event simulator provides time series for the ODS and PODS that include hourly tonnages and ore hardness. Maximum ore storage live inventories depending on the movable shuttle operation combination and season are supplied by the ore stockpile simulator. Maximum ore storage live inventory are reformatted to adhere to the limited number of zones modeled within the ore storage mass balance (four zones). The downstream concentrator model (including mills) then calculates the hourly ore demand from the ore storage facility, for each of the four zones. A mass balance is calculated for each zone considering inputs, outputs, inventories and time-varying constraints (storage live capacity varying between zero and the maximum value provided by block 2). Computing the mass balance for a period of 1 In the production chain, the maximum that can be produced always corresponds to the weakest link. If the damping property of the ore storage was infinite, the processing capacity would be the minimum capacity between the mine ( The losses attributable to the ore storage are either the unused plant potential ( The losses are calculated through a Monte Carlo procedure in which various mine output random draws are associated with different concentrator demand random draws. The simulation was repeated 10 In this section, the current plant situation (where the ore storage is not creating significant production losses) is compared to the future situation, where the production rate is to be increased by 50%. In the current situation, the PODS, the fourth AG mill and the additional spiral lines are not in operation. In this particular case, the concentrator processing capacity exceeds the mine delivery capacity (by approximately 9%, as will be explained when discussing results in In contrast, in the future situation, additional equipment (i.e. PODS, fourth AG mill and spiral lines) is to be installed to increase the plant throughput. At the projected future production rate (50% higher than the current nominal production rate), the concentrator processing capacity is expected to be similar to the mine delivery capacity. As a result, the ore storage facility will be much more solicited than in the present case. In order to visualize the impact of the mine and concentrator capacity differences on the losses attributed to the ore storage facility, simulations have been carried out for various mine yearly production capacities (  The losses attributed to the ore storage facility are always maxima when the mine delivery capacity (upstream production) is equal to the plant processing capacity (downstream production). At this production rate, any significant disturbance either in the concentrator production or in the mine production either completely fills or completely empties the ore storage facility. When the ore storage is empty, it results in a loss of production at the concentrator since some of the mills must be stopped. Conversely, full storage facility results in a loss of production at the mine since the train, trucks, loaders and shovels must be stopped. When the mine capacity exceeds the plant capacity ( The ore storage is full more often. The bottleneck is clearly the concentrator processing capacity. The losses attributed to the ore storage are given by: The losses are attributed to “empty storage”, therefore: When the mine capacity exceeds the plant capacity, “full storage” losses are normal and the ore storage facility is not responsible for them. However, when, despite the mine higher capacity, “empty storage” losses still occur, the ore storage facility can be identified as the root cause. When the concentrator processing capacity exceeds the mine delivery capacity ( The ore storage is empty more often. The bottleneck is clearly the mine delivery capacity. The losses attributed to the ore storage are given by: The losses are attributed to “full storage”, therefore: When When the upstream and downstream capacities are the same ( For all cases, the plant effective capacity can be calculated by the minimum value between the upstream and downstream capacity minus the minimum value between “full storage” and “empty storage” losses: In It can be seen that the small losses attributed to the ore storage facility are the result of the particular situation where the production capacities at the mine and at the concentrator are not well matched, the concentrator capacity being larger than that of the mine. Symmetrically, if the mine capacity was larger than the concentrator capacity, the loss due to the ore storage would also be low (for instance, In In order to diminish the losses attributed to ore storage, the simplest solution is to increase the mine delivery capacity and move the operating point to the right side of the bell-shape curve of On an economical point of view, it is desirable for the bottleneck to occur at the most expensive equipment (either mining equipment or concentrator equipment). When important capacity differences occur between two elements of a production chain, it reduces the pressure on the in-between damping (buffer) equipment. However, the production chain is designed most of the time in such a way that the downstream and upstream capacities are similar. This means that, the relative losses due to ore storage are at a maximum and both the mine and concentrator will operate below their designed capacity. Therefore the ore storage system must be designed in order to lower the apex of the loss curve ( The simulator was thereafter used as a tool to evaluate the benefits of potential improvements which could be made to the supply chain, for instance, by adding new equipment or by altering operating practices. In In order to more qualitatively interpret the former results of Section Two simulation runs from the mine simulator are selected, one for the current production scenario and one for the future expansion scenario. The two feeds correspond approximately to the two operating points identified by the stars in The hourly flowrate probability distributions are presented in  In The loss occurrences illustrated under the curves are the minimal losses as the real concentrator limitation is often lower than its maximum allowable flowrate. Also, the area under the curve indicates loss occurrences but does not mean that the whole hourly flowrate is lost, but only what is in excess from the concentrator capacity.  Moreover, with the installation of the new parallel ore delivery systems (PODS), the mine total output variance increases significantly, with very high production peaks (as illustrated in Given the significant increase in mine feed variability and unchanged ore storage facility size, losses will occur about 30% of the time in Winter, and 20% of the time in Summer (illustrated by the stripped areas). Knowing that the corresponding production loss is not the whole mine output but only what is in excess from the concentrator maximal flowrate, this simulation run result is consistent with the 8% losses obtained in Various solutions were studied in order to improve the ore storage facility performance (i.e. reduce the losses attributed to the ore storage facility). These solutions were tested by making use of the integrated simulators. The following is a short description of three solutions considered and their impact on the ore storage facility performance, given the upcoming expansion phases. The PODS Reclaim System (RS) is a series of conveyors that would allow stocking ore from the PODS in a new silo situated beside the ATO conveyors. Two independent apron feeders would transfer ore from the silo to either the East Shuttle or the West Shuttle of the ATO. The PODS RS would allow: An extra buffer between the PODS and the ATO shuttles. The transfer of production excess from PODS to the ATO shuttles (unidirectional). The ATO Reclaim System (RS) is a mine operating strategy that could involve the procurement of new ore handling equipment (possibly a loader). A silo at the mine already exists and could be used as an extra buffer for the ore storage facility (illustrated in The ATO RS would allow: An extra buffer between the mine and the ATO shuttles. The transfer of ore from the silo to the ATO shuttles when possible/needed. The additional reclaiming tunnel #9 could be commissioned (see The simulations performed in Results indicate that: The three proposed solutions are mostly additive, which justifies the implementation of all three solutions. The implementation of the various solutions could reduce the losses attributed to the ore storage facility by up to 2% (relative) ( Increasing the mine delivery capacity to 170% could lower the losses attributed to the ore storage facility below 3% ( This paper proposes an approach to simulate the mine-to-mill dynamic behavior, focusing on the role of ore storage units between the mine and the concentrator. Various simulators were combined to exploit their individual strengths, in order to mimic the dynamics of ore mining, delivering, stocking and processing on an hourly basis for typically a year horizon. The simulator is able to predict the 3D shape of the ore storage inventory every 5-min and, more particularly, the live and dead volumes, which are central for the assessment of the performance of the storage facility submitted to downstream and upstream disturbances. The ore storage simulator, connected to the mine and concentrator stochastic simulators, is able to calculate the production losses due to empty or full storage. It is shown that the ore storage sensitivity to mine production and concentrator demand is maximum when mining and ore processing capacities are matched. This study also demonstrates the importance of stockpiling in a production chain, and that the proposed approach provides means for analysing the performance of a given installation, detect where the bottlenecks of the production chain are, and either correct the ore storage operation strategy or redesign the system if production losses have been identified at the stockpiling stage. An application is demonstrated for a real situation in an iron ore Canadian mining company, in a context of a planned 50% production increase. Results generated from the simulator directly influenced the company decision to reorient their expansion projects, since the ore storage facility was identified as a major bottleneck considering the future production target. The cost associated with improving the ore storage facility performance and the cost of increasing the mine delivery capacity would have rendered the implementation of the entire expansion project, as it was initially defined, not economically viable. It is shown that keeping the current mine operating strategy with the combined ore delivery systems (ATO and PODS) will greatly increase the mine output variance, thus creating downstream problems, at the ore storage facility and at the concentrator. Results from this case study highlighted that one of the key ways to increase the current plant production, without modifying the existing ore storage facility, is to decrease the low frequency variability in the mine feed for which the damping capacity of the ore storage is overtaken. Three different modifications of the existing ore storage equipment were studied and evaluated with the simulator. The next step of the simulator development would be to close the loop between the currently open-loop discrete event mine simulator and the ore storage mass balance simulator, in such a way to optimize manual or automatic feeding and extracting control strategies for minimizing the production losses due to ore storage.