The total annual revenue stream in the US natural gas value chain over the past decade is analyzed. Growth of total revenues has been driven by higher wellhead prices, which peaked in 2008. The emergence of the unconventional gas business was made possible in part by the pre-recessional rise in global energy prices. The general rise in natural gas prices between 1998 and 2008 did not lower overall US gas consumption, but shifts have occurred during the past decade in the consumption levels of individual consumer groups. Industry's gas consumption has decreased, while power stations increased their gas consumption. Commercial and residential consumers maintained flat gas consumption patterns. This study introduces the Weighted Average Cost of Retail Gas (WACORG) as a tool to calculate and monitor an average retail price based on the different natural gas prices charged to the traditional consumer groups. The WACORG also provides insight in wellhead revenues and may be used as an instrument for calibrating retail prices in support of wellhead price-floor regulation. Such price-floor regulation is advocated here as a possible mitigation measure against excessive volatility in US wellhead gas prices to improve the security of gas supply.The depressed natural gas prices of 2009, 2010 and 2011 in North America threaten to decelerate the development of its unconventional gas resources. The US and Canadian unconventional gas potential is huge, but the technical, economic and environmental challenges remain steep. The resources are there: assessment of the technically recoverable unconventional resources in North America suggests that shale gas resources lead the way and translate to 274 The total volume throughput in the natural gas system from wellhead to burner tip is tediously monitored by the Energy Information Administration of the US Department of Energy. The present study uses the EIA/DOE database ( The depressed natural gas prices now threaten to slow down the development of the US unconventional gas resources. The average wellhead break-even price for unconventional natural gas lies at 8.03 The insight in the retail price fluctuations from this study establishes an analytical basis to define the Weighted Average Cost of Retail Gas (WACORG). The WACORG may serve as a tool to model future retail prices that would need to be charged to establish a floor for unconventional gas wellhead prices. The introduction of such a price-floor would render technically recoverable unconventional gas resources economically viable, by removing downward volatility in wellhead prices. The concept of wellhead price-floor regulation is new for the upstream US natural gas industry and requires further debate, but some of the underlying fundamentals are elaborated in this study. A list of acronyms used is given in a footer at the start of this article. The value chain analysis in this study provides useful insight for corporate planners (upstream, midstream, and downstream), regulators, investors, analysts, and academic researchers interested in understanding and enhancing the performance of the natural gas business. A concise schedule for the US natural gas value system is given in      The associated revenues can be calculated from annually averaged throughput volumes for each consumer group, times annually averaged prices ( What is important is the insight that the past growth of total annual revenues in the US natural gas value chain is entirely driven by rising wellhead prices ( Trader revenues from options and futures on wholesale prices – while volatile – are accounted for in the volume times wholesale price based revenues as specified in this study. Some companies may incur trading losses, while others may win on trading. Such effects may significantly affect the cash flow position of individual companies, and may help to improve earnings on their physical gas flow operations. A simple hedge involves buying “futures” contracts to lock in prices. For gas exploration and development companies, hedges in effect guarantee the amount of revenue that companies will receive on a future production, thus giving them some financial stability. Two current proposed US bills (‘ The total US natural gas consumption volume has remained relatively flat over the past decade ( Although the 2nd gas price hike did not result in a consumption decline, significant shifts have occurred over the past decade in the gas consumption volumes between US end-consumer groups. The retail prices for natural gas end-users traditionally differ for the following main groups:     Between 1998 and 2009, industrial consumption of natural gas declined from 41% to 29% of the total US gas consumption ( The individual retail price development for the four major US consumer groups over the study period (1998–2009) is graphed in  This study introduces the Weighted Average Cost of Retail Gas (WACORG) as a means to concisely monitor the overall price development in the US retail segment. The definition of WACORG is as follows: Vehicle fuel consumption can easily be included in the WACORG, but is negligibly small (see The efficiency of the overall value chain system for natural gas in passing price adjustments on to each adjacent segment follows from a plot of WACORG and wellhead prices ( A major new insight from the value chain analysis portrayed in While FERC regulation of gas transmission tariffs and public utility commission regulation for LDC tariffs meant to avoid excessive price inflation in the mid and downstream segments servicing a captive consumer market, such regulations also provide a stable floor for returns on investment in gas transmission and LDCs. Price regulation ensures that utility companies have a rate-making mechanism that facilitates recovery of most of their costs plus a fair return on investments. US energy utilities may bill the cost of their distribution and metering services, but the commodity price itself is billed at actual wholesale price and any rebates must be passed on in natural gas retail prices ( The introduction of Weighted Average Cost of Retail Gas (WACORG) visualizes the price effect of the downstream segment on the upstream wellhead prices. In the liquid US natural gas market, wellhead price, and WACORG differed only 2.55 Unlike the price regulation for mid and downstream energy utility companies, the US upstream energy segment has been deregulated in 1989 ( The analysis in this study reveals which end-consumers have benefited most from depressed wellhead prices in the short-term. The historic spread of retail prices for the four end consumer groups relative to the 12 year annually averaged WACORG is graphed in India was first in setting a price-floor for natural gas. The Administered Price Mechanism (APM) indexes the gas price to international price of oil products and ensures a handsome 12% post tax profit for gas operators ( Price-floor regulation was barred in the US until a 2007 landmark ruling by the US Supreme Court removed the 96 year old ban on price floors. Consequently, it is no longer automatically unlawful for producers and manufacturers to agree on setting a minimum retail price for their goods. Consumers' demand for an item may vary seasonally or conjecturally, but for reasons of economies of scale and focus manufactures may find it necessary to continuously produce. Distributors then add value by holding inventory until demand increases. There is a marked difference between vertical and horizontal price floors ( Horizontal price floors, where distributors collaborate and set a minimum price remain illegal according to US law. A gas wellhead price-floor should leave sufficient room for competition. In fact, setting floor prices for US energy supply has been considered before, and in some cases been adopted. For example, a price-floor was in place for 6 years between 2002 and 2007 in The idea of the adoption of a wellhead price-floor for unconventional natural gas has been briefly outlined in a concise policy paper ( A price-floor for natural gas production could be incorporated in the downstream retail rate-making mechanism. The impact on consumer prices resulting from a wellhead price-floor of $8/Mcf can be easily calculated using WACORG spreads and the 3 The powerful implications of WACORG as an indicator for decision makers for strategic planning of gas consumption and prices can be further considered as follows. Taking Growing concerns about the sustainability of the US natural gas business model ( Proprietary analyst reports consistently confirm the weak cash flow results that prevailed over most of the past decade for a significant number of US unconventional natural gas companies. For example, 24 of the 45 leading US gas operators had CAPEX/cash flow ratios larger than 1 in Q1 of 2010 ( The free cash flow of US gas companies is under further pressure from the imposition of severance taxes on unconventional gas plays. For example, the Marcellus shale development is estimated to result in 30% lower gas drilling between 2009 and 2020 as a result of the introduction of new taxes in Pennsylvania that address the State's concerns about future wealth loss due to environmental impact ( A recent cash flow analysis based on 5-year averages (2004–2008) showed that even prior to the Great Recession, unconventional operators commonly could not fund capital expenditures (CAPEX) for end-of-life-cycle replacement from the free cash flow of their short life-cycle wells ( The break-even price is not met by many unconventional gas producers, because volatile gas prices continue to move at the lower end of the energy elasticity price spectrum ( A third price hike epoch is now needed quickly to provide a sustainable price-floor for wellhead prices that must pay for unconventional gas production. Such a wellhead price-floor is needed because wellhead prices have not risen enough, not even in the 2nd price hike ( Removing investor's doubts about break-even cost and liquidity of unconventional gas companies is crucial for sustaining the US success in converting technically recoverable unconventional resources to economically recoverable resources. Investors play a crucial role in financing unconventional natural gas projects, but weaker energy prices and tighter credit contributes to reluctance among investors to invest in hydrocarbons at large. Prudent investors typically look for capital gains, profit growth from high return on assets, and increased net free cash flow yield payable as dividends or share buy backs. The unconventional gas business has seen higher than average returns in the past, but recent multiples have not outperformed the market ( One effect to be considered in connection with fixing a US gas floor price is that it may lead to excess production. Could such a price-floor fuel gas oversupply? Should the excess gas be sold on the world market? Would the excess US gas production put gas extraction in other countries at risk? This dynamic aspect of price-floor regulation should be examined in the broader strategic context. Wellhead price-floor regulation is recommended here as a means to underpin security of US natural gas supply. Introducing wellhead price-floor would mean a new gas policy and requires new legislation. But wellhead price-floor regulation can easily be included in retail price-making mechanisms using WACORG to determine what rate pays for the utility provider, plus the transmission segment, while ensuring a wellhead price-floor at the same time. Instead of capping wellhead prices as was the case in the Phillips decision of 1954, the introduction of a minimum commodity price in the retail rate-making mechanism would ensure upstream break-even prices for natural gas operators. The Wellhead Decontrol Act was useful when introduced in 1989, but market conditions have changed and security of supply may mandate the introduction of wellhead price-floor regulation. A quantitative basis is provided in this study to substantiate what cost coverage is needed to ensure break-even wellhead prices for unconventional natural gas operations. The adoption of such a system is fair as gas consumers will then foot the bill for the full value chain and not taxpayers, as was the case when tax breaks were given to unconventional gas producers. Investors in the upstream gas companies will still be subject to risks and rewards associated with outperforming the market in the energy peer group. And if markets function efficient, the wellhead price-floor should come down over time, as companies learn to bring down break-even cost. They will have an incentive to do so, because natural; gas producers want to increase their profit margins to satisfy shareholders—even when price-floor regulation guarantees break-even in principle. Some companies will be in basins that have lower gathering costs and may consistently benefit from a differential between their break-even cost and that of others. But remember, a wellhead price-floor gives no monetary presents to any party, but only sets a minimum price for the commodity while still leaving room for efficient companies to increase profit margins over competitors. A 2005 testimony for the US Senate Committee on Energy prepared by Lawrence Berkeley Natural Laboratory ( In times where government needs to be prudent about balancing fiscal budgets to avoid sovereign default, it is not sustainable to subsidize renewables in favor of premature life-cycle decline of natural gas resources. US taxpayers have funded subsidies to renewables, which has put downward pressure on gas prices and arguably exacerbated the losses of the unconventional gas industry. The short-term gas rebate for consumers (