To synthesize small and evenly distributed fillers in polymer matrix is important to fulfill the advantage of nanocomposite membranes in overcoming the tradeoff effect between permeability and selectivity. In this study, nanocomposite membranes were prepared by synthesizing calcium oxalate (CaOx) nanoparticles in confined space of the layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembled polymer network through bio-inspired mineralization. The active layer was tightly coated on hydrolyzed polyacrylonitrile substrate with thickness less than 200 nm. The CaOx nanoparticles were uniformly distributed in the polymer matrix with diameter less than 50 nm. The hydrophilicity of the nanocomposite membranes was decreased due to the incorporation of CaOx nanoparticles. And the free volume properties were tuned by creating new polymer/filler interface. At precursor concentration of 1 mM, the permeation flux increased by 14% to 958 g/(m2h), the separation factor increased by 2.36 times to 1562 compared to the control membrane, and the membrane showed good operating stability.Membrane technology has drawn increasing attention for separation and purification processes such as gas separation Space-confined synthesis is an effective approach to in situ generation of solid particles with small size and controlled distribution in confined space. In recent years, sol-gel method Calcium oxalate (CaOx) is the major components of kidney stone arising from the high oxalic acid content Polyacrylonitrile (PAN) porous ultrafiltration membranes with molecular weight cut-off of 100 000 were obtained from Shanghai MegaVision Membrane Engineering and Technology Co. Ltd. Polyethyleneimine (PEI, Mw 750 000 Da, 50 wt% aqueous solution) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Polyacrylic acid (PAA, Mw ~450 000 Da) was bought from Aladdin Industrial Corporation. Calcium chloride hexahydrate (CaCl PAN membranes were treated with 2 M NaOH aqueous solution at 60 °C for 30 min, and washed thoroughly. The resultant membranes were denoted as HPAN membranes and used as substrates afterwards. PEI and CaCl The surface and cross-sectional morphology of membranes were characterized by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Quanta FEG 450 for the surface morphology and Nanosem 430 for the cross-sectional morphology). The morphology of the in situ synthesized nanoparticles was shown by transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEM-2100F). Water contact angles were measured by JCL2000D Contact Angle Meter using at least 5 different points for one example. The chemical structure of membranes was characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectra (FT-IR, BRUKER Vertex 70) with a resolution ratio of 2 cm The separation performance of the membranes was evaluated using pervaporation ethanol dehydration as a model system. The experiment device was described in our previous literature The permeance ( Although the detailed formation mechanism of CaOx nanoparticles was not so clear, the supersaturation plays a dominant role in the nucleation and precipitation process The cross-sectional morphology of membranes was shown in The surface morphology of the nanocomposite membranes was characterized by SEM. As shown in The chemical structure of membranes was detected by FTIR ( Water contact angles were used to characterize the hydrophilicity of membranes. As shown in The slow positron beam Doppler broadening spectrum was used to detect the free volume property of the membranes, and the results were shown in The pervaporation performance of (PEI/PAA-CaOx( The separation performance of the LbL nanocomposite membrane was evaluated at different temperatures in 90 wt% ethanol aqueous solution. As shown in The separation performance of the LbL nanocomposite membrane was evaluated in different ethanol aqueous solution at 349 K. As shown in The long-term stability of (PEI/PAA-CaOx(1)) The separation performance of the membrane was compared with the current state-of-the-art related membranes including membranes in commerce, patent and literature. As shown in In this study, nanocomposite membranes were fabricated through LbL self-assembly for ultrathin membranes and bio-inspired mineralization for versatile nanofillers. Specifically, PEI and PAA were alternatively spin-coated on HPAN substrate, and CaOx was in situ synthesized in the confined space of the polymer matrix by the bio-inspired mineralization process. The membrane active layer was tightly coated on HPAN substrate with thickness less than 200 nm. The CaOx nanoparticles were uniformly distributed in the polymer matrix with diameter less than 50 nm. The alternate variation of water contact angles demonstrated the LbL self-assembly process. The incorporation of CaOx nanoparticles tuned the free volume and endowed the membrane with new polymer/filler interface, thus strengthening the diffusion process. At precursor concentration of 1 mM, the permeation flux increased by 14% to 958 g/(m 