In order to obtain magnetic nanorods (MNRs) with the neuro-cytocompatibility, silk-fibroin (SF)-coated Zn-ferrite NRs are successfully prepared via a mineralization process, and their saturation magnetization is 32emug−
                     1. After the mineralization of 2d and 4d in the mixed solution of the concentrations of 15w/w% SF and 0.01M HCl, the lengths of NRs are ∼220nm and ∼2μm, respectively. Cell tests of NRs with 220nm length showed that the as-prepared Zn-ferrite NRs hardly produced toxicity on Escherichia 
                     coli, Staphylococcus 
                     aureus, L929, and PC12 cells. The results of the outgrown neurites from PC12 cells indicated that the neurite length and the number of neurites were not significantly decreased at the low concentrations of SF-coated NRs (less than 0.25mgmL−
                     1) in 1–5d culture time. TEM images of cell ultrathin sections indicated that, although Zn-ferrite NRs were split in the cytosol for 5d at the NR concentrations of 0.125mgmL−
                     1, some integrated mitochondria in a neurite suggested that SF-coated NRs inside cells did not influence the extension activity of neurites. Based on the good neuro-cytocompatibility and magnetic property of Zn-ferrite NRs, their potential applications in safe cell manipulation and axon guidance can be envisioned.In recent ten years, the applications of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) in the field of biomedicine have been studied based on their interesting and promising bio-magnetic property In general, MNPs are the spherical shape, usually including a magnetic core and a functionalized sheath that allows the conjugation of bioactive ligands to realize desired biomedical applications Various approaches, such as the hard template method More recently, dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA)- or antibody-coated Zn-ferrite MNPs have been applied in cell marker PC12 cell, a widely used cell line as the paradigm for neurobiological and neurochemical studies, could readily and rapidly respond to nerve growth factor (NGF), leading to the neurite-like outgrowth  In a typical experiment, SF peptides (1.6 The morphology and crystalline structures of Zn-ferrite were analyzed with high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM-2100, Japan) and accompanying selected area electron diffraction (SAED), scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-5900LV, Japan), Transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL-200, Japan), and an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, X’Pert, Holland) with Cu Kα radiation, respectively. The ferromagnetic behaviors of the samples at room temperature were investigated by vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, Lake shore-7400, USA). Their bacteria compatibility was analyzed through co-culture of The MTT assay was carried out to investigate the toxicity of Zn-ferrite NRs on PC12 cells, which were cultured with high glucose Dulbecco’s DMEM containing 5% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10% (v/v) heat-inactivated horse serum, 1% (v/v) penicillin–streptomycin, and 2.5 Zn-ferrite NRs should be sterilized and completely dispersed in culture medium with different concentrations (from 0.063 to 0.5 First, cells were cultured as described above culture conditions. Then, cultured cells were washed three times with phosphate buffer saline (PBS). Later, they were centrifuged at 1500 Results were expressed as means  When the (Fe/Zn) ratio of two precursors is 2:1, a typical Zn-ferrite NR contains Fe XRD pattern of the prepared samples ( We have performed a series of experiments, finding that such NRs could be mineralized in the mixed solution of SF peptides and HCl, and the pH value of the mineralization solution was adjusted to 7.2 by HCl. When there were only SF peptides in the mineralization solution (without HCl), only NPs could be obtained (Fig. S4b). However, more and more NRs appeared with the increase in HCl concentration (from 0.002 to 0.01  The results of bacteria tests show that mineralized Zn-ferrite NRs with different concentrations (15–60 In order to assess the effect of NR and NP on PC12 cell, MTT assay was performed to determine the surviving fraction in different concentration of Zn-ferrite. In In order to evaluate the effects of NRs on the neurite outgrowth, the mean length and the number of the neurites outgrown from PC12 cells were calculated according to the method reported by Pasanic et al.  Although Zn-ferrite NPs were toxic to MCF7 (human breast adenocarcinoma cell line) and human neuroblastoma cells In this case, cytocompatible and magnetic Zn-ferrite NRs with SF peptides have been successfully prepared in SF peptide solution via a simple one-step bio-mineralization route. The as-prepared Zn-ferrite NRs with aspect ratio of more than 30 could be fabricated by the assembly of primary spinel NPs in SF tube-like structure under the optimal conditions, including 0.01 This work has been supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 51273122, 51173120 and 51202151). The supports of Key Technologies Research and Development Program of Sichuan Province (2008SZ0021 and 2010SZ0088) and the Research Fund for the Distinguished Young Scholars of Sichuan University (2011SCU04B21) are also acknowledged with gratitude. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 