Pulsed neutron diffraction under in situ mechanical loading was used to monitor microstrain evolution in individual phases of a polycrystalline γ/γ′ superalloy, CM 247 LC. The load partitioning and yielding of differently oriented grains and phases were evaluated. The critical resolved shear stresses of individual phases were obtained and are compared with dislocation models.Superalloys represent a remarkable achievement in the microengineering of nanoscale structures, since the strength and creep resistance of the coherent γ/γ At high temperatures, the constraint effect has a major influence on creep deformation. As indicated by Pollock and Argon The above deficiencies in the current knowledge base of high The material selected was a conventionally cast polycrystalline alloy CM 247 LC, provided by Rolls Royce Allison. The chemical composition was: 62.37Ni–13.3Al–0.82Ti–9.17Cr–10.1Co–0.26Mo–0.46Hf–0.91Ta–2.59W (at.%); C content was 780 wt. ppm. The alloy was selected based on its high A tension specimen was loaded in situ at room temperature in the neutron powder diffractometer (NPD) at the Lujan Neutron Science Center at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL). A pulsed neutron polychromatic diffraction source, obtained by spallation interactions of 800 MeV protons with a tungsten target, was used for the study. The NPD instrument utilizes time-of-flight (TOF) measurements, where a series of five He-detector banks at fixed positions are used to measure lattice spacing of ( The microstrains in the alloy are of two types. One is the strain that accumulates on the average in the differently oriented grains, usually referred to as the intergranular strain. Differences in the Schmid factors dictate when the different grains will yield, and this is usually manifested in a non-linearity in the stress versus elastic strain curve. The second microstrain (intragranular) corresponds to the individual γ and γ A single-peak fitting procedure, using GSAS In addition to the above approach, diffraction measurements from the extracted γ   Also shown in The strains in the [ The [1   This behavior is most likely a consequence of plasticity in other favorably oriented grains, which have a transverse axis along the [0 In order to interpret the measurements in terms of dislocation phenomenon, it is important the convert the elastic strains to stresses: Using this approach, the elastic constants for the γ Using Eq. With these qualifiers on It is useful to compare the CRSS of γ One reason for the discrepancy is the superposed effect of the γ phase. Using the results of Copley and Kear Focussing attention on the [1 We have demonstrated a method to probe local anisotropic elastic/plastic deformation of a high volume fraction γ/γ This work was conducted under UCDRD Contract 10012. We thank LANSCE, and in particular Dr. D. Brown, for the neutron diffraction experiments (# 20001113). Discussions with Drs. M. Bourke and T.M. Holden of LANL are gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Dr. J. Yohn of Rolls Royce Allison for kindly providing the cast CM247 LC test bars.