A novel organic-inorganic hybrid flame retardant consisting of a brucite core and a dodecylamine polyphosphate shell was synthesized by a facile nanoengineering route. The flammability characterization and synergistic flame retardant mechanism of the core/shell flame retardant (CFR) in ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) blends had been compared with EVA/physical mixture (PM, with the given proportion of brucite and dodecylamine polyphosphate as well as CFR) and EVA/brucite blends. With the same loading amount (40 wt%) of fillers in EVA, the peak heat release rate and smoke production rate of EVA/CFR blends were significantly reduced to 49% and 48% of that of EVA/PM blends, respectively. Meanwhile, the limiting oxygen index (LOI) was increased up to 32 (14.3% higher than that of EVA/PM blends) and the UL-94 test could achieve the V-0 rating. These remarkable properties were obtained just by nanoengineeing the core/shell structured brucite@polyphosphate@amine hybrid system, facilitating the formation of intact and compact residue with fence structure in process of polymer composite burning.Mineral fillers like brucite have been of increasing interest as halogen-free flame retardants for polymers because of its smoke suppression property, flame retardancy and good thermal stability which allows higher processing temperature In our previous works, we found that polyphosphate had flame retardant synergism with brucite Brucite powder (2500 mesh) was a commercial product from Fengcheng in China. The chemical components were given in The synthesis of CFR particles was illustrated in For comparison, the physical mixture (PM) was prepared by mixing brucite powder and dodecylamine polyphosphate with high-speed mixer at room temperature. The dodecylamine polyphosphate was obtained using a similar synthesis method of the core/shell structural composite particles in the absence of brucite powder. The weight content of brucite in the mixture was 71.4% as well as the CFR. The EVA/FR composites were prepared by melt mixing at 135 °C in an open mill for 15 min. After mixing, sheets with 4, 3 and 1 mm thickness were obtained by compression moulding under a pressure of 10 MPa at 150 °C for 10 min, respectively. The content of additives was varied from 0 to 60 wt%. The phase structural identification of the powder samples was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a Rigaku D/max 2400 X-ray diffractometer equipped with graphite monochromatized Cu Kα radiation ( The cryogenic fractured cross-sections of EVA/FR composites were obtained by liquid nitrogen (−196 °C) quenching. And part of them was etched with hydrochloric acid for 2 h to remove the surface inorganic particles. All the cryogenic fractured cross-sections were coated by gold and then the images were obtained on scanning electron microscope (SEM) (HITACHI, −4800 s) with an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. Limiting oxygen index (LOI, Standard Test Method for measuring the minimum oxygen concentration to support candle-like downward flame combustion) was detected using an OJN - 9307 type oxygen index apparatus (Shenzhen Test Machine Co., Ltd., Guangdong Province, China) on the specimens of 120 × 6.5 × 3 mm The UL-94 vertical burning tests were carried out using a M607B type instrument (Qingdao Shanfang Instrument Co., Ltd., Shandong Province, China) on the specimens of 127 × 12.7 × 3 mm The Cone Calorimeter (Fire Test Technology, UK) was used to test the fire behaviour of EVA/FR composites under 35 kW/m In order to easily get the SEM images of CONE combustion residues, we used alternatives that 3 × 3 × 4 mm FESEM and TEM images of pristine brucite and core/shell flame retardant (CFR) particles were shown in The interaction between core and shell could also be concluded from the wide angle XRD patterns, shown in In comparison with simply physical coating, we noticed that the acid–base reaction might occur between surface hydroxyl group of brucite and polyphosphoric acid (PPA). The FTIR spectra of the pristine brucite and CFR particles were shown in The cross-section SEM images obtained from the cryogenic EVA/flame retardants (FR) blends were shown in LOI and UL-94 data on different loading amount of FR particles in four kinds of formulations were listed in To elucidate the intrinsic reason for the enhancement of flame resistance by the core/shell structure, Cone Calorimeter test was examined The dynamic curves of total heat evolved (THE) and mass loss were shown in The most significance of brucite flame retardant is the absorption of smoke due to the formation of MgO layers in fire. The dynamic curves of smoke production rate (SPR) for the three EVA/FR blends were shown in The FESEM images of combustion residues from sample A1, A2 and A3 were shown in The detailed mechanism on the enhanced flame resistance of the core/shell structure was proposed as In summary, a novel microsize flame retardant consisting of a brucite core and a dodecylamine polyphosphate shell has been synthesized by a two-step nanoengineering method. The core and the shell were connected by chemical attachment which could maintain a stable fence structure in fire. The polymer composite filled with core/shell flame retardant (CFR) exhibited unique flame resistance. Based on the massive evidence, the mechanism for the enhanced flame resistance of the core/shell structure was proposed. These results suggested the core/shell structure might be a promising design for mineral flame retardant application as green flame retardant. G. L. Ning and other authors thank the  Supplementary data related to this article can be found at