For many years fractures of the distal radius were considered to be easily and successfully managed by plaster alone. Colles However society has changed in the last generation. As discussed in the previous article of this pair Added to the social changes are the projected demographic changes in the population, which indicate a rise in the older population. This is likely to have a significant effect on the workload of the orthopaedic surgeon particularly in relation to distal radial fractures. Most distal radial fractures occur in the age group over 45 years: this group is expected to increase by almost 500 There is some evidence that fractures of the distal radius are increasing in frequency as might be expected from the population data. A detailed analysis of fractures of the distal radius occurring in a 2-year period of the database has been performed. There were 1797 fractures during this period giving an annual incidence of 145 fractures per 100 Not surprisingly the majority of these fractures occur in the older population. The mean age was 59 years and women on average were over 20 years older than men. In females over the age of 40, fracture incidence rises by approximately 120 per 100 It is likely therefore that more demands will be placed on the orthopaedic services to achieve a good functional outcome for these patients. To this end training, clinical research and resources need to be tailored to the type of fractures which are likely to be encountered. Two-thirds of fractures of the distal radius are included in three AO types: A3.2, C2.1 and A2.1 i.e. the extra-articular and minimal articular fractures with metaphyseal comminution and the extra-articular fractures without comminution ( The wrist exists to subserve hand function which is critical to independence in the older patient. It has been stated in the past that malunion of the distal radius has no influence on hand function but this has been refuted recently as techniques have become available to prevent malunion. Residual dorsal angulation, radial shortening and carpal malalignment have all been shown to have a negative effect on function after distal radial fracture. Dorsal angulation of more than 10° has been shown to cause significant reductions in mass and specialised grip strength, range of movement and the ability to perform the normal activities of daily living more than 4 years after fracture. Solgaard also noted progressively poorer outcome with reducing length of the radial styloid as had a prospective study of 90 distal radial fractures 1 year previously. Possibly the strongest influence on function is carpal malalignment. This is defined as displacement of the capitate either dorsal or volar to the long axis of the radius. There is now a growing body of evidence that restoration of the normal anatomy leads to the highest likelihood that normal function will be regained after fracture of the distal radius. It follows therefore that in the fit independent elderly patient surgeons should aim to restore as near normal anatomy as possible to allow return of the ability to perform the normal activities of daily living. In the less fit low demand elderly patient restoration of alignment may be less important. Non-operative management of the distal radial fracture is achieved by plaster or brace and in the elderly is indicated for either stable fractures or unstable fractures in the low demand frail patient. Undisplaced stable fractures are well managed by a short time in a cast, splint or support bandage. In a randomised study of undisplaced distal radial fractures in patients over the age of 55 years patients treated with a crepe bandage and early mobilisation regained function more rapidly without increased pain compared to those treated in a cast for 5 weeks. The type of plaster should be a forearm cast. Despite theoretical advantages of immobilising the elbow for fractures of the distal radius Displaced fractures should be treated by manipulation and a cast in the fit elderly patient if there is a reasonable chance of maintaining the reduced position. Regional anaesthesia is preferable; haematoma blocks do not achieve consistent pain relief which is reflected in the quality of reduction. Non-operative management is indicated also in the frail elderly patient who is not capable of independent living even though their fracture is unstable. In the unstable fracture surgical treatment aims to achieve improved outcome mainly for activities requiring strength. If the patient does not live independently and therefore requires less strength in the hand then non-operative treatment will suffice. There has been recent evidence to suggest that even manipulation of a displaced fracture is unnecessary in the dependent patient. In a series of 60 such patients with distal radial fractures reduction was impossible to maintain in 53 cases. None was considered suitable for further surgery and therefore malunited. It was concluded that primary reduction was ineffective and should only be performed in this group of patients for a specific indication such as median nerve symptoms. Complications of cast management are often ignored in the literature but are as frequent as operative complications. Surgical treatment is necessary to maintain anatomical alignment in the unstable distal radial fracture. Rereduction and plaster immobilisation in the unstable distal radial fracture is unsuccessful especially in the older patient. Instability of the distal radius can be predicted with reasonable certainty. In a series of over 3000 patients with distal radial fractures multiple logistic regression was used to determine independently significant variables to predict instability. The most significant are increasing age and the presence of metaphyseal comminution with radiological measurements at presentation being less strongly significant. The same technique has been used to construct equations which give a percentage likelihood of instability. There are a number of different types of operative treatment for the unstable fracture of the distal radius in the elderly patient. External fixation of the distal radius is one of the most commonly used methods of treatment for the unstable fracture. Two types are available — bridging (  The technique has the advantage of being simple. The type of fixator used should be one which is light and versatile. Low weight fixators are particularly important for the older patient to allow as much independence as possible during the period of fixation. Although there is laboratory work which shows different mechanical characteristics of wrist external fixators There are conflicting opinions about the effectiveness of bridging external fixation employing ligamentotaxis and the results are difficult to interpret because of the heterogeneity of the fractures and outcome measures studies. Anatomical results are generally disappointing with persistent residual dorsal angulation albeit usually less than 10°. Despite these disappointing results bridging external fixation still achieves better anatomical results than cast management in randomised studies. However in the older patient the anatomical results achieved by bridging external fixation alone are not sufficient to guarantee consistently improved functional results. Stiffness is not a long-term problem after bridging external fixation with a majority of patients regaining over 80% of their normal range Dynamic bridging external fixators have achieved some popularity over recent years. They are designed with a moving part to allow the wrist to mobilise at some stage during the period the fixator is in place in the hope that this would improve the outcome. This has not however proven to be the case and the outcome with this method of fixation is no different from static bridging external fixation.  This technique is particularly suitable for the older patient as the hand is unrestrained during the period of fixation thus allowing increased use. Osteopenia is not a contraindication provided care is taken at the time of reduction of the fracture to avoid pin pullout. Non-bridging external fixation is indicated in unstable distal radial fractures which are either extra-articular or have an undisplaced articular extension and in which the distal fragment has more than 1 The main complication of external fixation is pin track infection which is common to both types of fixation. Rates of infection vary widely in the published literature mainly because of differences in definition but are mainly minor infections which do not alter the final outcome. Major infection, which is usually defined as requiring further surgery or early removal of the fixator, is fortunately unusual. Prevention is by regular pin track care and open pin placement ensuring that there is no tension on the skin edges. Internal fixation of the distal radius is used widely in the older patient mostly for the volar displaced fracture and for displaced intraarticular fractures. Both of these usually require open reduction although in combination with imaging techniques or arthroscopy articular fractures can sometimes be reduced by closed means. Closed reduction and stabilisation of extra-articular unstable fractures can be performed using multiple K wiring techniques, a technique particularly popular in continental Europe. Plating is most often employed for volar displaced fractures although dorsal plates can be used for dorsally displaced injury.  Until recently there were few reports on outcome after volar plating of the distal radius. In 1994 Keating and his co-authors Dorsal plating has enjoyed sporadic popularity in the management of acute dorsally displaced distal radial fractures although this technique is more commonly used for the treatment of distal radial malunions. Some of the disadvantages of dorsal plating may be overcome by the use of volar plating for dorsally displaced distal radial fractures which has recently been described.  Functional results are also poorly reported. Stoffelen and Broos  Recent developments of bone mineral substitutes which are injectable, non-exothermic and harden rapidly in situ to support compromised cancellous bone The numbers of distal radial fractures in the older population are projected to increase rapidly over the next few decades. Social changes and improvements in the general health of the population dictate that treatment outcomes for these injuries should return the individual to as near normal function as possible. Non-bridging external fixation is recommended for the unstable Colles’ type of fracture. For the more complex or articular fracture a number of techniques are available and treatment should be tailored to the needs of the patient and the fracture type. Bone mineral substitutes may be of use in the older patient to augment fixation.