In this paper, the effect of sodium alginate on the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite and fluorite using sodium oleate as collector was investigated. Flotation results showed that sodium alginate could selectively depress the flotation of calcite and fluorite in pH range of 7–12 when it was added before sodium oleate. The selective depressant effect of sodium alginate was studied using zeta potential measurements, contact angle measurements and FTIR. The zeta potential measurements results showed that sodium alginate exhibited little influence on the surface charge of scheelite but had remarkable effect on that of calcite and fluorite. The results of contact angle measurements indicated that sodium alginate could produce selective, non-recoverable decrease in surface hydrophobicity of calcite and fluorite. The FTIR studies demonstrated the chemical absorption of sodium alginate on calcite and fluorite surface and no form of adsorption on scheelite surface.Scheelite (CaWO Depressants in scheelite flotation, which are used for decreasing the flotability of calcite and fluorite, mainly include some inorganic salts and organic colloid. Sodium silicate and its solution with inorganic salt ions as well as organic colloid, are often applied in scheelite flotation to depress calcite and fluorite ( Sodium alginate is a kind of natural polysaccharides. It can dissolve in aqueous solution and become hydrophilic colloid. Owing to its stable properties, unique pH sensitivity and biocompatibility, sodium alginate is usually used as food thickeners, emulsifiers, stabilizers, and controlled release agents of drugs ( In this paper, sodium alginate (NaAl) was introduced as a flotation modifier to selectively separate scheelite from calcite and fluorite using sodium oleate (NaOl) as collector. Micro-flotation tests on single mineral and mixed minerals were conducted to show the selective depressant effect of NaAl on calcite and fluorite. Zeta potential measurements, contact angle measurements and FTIR studies on minerals with and without treatment of NaAl and NaOl were performed to define the depressant effect mechanism. The samples of scheelite, calcite and fluorite were all obtained from Xintianling mine, Hunan, China. Hand-selected crystals of these minerals were crushed to −1 Sodium alginate (NaAl) used in this study was purchased from Zhengzhou Taber Trading Co. Ltd, Henan, China. Sodium oleate (NaOl) was bought from Tianjing Kermil Chemical Reagents Development Centre, Tianjin, China. The molecular structure of NaAl and NaOl are shown in Micro-flotation tests were conducted on a XFGC flotation machine with a 40-mL cell at 1800 For artificial mixed minerals, the mass ratio of scheelite and gangue mineral was 1:1.5 for binary mixture (0.8 Zeta potential measurements were carried out with a Coulter Delsa440sx Zeta analyzer instrument. For the measurements, 30 Advancing contact angle is commonly observed to be the most reproducible contact angle, and is approximated to the ideal Young contact angle for the purpose of surface characterization ( Single mineral crystals of scheelite, calcite and fluorite were used for the measurement. The crystals were embedded in resin and then were ground with diamond grinding disks for flat surface. After the grinding, the surface was further polished with 0.05 For the infrared studies, 0.5 Single mineral flotation tests were conducted using NaOl as collector and NaAl as depressant. The effects of reagent dosage and pulp pH on the flotation recoveries of scheelite, calcite and fluorite were studied and the results are shown in  The effect of NaAl dosage on the flotability of scheelite, calcite and fluorite is shown in  The aforementioned single mineral flotation results indicate that NaAl can act as an effective depressant of calcite and fluorite in scheelite flotation. Then flotation tests on the artificial mixed minerals, such as scheelite-calcite, scheelite-fluorite and scheelite-calcite-fluorite mixture, were conducted using NaAl as depressant at pH 9.0. The results are shown in The scheelite grade in all concentrates (>55%) was higher than that in the original mixture (40%), suggesting that NaAl remained its depressant effect on calcite and fluorite and therefore, improved the flotation selectivity in mixed mineral pulps. Meanwhile, considerable decrease in recovery was observed, indicating that scheelite was also partly depressed in the presence of calcite and fluorite. The worsened flotation of scheelite in mixed minerals may be attributed to the dissolution of gangue minerals, which can make the scheelite surface partial similar to that of calcite or fluorite in solutions. However, it is still worthy highlighting that NaAl can act as an effective modifier in scheelite flotation. Zeta potential measurements for scheelite, calcite and fluorite samples with and without pre-treatment of NaAl (10 For bare scheelite, calcite and fluorite, the increase of NaOl concentration produced similar changes in their zeta potential, i.e., scheelite decreased from −30.1 The advancing contact angle of the three calcium minerals was measured to reveal the changes in surface hydrophobicity of the three minerals after treated with NaAl and NaOl. The results are shown in The IR spectroscopy was performed to define the adsorption mechanism of NaAl on the surface of the three minerals. The IR spectrums of reagents and the three minerals conditioned in different reagents were measured and the results are shown in  IR spectrums of NaAl and calcite conditioned in different reagents are shown in  On the basis of the flotation results, zeta potential measurements, contact angle measurements and IR studies, the possible depressant effect of NaAl on calcite and fluorite can be concluded as shown in The depression ability of NaAl on calcite and fluorite derives from its chelating ability. Functional groups such as HO Sodium alginate exhibits selective depressant effect on calcite and fluorite in scheelite flotation. Using sodium alginate as depressant and sodium oleate as collector can realize the preferential flotation separation of scheelite from calcite and fluorite in pH range of 7–12. Through analyzing the zeta potential, contact angle and IR spectrum, it is concluded that sodium alginate chemically adsorbs on the surface of calcite and fluorite and hinders the adsorption of sodium oleate. Sodium alginate cannot adsorb on scheelite surface nor interfere with the chemical adsorption of sodium oleate on scheelite. This work was supported by the