Recent discoveries related to ores from Kestel Mine in the Taurus Mountains of Turkey show how prehistoric miners used the magnetic properties of the black iron oxide to accomplish the difficult separation of cassiterite (tin oxide) from low-grade cassiterite ores. Excavations at the site of Göltepe, dating to the third millenium BC, have yielded hematite ore nodules containing a few percent, or less, of cassiterite and a sequence of processed, ground, and separated minerals. Laboratory experiments showed that reduction at temperatures as low as 700–850°C converted hematite to the black magnetic oxide, which could be much more easily crushed than the hematite ore. On grinding and panning this material, the magnetic oxide clumped together effectively to yield almost complete separation of the cassiterite grains, a separation which, without automatic magnetic clumping, would be extremely difficult to accomplish due to the similar densities of cassiterite and magnetite minerals. The deliberate production of magnetic oxide may explain the shallow crucible bowl furnaces, the vast quantities of stone grinding tools, the large amount of residual magnetite at the site, and the fine particle sizes (which were necessary for the magnetic separation). These findings establish Kestel/Göltepe as a viable cassiterite (ore) production site.The source of tin for Early Bronze Age alloys, and particularly the 7–10% tin bronzes found in the Near East from 3000 BC, has long been debated by archaeologists First excavated in 1990, Göltepe was located 80 km north of the Mediterranean coastal city of Tarsus and 2 km from the Kestel Mine Kestel Mine was approximately 2 km northwest of Göltepe, located in a limestone rock body with much hematite mineralization both in the mine and nearby outcropping. It was developed by fire setting, i.e., building a fire against the rock face to be mined, then quenching, so that the expansion and contraction stresses fractured the ore making it easier to extract. Hematite veins can still be found in the mine with extensive hematite debris in the chambers. While the major tin ore deposits had been worked out, tin oxide could still be found in the hematite veins and veinlets in the limestone. The major minerals identified in the mine were calcite, quartz, hematite, and cassiterite. Two metallurgically significant ores were found in the Kestel samples: hematite (–Fe Specular hematite is the steel gray to black and opaque variety. It has a distinctive cherry-red streak when scratched across the surface of a piece of hard unglazed porcelain — a streak plate. Its luster is not metallic but rather dull. In a finely divided state, it is deep red in color, transparent, and well crystallized. Optical properties include high refractive indices and birefringence. Being nearly pure –Fe Red hematite is bright to dull red in reflected light. It is also opaque, except when in very thin section where it is transparent and, like the specular variety, deep red in color. It is chemically identical to specular hematite with similar optical and physical properties. Red ochre is red and earthy. The particles are microscopic with diameters ca. 1–5 μm. They are deep red and transparent in transmitted light. They occur as iron oxides in mixed hydration states principally as isotropic noncrystalline particles only partly crystallized as hematite. Quartz (SiO Cassiterite (SnO) is transparent and colorless while thin. As the thickness increases the color changes to orange red. It occurs as sharp, angular chips with jagged edges, and sometimes as microscopic tetragonal crystals. The density of cassiterite is 7.0 g/cm Visual and microscopical examination confirmed that the cassiterite frequently occurred in veins almost entirely enclosed by the hematite. Although cassiterite is a primary source of tin today, as well as in the past, its intimate crystal aggregation with the Kestel hematite is not common, indeed it has rarely been reported. Cassiterite filling voids in hematite deposits has not been observed at other tin source sites such as those in Cornwall (British Isles), Nigeria, Malaya, Saxony–Bohemia, Italy, Afghanistan, China, or Bolivia. Genth and Rath in 1887 The Kestel hematite was not the blood-red variety but rather the dark gray to black, semidull variety, most closely resembling specular hematite but lacking a true metallic luster. It was crystalline, opaque, and only became transparent and red in color when reduced to highly angular submicron particles by mechanical grinding. Each freshly fractured ore surface exhibited numerous, highly reflective, microscopic particles, in contrast to the diffuse, gray-black, hematite matrix. Individual crystal facets sparkled in a bright direct light source, e.g., sunlight, the reflections originating from cassiterite grains that were uniformly dispersed throughout the hematite. Although the individual crystals were very small, they could be detached using a sharpened tungsten needle and fine forceps. The cassiterite from Kestel Mine occurred most frequently as individual grains ranging in diameter from 10 to 200 μm. They were essentially pure single crystals of high refractive indices and birefringence and ranging in color from almost colorless to yellow or brown. They showed no pleochroism, i.e., no color change as a function of crystal and polarization orientation. They were anhedral and conchoidal with somewhat jagged, irregularly curved and striated surfaces. Kestel cassiterite had a density of 7.0 g/cm Cassiterite from the Kestel Mine was entrapped in the crystalline hematite and, in some cases, high-temperature hydrothermal granite pegmatite veins. Laboratory experiments showed that Kestel hematite was very hard and not easily fractured. However, a fresh break exposed a hematite surface with grains of shiny colorless, yellow, and brown particles, many visible to the unaided eye. They were readily recognized against the dull gray background, and occurred heterogeneously throughout the hematite like “raisins in a muffin.” Individual particles of each color were removed for analyses using polarized light microscopy (PLM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. They were identified as nearly pure nonpleochroic cassiterite grains. Attached to the surfaces of many cassiterite particles were well-formed, red, transparent hematite crystals in addition to red ochre. Although numerous, the cassiterite crystals comprised only a few percent, by weight, of the hematite–cassiterite ore. Many thousands of stone tools for ore crushing were excavated from Göltepe. All were hand tools, showing indications of wear. Some were mortars and pestles, others had typical flat faces with a characteristic dimple in the middle, resulting from the grinding action. Large stone platforms, “mortar slabs,” with numerous concavities were found. Over 25,000 such items, representing the largest number of stone tools for ore crushing in antiquity, were found. The operation at Göltepe was clearly not just one of crushing but also of grinding to fine powders. Particle size distributions, reported by Earl and Ozbal Evidence of both habitation and work was found in the Göltepe shelters, or “pit houses.” These pit houses contained remains of fireplaces, hearths, vessels including cups (some filled with finely ground colored powders), lumps of Kestel hematite with cassiterite ore, variously colored powders strewn and piled on the pit house floors, ground-stone tools, and numerous shards from shallow clay vessels or “crucibles” and lids. Many vessels showed signs of pyrometallurgical use. SEM and secondary ion mass spectrometry analyses by Adriaens et al. According to Yener and Vandiver Hematite is stable at red heat, but decomposes to magnetite (Fe Laboratory reductions of Kestel hematite produced magnetite at temperatures in the range 700–900°C. Ore samples were placed in graphite crucibles: (1) open crucible, (2) covered with a carbon lid, and (3) covered with charcoal. After several hours, only the open crucible contained unaltered hematite. The two covered crucibles contained black, opaque, magnetic oxides with very little unaltered hematite. The cassiterite was unaffected at these temperatures and no metallic iron was produced. Once reduced to magnetite, the ore could be easily comminuted by grinding, a task that was extremely arduous prior to the “reducing roast.” Panning methods have been used throughout history to effect particle separation. Modern-day soil analyses routinely use a high-density liquid such as methylene iodide (density of 3.3 g/cm Panning involves placing earth, gravel, and ores in a dished container, adding water and swirling the pan in a circular motion. Lighter particles move more easily away from the pan center and are spilled over the edge leaving a concentration of the heavier particles in the pan center — as in “panning for gold.” In this research, a concentration of the Kestel minerals hematite, magnetite, and cassiterite would be expected. The unique aspect of this research is the discovery of the method used to separate the extremely fine cassiterite grains from the hard, dense, specular hematite Kestel ore. Normally, panning for gold or minerals involves few magnetic particles, yet nearly all the powders from Göltepe contained sizable magnetic fractions. As the Kestel hematite contained only trace quantities of naturally occurring magnetite, then the magnetic powders must have been deliberately produced as the by-product of a high-temperature “reducing roast” performed in the fireplaces and hearths of the pit houses. The importance of the magnetic particles became clear when the magnetite and the cassiterite grains were panned in water (density 1.0 g/cm The results of this research suggest that, even if richer veins of cassiterite ore were once mined, the prehistoric miners at Kestel/Göltepe recognized the presence of the very fine, shiny, brown, grains of cassiterite distributed throughout the dull gray hematite Kestel ore. Recovery of the cassiterite involved several stages. First, the hematite was given a “reducing roast” in the temperature range 700–850°C until the reaction was completed, i.e., the gray-red hematite (Fe This research was supported by Professor Aslihan Yener of the Oriental Institute, University of Chicago, who provided all the archaeological materials for the study, the McCrone Research Institute, and the Illinois Institute of Technology. The authors gratefully acknowledge their support.