Using molecular dynamics, nudged elastic band and modified analytic embedded atom methods, the diffusion behaviors of Pd adatom on stepped Pd(001) surface have been investigated. Lower than 975K, Pd adatom just hops along the perfect [110]-direction step. The diffusion dynamics equation is derived from the Arrhenius law between 875 and 975K, and the corresponding migration energy and prefactor are 0.76eV and 5.2×10−2
                     cm2/s respectively, which shows that they adhere to the step in case of adatom moving to the step. The adatom diffuses across the perfect step with an Ehrlich–Schwoebel barrier of 0.09eV by exchange mechanism. Our calculations show the kink at step can markedly decrease the static energy barrier across the step with a negative Ehrlich–Schwoebel barrier, and it contributes to form layer-by-layer growth model in the epitaxial experiment. Our calculations show that the kink can also markedly improve the adatom's mass transport of interlayer, contributing to the formation of the compact film. Lastly, a quantitative result at 300K shows that the kink affects tremendously the diffusion mobility of adatom near it, which indicates that the kink plays a key role in the formation of the compact and uniform film on Pd(001) surface in an epitaxial growth experiment.One of the challenges in recent studies of nanomaterials is the understanding of microscopic processes which control thin film growth, and this is not only a necessary task if we are to build materials of choice by design, but it is also a daunting task For atomic diffusion relevant to nucleation and early stage of thin film growth, a great many experiments based on field ion microscope (FIM), scanning tunneling microscope (STM), low energy electron microscopy (LEEM) and quasi-elastic helium atom scattering have been devoted to the determination of surface diffusion coefficients Multi-scale modeling which has become popular these days remains as yet a challenge. Nonetheless, the field is advancing fast. Based on macroscopic continuum mechanics the films are treated as elastic solids Palladium (Pd) is a rare metal, which has wide application in catalysis and hydrogen storage In this paper, the interactions among Pd atoms are described by the MAEAM potentials. The corresponding details and parameters can be found in Refs. Our systems which are shown in In the present work, the static energy barriers ( When a Pd adatom is placed at the step of slab, the adatom vibrates in fourfold equilibrium site because of the thermal fluctuations. Movement of the adatom away from the step at the low temperature range is very difficult because it requires breaking more bonding with surrounding atoms. Essentially, this is a process where a two-dimensional cluster containing (N A Pd adatom is placed at the step of slab as shown in To explore the most probable diffusion path of the adatom across the [110]-direction step on Pd(100) surface, a Pd adatom is placed in fourfold site on the upper terrace near step, and several MD simulations are performed in NVT ensemble in the temperature range from 750 to 1000 For the self-diffusion of the Pd dimer across the step, several MD simulations are also performed in the temperature range from 750 to 1100 In fact, there are plenty of kinks in a real surface, which occupy a very important position in TSK model. Differing from 2D terrace and 1D step, structurally the kink is zero dimension. So the diffusion behavior of adatom nearby a kink may be different from that on 2D terrace or along 1D step. To simplify our simulation, the slab containing only one kink has been build, so the interaction among kinks along the step is not considered, as shown in Based on our calculated results, further we discuss the homoepitaxial growth of film on Pd(001) surface. The self-diffusion parameters such as the migration energy, prefactor and static energy barrier about adatom and dimer at various surface structures are listed in As shown in In this paper, we have studied the diffusion behaviors of Pd adatom on stepped Pd(001) surface by MD method with the combination of NEB method and a MAEAM potential. MD simulations show that Pd adatom only diffuses along the [110]-direction step by hopping mechanism in the low temperature range. The migration energy (0.76 This work is financially supported by the