Intramedullary nailing (IMN) is a standard treatment for humeral, tibial and femoral shaft fractures. It is a minimally invasive procedure allowing fracture fixation without exposing the fracture site. Therefore, this procedure offers advantages compared to open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). Only few reports have been published describing the problem of fragment protrusion into the knee joint after femoral IMN. A 64-year-old woman sustained a subtrochanteric femur fracture (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Orthopaedic Trauma Association, AO/OTA 32 B1.1) after a quad bike accident. The patient was transferred to our clinic from an outward hospital by air ambulance without any operative treatment of the fracture. After secondary survey at our institution, vertebral fractures of TH1, 7 and 11 as well as L1–L4, a stable sacrum fracture and right peroneal nerve palsy were diagnosed. Due to an active pneumonia and high inflammatory markers, surgery of the femur was delayed and supracondylar traction with a 4.5-mm Steinmann pin was applied. After 2 The vertebral fractures were stable fractures and did not interfere with mobilisation, although the patient occasionally reported pain in the back. Control X-rays of the femoral fracture were taken on the 2nd and 12th postoperative day after mobilisation of the patient and before discharge. All control X-rays were interpreted as normal, but the knee joint and the distal nail end were not displayed in those postoperative X-rays. On the 21st postoperative day, the patient described pain spreading from the back down to her right knee. This pain was attributed to the pin site after supracondylar traction. The patient was finally transferred to a rehabilitation facility the next day. On the 28th postoperative day, the patient was readmitted to our hospital after complaining of persistent severe pain in the right knee. An immediately performed X-ray of the right knee showed a 5-cm cortical fragment at the distal nail end ( An arthroscopy was performed and the intra-articular part of the cortical fragment and a part of the medial meniscus were removed. The medial meniscus tear was a coincidental finding and was not attributed to the penetrating fragment. Postoperatively, the patient reported no more pain in the right knee joint and was transferred to the rehabilitation facility 2 A 23-year-old man sustained a diaphyseal fracture of the left tibia and fibula (AO/OTA: 42-B1.3) after a skiing accident. Initially, closed reduction and intramedullary nailing (T2™, Stryker Immediately postoperatively the patient complained of pain in the left ankle, which was attributed to common pain after the operation. After 10 Thereupon, the patient was admitted to our hospital where X-rays ( IMN is the standard treatment for many diaphyseal fractures since Küntscher introduced this technique in 1940. Other authors have described joint penetration after IMN of long-bone fractures. Rajappa and Kumar reported the problem of guide-wire penetration after IMN. We describe two cases of fragment penetration, which was the result of different problematic factors during the peri- and postoperative period. In both cases, the cortical fragment was displayed in the immediate preoperative radiographic examinations ( In the first case, diagnosis of the rare complication of fragment penetration was probably delayed by the presence of additional injuries as described above. Especially the lumbar vertebrae fractures and suspected residual pain from the traction pin site led to confusion about the origin of pain. After the patient was able to specify the pain, it was possible to verify the underlying cause of her pain by a CT scan. In our opinion, the diagnostic dilemma was caused by misinterpretation of peri- and postoperative X-rays on the one hand and by the fact that the knee was not displayed on follow-up films on the other hand. Retrospectively, an only minimally restricted ROM of the ankle joint caused delayed diagnosis, although the fragment penetrating into the talus was equivalent to an iatrogenic arthrodesis. The main reason for misdiagnosing this rare complication was that the ankle joint was not displayed on perioperative X-rays. The ankle joint was also not displayed after removal of the proximal locking screws and apparently not during the further postoperative period. Nail insertion and advancement into the medullar cavity must be performed under image intensifier control. Surgeons have to avoid any damage of adjacent joints, which need to be displayed on peri- and postoperative X-rays. Initial X-rays should be analysed carefully and CT scans taken in case of uncertain situations, especially if prolonged postoperative pain persists. None of the authors of this manuscript has declared any conflict of interest which may arise from being named as an author on the manuscript.