Air classification is a method used to classify feed material according to the shape, specific gravity and size of the particles and preferred where water interaction is avoided. Since it is widely used by many of the industries, this study contributes to the literature related with high efficiency air classification by considering the design and modelling aspects for cement industry. In this context, various types of high efficiency classifiers operated at cement grinding circuits were sampled at the same cement quality then mass balancing studies were carried out. After all, the variation of rotor size and air amount parameters with the capacity of the classification process was investigated. Moreover, a mathematical model for high efficiency air classifiers was developed by applying the efficiency curve approach. In contrast to previous studies, the sharpness parameter (α) was found to be dependent on the capacity of the separation process and the diameter of the classification chamber which made the model structure unique.Air classification is a process employed to control or adjust the final product fineness of the grinding circuit where water interaction with the material is avoided. This technology was developed early in the 19th century to meet the demand of cement industry where tube mills with high capacities were employed. High milling capacities and the need for fine particle classification had driven the technology. Up to now, various types of air classifiers have been developed to be used in different industries, i.e., pharmaceutical, food, pigment, coal, and cement. Air classifiers can be grouped as static classifiers and dynamic classifiers. Static classifiers have no moving parts and the target size is adjusted by changing magnitude and direction of the air flow. Vane-type The performance of an air classifier is evaluated by drawing the “actual efficiency curve” or “Tromp curve” that explains what portion of the material in the feed subjects to the underflow or overflow streams at a given size fraction Air classification process has attracted interests of researchers as it is widely used in dry processing, particularly in cement grinding area. Its selection and efficient operation are of crucial importance for the plants. Within the scope of the study, a methodology for selecting high efficiency separators was developed and then the modelling studies were performed by using the data obtained from cement grinding circuits. In this context, sampling campaigns around high efficiency separators were conducted initially. Operational parameters, i.e., feed tonnage, product tonnage and air flow rate, were correlated with the design of the rotor. The obtained results from the sampling campaigns were then used in modelling studies so as to develop a software that could be used in simulating closed circuit cement grinding operations accurately. In this context, the efficiency curve approach was applied and all the parameters in the equation were correlated with the operating conditions and design variables. The novelty of the model structure with respect to previous modelling studies is; The development of the correlations with the sharpness of separation parameter. This parameter was assumed as constant in the previous modelling works; however, it was found to have a correlation with the design and operating parameters of the classifier. In the following sections, the findings obtained are discussed in details with the literature related to modelling of air classifiers. In this study, several sampling campaigns were arranged around different brands of high efficiency air classifiers. All of the sampling studies were conducted at the same cement type (CEM I 42.5R) having the final product fineness (% retained on 45 Prior to performing a sampling survey around a classifier, steady state conditions were provided that is, minimum fluctuations were observed in power draws of the mill discharge elevator (that feeds the classifier), rotor and product conveying systems. In other words, what came into the grinding circuit came out from the final product stream equally. Simplified representation of a classifier with the sampled streams and control room trends is illustrated in The collected samples from sampling surveys were subjected to the size characterization studies. Sympatek Laser Sizer was used to determine the whole size distribution of the material starting from the top size, down to 1.8 The measured particle size distributions were then used to perform mass balancing studies in order to calculate the flow rates of each stream and to disperse errors occurred during sampling campaigns. For this purpose, JK-SimMet software was used and the accuracy of the results was assessed by plotting the measured cumulative passing percentages against the calculated values ( The selection of an air classifier for a given application is accomplished by sizing the separator body and choosing sufficient fan capacity that are actually functions of throughput required and fineness desired from the classification operation. Within the scope of this study, correlations were developed between the operational and design parameters of high efficiency classifiers. It should be emphasized that the presented correlations are valid within the product As given in The other important parameter is the amount of air to be used during classification operation. This study also proved that the air amount varied with the rotor area as well. In this study the influences of operating parameters on performance of air classifiers were discussed in order to estimate what performance data is obtained when an air classifier is selected for the specified applications. As indicated previously, the main parameters used in evaluating the performance of an air classifier are; the bypass amount and the cut size. Within this study it was found that the bypass obtained from the efficiency curves varied between 2% and 40% depending on the separator feed tonnage and the air amount. The cut size of the classification was another parameter considered in performance evaluation studies. As reported in the literature, rotor speed and air speed are the main parameters used in adjusting the fine stream product size of a high efficiency air classifier. In fact, these parameters mainly shift the efficiency curve and thus have an influence on the cut size. Within the study, air speed was calculated by dividing the air flow rate by the rotor cage area. There are number of different approaches in modelling of air classifiers. Within the scope of this study, efficiency curve approach was applied to develop a model structure for high efficiency air classifiers. This approach basically depends on developing the relations between the parameters in equation and the operational or design parameters. Up to now, a number of equations have been developed defining the efficiency curve : The actual efficiency to overflow : Fraction subjected to real classification; (100-bypass) : Parameter that controls the initial rise of the curve in fine sizes (fish-hook) : Parameter that preserves the definition of : Sharpness of separation : Size : Corrected cut size In this equation, some of the parameters are explained by drawing the corrected and reduced efficiency curves. Corrected or normalised curve methodology was developed to compare the efficiency curves of classifiers operated at different operating and design conditions So far, air classifiers have been mathematically modelled by various researchers In this study, the modelling studies were performed for Sepax® high efficiency classifiers processing CEM I 42.5R type cement ( The modelling works commenced with the model fitting studies. For this purpose, JK-SimMet software was used and efficiency curve parameters for Sepax® separators were back calculated. A typical agreement between the measured and the fitted efficiency curve is illustrated in The range of the calculated efficiency curve parameters for the classifiers having different chamber/rotor diameters is given in As reported in the literature, the bypass parameter is influenced by dust loading of the separator feed (DL). In this study, an inverse trend is observed between calculated Dust loading not only affects the bypass fraction but also changes the circulating load around the classifier at the same product fineness. Circulating load is calculated by dividing the flow rate of classifier reject stream by product stream. The trend illustrated in Corrected cut size ( where; : Air flow used in the classification process (m : Rotor speed of the classifier (m/s) : The amount of (− From the reduced efficiency curves illustrated in where; : Dust loading of classifier feed (kg/m : Classifier chamber diameter (m)  So far, the results of the mathematical modelling studies presenting correlations between working conditions, design variables and efficiency curve parameters (Eq. The trends developed in this study have also been obtained from the mechanistic approaches e.g. (CFD, DEM, LPT etc.) used in modelling of air classifiers whether it is dynamic or static. These techniques are applied to calculate the flow fields and particle trajectories in the unit. Karunakumari et al. Within the context of the study, the performance, selection and modelling of the high efficiency air classifiers were overviewed depending directly on collected industrial data from cement industry. The studies showed that; Performance of a high efficiency classifier was influenced by feed dust loading, rotor speed and air flow. These parameters had an influence on bypass and cut size parameters. Design parameters of high efficiency classifiers, e.g., rotor diameter/area, air flow, could be correlated with the feed/product flow rates. Therefore a classifier with the required capacity could be selected with regards to rotor area and fan capacity depending on the target size. Within the study high efficiency classifiers were mathematically modelled with the efficiency curve approach. The novelty of the model structure developed is the use of the variable reduced efficiency curve approach since the sharpness parameter was found to be changing with the separator feed dust load and separation chamber diameter. It is the first application of changing sharpness parameter in modelling of air classifiers that makes the model structure advantageous over the previous studies. As a result of the modelling works, all of the efficiency curve parameters (Eq. : Classifier chamber diameter (m) : Dust loading of classifier feed (kg/m : Air flow used in the classification process (m : Rotor speed of the classifier (m/s) : The amount of (− Developed correlations can be integrated into Whiten's efficiency curve equation (Eq. The selection methodology and modelling approaches developed in this study can be used for the other types of high efficiency air classifiers as well, since the classification mechanisms and operating principles are quite similar to each other.