The recovery of valuable base metals from mining rejects presents an economical alternative to conventional hydrometallurgical processes. The reject of interest investigated in the present work is a nickeliferous, upgraded pyrrhotite tailings produced by Vale Base Metals in the Sudbury Basin of Ontario. A QEMSCAN™ analysis of the tailings showed a total Ni content of 1wt%, with 59% of the total Ni deported to pyrrhotite and 40% associated with pentlandite. The initial part of this study involved the development of a selective dissolution protocol to quantify the differential dissolution extents of the two Ni-bearing minerals. Application of this protocol to the pyrrhotite tailings sample showed that an acidity of 15wt% HCl, and a temperature of 80°C was adequate to selectively dissolve 96% of pyrrhotite from the tailings. Subsequently, an anoxic acidic leach of the tailings at pH1.5, and at 5% (w/v) solids loading showed minimal dissolution of Fe and Ni from pentlandite in tests with and without pH control. The extent of Ni dissolution was next evaluated as a function of pH during an oxic acid leach. The testing protocol involved leaching the tailings under two pH regimes: fixed and uncontrolled pH. The results showed that operation at a fixed pH increases the extent of Ni dissolution due to the higher concentration of the oxidant Fe(III) in solution. Finally, an oxic ferric leach showed that the terminal dissolution extents of pyrrhotite and pentlandite were comparable at 46% total Ni extraction.With stricter environmental regulations necessitating investment in emissions reduction technology, the mining industry is moving towards more cost-effective and environmentally friendly methods of extracting metals from minerals. The microbial-mediated recovery of valuable base metals from mining rejects presents an economical alternative to conventional hydrometallurgical processes ( Previous estimations have shown that a conservative estimate would assign Sudbury with 50–100 Pyrrhotite is known to occur naturally in two forms: monoclinic (Fe  On the other hand, The initial part of the study is focused on the mineralogical characterization of the tailings sample using QEMSCAN™ methodology. Next, a testing protocol was developed to establish conditions of acidity, temperature, and agitation speed to selectively dissolve pyrrhotite from the tailings, without dissolving pentlandite. The resistance of pentlandite to acidic dissolution was determined by quantifying the extent of Ni dissolution from a chalcopyrite-pentlandite mineral specimen that contained no pyrrhotite. Finally, the developed selective dissolution protocol was used to determine the terminal unreacted fractions of the two Ni-bearing minerals under two leaching regimes: an anoxic acidic leach, and an oxic ferric sulfate leach. Upgraded pyrrhotite tailings were used in this study, and were obtained from Vale's facilities in Sudbury, Ontario. The upgraded tailings were shipped to the University of Toronto in two 10 A chalcopyrite-pentlandite mineral specimen was obtained from Xstrata's strathcona mill in Sudbury, Ontario. The specimen was initially pulverized in a jaw crusher, and subsequently ground in a ball mill. Its chemical composition was determined using an aqua regia digestion protocol. Major sulfide and gangue phases were qualitatively determined using XRD, and then confirmed using an SEM-EDX analysis. The fraction of Ni assigned to pentlandite was calculated from the mass fraction of this phase, and the average elemental wt% of Ni in pentlandite. Samples were analyzed at the Department of Geology, University of Toronto using a BRUKER AXS D8 Advance Diffractometer. The accelerating voltage and the beam current were maintained at 40 About 200 The preparation of polished cross sections involved dispersing 1 An electron microprobe analysis (EMPA) was used to determine the Ni content in the Ni-bearing minerals, via a wavelength-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (WDS) using a Cameca SX-50 Microprobe Analyzer. The analysis was carried out at an accelerating voltage of 20 The concentrations of base metals in solution were determined using an Optima 7300 dual view ICP-OES. The tailings and leach residue samples were digested in aqua regia, and diluted to appropriate concentrations using 5% HNO The selective dissolution protocol shown in Experiments were designed to quantify the extent of Fe and Ni dissolution from the Ni-bearing minerals by acid-leaching in the absence of oxygen. Leach solutions at a pH The controlled pH experiment involved the use of two reactors to test the reproducibility, each with a working volume of 1 The experimental setup was similar to the anoxic dissolution test with pH control. Working volumes of 1 or 0.5 The results in A modal mineralogical analysis of the chalcopyrite-pentlandite mineral specimen showed that the sample contained 66.5   In order to independently establish the extent of Ni dissolution from pentlandite in a pyrrhotite-free system, the acidic dissolution of the chalcopyrite-pentlandite mineral specimen was evaluated. The testing protocol involved leaching 5 The results from the anoxic dissolution experiment without pH control are presented in The extraction profiles for Ca and Mg level off at 15%. It is clear that the non-oxidative acidic dissolution of pyrrhotite is the dominant factor contributing to an initial increase in pH. On the other hand, the extent of Ni dissolution in the experiment with pH control ( The anoxic acid dissolution experiments described previously showed the dissolution of Ni and Fe to be minimal. However, the presence of oxidants like O Two types of tests were conducted at an initial pH of 1.5, one without pH control and the other with pH control at 1.5. The extraction profiles for Ni, Al, Ca, Mg, together with the Fe speciation profiles are shown in The oxic acid leaching experiments with oxygen sparging showed that the extent of Ni dissolution was greater in the experiment with pH control at 1.5, as a result of maintaining a higher concentration of Fe(III) in solution. Since Fe(III) is an oxidant, it may be desirable to commence the leaching with an initial addition of Fe(III). Hence, to minimize any initial acidic dissolution and maximize the extent of oxidative dissolution of pyrrhotite, an oxic ferric leach of the tailings was carried out. The results presented in Overall mass balances and Ni deportment in the leach residues by applying the selective dissolution protocol described earlier are shown in A selective dissolution protocol has been developed to selectively dissolve pyrrhotite from an upgraded pyrrhotite tailings using an optimum acid strength of 15 The results showed that the fractions of Ni associated with pyrrhotite and pentlandite in the leach residue were comparable at 26% and 23%, respectively. This suggests that in the presence of Fe(III) and oxygen, pyrrhotite and pentlandite are dissolving essentially with similar rates. The developed selective dissolution protocol allows the measurement of Ni dissolution from the constituent mineral phases in a given leaching regime. Financial support of