The objective of this paper is to introduce the development of a dynamic blasthole expansion model, which is coupled to the discontinuous deformation analysis (DDA) code of Shi (Ph.D. Thesis, University of California at Berkely, Berkely, 1988). The developed model considers the effects of blast geometry (blasthole shape, angle, and location), the physical properties of the intact rock and existing discontinuities, the distribution and orientation of pre-existing discontinuities, and the blasthole pressure on the processes of burden breakage, fragment throw and muckpile formation. The newly modified DDA code (DDA_BLAST) describes the expansion of the blast chamber as a function of blast chamber volume and time. It is assumed in the code that the rock is already fragmented in situ due to the intersection of pre-existing discontinuities and the passage of stress wave. Hence, the model only considers the gas pressurization phase of the blasting process. Moreover, the proposed model for blasthole expansion assumes an adiabatic expansion of explosion products and variations in explosion pressure upon expansion of blast chamber is calculated from an equation of state. Furthermore, a rigid-body damping algorithm, based on energy approach, was developed and implemented to the original DDA code. Accordingly, the newly modified DDA_BLAST code was employed to simulate typical blasting problems in jointed media and delve into the mechanisms involved (in a macro scale) in the gas pressurization phase of the blasting process, burden breakage, and the effects of discontinuities on the process of burden breakage.The process of rock breakage by blasting is a complex phenomenon, which is controlled by many variables and parameters. Considering all these parameters in a single analysis is not possible at the present time especially when some of them are not clearly understood yet and the effect of others is difficult to quantify. In the past, empirical or semi-empirical techniques were used for blast design and prediction of rock fragmentation. These techniques were based on information obtained from a certain range of rock types and blasting conditions. The disadvantage of empirical techniques is that they cannot be generalized for various ground conditions and blast configurations. Small-scale experiments have been conducted by many researchers to delve into the mechanisms of the blasting process. In most of these experiments, the behavior of the materials used (e.g. Plexiglas, concrete, etc.) was much better characterized and known than that of the actual material of concern (rock). Despite the fact that these studies have provided very useful insights into the blasting process, in some cases they further confused the issue. Hence, with regard to the above discussion and ease of access to powerful computers, it would be beneficial to develop numerical models to further understand and predict the rock fragmentation process. Several codes have been developed to investigate the fundamental processes taking place in blasting. These codes typically model damage using a continuum approach or displacement of fragments using discrete element methods. Very few approaches have attempted to handle the complete blasting process from the detonation of the explosive to the formation of the muckpile and these have been limited by the complexity of the problem they can handle. Munjiza et al. The developed code considers the effects of blast geometry (blasthole shape, angle, and location), the physical properties of the intact rock and existing discontinuities, the distribution and orientation of pre-existing discontinuities, and the blasthole pressure on the processes of burden breakage, fragment throw and muckpile formation. Discontinuous Deformation Analysis (DDA) is a method that has been introduced by Shi The system of The roles of both stress wave action and expansion of detonation products in fragmentation has been acknowledged by many authors. Kutter and Fairhurst It is assumed in this paper that the process of rock breakage by blasting, at least in jointed rock masses, is most completely described by the theory described by Kutter and Fairhurst Modelling of the interactive behavior of the detonation products and the surrounding medium is a major requirement for rock blasting analysis. It is assumed here that the explosion gases behave ideally and no heat losses occur. The pressure of the detonation products depends on the expansion of the blast chamber and open cracks, which in turn is related to the properties of the surrounding material. Therefore, the interactive modelling of volume (expansion of gases) and pressure of the gases is essential in the simulation of the process. The instantaneous pressure of the explosion gases at any time during the expansion process is calculated using a simple power law equation of sate (EoS). It is recognized that better EoS exist to describe the The expansion model presented here is based on dynamic tracking of rock blocks, which are located around the blasthole. A simplified concept of the model is illustrated At step 1 the expansion has just occurred and gas pressure is uniformly applied to the block edges, which form the blasthole chamber. Then, these pressurized blocks push the surrounding blocks outward and energy is exchanged between all blocks. Accordingly, the blast chamber expands and obtains a new geometry with gas pressure acting on it ( The intersection of participating block edges, whose displacements are calculated in the previous step, defines the chamber shape to be pressurized at the current step. Edges exposed to gas pressure are in the form of line segments with known end-point coordinates from the search algorithm. The main blast chamber is formed from the edges of blocks that are closest to the chamber. The geometry and location of these blocks change significantly at every time step since they are exposed to high loads. At a given time interval some blocks may leave the chamber vicinity or some blocks may step into the chamber proximity. The model precisely tracks deformation and displacement of the blocks that surround the blast chamber. Once the main blast chamber is formed, if there is an opening connected to the chamber, its geometry is found from the surrounding blocks and is added to the main chamber for the current step calculations. After the identification of all new openings that are connected to the main chamber by a path, the gas force is applied to the associated blocks. Once the gas loads an open discontinuity, the discontinuity is going to be further opened and propagated. Consequently, adjacent discontinuities will be squeezed and closed. Depending on the number of blocks that surround the blasthole, any number of discontinuities in any direction (outward from the chamber) and up to any length (constrained by the whole geometry of the model) can be opened and propagated by the gases. A plain strain loading condition (the mechanical interaction of gas load and blocks surrounding the blast chamber) is assumed in the analysis. The 2D treatment of the problem is justified assuming a long bench that its length is considerably larger than its height and width. Accordingly, a planar slice of the bench (far from the bench end points) is considered for the analysis. Moreover, since in bench blasting operations a single blasthole is designed to dislodge a material volume of hole spacing× burden× bench height, a thickness equal to a given spacing is considered in calculating the mass of blocks to be removed by the blast. With regard to the blast geometry (blasthole length, burden, stemming) and the size of the blocks, the gas penetration domain can be input to the model by the user. With regard to the first-order displacement function used in the DDA method, the edges of blocks are always straight lines and no bending is allowed. As mentioned earlier, knowing the block edges, which are pressurized, the gas pressure is applied as a uniform load on blocks in the appropriate direction. It is obvious that the blast chamber does not expand uniformly in all directions. Depending on material properties and strength parameters of joints (friction angle, cohesion and tensile strength), the walls of the chamber dislodge differently. Assuming that the gas load is distributed on a straight block edge from point ( The derivatives of the above energy function are computed with respect to the deformation variables to minimize the induced potential energy (equilibrium state). This, in turn, represents the equilibrium state of block In a blocky rock mass subjected to loading (e.g. blasting), unwanted vibrations due to internal or transient external forces (e.g stress wave or gas force) are mainly controlled (damped) by the following energy consuming mechanisms: frictional sliding along block interfaces (Coulomb damping), plastic deformation occurring in the intact material and/or block interfaces upon contact or impact, internal block failure mechanisms such as microcrack nucleation, growth, and coalescence, frictional movements along grain boundaries, which convert mechanical energy into heat and sound. The employed version of the original DDA code is predominantly elastic and Coulomb damping is the only mechanism of energy dissipation. Therefore, some artificial damping is required to more realistically consume the extra kinetic (such as impact between blocks) energy of the system and bring it into an equilibrium state. Two types of damping, namely velocity-proportional and stiffness-proportional, are commonly used in geomechanical modelling. In the DDA method, block kinematics are satisfied completely and frictional movements along block interfaces consume most of the energy of the system. With regard to the solid contact mechanics of DDA, Coulomb damping is very well formulated and handled in the method. To account for other vibration controlling mechanisms mentioned earlier, an appropriate type of damping should be implemented into the DDA formulation. The mechanism of internal damping is not properly understood at the present time, in particular for geomaterials. It is, therefore, beyond the scope of this study and not considered in the proposed damping formulations. Stiffness-proportional damping is not suitable for implementation into the DDA formulations for reasons explained in the following. Stiffness-proportional damping accounts for inter-block vibrations that occur at contacts and its effect is to make the contact stiffer and as a result increase the contact force between blocks. In the DDA code, the stiffness of the contact spring is primarily selected large enough to prevent block penetrations and to ensure that contact displacement is very small in comparison to the individual block deformations. Furthermore, because of the matrix solution scheme used in the DDA method, use of highly stiff contact springs will lead to numerical errors In the proposed damping formulations, a pair of blocks with masses With regard to the energy method used in the DDA formulations, a similar approach can be used to implement the dashpot effect into global The objective of this verification example is to demonstrate the suitability of the developed damping formulations. A simple three-block system was considered for the analysis. The selected example represents, in a simplified manner, the actual vibration of elastic blocks due to applied blast load for the joint and bench geometry shown in Considering a short time interval, the explosion gases can be regarded to act as a constant force on the highlighted blocks of As shown in A typical bench blast geometry was considered for the analysis. The rock mass was intersected by two joint sets, which were oriented in the vertical and horizontal directions. The joint sets had a spacing of 0.5 The power law equation of state ( The model was run while maintaining a constant value for all input parameters with the exception of the burden size. DDA_BLAST simulation results for varying burden distances are presented in  When a small burden distance was employed, as shown in As the burden distance was increased, the expansion rate decreased and the rock mass behaved slightly differently. The gases tried to force a path to the atmosphere through the stemming column rather than opening a path in the burden. At a larger burden distance of 2.5 The simulated models of larger burden distances (3–4 Another interesting point that can be speculated from  In brief, the simulated examples clearly demonstrate the influence of the burden distance on the blasthole expansion, blasthole pressure history, mechanism of burden breakage, and throw. Using the DDA_BLAST code, for a given set of initial blasthole pressure, rock mass joint configuration, rock mass physical and mechanical properties, spacing distance, and stemming column, the optimum burden distance can be found by running the model for various scenarios and observing the results. The significance of geological features and their influence on blasting has been a major concern in blast design for many years. Nevertheless, due to the complexity of blasting problems in jointed media, the effects of geological features still remains poorly understood. Hence, accounting for important geological features such as joint orientation, continuity, and dipping direction will provide information on how the blast design can take advantage of pre-existing discontinuities. The aim of this section is to study and compare two typical classes of dipping layers with regard to bench blasting. These two classes are: layers dipping away from the bench face i.e. dipping into the wall, layers dipping toward the bench face. Once again, a typical bench blast geometry was considered for the analysis. The rock mass was intersected by two joint sets. The first joint set had a dip angle of 3° (with respect to horizontal) and a spacing of 0.35 The DDA_BLAST simulation results, showing the effects of dipping of geological layers on the blasting process, are presented in  In case (b), the only resistance of the burden against gas force was due to its mass and inertia, whereas in case (a) the dipping direction of the second joint set and its frictional resistance added another resisting force component against gas loading. The analysis also showed a different burden failure mechanism for each of the dipping scenarios. In case (a), the bottom portion of the burden was not pushed far due to the frictional resistance along the burden layers. Also high stress concentrations at the bottom portion of the burden (due to burden weight, its bending and toppling over the toe) increased the normal contact force and resulted in larger shear resistance at the bottom layers. Consequently, the main body of the burden was forced to land much quicker and to form a higher muckpile profile. Looking at the other scenario, i.e. layers dipping toward the bench face, ( Continuous elastic systems have known vibration modes. For such systems, the determination of natural frequency, critical damping, and damping factor are straightforward. In discontinuous systems, which involve individual block deformation, rotation, and slip along interfaces, the oscillatory modes of the system cannot be identified clearly. Each individual block, in a system of many, has its own frequency of vibration and it is very difficult to predict the controlling vibration frequency of the system. The damping parameters for discontinuous systems can only be determined by applying the dynamic load, in the absence of damping, and monitoring the vibrations of all individual blocks. Consequently, the lowest frequency of the system can be determined. Once the critical frequency is known, the damping factor could be set by trial and error. This method is not very feasible if the involved blocks are large in number, have various shapes, physical properties, and mechanical characteristics. The recommended procedure for determining the damping parameters is to run the model for a given geometry and material properties. In other words, calibration of the model for specific rock types, joint orientation, and structure geometry is the preferred method. One must be careful not to overdamp the low frequencies of the system since they usually control the solution procedure. According to Itasca The objective of the first example was to evaluate the effects of the burden distance on the pressure history experienced at the blasthole walls, the volume history of the blast chamber, the venting time of the explosion gases, and the throw of the burden material. The obtained results clearly showed the effects of the inertial resistance of the burden on the blasthole pressure, expansion of the blasthole, and venting of the explosion products. Additionally, the effects of the deformability of the intact blocks, surrounding the blasthole, as well as the deformability of the rock mass (assembly of all blocks) on the pressure and volume history of the blast chamber were demonstrated. Moreover, non-linear behavior of the jointed rock mass under applied gas load was demonstrated through the obtained blasthole volume versus time diagrams ( The aim of the second example was to examine the influences of the dipping of the geological layers on the blasting operations in jointed media. The following results, compatible with observations of other authors When the geological layers were dipping away from the bench face, less movement from the face occurred resulting in a higher muckpile profile, increased likelihood of toe problems was observed and, less backbreak occurred because the strata was dipping into the wall and had a higher stiffness with regard to the blast and gravity loading. When the geological layers were dipping toward the free face, more backbreak occurred, there was less likelihood of toe problems because the rock mass was loose and could be pulled off completely and, there was larger throw of the burden and as a result a flatter muckpile was formed.