The influence of dietary vitamin D3 (VD3) on survival, growth and morphogenesis during the larval development of European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) was evaluated until 45days post hatching. Diets contained 4% of the standard vitamin mix (VM) recommended by the National Research Council (NRC) and incorporated 0, 19.2, 38.4, or 140IU of VD3 per gram of diet to give VD-0, VD-1, VD-2 and VD-3 dietary treatments, respectively. The present study revealed for the first time an impact of dietary VD3 on the sea bass digestive system ontogenesis that consequently conditioned the ossification process and morphogenesis. All dietary VD3 levels were in the “adequate range” based on larval survival. Nevertheless, growth, intestinal maturation and ossification at the end of the larval stage were harmed by the minimum dose of VD3 tested and resulted in the appearance of malformations. VD-2 and VD-3 groups showed satisfactory growth and ossification levels at the end of the larval period. However, results of enzymatic activity and expression of genes involved in the VD3 pathway (bone morphogenetic protein 4, osteocalcin, vitamin D receptors and transient receptor potential cation channel-subfamily V, member 6-) gave evidence of complications during the ossification process as revealed by the high percentage of deformed larvae. A VD3 level of 19.2IU/g diet appeared necessary to obtain harmonious larval morphogenesis.Greater understanding of the nutritional influences on fish larval skeletogenesis is relevant, not only to deepen the knowledge of bone physiology, but to aid in resolving one of the most important bottlenecks in reared fish larvae, skeletal malformations that cause a severe economic impact for the aquaculture industry. Efforts have been made to study the different factors influencing fish larval morphogenesis and to understand the mechanisms inducing the development of deformities ( The known influence of vitamins on the appearance of larval malformations ( Vitamin D is a fat-soluble pro-hormone that is crucial for maintaining calcium and phosphate homeostasis and protecting skeletal integrity ( Few studies exist on the role of vitamin D on the development of skeletal deformities in fish. Among them only one was performed in juveniles ( Three-day-old European sea bass ( Thirty larvae were collected from each tank for weight measurement (formalin preserved) every week, and at the end of the experiment. Survival was evaluated by counting the individuals in each tank at the end of the experiment. Forty larvae per tank of 45 Larvae were double-stained with alcian blue and alizarin red S to demonstrate cartilage and bone, respectively. Larvae from the different experimental groups were stained simultaneously in order to prevent any technical variability. Image analysis of the ossified larval surface was carried out as described in For enzymatic assays, larvae were dissected as described by Data on pancreatic enzymes (amylase and trypsin, mU/segment) were expressed as a ratio of activity in intestinal segment (I) related to that in both pancreatic (P) and intestinal segment (total amylase or trypsin content). This ratio reflects the secretion of pancreatic enzymes ( The following genes were chosen as markers and their expression was analysed during the larval period: vitamin D receptors (VDRα and VDRβ) ( Results are expressed as means All of the experimental feeds were efficiently ingested by the larvae. There were no significant differences in survival rates between groups ( Appeared skeletal deformities consisted of kyphosis, scoliosis (vertebral column), pugheadness, or light curvatures of the branchiostegal rays (skull), as well as deformities of the caudal-fin supporting elements (fusions, displacements, extra formation or breaking of hypurals, epurals and vertebral processes; The ossification level for 45-day-old larvae is represented in The ratio “pancreatic enzyme in intestinal segment/pancreatic enzyme in whole larvae,” expressed as a percentage, in larvae fed the different VD The ratio of AN and AP segmental activity in bbm related to a cytosolic enzyme LeuAla peptidase indicates the developmental status of the enterocytes ( Two-way ANOVA indicated that BMP-4 expression ( Two-way ANOVA showed that VDRα expression ( With the exception of the VD-0 group that only showed a decrease in VDRβ expression from day 11 to day 22 to remain constant afterwards, the rest of the groups displayed a decreasing level of VDRβ expression during larval development (two-way ANOVA, Osteocalcin expression ( With the exception of the VD-1 group that showed the same amount of transcript on days 22 and 45 ( It is well known that European sea bass larvae perform adequately when fed on microdiets ( Skeletal deformities especially develop during the early ontogenetic stages due to unfavorable biotic factors, including nutrition ( The present study revealed for the first time an impact of dietary VD As intestine is involved in calcium absorption through the epithelial calcium channels ( Since VD As stated before, larvae from VD-2 and VD-3 groups were unexpectedly able to achieve at 45 Results of VDR expression could indicate that requirements in VD The present study revealed that sea bass larvae are extremely sensitive to dietary VD The authors are grateful to Mrs Viviane Verlhac from DSM Nutritional Products—France who kindly provided all the vitamins used in this work. The authors also thank Hervé Le Delliou for the diet analyses and Ms. Vagiani G. and Ms. Georga I. for their involvement in the analysis of bone deformities. This work was, in part, supported by