The thermal behavior of porcelain stoneware compositions during the sintering was investigated by hot stage microscopy, HSM, and dilatometric tests. The experiments were carried out with a commercial porcelain stoneware composition as a reference, STD, and a modified composition in which 10.0wt.% of potassium-feldspar in STD mix was replaced with the same content of nepheline syenite. In order to evaluate the effect of technical factors on shrinkage, the specimens were prepared at different milling time and forming pressures. According to HSM results, the increment in milling time of modified composition causes the improvement in dimensional stability. Also, the non-isothermal variation in shrinkage is accurately described by a new semi-theoretical model. The value of dimensionless factor, m, shows that the diffusion mechanism is a function of milling time and the forming pressure cannot change dimensionless factor. The model successfully predicted the shrinkage of bodies sintered in presence liquid phase.Sintering in the presence of liquid phase is a method for rapid densification of ceramic compositions such as porcelain and porcelain stoneware bodies. The structural changes are quite complex, but these variations can be grouped into two major categories. The first category consists of changes which occur as a result of liquid phase flow while the second category is associated with chemical reactions, occurring during the heat treatment. The liquid phase has the potential to diffuse into the pores due to fluidity at high temperatures Generally, the reactions occurred in ceramic body during the heat treatment have a complex origin. Ceramic body undergoes some transformations during firing which can be listed as: losing humidity and crystal water of clay components, forming Al–Si spinel and amorphous silica around 980 Hot stage microscopy, HSM, is a standard, well-known technique in the ceramic fields Fast firing is the dominated technology for manufacturing porcelain stoneware bodies. The time is reduced to reach an optimal stabilization of the body Sintered ceramic bodies, like porcelain ware, undergo a viscous flow sintering, where the driving force is mainly given by the surface tension of the liquid phase and the speed of the process is controlled by the viscosity of the liquid phase Sintering in the presence of liquid phase is broadly defined as a densification of a relatively loose mass of compacted particles to a denser body. Sintering of porcelain stoneware body causes both the pore size and porosity to decrease until minimum value The shrinkage measurement technique is applied to a variety of sintering data and discussed in terms of simple model The results presented in this investigation deal with two porcelain stoneware compositions. The first contains illitic–kaolinitic clay, potassium and sodium feldspars. This composition, denoted as a reference body, is normally used by industries for manufacturing porcelain stoneware bodies. The second is a modified composition that contains 10.0 The theoretical procedure that is proposed here for prediction of shrinkage in non-isothermal sintering is based on creeping flow in spherical coordinate. In The experiments were carried out with two porcelain stoneware compositions. The first one, STD, was obtained according to industrial practice. The second composition was modified by mixing nepheline syenite, C. 10.0 The compositions prepared by the following protocol, were used to simulate the production of porcelain stoneware bodies. The mixtures were wet milled in a porcelain jar mill for 8 and 12 Differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric analyses (DSC-TG Netzsch Model STA 409C, GmbH, Germany) were executed under the following conditions: 30 The hot stage microscopy (HSM, Misura 3, Expert System Srl, Modena, Italy) tests were carried out on the powders at a constant heating rate of 5 The powders were homogeneously moistened up to 6 The water absorption of sintered specimens was measured according to standard method The chemical analyses of reference, STD, and modified, C, porcelain stoneware compositions are reported in The XRD analyses show the presence of quartz and kaolinite in both compositions, The reported data in DSC curves for STD, C-8 and C-12 powders are presented in The HSM photos of studied powders are illustrated in The effect of nepheline syenite on thermal behavior of porcelain stoneware body is also represented in  The linear shrinkage as well as shrinkage rate of STD and C-8-52 bodies are plotted in The samples of dilatometric study were tested for water absorption to verify their degree of vitrification. The results are given in The plot of All the dilatometric curves were analyzed by Eq. This model appears to have considerable merit in determining the mass transport mechanism during the sintering. The assumption that the surface tension/viscosity ratio provides the driving force for sintering led to proposal for kinetic law represented by Eq. In the new model, the rate constant, In this investigation, it was shown that a commercial porcelain stoneware body and a mix containing 10.0 The sintering kinetics was investigated and the results were compared with those obtained for industrial composition which was taken into account as a reference composition. A good agreement is observed between the experimental data and computational values. The dimensionless factor, The authors would like to thank Dr. E. Rastelli and Dr. A. Salamoni for their contributions during research period. The semi-theoretical model proposed in this study is derived based on creeping flow in spherical coordinate. It is assumed that the active material surrounds the pore, Theoretically, the reductions in pore and active material radiuses are equal, as a result the following equations can be considered for relating pore radius and shrinkage: The theoretical equations that have been proposed in this investigation are based on continuity equation, radial momentum balances. The decrease in total porosity of ceramic body can be written in the following form as presented by Jazayeri et al. By substituting Eq. The left part of Eq. In the presented investigation, the specimens were heated with constant rate and heating rate can be related to time by