A polymetallic sulfide ore from which several metals are commercially extracted has a high pyrrhotite content that results in elevated temperatures in the ore leaching heaps. Laboratory ore columns were inoculated with moderately thermophilic bacteria and thermophilic archaea to assess the influence of microbial activity on leaching of metals from the ore at 47°C and 68°C. The populations of moderately thermophilic bacteria that became established on the ore were dominated by acidophilic Actinobacteria. Excessive precipitation of oxidized iron compounds in the presence of microbial activity hindered extensive leaching from small-scale ore columns (0.7kg ore). Copper extraction was generally delayed in comparison to that of the other target metals (principally nickel and zinc) when ore column effluent solutions remained above about pH 2.5.The industrial heap leaching of polymetallic black schist ore at the Sotkamo mine in Finland began in 2008, with reserves for over 40 Leaching of the polymetallic sulfide ore from Talvivaara with thermophilic bacteria and archaea is described here with small laboratory scale ore columns. These columns were used previously with copper ore when the activity of thermophiles promoted copper release without ferric iron being added to feed solutions, while extensive leaching of copper from un-inoculated ore required addition of ferric iron ( A sample of the polymetallic ore was obtained from the Talvivaara mine, Sotkamo, Finland. It contained (w/w) 0.31% nickel, 0.58% zinc, 0.22% copper, 0.03% cobalt. 0.97% manganese, 13.2% iron and 13% sulfur. The nickel was mostly present as an altered pentlandite and associated with pyrrhotite, with a lower amount in pentlandite. Pyrrhotite and pyrite were the main iron sulfides. Copper, zinc and manganese were present primarily in chalcopyrite, sphalerite and alabandite respectively (analyses by the Geological Survey of Finland). The columns used for ore leaching were described previously ( In some experiments at high temperature (68 Ore columns were inoculated with cultures grown on finely ground pyrite (1% w/v) in shaken flasks. At 47 Nickel release from the un-inoculated ore column ore was slow before the feed solution was supplemented with ferric iron ( At 47 In previous work with copper ore in the same columns, the relative concentration of ferrous and ferric iron in effluents was an indication of microbial activity ( Copper leaching was limited with responses to temperature and ferric iron unlike that of the other metals ( An attempt to repeat these observations and focus on metal yields with further columns at high temperature was abandoned after 146 The different characteristics of the release of different metals ions ( Nickel, zinc and cobalt shared a similar pattern of enhanced extraction from the inoculated ore compared to the un-inoculated ore, but with much less of the available cobalt released in both cases ( Iron in effluent from the un-inoculated column was essentially all ferrous iron and at a concentration initially about threefold greater than that of iron in the feed solution, falling to just over twofold greater by 112 In effluent from the inoculated column, the total iron concentration was generally about twice that added in the feed solution, apart from a period between 40 and 50 Removal from, gentle mixing and immediate replacement of the un-inoculated ore in the column after 112 Microscopy with solution in contact with ore fragments that were removed from the inoculated column for repacking revealed organisms resembling all of the major components of the inoculum, i.e. species of “ DNA was extracted from the inoculated ore column after 130 The influence of the higher metal ion concentrations which would develop in industrial heap leaching has not been investigated in situ on the populations developed in the laboratory ore columns, i.e. there has been no supplementation of the percolating solution with potentially toxic metal salts other than other than ferric sulfate. However, sufficient tolerance of nickel for application in industrial heap leaching would be expected of “ For higher temperature leaching, the upper column of a pair of columns connected in series was inoculated after solution had percolated through the ore for seven days. After some initial high consumption of acid by the ore, the pH of effluents from un-inoculated columns settled between pH 3.1 and 3.4 ( Concentrations of nickel, zinc and manganese in column effluents are shown ( The apparent relative contributions of upper and lower ore columns to metals in final effluent solutions differed with different metals. After some initial release of nickel from the lower columns of un-inoculated ore and inoculate ore, further release appeared to come from the upper columns ( The iron concentrations in effluents from the upper and lower un-inoculated ore columns were similar ( If roughly equal amounts of iron were solubilized from ore in the upper un-inoculated and inoculated columns, there was considerable precipitation of iron in the inoculated upper column ( Removal of ore from the inoculated columns after 74 No organisms were observed by microscopy in the un-inoculated columns on examination of the ore fragments when these were removed and repacked. Organisms with  The capacities of moderately thermophilic bacteria and thermophilic archaea to become established in columns of a polymetallic sulfide ore and to influence metal extraction from the ore were established. An acidophilic iron- and sulfur-oxidizing “ Initial experiments indicated that leaching of nickel and zinc from ore in the absence of microbial activity could be more extensive at 68 Copper was preferentially retained in ore columns under some conditions: for example, when the lowest pH of effluents from inoculated ore columns at 68 The maintenance of irrigation solution flow through small-scale ore leaching columns at high temperature proved difficult where microbial activity promoted extensive precipitation of ferric iron. Less precipitation occurred with un-inoculated ore where iron in solution was maintained as ferrous iron. However, in comparison to inoculated ore columns, lower extraction of nickel and zinc occurred in the absence of microbial activity at an ore depth where the influence of ferric iron which was added to irrigation solution was absent (i.e. in the lower ore column of columns in series at 68 This work was funded by the