Ferrous powder metallurgy preforms containing 0%, 0.5%, 1.0% and 1.5% of molybdenum were completely investigated experimentally to study workability behaviour. The formability behaviour of the above-said powder metallurgy sintered steels preforms with aspect ratio of 0.75 under triaxial stress state condition was determined by cold upsetting them with graphite as lubricant. The formability stress parameter was evaluated for all the above-mentioned steel preforms and its variation with respect to axial strain was plotted, studied and discussed relative to their as-sintered microstructures. Also the characteristics of various stresses and stress ratio parameters with respect to axial strain were analyzed and presented.force applied on the cylindrical preform for deformation initial height of the cylindrical preform height of the barreled cylinder after deformation initial diameter of the preform bulged diameter of the preform after deformation top contact diameter of the preform after deformation bottom contact diameter of the preform after deformation Poisson's ratio true stress in the axial direction true stress in the hoop direction true stress in the radial direction effective stress hydrostatic stress true stress true strain true strain in the axial direction true strain in the hoop direction true strain in the radial direction formability stress index initial preform density of the preform density of the preform after deformation theoretical density of the fully dense material relative density The powder metallurgy (P/M) process is a near-net or net-shape manufacturing process that combines the features of shape-making technology for powder compaction with the development of final material and design properties (physical and mechanical) during subsequent densification or consolidation processes (e.g., sintering). It is critical to recognize this interrelationship at the outset of the design process because a subtle change in the manufacturing process can cause a significant change in material properties. Historical developments in iron powder metallurgy technology occurred in 1940s in Central Europe and through the 1940s and early 1950s, self-lubricating bearing were the principal products of powder metallurgy. Since then, iron powder and steel P/M mechanical components such as gears, cams, and other structural shapes have become dominant Workability is the capacity of a material to tolerate the induced internal stresses of forming earlier to the occurrence of splitting of material. It is a meandering technological perception that depends not only on the material but also the various process parameters such as strain, stress, strain rate, friction, temperature, etc. Workability of porous steel preforms was earlier discussed by Aly El-Domiaty and Mostafa Shaker Gouveia et al. In the present work the workability behaviour of steel (Fe+0.7%C) powder metallurgy preforms containing 0%, 0.5%, 1.0% and 1.5% of carbon having aspect ratio 0.75 were experimentally investigated completely. The aforesaid steel preforms were subjected to cold deformation with graphite lubricant and their formability behaviour under triaxial stress state condition was evaluated. The variations of formability stress parameter with respect to axial strain were established for the four different powder metallurgy steel preforms. Also the characteristics of various stresses, namely, the true axial stress ( Atomized iron powder of −150 Widest range of most frequently used P/M engineering materials, including iron, steel, stainless steel, brass, bronze, copper, and aluminum are preferably produced metallurgy through conventional die compaction process. Conventional die compaction process is most applicable to medium-to-high production volumes; small-to-medium-size parts such as gears, sprockets, pulleys, cams, levers, and pressure plates (automotive, appliances, power tools, sporting equipment, office machines, and garden tractors are typical markets). It is also capable for greatest density range, including high-porosity filters, self-lubricating bearings, and high-performance structural parts. Limited physical and mechanical properties caused by residual porosity, most cost-competitive of the powder processes, wide range of applications from low- to high-stress applications are added advantages of conventional die compaction powder metallurgy process The free surfaces of the compacts were coated with an indigenously developed ceramic mixture Sintering of powder mix sequentially involves the establishment and growth of bonds between the particles of powder at their areas of contact, grain growth and migration of the grain boundaries formed at the bonds, spheroidization of the pores between the particles, and the elimination of small pores (and possibly the growth of larger pores). Increasing molybdenum content promotes an increase in relative density. This is due to the reason that molybdenum forms solid solution with ferrite matrix and thus reduces the porosity for the case of sintering temperature of 1120 The ceramic coatings over the specimen were machined off and further machining was carried out to such dimensions, so that to obtain preforms with initial aspect ratio of 0.75. Initial diameter ( The various upsetting parameters under triaxial stress state condition are determined with the application of the following expressions. The state of stress in a triaxial stress condition is given by Narayanasamy et al. From the above Eq. In the above Eq. The hydrostatic stress is given by Since The effective stress can be determined from the following expression in terms of cylindrical coordinates as explained elsewhere Since Eq. As an evidence of experimental investigation implying the importance of the spherical component of the stress state on fracture, Vujovic and Shabaik This index determines the fracture limit as explained in the Ref. The axial true strain ( The hoop strain (   When plots are made between the stress ratio parameters, namely, ( The following conclusions can be drawn from the above results and discussion. As the molybdenum content increases the pore size increases. Steel with 1.5% molybdenum exhibited the decreased flow stress due to presence of bigger size voids compared to other steels. All stresses have been found to be lower for 1.5% molybdenum steel. Steel with 1.5% molybdenum exhibited the highest formability stress index value because of greater geometric work-hardening and matrix work-hardening of ferrite.