China clay is an important mineral, which is used in the manufacture of ceramics and refractory, as also in other industries. Mined China clay contains iron oxides and silicates as impurity; if present in excess of a threshold level, the impurities affect the commercial value of the products. Currently available processes for lowering the iron content in China clay to the desired level (<0.8%) are energy- and cost-intensive, not sufficiently flexible, and may cause environmental pollution. An alternative approach for iron removal consists in the development of a biotechnological process which is expected to be cost-effective, less complex and eco-friendly. We reported earlier that several fungi, especially Aspergillus niger, and their culture filtrates could leach sufficient amount of iron from a China clay sample; oxalic acid was found to be the most active component of the culture filtrate (Trans. Indian Inst. Met. 55 (2002) 1). We now report the rates of iron leaching from another China clay sample by oxalic acid and by the culture filtrate of A. niger NCIM 548 that was found to be the most active strain in our previous study (Trans. Indian Inst. Met. 55 (2002) 1). The iron-leaching rates increased with temperature (T) and followed biphasic kinetics. The effect of oxalic acid concentration (C), pH (H), solids concentration or pulp density (P), time and mode of agitation on the rate of iron leaching is described. The rate of leaching with oxalic acid (R
                     ox) can be calculated theoretically from the following relationship: R
                     ox∼(C)0.76(T)1.76(H)0.80(P)0.20 under the specified set of conditions. Using the same concentration of oxalic acid in A. niger culture filtrate, the relationship of the rate differed; this may be due to the influence of other metabolites present in the culture filtrate on the rate.The importance of China clay in the manufacture of pottery, ceramics and refractory, as also in paper, rubber and other industries is well known Iron is an essential element for growth. Though it is abundant in nature, it remains mostly in the insoluble state. Microorganisms have therefore evolved special mechanisms for extracting it from nature. One of them is the production of metabolites like organic acids and siderophores The The China clay sample (particle size −300 mesh BSS) was mined from a deposit near Mukdumnagar, Birbhum district, West Bengal, India. Elemental composition (w/w as oxide) of the clay was SiO The culture filtrate was made 100 mM with respect to oxalic acid by adding the requisite amount of the acid. The clay sample was taken either in screw-capped bottles (30-ml capacity) or in Erlenmeyer flasks (100-ml capacity). The bottles containing 5 ml slurry of oxalic acid solution or Iron content was measured following a modified method of May and Fish A scanning electron microscope (Model No. S440) of Leo Electron Microscopy Limited (UK) was used for this purpose. Plots were drawn with the values of log (rate of iron dissolution) on the The leaching experiments were normally conducted under the following conditions: concentration of oxalic acid, 100 mM; temperature, 60 °C; pH, 1.5; pulp density, 10% (w/v); and time, 4 h. The rates of iron leaching were calculated with change in oxalic acid concentration, temperature, pH, pulp density, reaction time and shaking conditions and are described in the respective sections. All the experiments and analyses were replicated. The rate of iron dissolution was observed to be very fast during the first hour. As this might be due to the dissolution of freely available iron oxyhydroxide, the rates were calculated from the data obtained after the first hour of reaction. The experiment was carried out in 100-ml Erlenmeyer flask on an orbital shaker (16-mm throw) at 215 rpm using concentrations of oxalic acid varying from 10 to 300 mM. Iron dissolution rate ( The culture filtrate of The experiments were conducted in screw-capped bottles in a hybridisation oven (cyclic rotation) at 40–80 °C. After the first hour, iron dissolution occurred at a constant rate, which increased with temperature The rates of iron dissolution for different temperatures were calculated after the first hour of leaching. From the plot of log (rate of iron dissolution) versus log of temperature (in absolute scale as Initial pH of the oxalic acid solution was allowed to vary from 0.75 to 4.0 in this experiment that was carried out in Erlenmeyer flasks placed in a reciprocal shaker (25.5-mm throw). It was observed that above pH 2.0, the amount of dissolved iron in the leached solution decreased rapidly; this was probably due to precipitation of iron at pH>2 This experiment was conducted by varying the pulp density from 5% to 50% (w/v), and was performed in the hybridisation oven. The rate of iron dissolution was observed to increase with increase in pulp density, reaching a maximum at 15%, and then declining slowly Leaching of iron was slightly better when clay suspension was agitated on a reciprocal rather than an orbital shaker; under a set of conditions, 26% and 27.5% of iron was leached under orbital and reciprocal motion, respectively. Variation of the shaking speed (range of 60–250 rpm) did not have much effect on iron leaching. From the various results, however, it may be suggested that under the same conditions leaching must be much better under cyclic rotation. This study was conducted with a China clay sample from which at least 40% (w/w) of total iron had to be removed to make it suitable for the production of quality materials. The reddish colour of the clay was almost completely removed after treatment with 0.1 M oxalic acid (pH 1.5) for 6 h at 80 °C under cyclic rotation (60 rpm) This work was supported by the Department of Science and Technology and NES, Government of West Bengal, Kolkata. Authors are indebted to The West Bengal Projects, Kolkata, for the China clay along with its elemental composition. Sincere thanks are also due to Mr. S. Shome and other persons of the Geological Survey of India, Kolkata for the scanning electron micrographs. Authors thank Dr. B. Achari for revising the manuscript and other staff members of the institute who helped them in various ways.