Drag reduction (DR) agents are used at very low concentrations to accelerate significantly the flow in oil pipeline conduits, oil well operations, flood water disposal, fire fighting, field irrigation, transport of suspensions and slurries, sewer systems, water heating and cooling systems, airplane tank filling, marine systems, and biomedical systems including blood flow. DR agents are typically high molecular mass polymers; this review discusses a mechanism explaining how DR occurs using such agents. All pertinent experimental findings are challenged with that mechanism and all are shown to support it. In industrial applications DR agents undergo mechanical degradation in turbulent flow. An equation predicting the degradation as a function of time is presented and successfully confronted with experimental data. Experimental methods of determination of DR are outlined. Finally a connection between DR and flocculation is discussed.To begin, there are two main types of flow: laminar and turbulent. In a cylindrical conduit one can visualize the laminar flow as a series of co-axial cylinders oriented along the flow direction; such a flow structure is known as Non-laminar flow is called turbulent flow For both types of flow, the flowing fluid has its motion imposed by an applied shearing force Consider now the case displayed in Consider the velocity Going vertically down along the Now we recall a simple rule from calculus: in two consecutive differentiations the order does not affect the result. Therefore The fluid resists the motion; a measure of that resistance is viscosity Incidentally, here lies the main difference between fluids and elastic solids; in the latter the stress is proportional to strain (not to the strain rate). Armed with the above definitions, we return to the story of laminar and turbulent flow. We need just one more definition, that of the Reynolds number We can now (at last …) consider the topic of this review: drag reduction (DR). While the phenomenon of DR can take place in laminar flow, its occurrence in turbulent flow is of very large interest. As already discussed, the velocity of fluid particles at the walls in Section DR as defined above has numerous applications in a variety of fields. To give the first example, large urban agglomerations in India – and in other countries as well – find their sewer systems inadequate in the face of doubled or tripled populations. An alternative to Other applications of the DR phenomenon are as follows: oil pipelines, such as the Alaska pipeline oil well operations flood water disposal fire fighting field irrigation transport of suspensions and slurries water heating and cooling systems airplane tank filling marine systems (ocean thermal energy conversion systems) The above list is Still further, the occurrence of DR in blood flow and the fact we know it takes place make possible atherosclerosis prevention In spite of so many different positive applications, DR provided by polymeric agents is not without shadows; mechanical degradation in flow takes place. Flow turbulence causes the polymeric chains providing DR to undergo scission. We shall address this issue in particular in Section The reason the present author started working in the area of DR was in response to a challenge. In the Spring of 1980 Jacques Zakin, Ohio State University, Columbus, told this author that the DR phenomenon is unexplained – in spite of its numerous applications. Actually, a number of explanations have been provided but each of them was able to explain only The original list of findings concerning DR was based on papers by Zakin and Houston DR is directly proportional to the molecular mass The concentration of DR agent required for a given level of drag reduction is several times higher in a poor solvent. We recall that solvents can be classified as good, theta (=Flory) and poor More MDF occurs in a poor solvent under fixed flow conditions than in a good solvent under the same flow conditions. MDF stops at some time, so that further flow turbulence does not make the chains which already underwent scission any shorter. We define the limiting molecular weight It has been proven in experiments Bond scission in flow along chain backbones does not occur exclusively at chain midpoints (as some authors hypothesized) nor is it random.  Shear degradation at a given shear stress is independent of the viscosity of the solvent. Entanglements do not play a major role in MDF. The degradation rate increases or remains the same as the DR agent concentration is decreased. Taking photographs of flowing liquids containing DR agents, Donohue et al. Hunston and Reischman Long ago Flory Kulicke et al. DR takes place also in laminar flow. Injecting a DR agent into the center of a pipe results in practically instant drag reduction Among the experimental findings listed above, for a long time (c) was considered very puzzling. By definition, in poor solvents the liquid volume pervaded by each polymer chain is small Given the practical importance of DR, various explanations how it occurs have been advanced. Models based on fluid mechanics were of the continuum type, did not take into account discrete polymer A model was created in 1983 The model assumes that in each polymer chain there are two kinds of sequences, good (oriented along the flow direction or close to it, and strongly solvated, can be called oak-like) and poor (oriented more or less perpendicularly to the flow, poorly solvated, can be called willow-like). Statistical mechanical calculations have been made based on that model Indirect support for the model shown in Still, the model represented in We can now consider the facts listed in the preceding Section in the light of the DR mechanism represented in Clearly higher The solvated domains in poor solvents are necessarily smaller than in good ones and thus less effective as drag reducers. Solvated domains in poor solvents are smaller, hence the fraction of the total volume in the fluid taken by solvated molecules is smaller than in good solvents. Therefore, in poor solvents there is less ‘defense’ against polymer chain scission. The assumption that scission occurs at each chain at its midpoint never had any foundation. The scission is not random either since the sequence location in the domain (good or poor in As a consequence of scission caused by turbulence, the chains become eventually so short that turbulence becomes ‘powerless’ and cannot cut the chains to pieces anymore; Clearly solvation is important rather than viscosity. Some of the continuum models assumed substantial viscosity changes to explain DR. As noted above, DR at the DR agent concentration such as 10 Again When the DR agent concentration is decreased, then turbulence causing chain scission has less domains to attack, there is more turbulence per domain. Streaks lift off the conduit walls, but it is because they encounter the solvated domains that after neither oscillating nor bursting they return to the wall. Short polymeric chains are unable to form domains. Solvation results in enlarging the chain dimensions in comparison to the predictions of the freely jointed chain model. Precisely because a single chain (of sufficient length) can create a domain, DR occurs at very low DR agent concentrations. Solvation can occur and domains can be formed in laminar flow as well. The finding of Bewersdorff Since we now understand how DR occurs, the next logical question is how can we enhance it. There are a least three approaches which deserve to be named. One advocated by Singh We need to describe quantitatively the drag reduction and its changes with time Quite generally, the key property we seek to evaluate MDF is the change of the ratio An equation for that ratio A series of papers by Choi and his coworkers deals with DR It is instructive to consider the role of the parameter In Finally consider that DR agents increase the liquid throughput but constitute additional cost. For this reason one wishes to find the lowest necessary concentration of additive. Results reported in Having discussed in detail the mechanism of DR, we now turn to the question how is DR measured. A turbulent flow rheometer based on the classical design of Hoyt In a modern procedure of DR determination, Lucas et al. have adapted a capillary viscometer for accurate determination of the pressure drop in turbulent flow regime Another method of DR determination based on a rotating disk apparatus has been developed by Choi and his laboratory As emphasized by Rustum Roy However, there is still more. It is difficult to get solid constituents out of a liquid solution or suspension. Fine particles with diameters on the order of 10 The same polymers that act as DR agents are typically also flocculation agents. Why? There must be a common or similar mechanism. As shown in We have demonstrated the existence of a relationship between The phenomenon of drag reduction has been apparently discovered by Toms in 1948 We find that the advancement of a model and mechanism for drag reduction is not self-limiting. The experimental findings and mechanism described in previous sections propels our understanding of another field – flocculation – along with the informed development of improved agents for drag reduction. Discussions with: the late Prof. Paul J. Flory at Stanford University on the nature of polymer solutions; the late Prof. Jürgen Springer at the Technical University of Berlin on solutions structure; with Prof. Abdel Azim A. Abdel Azim, Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute, Cairo; Prof. Michael Bratychak, Lvivska Politechnika National University; Prof. Hyoung Jin Choi, Inha University, Incheon; Dr. Tea Datashvili, LAPOM, University of North Texas; Prof. Ulf W. Gedde, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm; Prof. Werner-Michael Kulicke, University of Hamburg; Prof. Elizabete F. Lucas, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro; Prof. R.P. Singh, University of Lucknow; Prof. B.A. Wolf, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz; and Prof. Jacques L. Zakin, Ohio State University, Columbus, are acknowledged. Haley E. Hagg Lobland at LAPOM has been very helpful in the creation of this article. A partial financial support has been provided by the US-Egypt Joint Research Fund, Washington, DC and Cairo, administered by the US National Science Foundation.