Mine roof, is a stiff rock strata, located on the top of coal seam, which can prevent the deformation and control the stability of coal roadway after the coal roadway is tunneled, so mine roof is one of the most important structures in coal mining engineering. In this paper, mine roof is treated as elastic plate, which is studied thoroughly at the theoretical level. Based on the mechanical models of plane and stress analysis for elastic roof, using the boundary integral equation which is obtained by the natural boundary reduction, this paper obtains stress functions of elastic half roof, as well as the analytical and numerical solutions to the each stress field functions. We also analyze the rules of different stress distributions for roof under a concentrated force and a uniform distribution load, the results of calculation show uniformity of the stress distribution. In order to research the mine roof deformation law, Mohr–Coulomb model is established to describe the deformation behavior of roof surrounding rock, FLAC3D is also used to simulate the deformation of roof after the coal roadway is tunneled under different length of coal roadway excavation. The comparison result between BEM solution and FLAC3D simulation shows advantages to solve the problem by boundary element method, and numerical simulation proves the deformation behavior of roof is influenced by the length of coal roadway excavation.Mine roof plays an important role in coal mining engineering especially in longwall mining, it can prevent the deformation and control the stability of coal roadway after the coal roadway is tunneled. However, the fracture of the mine roof would affect the distribution of the abutment pressure ahead of the longwall face and a series of phenomena would happen around the face area. For instance, the convergence in working area and load acting on the support would be increased, and sometimes some kinetic phenomena might happen In generally, rock strata are usually regarded as plate in the working area. Miao et al. The boundary element method (BEM) In theory, it is convenient to analyze the problems of elastic half roof under various boundary conditions using the natural BEM. The natural BEM This paper uses the surface forces on the boundary to calculate the stress function and its normal derivative, which are substituted into the integration equation, then obtains the specific expression of a stress function under various boundary conditions, and permits of the analysis of stress and related deformation for the elastic half roof, and then the rules of stress distribution varying with In general, there exist the obvious characteristics of layers of coal seam rock strata, such as some solid strata have great ability of loading, and for other strata, which contain mud or clay minerals with a good anti-seepage ability, have the functions of water-preserved. The roof can be regarded as plate for the following analyses. Assume the boundary value problem of the bi-harmonic equation is as follows: According to the second Green formula of bi-harmonic equation Eq. Suppose the boundary As shown in Substituting For the above integral equation, let The solution (Eq.     For this problem, in By integration, we have Especially, when the whole right boundary of the half-roof is with the uniform load The failure criterion chosen for the coal seam model is the strain-softening model based on the FLAC Set in mining geological conditions of a certain mining area, let the buried depth of simulation tunnel be 400 The simplified panel stratigraphy and geotechnical parameters of the rock, roof, coal seam and floor strata are shown in The calculated results show that overlying strata load is Once a rock is broken, fractures will be dislocated or new fractures will be produced, which have a direct impact on rock permeability. When the fractures inside rock are broken through, a drastic change will happen to the percolation features of the rock Let model be plane strain model, which means that make cross section of mining tunnel as simulation object, we study effect of different lengths of coal roadway excavation According to the simulation scheme, we can get the Compared The Comparison between Scheme is to simulate the influence of different length of coal roadway excavation on deformation of surrounding rock, the simulation method is to keep the other conditions remain unchanged, changes only length of coal roadway excavation, set length of coal roadway excavation are: From From In this paper, the stress analysis problem of elastic half roof can be treated as boundary problem of biharmonic equation for the elastic half plate, Mohr–Coulomb model is established to describe the deformation behavior of roof surrounding rock and FLAC We obtain the Poisson integration equation based on a natural boundary reduction, thus we get the analytic solution for the stress function of the problem of half roof. The detailed example shows the advantages to solve the problem by BEM, and offered a similarity solution. We have analyzed rules of the distribution of the stress function for the elastic half roof, using BEM simulation, we obtain the We have developed the analytical solution of stress function for the elastic half roof. The solutions are exactly equal to the answers given in various sources of the literature. The comparison of BEM solution and FLAC A FLAC Financial support for this work, provided by the