The effect of pH on the bioleaching of a low-grade, black schist ore from Finland containing pyrrhotite, pyrite, pentlandite, chalcopyrite and other mineral sulfides was studied using columns containing 9.0 kg of agglomerated ore that was irrigated with nutrient supplemented surface water from the deposit at ambient temperature. Iron and sulfur-oxidizing enriched culture was used to inoculate the columns. Iron oxidation and metal leaching increased with decreasing pH. At pH 1.5, 59% Ni was bioleached after 140 days together with 59% Zn, 13% Cu and 16% Co. In comparison, at pH 3.0 only 15% Ni, 10% Zn, 5% Cu and 0.5% Co were leached; while at pH 2, 53% Ni was bioleached after 230 days. Based on an optimization between the leaching of metals, the acid consumption, the concentration of soluble iron and the dissolution of other gangue minerals, leaching at pH of 2.0 were recommended for this heap bioleaching application.
                  The microbial composition as determined by a combination of Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)–Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE)-sequencing approach was not significantly affected by pH. Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and Leptospirillum ferrooxidans were the dominant species in all the leach liquors. In addition, L. ferriphilum was detected for the first time in extracted leach residue liquor after 300 days of bioleaching. Sulfobacillus thermotolerans, A. caldus, A. thiooxidans and some unknown species were found to lesser extent. Archaeal species were also present in all leach liquors.Biohydrometallurgical processes are widely used for the recovery of gold and copper ( Due to a concurrent dissolution, precipitation, oxidation and reduction reactions, both acid consumption and acid production prevails in bioleaching processes ( Bioleaching of nickel bearing complex black schist sulfide ore from Sotkamo deposit, Finland was demonstrated in the early studies of The mineral composition of the sulfide component of the ore was 61.2% pyrrhotite (FeS), 24.3% pyrite (FeS The enrichment culture used for the inoculation of the bioleaching columns was obtained by combining several acidic water samples from the Sotkamo ore deposit. The pH of the water samples varied between 3 and 4 and samples contained red–brown iron(III) precipitates. The cultures were first enriched in shake flasks at 25 °C in three different acidic media. All the media contained basal salts (0.4 g L After one month of incubation the enrichment cultures were combined with the medium. The enrichment culture was sub-cultured three times on this medium prior to transferring to the bioleaching columns. Microbial growth was monitored by phase contrast microscopy (Zeiss Axioskop 2). Four columns at different target pH values (1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0) containing about 9 kg of agglomerated ore were set up. The description of the columns used in the study is given in The recycle of the leach liquors were initially monitored on a weekly basis and later every second week for pH, redox (Pt electrode Ag Soluble metals were determined according to the Finnish Standard Methods SFS 3044 and SFS 3047 ( Total cell counts were estimated with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining technique using epifluorescence microscopy. Viable counts of mesophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria in the sample were estimated with Most Probable Number technique (MPN) modified from the Finnish Standard Methods SFS 4447 ( The microbial communities were investigated by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)–Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE); followed by partial sequencing of 16S rRNA gene. For DNA extraction, a 15–20 mL sample was taken from column liquor and filtered immediately on a 0.2 μm pore size polycarbonate filter (Cyclopore Track Etched Membrane, Whatman). The filters were rinsed with 0.9% (w/v) NaCl at pH 1.8 for 1 min to remove the excess metals and then neutralized with 40 mM Na–EDTA in phosphate buffered saline (PBS; 130 mM NaCl, 5 mM Na The crude DNA was used as a template for PCR. Partial 16S rRNA genes (550 bp) were amplified using bacterial-specific forward primer 357F 5′-CCT ACG GGA GGC AGC AG-3′ ( PCR reaction mixtures contained 5 μL of 10 Archaea were characterized using nested PCR approach. First partial 16S rRNA gene (933 bp) was amplified using the Bacterial species of the leach residue were analyzed at the end of the experiment. Circulation of the leach liquor was stopped one day prior to ore removal from the column. The ore samples (15 g each) were taken by squaring according to the Finnish Standard SFS-EN 932-2 ( The solid residues of the ore from columns at pH 2.0 and 2.5 were studied after 80–90 days of bioleaching after the columns became blocked at the bottom. Circulation of the leach liquors was stopped and the solutions were allowed to flow out of the columns. The mineralogical compositions of solid samples were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Siemens AG D500) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Stereoscan 360, Cambridge Instruments) coupled with an energy dispersive spectroscope (EDS) (INCA-energy ISIS-300, Oxford Instruments) at Outokumpu Research Oy. The acid consumptions to obtain desired pH levels of 1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0 were determined for the black schist ore. Acid was steadily consumed in all columns and the pH initially climbed to pH 4–5 before slowly falling. After 140 days of bioleaching leach liquor pH values were 1.5, 2.2, 3.2 and 3.5 after continuous titration of the leach liquor and the cumulative acid consumptions were 160, 38, 8 and 3 g kg Redox potentials and iron concentrations during the bioleaching are presented in The bioleaching of Ni, Cu, Zn and Co from the ore are presented in After 290 days of bioleaching, the extraction of base metals at pH 2.0 reached the same % level as at pH 1.5, and thereafter remained steady. However, at pH 2.5 and 3.0, there was no further extraction of metals after 150 days, possibly due to metal adsorption onto the iron oxide precipitate. The results demonstrate that the highest leaching of base metals is achieved at low pH values under high redox conditions where ferric ion remains in solutions. The dissolution of gangue minerals at different pH values during column leaching brings aluminum, calcium, magnesium, manganese and silicon into solution as presented in Only a few studies report the effects of different metals on microorganisms and bioleaching rates. In high concentrations, metals may interfere with microbial ferrous ion oxidation. High concentrations of Mg ( Total cell counts in leach liquors and residues were determined once a month by DAPI staining technique and the viable counts of mesophilic iron oxidizers by MPN technique. The results are presented in The number of mesophilic iron oxidizers in the leach liquor was 10 Bacterial 16S rRNA gene fragments obtained by PCR amplification of DNA extracted from the leach liquor were analyzed by DGGE. Duplicate DGGE profiles (from 10–80% of denaturing gradient) of the original enrichment and after 27 days of leaching are shown in All the detected bacteria from the leach liquors and leach residues are presented in At the beginning of the experiment,  Archaea were analyzed with DGGE after 111 days ( A species related to an uncultured archaeon clone ant b7 (99%, The solid residues of the agglomerate were studied after 80–90 days, when the columns at pH 2.0 and 2.5 became blocked from the bottom. The main sulfides were pyrrhotite, pyrite, sphalerite, chalcopyrite and violarite. Jarosite and goethite were found on the surfaces. However, there was no evidence of gypsum or gelatinous silica acid. Bright yellow precipitates, possibly elemental sulfur, were observed at pH 1.5 and 2.0. The effects of pH on bioleaching of a complex sulfide ore originating from the Sotkamo deposit, Finland were as follows: The sulfuric acid consumption increased with decreasing pH. At pH 1.5 the cumulative sulfuric acid consumption was 160 g kg The redox potential (ref. Ag/AgCl) was highest at pH 2 (580 mV) and lowest at pH 1.5 (515 mV). Low concentrations of Fe(II) demonstrated the activity of ferrous ion oxidizers at all pH values. The concentration of Fe(III) increased significantly with the decrease in pH, but at pH 2.5 and 3.0 the total dissolved iron remained low throughout the experiment due to iron(III) oxide precipitation. The highest bioleaching of base metals were achieved at pH 1.5 where the ferric concentration remained high. After 140 days, 59% Ni, 52% Zn, 12% Cu and 13% Co were extracted. At pH 2.0 similar extractions were achieved over 220 days. The rate of bioleaching of nickel and zinc was 3–4 times faster at pH 1.5 than at pH 3.0. The lack of dissolved ferric ion and diffusion barriers created by iron(III) oxide precipitates slowed down metal leaching at pH 2.5 and 3.0. Dissolution of gangue minerals was significant at pH 1.5 giving high concentrations of aluminium, manganese and amorphous silica which have the potential of interfering with liquid flow in heap leaching and subsequent recovery of base metals. The numbers of microorganism in the leach liquors were 10 Based on an optimization between the bioleaching of base metals, acid consumption, the concentration of soluble iron and the leaching of undesired cations (Si, Al, Ca, Mg and Mn), a leaching solution of pH 2.0 is recommended for the heap bioleaching application. This work was part of a larger project funded by the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation and Talvivaara Project Ltd. The authors wish to thank Eila Kuronen, Sin Man Kwan and Kirsi Määttä for technical assistance.