China’s manufacturing industry has undergone intense structural change during the enterprise reform. The waxing of private and foreign-owned firms and the waning of state-owned and collective firms are accompanied by dramatic technological upgrading and productivity growth. We study how ownership type affects technical efficiency and technological advancement in China’s industrial sectors using detailed firm-level data. By employing a metafrontier-based technique, we are able to account for technology heterogeneity in ascertaining four types of firm ownership in 30 manufacturing sectors. The robust data envelopment analysis offers estimation flexibility and enables us to mitigate data problems. Our results confirm that firm ownership is important in explaining technical efficiency and technology gap among Chinese firms. We show that foreign-owned firms set the standard for technical efficiency and are technology leaders. Private ownership is found to dominate state as well as collective ownership in both technical efficiency and technology gap. Over time, foreign-owned firms take the lead in efficiency improvement and private firms contribute to technology advancement. We also find that China has successfully revitalized state-owned firms, although room for improvement remains. Lastly, we find evidence that China has successfully stimulated technological progress in almost all industrial sectors. We contribute to the literature by using a nonparametric estimation method that assumes technology heterogeneity when firms are partitioned into hierarchical categories. Our study also has rich policy implications on China and other transit economies.In the past 40 years, researchers witnessed profound structural transformations in China’s manufacturing industry. Prior to 1978, China was an absolute planned economy dominated by state-owned enterprises (SOEs). From the 1980s to the early 2000s, a series of policy interventions transformed the ownership structure of the industry, resulting in a hybrid structure that distinguishes China from any other major economy. Indigenous private firms have overtaken SOEs in industrial output and R&D activity ( China’s experience provides researchers a unique opportunity to inquire into the role of ownership in firm performance. In this study, we investigate the technical efficiency and technology gap of different ownership types using firm-level data for 1999–2007 on 30 industrial sectors. In particular, we employ data envelopment analysis (DEA) to construct our measures of efficiency and technology gap. DEA, first presented by The main distinguishing feature of our empirical study is recognizing heterogeneity in technology. Given their unique operation modes, firms of each ownership type arguably possess a distinct technology, and hence, a uniform treatment may not be appropriate. To date, metafrontier-based techniques have not been defined when partitioning firms into hierarchical categories (for this empirical study, into different ownership types within each industrial sector). Since we investigate the technical efficiency and technology gap of firms in every sector when distinguishing between ownership types, we extend the concept of metafrontier in that direction. This extension is particularly relevant when firms are further divided into subgroups within every group, as in our empirical study. Attractively, this option is introduced by a simple modification of the initial concept of metafrontier as defined by The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next two subsections introduce the background of China’s industrial reform and review the literature on the ownership-efficiency linkage. In Section The first stage of China’s industrial reform was launched in the early 1980s. The contract responsibility system and dual price system are regarded as the two major institutional innovations of this period ( The landmark event of the second-stage reform was Deng Xiaoping’s south tour in 1992, during which he encouraged the development of private ownership and the market economy. Foreign direct investment (FDI) surged, and the The third-stage enterprise reform aimed to centralize state ownership among large SOEs. Until the early 2000s, multiple government agencies controlled each SOE. Thirty years of continuous reform left China with hybrid ownership of industry: a state sector that is under firm control by the SASAC, a downsized collective sector, and flourishing private and foreign-owned sectors. As of 2007, the output shares were 17.9% (state), 6.8% (collective), 41.0% (private) and 34.3% (foreign). In addition to SOE reforms, Chinese policymakers have pursued various industrial development plans to enhance the technology content of the manufacturing industry. In 2009, the State Council (SC) decreed the Restructuring and Revitalization Plans for 10 “mainstay” sectors, nine of which belong to manufacturing. The choice between public and private provision of goods and services is always under debate. Arguments for government intervention include the need to regulate monopolies, to deal with externalities, and to provide public goods. Under these market failures, state ownership will increase efficiency over private ownership (  In this regard, empirical studies find mixed results. Early studies focusing on productivity or profitability generally find that private ownership outperforms state ownership; these include studies by China’s state-owned firms and collective firms fit State-owned firms and collective firms are less efficient than private firms. After the third-stage enterprise reform in 2003, there is a boost in the efficiency of some state-owned firms but not of collective firms. The debate regarding foreign ownership is much less. First, according to the traditional theory of multinational enterprises ( Foreign-owned firms are more efficient than indigenous private firms. Recent empirical studies on China’s industry document strong productivity growth ( China’s industrial sectors experienced net technological progress during the study period. Although We assume that we observe firms from We start by defining the technology and the notion of potential outputs. Next, we define the technical efficiency and technology gap indicators. Finally, we show how our different indicators can be computed by means of linear programs. For the sake of compactness and to improve the readability of our exposition, we do not explicitly add a subscript for the period for the concepts defined below, but a point to note is that these are all time dependent. We define the technology in terms of output requirement sets for every period. Given our setting, we distinguish between three levels: each group in every sector; each sector; and when considering all sectors. The output requirement set for group In The technology set for sector 1, Based on the previous concepts of output requirement sets for the three levels, we can define the potential outputs as follows: Intuitively, the actual value cannot exceed the potential values, implying that We can now define our concepts of technical efficiency by means of the following ratios: Of the three ratios, the sector-group technical efficiency    Technology gaps are captured by the following ratios: Intuitively, the sector-group technology gap ratio    Assume that in a specific period we observe Therefore, we estimate the potential outputs using a DEA-based methodology. DEA, introduced by In fact, the three potential outputs can be obtained by means of linear programs. The only difference between the three definitions of potential output is the referent technology set, captured, in practice, by a set of comparison partners. Let us define For every firm As a final remark, we point out that, in general, linear programs are very sensitive to the presence of outliers. This problem arises because all the peers are used to construct the frontier (potential outputs) in Eq. We question the ownership–efficiency linkage in China’s manufacturing industry, while distinguishing between different sectors. We start by presenting the data and contextualizing our study by showing some key descriptive statistics. Next, we provide our results for the technical efficiency and technology gap. Finally, we present a summary and discuss policy implications. Our study uses a firm-level dataset issued by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of China: the China Industry Survey (CIS). The CIS dataset assigns a four-digit industry classification code to each firm. The corresponding national standard of economic classification (GB/T 4754) defines manufacturing sectors as those in the code range 1300–4400. That is, we finally have 30 sectors; see We classify all firms into four ownership types: state-owned, collective, private, and foreign-owned. We determine a firm’s ownership type based on two separate sources of information: registration type and registered capital. Because neither offers a complete characterization of ownership type for all firms, we adopt a two-step procedure that combines the information from these two variables. In step one, a firm is defined as state- (or collective-, private-, or foreign-) owned if the registered capital owned by the state (or collective organization, private persons, or foreigners) outweighs the shares of the other owners. If step one is indeterminate, we move on to step two. There, ownership is well defined only if the registration information is unambiguous about the control rights. We consider a very simple setting with two production factors: capital and labor. In this case, value added becomes the output variable. This setting, although simple, is the most used one in empirical macroeconomics, and dates to It is well known that DEA is sensitive to outliers. In this study, we follow the procedures of After these procedures, we have a total of 1,628,700 observations. We present the relative importance of the four ownership categories in China’s manufacturing industry in  In the We start by presenting our results for the estimated technical efficiency and technology gap. These estimates are computed for every firm using the procedure explained in Section  We observe a much greater variation for the overall technical efficiency than for the sector-specific technical efficiency. The sector-group technical efficiency exhibits the smallest variation. Therefore, we observe two layers of heterogeneity in technical efficiency: between sectors, and between ownership types. Failing to control for either one may obscure firm-level technical efficiency (compared with the sector-group metafrontier) with between-sector or between-group variations of technology. Thus, it seems reasonable for us to concentrate on the sector-group technical efficiency when we study technical efficiency in all 30 sectors together. The median for the sector-group technical efficiency is rather constant over time, indicating that the distance of an average firm to the sector-group frontier is relatively stable. A possible explanation is that the change in efficiency is not balanced across sectors or ownership types. Some ownership types or sectors may experience efficiency gains, whereas some others may experience efficiency losses; when aggregating, these effects cancel out each other. Later, when we study Next, we discriminate our analysis with respect to firm ownership. The box plots per ownership type are shown in In Over the years, foreign-owned firms have exhibited considerable improvement of their technical efficiencies, which pushes the median technical efficiency close to unity in most sectors. Only in sectors 17 (textile), 25 (petroleum processing), and 29 (rubber) do we observe efficiency degradation. The situation is similar for state-owned firms. Except for nine sectors (16, 18, 20, 22, 25, 30, and 33–35), state-owned firms are able to increase their technical efficiencies (decreasing technical efficiency ratios) over time. We might attribute this change to the third-stage enterprise reform (Hypothesis  To further investigate the relationship between ownership and technology gap, we plot We report the sector-specific technological gap ratios per sector-year in We report the sector-group technology gap ratios per sector-year for each ownership type in Inspecting the annual change rates of technology gap ratios, we find clear evidence of technological progress among private firms. They are able to increase their technology gap ratios in 19 sectors, and the increase is substantive in sectors 13, 18, 20–23, 25–31, 34, 37, and 42. This observation is consistent with Our previous analyses are based only on box plots, averages, and medians and thus suffer from a lack of statistical foundation. To formally verify our previous findings and to provide more evidence, we rely on a version of the Li test adapted to the DEA context by The The  As a final remark, we report that these results are also confirmed when performing tests for every sector separately. We do not report these tests here for the sake of compactness. Lastly, we modify our modeling and variable selection to verify that our findings remain valid. In particular, we re-estimate the technology efficiency and technology gap ratios with which we regenerate The first sensitivity analysis consists of adding a third production factor in our modeling of technology. Previous empirical works have suggested using intermediate inputs ( In both scenarios, we observe high levels of similarity between the new results and those presented in Section Overall, we conclude that our main findings are valid even when modifications to our modeling or variable measure are made. We summarize our findings in five main points: Our results support the hypotheses that foreign-owned firms are the most efficient and state-owned and collective firms the least in terms of technical efficiency. Foreign ownership is the clear winner in terms of technical efficiency, followed by private ownership; together they take the lead in all high-tech and almost all medium–high-tech manufacturing sectors. We find that China’s enterprise reform successfully boosted technical efficiency among state-owned firms in many sectors. Consequently, the most efficient state-owned firms began to gain efficiency relative to private firms in the third stage of the enterprise reform. Meanwhile, foreign ownership takes the lead in efficiency improvement in almost all sectors. The analysis demonstrates that foreign-owned firms are the most technologically advanced and state-owned and collective firms the least. The technology advantage of foreign ownership is manifested in a wide range of sectors, and such advantage is stable over time. Although state-owned firms are technologically constrained in many sectors, they are found to be technologically advanced in a few sectors dominated by the state. We fail to find evidence in support of the hypothesis that state-owned firms improved their technology level during the enterprise reform, but we find that private firms registered the most prominent technological progress during the period of study, Technological improvement is observed in almost all manufacturing sectors. This is justified by the relative measure of technological progress as well as the absolute measure. Despite these similarities, a major departure of our methodology from the conventional treatment (total factor productivity) is that we disentangle technical efficiency from technology gap, which are both determinants of productivity. Our results reveal the dual advantage of foreign-owned and private firms: They not only are more efficient but also more technologically advanced. We are able to assess separately the efficiency gains and technological progress (relative to sectoral technologies) achieved by the same type of firms. We demonstrate strong technological progress yet marked efficiency loss among private firms; we also observe strong efficiency gains among state-owned firms in the upper quartile. Finally, our method allows us to study the technological progress of sector-specific technologies. To our knowledge, no extant studies have presented similar results in their pursuit of such research questions. These findings have rich policy implications. First, our results indicate that China’s enterprise reform successfully revitalized state-owned firms, some of which are operating at high levels of efficiency (relative to their technology potential). Although the effect of privatization has been thoroughly studied, little attention has been paid to surviving state-owned firms. Therefore, our finding is an important complement to the literature. Interestingly, Second, our results pinpoint the advantage of private ownership over state ownership in terms of efficiency and technology level. Although empirical studies in developed and middle-income countries generate conflicting results (Section Third, our findings indicate that foreign ownership is the driving force of efficiency improvement, which affirms China’s FDI-friendly industrial policy. Although we do not have direct evidence, the literature suggests that foreign-owned firms create technology spillovers to indigenous Chinese firms ( Finally, a profound shift has occurred in China’s enterprise reform strategy recently. Since the launch of the 2009 stimulus package, the Chinese government has adopted a new policy that is described as “the state advances as the private sector retreats” ( In China, the manufacturing industry is playing the most important role in boosting economic growth, and various policies have been designed to improve its efficiency and technological performance. In this study, we identify the ownership effect on firm efficiency during 1999–2007, which provides valuable information in the context of policy implementations. The main distinguishing feature of our empirical analysis is to properly control for technology heterogeneity across industrial sectors and ownership types using an extended nonparametric estimation method. Our results suggest that firm ownership is important in explaining the technical efficiency and technology gap among Chinese manufacturing firms. Foreign-owned firms not only shape the sectoral technology metafrontier, but also set the standard for technical efficiency. Hence, it is important for China to stay open to industrial FDI to further receive technology and improve efficiency. Our results reveal a marked state-private sector gap in efficiency and technology level. Thus, further privatization will improve the overall performance of China and other transit economies. Our results also corroborate others’ finding that efficiency improvement among state-owned firms is possible with government intervention. In addition, we find evidence that China’s industrial development plans have been successful in stimulating technological progress in most sectors. Finally, our findings suggest that re-nationalization policies may undermine technical efficiency and slow down technological progress in the manufacturing industry. However, we point out some limitations of our empirical study that may be considered for further research. First, we focus on two performance measures, technical efficiency and technology gap, but leave scale efficiency untreated. Given the fact that state- and foreign-owned firms are, on average, larger in size ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We are grateful to the Editor-in-Chief, Arun Agrawal, and the two anonymous referees for their invaluable comments. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 