Swelling and embedment exert significant influence on the evolution of permeability in propped fractures, potentially consuming significant proportions of the original gain in permeability. We measure the evolution of permeability in propped fractures of shale to both adsorbing CO2 and non-adsorbing He – accommodating the impacts of aperture change due to proppant pack compaction and both reversible and irreversible modes of embedment. A linear relation between pressure and log-permeability is obtained for He, representing the impact of effective stresses in proppant pack compaction, alone. Permeability change with pressure is always concave upwards and U-shaped for gaseous subcritical CO2 and W-shaped for supercritical CO2. One exception is for liquid CO2 at high injection pressure where effective stress effects and swelling contribute equally to the change in permeability and result in a linear curve with the lowest permeability. Approximately ~50–70% of the permeability recovers from the recovery of swelling after the desorption of CO2. The magnitude of swelling is recovered from measurements of permeability change and ranges from 0.005 to 0.06 mm, which contributes ~9–56% of the total swelling and induced embedment as evaluated from the adsorbed mass. Swelling also increases embedment by a factor of ~1.84–1.93 before and after the injection of CO2. A new calibration equation representing swelling and induced embedment is generated accommodating Langmuir isothermal sorption and verified against experiments on rocks both admitting and excluding swelling and embedment and for various sorbing and non-sorbing gases. Stability and accuracy of the predictions demonstrate the universality of the approach that may be applied to both enhanced gas recovery and CO2 sequestration.CO An accompanying issue with a similar significant impact on permeability is that of particle embedment in propped fractures - occurring when the particle has a higher stiffness than the rock. The embedment, by itself, may induce a 10 to 60% reduction in fracture aperture with a subsequent significant (78%) loss in conductivity in shale ( Nonetheless, the behaviour of swelling and induced embedment, and their respective contribution to the destruction of permeability in propped fractures, is poorly defined since the direct observation of swelling is infeasible in real-time and under triaxially stressed, sealed and gas injection conditions. Therefore, we explore the impacts of swelling-induced embedment of proppant in artificial fluid-driven fractures. We measure permeability loss with the injection of both non-adsorptive Helium (He) and adsorptive carbon dioxide (CO We measure permeability evolution to CO Axially-split core samples (25 mm diameter 50 mm length) of Westerly granite and Green River shale are placed in a pressurized core holder with proppant sandwiched within the fracture. The high strength Carbo-Lite ceramic proppant is segregated by size fraction (40/80 mesh). A single layer of proppant is first sandwiched between the two facing artificial fractures. In particular, we explore the behaviour of a monolayer since the deformation of proppant can be calculated more accurately, and leaves swelling and embedment as the main factors influencing permeability evolution. The proportion of monolayer-propped fractures in field-fracturing is significant. This is apparent in branch fractures or micro-fractures and composes a crucial amount of the total stimulated reservoir volume ( A standard triaxial apparatus, as shown in We use standard pressure transient (pulse) methods for permeability measurements. Once the sample is in the core holder, the system is first evacuated for one hour and then saturated with the desired gas (CO We measure the permeabilities alternately with CO The cross-sectional area The values of A total of five groups of permeability measurements are conducted with multiple repeats in each of these five groups. Each probing injection (increasing gas pressure) and depletion (decreasing gas pressure) are repeated at least three times. The measurements are for CO Permeability evolutions in granite and shale (sample A) are shown in Swelling and more significant corresponding embedment diminish the permeability significantly for infiltration with gaseous CO Repeat experiments on shale samples B, C and D reveal the permeability recovery behaviour following swelling. The permeability returns to ~50 to 70% of the initial value in the repeated He test after injecting CO The three separate groups of the experiments present relatively good repeatability in both values of permeability and trends with pressure and gas state. A minor difference in the repeated He permeability measurement is found in sample D, where the operating temperature is 45 °C and CO The flow mechanism determines the linear or U-shaped form of the permeability curve in For steady parallel plate flow in fractures separated by a constant aperture, the evolution of fracture permeability follows the evolution of fracture aperture ( Experiments on fractures in granite (neither embedment nor swelling occurs) are used as a reference, in which the aperture ( The embedment depth ((( Similarly, the aperture change for CO Eqs. The embedment curves for He are near constant with gas pressure and fluctuate only within a small range since embedment is irreversible. The gas pressure only slightly affects the permeability by particle rearrangement under various effective stresses. The high repeatability of the embedment results are shown for both He and CO We quantitatively distinguish between embedment and swelling by contrasting response for these two cases – embedment with He and the additive effects of embedment and swelling with CO Embedment for the case of He is calibrated independently from the particle deformation. The deformation Correcting for the reduction in proppant diameter The swelling, its proportion and corresponding fractional adsorption are calculated by Eq. More common outcomes are generated by fitting the relation between aperture reduction ratio and fractional adsorption. Aperture reduction (AR) is defined as half of the aperture change (( As shown in An indirect method is proposed to examine the universal applicability of Eq. In this study, we fit the cubic relation between permeability and effective aperture in Then, the non-sorbing gas permeability is applied to predict the permeability for the sorbing gas case by the following relations, Prior experimental results are available with different rock types and for different gases ( Permeability evolution in propped shale fractures to non-adsorptive He and adsorptive CO Permeability evolution is linear with pressure for non-sorbing He, U-shaped for sorbing CO Permeability evolution is linear in pressure for both initial and repeated He injection, with the intervening injection of CO Embedment depth is 0.025 to 0.048 mm for permeation of He, while swelling increases the embedment by a factor of ~1.84–1.93 between the initial and repeated He tests. The swelling and induced embedment, for CO A new calibration equation representing swelling and induced embedment is generated accommodating Langmuir isothermal sorption and verified against prior experiments with different rock types (coal) and for different sorbing gases (CH  This research has received funding from the