This work describes a method for supervisory control of flotation columns based on predictive trajectory generation of setpoints to be applied to the local controllers of the process. The system maximizes the profit while keeping quality constraints and engineering indices. It represents an advance over predictive supervisors using a single evaluation function or those that reduce a multi-objective problem to a single-objective one by means a weighted sum. The procedure is founded on multi-objective optimization using non-dominated genetic algorithms, and a new classification criterion of the Pareto optimal set. The system has been tested by simulation against usual perturbations affecting the flotation process and exhibits good performance, provided that the model properly represents the system operation.concentrate mass flow concentrate grade minimum allowable value for solid feed rate by weight universal set that includes all possible values of the decision variables concentrate froth solid-to-liquids ratio by volume maximum allowable value for vector of evaluation functions ideal vector of evaluation functions maximum and minimum values of evaluation function normalized value of evaluation function constraint functions to an optimization problem froth depth bias rate supervisory sampling time prediction horizon costs price of reagent profit of the process price of concentrated mineral number of individuals of collector rate frother rate wash water rate recovery set of feasible solutions vector of possible setpoints to be applied to the control system vector of applied setpoints in the previous sampling interval sequence of setpoint vectors finite version of the Pareto optimal set of possible setpoint sequences elite inside sales vector of decision variables  optimal vector of decision variables Pareto optimal set finite version of the Pareto optimal set gas holdup projection set in the space of evaluation functions of the set of feasible solutions The usual approach to the flotation column supervisory control problem, and certainly the most widely accepted procedure in the industry, is the use of expert systems based on fuzzy logic ( With a different viewpoint, All solutions mentioned above are not optimal in the sense of finding the minimum/maximum of an evaluation function. Following this idea,  However, cited contributions in the preceding paragraph address the problem from a static viewpoint. Thus, if boundary conditions (i.e., disturbances) change, the system will find a new optimum, but it does not solve the transition from the current state to the next one. In order to improve this side, MPC based predictive supervision techniques have been developed ( The supervisory control system monitors the process in the context of the market, using multi-objective optimization techniques in order to generate a profile of vector setpoints Certain basic assumptions are taken into account: The local controllers’ problem is solved. Predictive controllers have been used in the laboratory column flotation process optimized in this work. ( As in any supervisor system, the supervisory control system sample time is much longer than the process dynamics. There is a reliable system model for calculating the evaluation functions (See Section Since multi-objective optimization does not involve just a single solution but a set called Pareto optimal set, just one element of this set must be selected. On these accounts, a new classification criterion of the Pareto optimal set has been developed. The following section shows a summary of the concepts on multi-objective optimization employed in this work. Then, the classification criterion is expounded, as applied to the generation of setpoint trajectories with maximum profits. The work concludes with an evaluation of the column flotation optimization system. The problem of multi-objective optimization can be formally defined as: Find the vector of Which satisfies the When there is a single objective, the concept of optimum is clearly seen: it is the vector that minimizes or maximizes the objective function. When having more than one objective function, the concept changes because it is very probable that the objective functions will compete among themselves. This means that it will not be possible to find an optimum and, therefore, it has to choose for a trade-off solution or a group of optimal solutions. Within this context, three vector sets can be defined: An The The The concept of optimum in a multi-objective framework was proposed by Francis Isidro Edgeworth in 1881 and later generalized by Vilfredo Pareto in 1896. It states that a vector of decision variables   Expressed otherwise, There are several methods that can be used to solve multi-objective problems using single-objective approximations ( These drawbacks are outweighed by the heuristic methods. The most commonly used are the Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithms (MOEAs – Despite these algorithms require more computational effort than mathematical programming techniques, it is not a problem when applied to industrial processes with slow dynamics such as the column flotation system. In this work, a variant of the NSGA II: Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II, proposed by The Pareto optimal set When trying to obtain optimal setpoints trajectories, the generalized argument of objective functions The Pareto optimal set The fact that the trajectory can be affected by disturbances introduces some particular conditioning which has given rise to special features of the evaluation functions, as well as to create a new classification mechanism of the Pareto optimal set. This point has influence in several features of the development as stated below: The evaluation functions have a predictive nature by considering an entire sequence, and not just a single point to be calculated (see Section Some functions associated to trajectory generation have been specifically designed (see Section The inequality constraints of type The classification system takes into account not only the Pareto optimal set computed in the current supervisory sampling instant To compute the multi-objective algorithm, the starting element is the setpoint vector The context of dynamic generation of setpoint trajectories, in combination with the requirement of maximizing the economic benefits and keeping good engineering indices, has given rise – in this work – to specific characteristics that affect the evaluation functions. As in any predictive supervisory system, the evaluation functions should examine the performance of the process from the current moment towards the future. These functions consider a horizon From the viewpoint of the column flotation multi-objective optimization algorithm, each prediction A decisive element of the features taken by the evaluation functions in this work is that they must be normalized for the purpose of classifying the Pareto profile (see Section This normalization process requires that the evaluation functions be designed in such a way that all members will never receive the same evaluation. If this ever happened, then The mathematical model used to calculate the evaluation functions is essentially the one presented by Some functions, listed below, should be present on account of the dynamic nature of trajectory generation. All of them are devised in such a way that the optimal is found in one of their minima, in accordance to the operation of the modified NSGAII algorithm cited in Section This function is based on the term that it limits the variations of control actions in classic predictive controllers. The aim is to reduce the stress upon actuators, but, overall, to prevent sudden and steep oscillations from arising in the system. In a discretized form, it may appear as The Profit Costs Since the optimization algorithm requires a minimizable function, there should be some expression that gets decreased while the benefits are increasing. For example the inverse of the profits: In the simulations carried out in this study, the average prices of fluorite and reagents have been used. An evaluation function is included in order to force the system to prioritize the increase of profit In order to avoid sharp changes in the flows into the column, between a supervision sampling interval and other, variations of bias rate In practice, the engineering constraints of type This may be a disadvantage for trajectory generation applications, because some disturbance may lead the system close to the edge of constraints expressed by The solution found was to implement the restriction with a very high value (so as to impose a penalty), though not uniformly but characterized, instead, by a slightly sloped linear function. Thus, all the elements with Of course, a weak point in this procedure is the fact that the algorithm does not reject from the optimal population those members that do not meet the constraints Previous studies ( The “soft window” evaluation function is implemented as Product quality is established by a minimum bound Other restrictions are not implemented as inequality constraints or “soft windows” constraints. Instead specific evaluation functions are designed. It is generally established ( The cleaning efficiency is then evaluated by: As was stated in Section Upon finishing the optimization process with the functions detailed in Section Each element The information of the Pareto optimal set On a first phase of the classification process, and following the options taken in other works, e.g. After completing the normalization stage using the expression The course of action that unfurls by itself, naturally, is to order in increasing sense the An adverse effect caused by restricting the variation of control actions using function The first step is to select, within the Pareto optimal set Although the objective is to attain the highest profit, it is nevertheless a priority to keep the engineering indices within the pre-established limits. On these accounts, the With the matrix thus re-arranged, an orderly search is made, starting with Now, it is also possible that in this search, the element The procedure can be outlined with the following pseudo-code: In spite of the above, there may occur that within the The supervisory control system, applied to a laboratory column flotation process, has been tested by simulation in typical circumstances in which it is possible to increase the profit, and also against usual perturbations affecting the flotation process. The average conditions in which the process was tested are a feed grade of 0.4, a feed rate of 0.5 In order to note the relationship between the setpoints, process variables, mineralogical indices and steady-state values, With the aim of better appreciate the optimization task performed by the supervisor system, in the following figures only the five setpoints, not process values, can be seen on the left side, and the steady-state corresponding sequence of profit and mineralogical indices have been shown on the right side. The time scale is expressed in sampling periods of the supervisor system  It can be noted a constant growth of profit It should be noted that, although it has achieved a consistent growth in profit, the references do not have a monotonic evolution but also present some oscillations. This behavior, typical of multi-objective optimization, is caused by the competition between different evaluation functions and a progressive calculation in which the system is learning from the previous operating point.  It can be noted an expected reduction in profit because the material entering the column is of lower quality. Since the conditions previous to change in the disturbance were optimal, the supervisor system can only achieve small improvements in profit Also, it must be noted that there are several objective functions competing among themselves. It is expected then that, particularly when strong disturbances are present, alternately some objective functions may prevail over other ones, causing the spikes observed in the recovery and bias rate between Similarly, Finally, A supervisory control system has been designed based on multi-objective optimization. By means of a Pareto classification strategy, it allows selecting successfully a sequence of setpoints that are applied to the system controllers. At the same time, the system optimizes both the economic and the engineering indices. The results evaluated through simulations show a good performance, taking into account the capability for increasing the economic profit when facing different perturbations. A previously validated model of a laboratory column flotation process has been used. As regards the validity of the procedure when applied to other minerals or other flotation techniques (e.g. flotation cells) it should be noted that if the model properly describes the process and the cost function that evaluates the mineralogical indices are appropriately adjusted, the system should properly deal with these processes.