Carburization was carried out to improve corrosion resistance of porous Ti–46.5 Al (at.%) intermetallic compound. X-ray diffractometry (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were applied to analyze the carburized layers. Electrochemical corrosion behavior of the untreated and the carburized samples were investigated using potentiodynamic polarization, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and open circuit potential. The results reveal that the continuous and thick carburized layers form after carburization treatment at 1203K for 10h, whose main phase is a functional complex ceramic phase, Ti2AlC. Carburization can improve corrosion resistance of the porous TiAl alloy. Among the carburized samples, the carburized one at 1203K for 10h presents the highest corrosion resistance and has the most stable oxide film.TiAl alloy has been considered as structure materials owning to its low density, high strength at elevated temperatures, good oxidation resistance, good corrosion resistance Many studies have been reported that chemical thermal treatment can improve corrosion resistance of materials The paper of primary goal was to synthesize a functional complex ceramic phase on the surface and around the pores of the porous TiAl alloy by a gas–metal reaction in a carburizing atmosphere and improve the corrosion resistance of the porous TiAl alloy. Potentiodynamic polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were used to evaluate the corrosion resistance of the untreated and the carburized porous TiAl alloy. Open circuit potential was also measured after static polarization at 2 The preparation of the porous Ti–46.5 Al (at.%) was started with elemental powders. Al powders and dehydrided Ti powders were used in experiments having 99.8% purities and the particle sizes of the powders varying between 200 and 300 mesh. The powders were dry-mixed in a tumbler ball mill for 12 Carburization tests were carried out in a tube furnace at 1203 The open porosity and the pore size of the samples were measured by the Archimedes method in water Electrochemical measurements were performed on CHI-660D electrochemical workstation with a three-electrode system. The reference electrode was a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) separated from the main compartment by a bridge with a Luggin cupinary tube, and all potentials quoted were based on this reference system in this paper. The auxiliary electrode was a large piece of Pt foil, and the electrolyte was 0.5 Insulated copper wires were connected to the specimens with conducting resin to avoid undesirable ohmic effects. All specimens were sealed with epoxy resin exposing the whole geometric area of 1 For a fresh working electrode, it was immersed for ten hours in the supporting electrolyte solution in order for the fully infiltration. Anodic polarization measurement or electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was recorded when open circuit potential ( Specific surface area of each specimen was measured by small amplitude cyclic voltammetry in order to obtain a current density before anodic polarization measurement. In addition, open circuit potential was recorded for the untreated and the carburized porous TiAl alloy at 1203 X-ray diffraction (XRD: D/MAX-255) with Cu Kα radiation (wavelength The X-ray diffraction patterns of the untreated and the carburized porous TiAl alloy at 1203 The sintered and the carburized samples have a same pore size distribution of 20–30 SEM backscattered electron images of the carburized porous TiAl alloy are exhibited in The carburized mechanism of the identical composition TiAl alloy has been reported in other work The anodic polarization curves recorded for the untreated and the carburized samples from open-circuit potential to 2 The corrosion behavior is closely related with the composition and microstructure of materials. As a whole, the untreated porous TiAl alloy has the same corrosion behavior as the compacted TiAl alloys in H For comparison, the carburized samples have similar noble corrosion potentials and lower current densities owing to the formation of the carburized layer. As mentioned above, the different carburization time results in distinct microstructures of the carburized layers. As a result, they exhibit distinguish corrosion behavior at high potential. The carburized sample at 1203  Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is generally considered as one of the most important methods for investigation of the electrochemical behavior of passive films. In this method, the polarization resistance The complex plane plots of the untreated and the carburized porous TiAl alloy are exhibited in Bode spectra with Bode-phase and Bode-magnitude plots for all the samples are depicted in It can be seen from the Bode spectra that their characteristics are different from the typical Bode spectra of the compacted materials, the large phase angles and the Bode magnitude plots deviate from high frequency range. The phenomena are caused by pore-size, the length distribution and the rough surface. Such characteristics of the sample retards the appearance of the ideal capacitive behavior. Thereby, the impedance approaches the ideal capacitive behavior at low frequency From the Bode-phase plots, the impedance value and the phase angle of the untreated porous TiAl alloy are much lower than that of all the carburized samples, which suggests it is easy to react with corrosive medium and no passive film exists on the surface of the untreated sample at open circuit potential. Among the carburized samples, the impedance value of the carburized sample at 1203 The impedance behavior of the passive film can be modelled by equivalent circuits, the selection of equivalent circuits is on the basis of the mount of time constants. There are two time constants in electrochemical impedance spectra for all the carburized samples based on the above analysis, the equivalent circuit model Where The charge transfer resistance ( The untreated and the carburized porous TiAl alloy at 1203 From the above mentioned experimental analysis, some conclusions can be made as follows: The carburized layers, whose main phase is Ti The thin carburized layers exist around the pores at the centre of the carburized sample at 1203 Carburization improves the corrosion resistance of the porous TiAl alloy and the carburized sample at 1203 This research was financially supported by the