Thin films of 0.5[Ba0.7Ca0.3TiO3] – 0.5[Ba(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3] (BCZT) ceramics were grown on platinized Si-substrates by pulsed laser deposition using a BCZT ceramic target. The crystal structure, morphology, ferroelectric and mechanical properties of the BCZT films were studied as a function of different deposition temperatures: 600, 650 and 700°C. The XRD studies confirmed the crystallization of tetragonal structure for all the BCZT films and the crystallinity of these films tend to increase with increase of deposition temperature. The FESEM analysis revealed homogeneous microstructure with columnar grains, particularly at higher deposition temperature. The presence of both dark and bright ferroelectric domains with oppositely polarized states and switching behaviour is evident in the PFM images. The estimated ferroelectric polarization values and mechanical properties such as hardness and elastic modulus showed an increasing trend against deposition temperature.Piezoelectric materials are an important class of functional materials, as they generate electric voltage under mechanical stress and vice-versa. During the past fifty years, lead zirconate titanate (PZT) ceramics exhibiting outstanding piezoelectric properties (d Thin films of BCZT were grown on Pt/TiO The phase composition of the as-grown films was studied using grazing incidence X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8); while the thickness and the surface morphology was analyzed by means of field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Gemimi Supra 40).. The mechanical properties such as elastic modulus and hardness were evaluated using a Nano indenter with Berkovich indenter. Nanoindentation tests were carried out under a load of 0.3 mN with constant loading and unloading rate (0.6 mN/min). Room temperature (RT) hysteresis curves of BCZT films were recorded at different electric fields using TF analyzer 2000, aixAcct systems, Germany. Prior to recording hysteresis curves, a top metal electrode (Pt) was deposited by e-beam evaporation with 0.3 The XRD patterns of BCZT thin films at three different deposition temperatures: 600, 650 and 700 The FESEM images of BCZT thin films deposited at 600, 650 and 700 The polarization versus electric field hysteresis loops of the films deposited at 650 and 700 Further, the PFM studies on the BCZT films deposited at 700 A representative load versus indentation depth plots obtained for the BCZT films deposited at 700 The lead-free piezoelectric ceramics, such as those used especially for actuation and energy harvesting application should possess less elastic modulus and high hardness. In our study, the BCZT film deposited at 700 The effect of deposition temperature varying from 500 to 700 The authors thank