Vibration of an elastically mounted circular cylinder subjected to an oscillatory flow is investigated by two-dimensional numerical simulations. A low Reynolds number of Re = 150 and two Keulegan–Carpenter numbers of 5 and 10 are chosen in this study. A wide range of frequency ratios, which is defined as the ratio of the oscillatory flow frequency to the natural frequency, are studied. The cylinder, with mass ratios of 1, 2 and 3, is free to vibrate at zero damping ratio along the streamwise direction only. The vibration velocity of the cylinder relative to the fluid motion (referred to as relative velocity) is found to vary significantly with the frequency ratio. The amplitude of the relative velocity is greater than the amplitude of the oscillatory flow velocity as the frequency ratio is less than a critical value, which is slightly smaller than 1. The amplitude of the relative velocity significantly reduces as the frequency ratio is greater than this critical value. The change of the phase difference between the cylinder motion and fluid motion is identified as the cause for the increase or decrease of the relative velocity. The phase changes from −90° to 90° as the frequency ratio exceeds 1. The drag force is found to be zero at a frequency ratio of 1.As fluid flow comes in contact with an object, it may produce flow induced vibration. A topic of interest in fluid-structure interaction is the study of vortex shedding and its impact on a cylinder. The vortex shedding in the wake of a circular cylinder in a steady flow occurs when the Reynolds number (Re) exceeds approximately 47 ( It was demonstrated that for an elastically-mounted cylinder subject to vortex shedding, the amplitude of cylinder vibration is dependent on the cylinder's mass, natural frequency and damping ratio ( In offshore engineering, wave-induced water motion is commonly modelled by oscillatory flow. The interaction between circular cylinders and oscillatory flow is relevant to engineering applications, such as offshore pipelines, riser pipes, mooring cables, etc. In addition to Re, the effects of oscillatory flow on vortex shedding is also dependent on the Keulegan-Carpenter ( Increasing  Regime A*: no vortex shedding occurs. regime A: vortices start forming and two vortices are shed (symmetrical) per half cycle. regime B: vortices are formed due to instability in the boundary layer flow (3D structure). regime C: large vortices of opposite sign are formed for the number of oscillation cycles. regime D: asymmetrical vortices with opposite rotations are formed due to the cylinders movement (and the flow is convected implicitly to one side of the axis). Regime E: it is similar to regime D except the flow switches to the other side of the movement at irregular intervals and the flow is convected diagonally. Regime F: due to the cylinder moving a large clockwise vortex is formed on the upper side and a smaller counter clockwise vortex is formed on the lower side. Regime G: two vortices are formed, one is attached to the cylinder and the other is shed from the cylinder. Numerical investigation into oscillatory flow around a circular cylinder at low Vortex shedding in the wake of an oscillating cylinder can be categorized based on the number and pattern of vortices that are shed from the cylinder. In one cylinder oscillating period, If a cylinder is elastically mounted in an oscillatory flow and is only allowed to vibrate in the cross-flow direction, the cylinder's vibration amplitude in oscillatory flow is reported to increase as reduced velocity increases, until it reaches a maximum amplitude. Then, increasing the reduced velocity will lower the amplitude ( The majority of current literature has focused on flow-induced vibration (FIV) in the cross-flow direction, with little attention towards FIV in oscillatory flows in the in-line direction. The vibration of a cylinder in the inline direction makes the relative velocity between the cylinder and the flow different from the flow velocity. This variation in the relative velocity (either more or less than the flow velocity) impacts the cylinder's response and vortex shedding pattern. In this paper, the effects of the Numerical simulations are carried out at a constant Reynolds number, A Cartesian coordinate system The fluid is assumed incompressible and can be governed by the two-dimensional incompressible Navier-Stokes (NS) equations. The velocity, the time and the pressure are non-dimensionalized as In Eq. The cylinder surface is smooth and thus a no-slip boundary condition is applied, i.e. the fluid velocity on the cylinder surface is the same as the vibrating velocity of the cylinder. On the left and right boundaries, non-dimensional sinusoidal oscillatory flow velocity is given as A square non-dimensional computational domain with a side length of 110 is used and the cylinder is located at the centre of the domain. The selected mesh size is based on the mesh dependency study for oscillatory flow past cylinders at To validate the results, numerical analysis was conducted using an open-source Spectral/hp element code, Nektar++ ( The incoming oscillatory flow velocity is the same harmonic function of time as given in equation  To ensure the selected mesh is sufficiently dense for obtaining converged numerical results, a mesh dependency study is conducted for two cases with different mesh densities, as listed in This investigation focuses on the vibration of a cylinder in the It is found that the flow develops to its equilibrium stage extremely slowly in some simulations. To avoid treating not-fully-developed flow as the final result, cases for Simulations are firstly conducted for 100 oscillating periods with an initial condition where velocity and pressure are zero in the whole computational domain. This initial condition is referred to as Initial Condition 1 (IC1). Simulations for these cases were continued until To speed up the transition of the flow to its equilibrium state, simulations for   The motion of the cylinder in the fluid makes the relative velocity between the cylinder and the fluid very different from the incoming fluid velocity. The fluid force and the vortex flow pattern are affected significantly by the relative velocity After To understand the frequency components of the vibration, the vibration velocity of the cylinder is decomposed into harmonics as Since the velocity of the cylinder is nearly monochromatic with a dominant frequency the same as the oscillatory flow frequency, the relative velocity of the cylinder The flow patterns around a vibrating cylinder in oscillatory flow changes with the change of  The variation trends of  Flow induced vibration of a circular cylinder in oscillatory flow in the streamwise direction is investigated numerically. Two-dimensional numerical simulations are conducted for It is found that the amplitude of the relative velocity of the moving cylinder to the fluid motion is greater than the amplitude of the oscillatory flow velocity when the frequency ratio is smaller than some certain value. The increased relative velocity results in a significant increase in the effective KC number ( The reason of the increase of When the frequency ratio The flow for some regime F cases remains symmetric until a few hundred periods of the flow, provided the initial condition of the numerical simulation is that both the velocity and pressure in the whole domain are zero. This symmetric flow pattern (referred as regime S) is unstable because it does not occur if an initial condition with an asymmetric flow is employed.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. It has been shown that variation trend of drag and inertia coefficients with the 