Experiments are conducted on kaolin contaminated with a lixiviant obtained from a sodium dichromate plant residue to demonstrate the efficacy of electrochemical cleaning. After 120 h, only 36% chromium is removed from the soil. Chromium removal is high in the first 20 h, after which it falls drastically. Acid–base neutralization near the cathode appears to be the rate controlling mechanism. Unremediated chromium in kaolin are either present as Cr(VI) in the pore fluid or as strongly adsorbed species because of acidic conditions in kaolin.Over the years, both solid and liquid industrial wastes have been dumped indiscriminately, without resorting to proper waste management techniques. Toxic heavy metals in the solid wastes are leached by rainwater, which in turn contaminates the soil as it migrates through the subsurface. The heavy metal-contaminated soil is a recipe for disaster since it contaminates not only the ground water supply but also the crops grown on this soil Because of their cost effectiveness, there has been an increasing interest in situ treatment techniques, without excavation of the soil. One possible method of removing heavy metals is the percolation leaching technique A relatively new and potentially important in situ technique has emerged in which a dc electric field is applied across electrode pairs placed in the ground. The contaminants in the liquid phase in the soil are moved under the action of the field to wells where they are then pumped out. The principal mechanism by which contaminant transport takes place under the action of an electric field is electroosmosis and electromigration. Electroosmosis is only effective in fine-grained soils with micrometer-sized or smaller pores. Electromigration is not dependent on pore size and so are applicable equally to coarse and fine-grained pores. Another important advantage of this electrochemical technique is the high degree of control of flow direction that can be achieved because the material move along electric field lines that are defined by the electrode placement. In the past decade, numerous laboratory studies have been reported on the viability of electrochemical cleaning of heavy metals A schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Residue collected from a sodium dichromate plant was first ground in a ball mill and then sieved to −100 mesh size. The lixiviant was obtained by a three-stage sequential leaching of the dichromate residue in double-distilled water. pH of the lixiviant was 11.3. Kaolin is mixed thoroughly with the requisite volume of lixiviant to achieve the desired Cr(VI) concentration of 500 mg/kg soil. The resulting slurry is compacted in the perspex tube, to which the two end caps are screwed, the reservoirs and the electrolyte chambers are filled with double-distilled water. A 25-V constant dc power supply was connected to the graphite electrodes and operated for 120 h. To avoid hydraulic head-driven flow, levels in the reservoirs were continuously adjusted to ensure that difference in the electrolyte level never exceeded 10 cm After completion of the experiment, the soil slurry was carefully extruded. Kaolin was then cut into seven sections. Each section was first thoroughly mixed. Thereafter, a small portion of kaolin from each section was water leached to measure the extent of “unremediated” Cr(VI) in each section of kaolin. To determine the extent of water-insoluble chromium, possibly adsorbed or precipitated in kaolin, total chromium analysis was conducted in each of the seven soil sections. Total Cr analysis was done by acid digesting 1 g of dried sample from each section in a mixture of dilute nitric acid and sulphuric acid at 95 °C for 2 h. After acid digestion, the slurry was filtered and then subjected to oxidation by ammonium persulphate in the presence of silver nitrate solution. Cr(VI) concentration in the resulting solution was a measure of “unremediated” total chromium in kaolin. The methodology for determining the magnitude of chromium adsorption in kaolin as a function of pH was same as that of   The rate controlling mechanism can be deduced from the voltage distribution plot shown in Cr(VI) concentration in kaolin at the end of electroremediation is shown in Electrochemical cleaning experiments of kaolin contaminated with lixiviant obtained from a sodium dichromate plant residue show that after 120 h, only 36% of chromium is removed from kaolin. In the first 20 h, approximately 15% of chromium is removed from kaolin. Thereafter, there is a drastic reduction in the Cr removal rate. Migration of the acid and base fronts leading to acid–base neutralization appears be the rate controlling step in electrochemical cleaning. Unremediated chromium in kaolin are either present as Cr(VI) in the pore fluid or as strongly adsorbed species because of acidic conditions in kaolin. Experiments described in this paper are part of a major research programme for the design and optimisation of electrochemical cleaning. The major aim of this research programme has been to develop a mass transport-based mathematical model for the design of real-life electrochemical cleaning projects. Consequently, a number of experiments are being carried out to determine the (i) effect of physical properties of soil and Cr(VI) source, (iii) optimum voltage, (ii) optimum electrode spacing and geometry and (iii) scale-up criteria. Mathematical modelling is being done with the software PHOENICS. The authors are grateful to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi for funding this research project through sanction number 70 (0035)/00/EMR-II. The assistance of Mr. G.P. Bajpai for fabricating and conducting experiments is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are also due to Prof. M.R. Madhav and Prof. S. Sarkar of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur for providing insights into soil behaviour and chromium chemistry.