In order to find out the relationship between driving torque and thickness of abrasive layer of a three-body abrasive wear system, a continuum model of abrasive layer was proposed. The model is based on the assumption of continuum of abrasive particles and a continuous contact pressure distribution was obtained. A sand crushing test was designed to get compressive behavior of the abrasive layer. The test was used to understand the loading–unloading–reloading behavior and the constitutive relationship between compressive displacement and compressive loading. The macro-contact pressure distribution of the abrasive wear between the cylinder–cylinder and cylinder–plane was obtained based on the sand compressive behavior. With the sand compressive behavior, an FEA model has been built for ring-on-ring abrasive wear test machine to simulate the normal contact pressure distribution and friction force. To verify the model, a set of experiments was conducted. Quartz sands were used as abrasives in the analysis and test. The measurement of torque accorded well with model prediction. With this model, only a simple sand crushing test is needed to obtain the relationship between driving torque and thickness of abrasive layer which is important for wear prediction of a three-body abrasive wear system.Abrasive wear is observed when a material comes into contact with rugged or abrasive particles. It can occur as two-body abrasive wear, in which the abrasive material abrade the softer material, and three-body abrasive wear, in which loose abrasive particles remove the softer material There have been several theoretical studies that investigated the contact pressure distribution of different contact types, from static normal contact of elastic solids – Hertz theory – to rolling contact of inelastic bodies. The normal elastic contact could be simplified by modeling the elastic bodies as a simple Winkler elastic foundation or “mattress” rather than by elastic half-spaces. The method can avoid the difficulty of solving differential equations. The same expedient can be applied to the tangential tractions that arise in rolling contact. The theory of rolling of a rigid cylinder on an elastic hysteresis or a viscoelastic foundation has been developed to obtain a theoretical solution of contact pressure distribution and rolling friction Most of the research results on abrasive wear are empirical relationships between load, slip and other factors. Most results are obtained from expensive field tests or full-scale lab tests e.g. full size rail-roller wear test in Based on the experiences of compressive test of abrasives, the material behavior model for the abrasives under compression can be obtained. After reviewing the results of compressive tests, a loading–unloading–reloading model is found. In Under the assumption of the continuum of abrasive layer, the abrasive layer can be regarded as a layer of bulk material. Only the overall compression behavior is in our scope and the discontinuity of particles is neglected. With the measured behavior in compression, a layer of abrasives between two wear parts is considered. The abrasive layer with original thickness Normal force: Driving torque: Driving force: A sand crushing test was designed and executed to find out compressive behavior of quartz sand—a typical abrasive material for the rail-roller and ring-on-ring wear tests. The sand crushing test is designed to understand the loading–unloading–reloading behavior and find out the constitutive relationship between compressive displacement and compressive loading. The macro-contact pressure of the abrasive wear between ring-ring and rail-roller can be obtained based on the sand crushing. The compressive behaviors could be used to build a wear model that includes the abrasive material properties. The sand crushing tests were conducted with an Instron Material Test Machine. See Each test sample contains 0.1158 By observing the concentration of quartz sand in the test, the assumption of the multi-layer fragment of the crushed sand was confirmed. The obtained compressive behavior is for the multi-layer of fragments. The mechanisms of the compression and crushing, friction and interlock between the grains of fragment will become more significant. It was noticed that all load–displacement curves for either loading or unloading portion have monotonic increase in slopes. This is due to that the effect of contact between sand grains, sand grain size variations and crushing mechanism. Size differences existed in the sand grains; large grains will take the load at beginning of loading. With increased loading, large sand grains deformed or crushed and more and more medium and small size of sand grains will take the load. The sand layer exhibited stiffening with the load. Even a single sand grain crushing, due to the contact mechanism, the loading curve becomes stiffer and stiffer (hardening). With the increased load, the contact area between sand grain and load head increases. The local contact stiffness increases. The crushing mechanism is slightly complicated since the crushing itself will degrade (soften) the load–displacement curves. The crushing will produce large displacement without increased load or even with decreased load. But this degradation was not observed in loading curve but in the offset of unloading curve. It might be that the stiffening effect is much stronger than softening during the crushing. The stiffening is in macro-level and softening is in the micro-level of sand grains. After the sand grains were crushed, the fragment size was smaller than original. The contact stiffness will increase and the sand layer will behave stiffer. A curve averaging technique was used to find the mean loading curve and unloading curves. A group of loading and unloading curves were found very close to the mean curves and are plotted in A ring-on-ring wear test machine was used to perform wear test in author's lab. The new wear test machine can precisely control the normal loading, rolling speed and slip (sliding) ratio. The sand-feeding rate (sand concentration) can also be adjusted. The machine can detect turning torque in driving and driven rings. The initial purpose of this wear test machine is to conduct a precise ring-on-ring wear test with precise control of loading and slip. To model the wear process and verify the model, this wear test machine will be used to measure the normal loading, turning torque and corresponding wear rate. With these measurements, the predicted relationship between normal loading and driving torque by continuum abrasive layer model can be verified. The wear test machine sometime will combine pure rolling and pure sliding wear together. The test machine will detect combined turning (driving) torque of rolling and sliding (slip). But the continuum abrasive layer model uses the pure rolling condition. Thus it is necessary to separate pure torque driving the rolling and pure torque driving sliding. If we use Based on the measured loading–unloading behavior of quartz sand, the contact pressure in macro-scale can be obtained for the ring-on-ring or rail-roller test by using Eqs. An attempt is made to compare the contact pressure derived from the continuum abrasive layer model with the contact pressure of classic Hertz's theory that did not include abrasive layer in the considerations. By plotting the curve of normal loading versus rolling torque for continuum abrasive layer model and measured data in the same diagram, it was found that there are some differences in scale between predicted and measured data points although the overall trends are very similar. The differences can come from the assumption of the model that rings are rigid ( To verify the continuum abrasive layer model, a series of finite element analyses were conducted. A layer of gasket elements with compressive behavior, which was measured in the sand crushing test, was used in the analysis. The ring-on-ring test was modeled with two different ring material definitions. One is the normal steel with the right surface hardness ( The finite element analysis is a good way to verify continuum abrasive layer model and find out the reasons why errors existed. Plotting load–displacement curves in one plot is common method to find the differences of the results. By plotting the normal loading versus compression displacements it was found that the finite element analysis model with flexible rings (Young's modulus With the abrasive layer model discussed above, it is found out that the contact pressure between two wear parts are very different from the Hertz theory for the normal abrasives concentration used in the wear tests. The peak contact pressure predicted by this model is less than half of the Hertz theory while the contact area is more than three times larger. The traditional correlation of abrasive wear amount is a function of peak contact pressure (Hertz theory), slip and other factors. A correct peak contact pressure is very important for the wear predictions especially with different geometry of wear parts and different sizes and types of abrasives. This model has been used to help understanding different wear amount for different concentration of abrasive under the same test conditions. With the correct peak contact pressure predicted by this model, the wear prediction formulas used in author's department will be updated. The driving energy is very important for the dynamic simulations of machine mechanisms. The system dynamic modeling of an earth-moving machine needs inputs of the energy consumption of the abrasive wear with different concentration. This model has provided theoretical background for the energy consumption prediction and has provided specific parameters to the simulation of a commercial track type tractor.  A continuum model of abrasive layer was proposed to investigate the relationship between driving torque and the thickness of abrasive layer of a three-body abrasive wear system. The details of forming and features of the model were discussed in this work. Based on the continuum abrasive layer model, the relationship among normal force, rotation moment, contact pressure and friction distribution will be obtained. A better understanding of external force, moment and continuous contact pressure and friction will be available. Compared to Hertz contact pressure model, a more precise contact pressure will be obtained. The relationship between driving torque and normal loading predicted by continuum abrasive layer model has similar scale and shape as measured. The finite element analysis gives a similar prediction of stiffness as continuum abrasive layer model. With this model, only a simple sand crushing test is needed to obtain relationship between driving torque and thickness of abrasive which is important for wear prediction of a three-body abrasive wear system. The author would like to thank Paul T. Corcoran for his support to publish this paper and for his overall research supervisions and guidance. He also thanks Thomas M. Congdon and Don L. Hutchens for their technical assistances in lab test machine and the author is grateful to Elmer S. Zanoria, Steve L. Hornbrook and Liqun Chi for their valuable discussions and help.