This study concerns the application of multiple correspondence analysis and factorial kriging analysis to soil data, and aims to identify spatial patterns and superficial soil anomalies of the Au and Ag deposit at Marrancos, Vila Verde. The mineral deposit can be described as a quartz auriferous shear-zone, consisting of a quartz breccia of tectonic origin hosted by metamorphic rocks (hornfels). Gold is associated with arsenopyrite and pyrite, and Ag with galena and galenobismuthite. A total of 286 soil samples were analysed for Fe, Cu, Zn, Pb, Co, Ni, Mn, Ag and Bi by atomic absorption spectrometry, As, Se, Te and Sb by atomic absorption spectrometry–hydride generation system and Au by inductively coupled plasma–atomic emission spectroscopy after extraction of the metal by an organic solvent (methyl-isobutylketone). The methodology used included (a) multiple correspondence analysis applied to soil data to obtain some factors that summarize geochemical information, (b) a structural analysis (variography) in order to account for spatial variability of these factors, and (c) factorial kriging analysis used to split these factors into their spatial components. This methodology allowed an efficient multi-element characterization of the spatial patterns as well as the identification and interpretation of significant anomalies, not always associated to Au-bearing geological structures.A large number of elements, such as Cu, Ag, As, Zn, Bi, Se, Te, Pb or Sb, are enriched at Au-bearing deposits and are useful indicators of the presence of Au (pathfinder elements). Therefore, such elements should always be considered in all types of geochemical surveys, meaning that multi-element surveys are necessary if Au is the main target. Moreover, Au forms malleable particles and is highly resistant to comminution, giving poor sample representativity and poor analytical reproducibility ( Multiple correspondence analysis ( To identify and filter the spatial structures associated to the factors it is necessary to perform a structural analysis ( The methodology used in this study comprises the application of multiple correspondence analysis followed by factorial kriging analysis, with the aim of establishing geochemical patterns and anomalies for the soils of the Au and Ag deposit at Marrancos, Vila Verde. These methodologies have been used successfully by several authors, even in other scientific domains ( The study area is located in northern Portugal ( The mineralization occurs in a NE–SW late-Hercynian sub-vertical breccia within Silurian metasediments adjacent to a Hercynian granitoid ( A Fe+As+Bi+Au+Sb+Se+Te+(Cu+Pb+Ag+Zn) assemblage defines the primary geochemical signature of the Marrancos mineralization (34.8 g/t maximum value for Au), which corresponds to a mineralogical assemblage of arsenopyrite+pyrite+bismuthinite+gold/electrum+(galena) with minor chalcopyrite, pyrrotite, sphalerite and sulphosalts ( The soil is a brown soil type ( The vegetation is mostly pines, eucalyptus, A maritime temperate climate prevails in the area with a mean annual rainfall of 1500 mm and an average temperature of 15–16 °C. The topography of the area is smooth. The soil samples were collected in a rectilinear grid at equal distances (40 m) along evenly spaced lines (50 m). The lines are perpendicular to the NE–SW trending quartz breccia ( The 286 soil samples were analysed for Fe, Cu, Zn, Pb, Co, Ni, Mn, Ag and Bi by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). An aqua regia attack was used for Ag and Bi ( The precision of the analytical results is based on routine replicate sampling (30 duplicates) according to the method described by The data set used in this study comprises 286 soil samples collected from the upper horizon of the soil. Fourteen chemical elements were analyzed for each soil sample, generating a data matrix of 14 columns and 286 rows.  Multiple correspondence analysis (MCA) is a method of data analysis ( For strongly skewed variables (As, Au, Sb, Te, Se, Ag and Bi), a 4-class histogram was calculated whilst for the variables Mn, Cu, Zn, Pb, Co, Ni and Fe a 3-class histogram was calculated. However, Ag and Se were recalculated with a 3-class histogram since they had empty classes with a 4-class division. Thus, each variable was divided into 4 data groups for As, Au, Sb, Te and Bi, and 3 data groups for the remaining variables, with all values having the same weight. The variables were recoded with indicators ranging from 1 for low values to 3/4 for high values. The original data matrix is now transformed in a 286×47 indicator matrix. MCA was calculated on a 47×47 Burt matrix (  The loadings of the samples on the first 2 factors (F1 and F2) produced by MCA were then used to do a multi-element study of the mineral deposit. The variography allows the description of the spatial pattern of a continuous attribute such as the anomalous concentrations of a mineral deposit with economic interest ( In this study, in order to include the spatial structure, direct variograms of F1 and F2 (major axes of MCA) were computed for the main directions of the sampling grid: 5°, 45°, 81° and 135° in Factorial Kriging Analysis (FKA) is a geostatistical method used in geochemical exploration for filtering purposes ( The structural analysis of the data set (resulting from MCA) suggests that the spatial variability for variables F1 and F2 is the sum of 2 anisotropic spherical structures, C1 representing local events and C2 representing regional events. These were the basis for estimating the corresponding spatial components Y1 and Y2 through univariate factorial kriging analysis. For each variable, Y1 represents the local structure whilst Y2 represents the regional structure of the phenomena. Maps of factors F1 and F2, and correspondent spatial components Y1 and Y2 were made for F1 and F2 ( The analysis of factor F1 ( The application of factorial kriging analysis to the factors gives more detailed information about the anomalies for F1 and F2. Mapping of the first component (Y1) of F1 shows a N45°E anomoly and 4 other small anomalies (A in The application of multivariate analysis to soil data from the Marrancos survey area led to the recognition of geochemical patterns for categorized variables. Multiple correspondence analysis generates 2 factors (F1 and F2) that jointly account for about 45% of the explained variance. Results show that variables Au, As, Sb, Te and Bi (variables associated to the Au mineralization) are strongly associated with F1 while the variables Zn, Pb, Co, Ni, Mn, Fe and Ag, minor elements in the mineralization, are associated with F2. High values for Cu and Se have an indistinct behaviour since they are related to both factors. To account for the spatial structure, direct variograms were computed for the main directions of the sampling grid. The spatial model deduced from the experimental variograms shows two structures of continuity. FKA was applied to obtain the decomposition of F1 and F2 into their spatial components, and allowed the identification of geochemical patterns and anomalies of the variables, representative of groups of geochemical variables with a subsequent geochemical interpretation. Maps for F1 and F2, and its spatial components Y1, Y2, show that: (a) F1, F1–Y1 and F1–Y2 anomalies point towards the N45°E quartz breccia (the regional mineralised structure), although mapping for F1–Y1 also enhances small N45°E anomalies that are associated with small quartz veins that occur in the area; (b) the case of F2 and its spatial components shows a high degree of complexity and can be interpreted as areas disturbed by tailings, garbage dumps and farms. The composite methodology applied here was effective in the detection and interpretation of “multi-element” anomalies related to the Au and Ag deposit at Marrancos, Vila Verde. The first author wishes to thank the Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia for the post-doc scholarship grant. The authors also wish to express their gratitude to the reviewers for their helpful and constructive remarks.