Heat transfer to and mass transfer from NaCl–water droplets are investigated both numerically and experimentally. A new model is presented and used to simulate saline water droplet evaporation. The model is robust enough to be applied for various initial concentrations and conditions of the droplet, ambient conditions, and dissolved media properties. The model is validated using experimental data obtained in this study on top of those already available in the literature. The experimental apparatus as well as the processing routines to optically measure droplet evaporation at a range of ambient conditions are presented. The droplet was suspended using a glass filament. Data were collected for droplets with an initial radius of 500μm at three temperatures 25°C, 35°C, and 45°C and three air velocities 0.5m/s, 1.5m/s, and 2.5m/s to provide a comprehensive validation dataset. Based on experimental and simulation data, a correlation is presented that captures the start time of solid formation. This time plays an important role in cooling tower design as it shows the time that the outer surface of the droplet dries. Using the validated model, it is shown that for 500μm radius droplets with 3% initial mass concentration the start time of reaching the final size is 17% less than evaporation time of a pure water droplet. Also, the net energy required to evaporate the droplet falls by 7.3% compared to a pure water droplet. For 5% initial concentration these values are 24.9% and 12.2%, respectively. Using saline water in spray-cooling has two major effects: the energy extracted from the air per unit droplet volume is reduced (which can be compensated for by increasing the liquid flow rate). Moreover, compared to the time taken for the evaporation of a pure water droplet, the period with wet surface is shorter as a result of crust formation around the saline water droplet. This allows a shorter distance between spray nozzles and heat exchangers.surface area (m Spalding number mass concentration specific heat (J/kg constant in experimentally obtained correlation vapour diffusion coefficient (m experimental correlation heat transfer coefficient (W/m mass transfer coefficient (m/s) specific heat of evaporation (J/kg) thermal conductivity (W/m mass (kg) mass transfer rate (kg/s) mass flow rate (kg/s) molecular weight (kg/mol) Nusselt number pressure (Pa) Prandtl number radial space coordinate (m) radius (m) universal gas constant (J/mol Reynolds number relative humidity Schmidt number Sherwood number Stanton number time (s) dimensionless time temperature (K) weighting factor for transition to crust formation empirical power coefficient crust porosity temperature ratio density (kg/m crust droplet gas solid vapour wet-bulb wet-core initial condition free stream Improving the efficiency of dry cooling towers has always been a challenge for designers. For instance, in arid areas production capacity losses of about 50% are predicted Applying spray cooling in dry areas, however, faces an obvious challenge of fresh water scarcity. However, as an alternative, saline water might be available in spray-assisted dry cooling towers (hybrid). For example, in arid areas in Queensland, Australia a large volume of water is produced in the production of natural gas from coal-bed methane. Methane desorbs from coal if pressure is decreased in the underground reservoir by water pumping To simulate the evaporation process from solid-containing droplet, researchers have suggested two The droplet is warmed/cooled to be close to ambient conditions. Evaporation takes place during an isothermal phase. First particles form at the bottom of the droplet The remaining water is then evaporated followed by complete drying. The slow formation of the crust is considered in the mathematical modelling by Sadafi et al. Handscomb and Kraft described a generalised model with different possible sub-models for evolution of the droplets following shell formation which includes slow boiling after dry shell formation Recent experimental studies on a single droplet have been performed using thin filaments to hold the droplet. Temperature measurements of the droplet were performed using two thermocouples in the experimental study by Qi Lin and Chen The four-stage model developed by Sadafi et al. According to this model, during the first stage of evaporation, the temperature of a saline water droplet adjusts to approach the wet-bulb temperature. Evaporation in this stage is negligible compared to the later stages. Next, the second stage starts and the droplet size decreases. This stage is an approximately isothermal process with a nearly constant radius reduction and drying rate  Assuming axisymmetric shape for the droplet, homogenous properties (in the temperature adjusting and isothermal evaporation stages), and neglecting directional forces (e.g. gravity) To calculate the heat and mass transfer coefficients at the gas–liquid interface when gas is forced to flow over (and around) the droplet (during the first and second stages), the correlations from Ranz and Marshall In the model developed by Sadafi et al. A Lagrangian formulation of the flow field is used to solve the governing equations for the first and second stages. A grid with 64 cells in the radial direction is implemented and a fixed time step of 0.1 From a design analysis point of view, predicting the start time of solid formation (beginning of the fourth stage) is a key factor. This, Dimensional analysis was used to determine a relationship between evaporation time, Experimental data collected as part of the current study, and presented in Section In this section, the experimental results for water droplets containing NaCl are presented and compared with those from theoretical model. A schematic of the test rig is given in As the evaporation progresses (especially after solid formation) the photo capture may be inaccurate because the droplet loses its axisymmetric shape. This is because the camera only captures one view of the droplet outline at a time. Therefore, in the case of a concave or convex shape on the droplet surface, the actual size is missed by the camera. To overcome this issue a computer controlled low speed (less than 5 Since the objective of this research is to study the evaporation behaviour of droplet solution in dry cooling towers, relevant conditions are chosen for experimental tests. A typical dry cooling tower in Queensland operates at around 45 Droplet diameter was continuously monitored and recorded using an optical microscope and video camera to measure the changes in the droplet size during the experiment. The images are processed using MATLAB to extract droplet surface area. Droplet dimensions are determined by distinguishing dim pixels in each image and subtracting the filament volume from the measured value. This results in the accurate droplet size at each time step. Using the servo motor allows estimating a more accurate size for the droplet by averaging images taking at different angles. The minimum and maximum frequency of the servo motor is 0.1 Each experimental test was repeated at least three times. The results fell within the respective uncertainty bounds, thereby demonstrating that our laboratory studies are repeatable with a high level of reliability. Following the procedure recommended by Moffat The accuracies of the K-type thermocouples to measure the dry-bulb and wet-bulb temperatures were ±0.25 The results obtained from the experiment are presented in this section. Initial droplet and air conditions are listed in The measured and predicted particle volumes are shown in According to   Initial conditions of the tests for 5% initial concentration are stated in   As shown in  Early formation of floating solid particles before reaching critical concentration was observed during the experiments and proved the existence of a transient stage and consequently gradual crust formation. According to Eq. Point “B” shows the end of transient stage (start of drying stage where the droplet diameter remains constant). Point “B” is defined as the point, where the experimentally measured volume is within 1% of the final volume. The corresponding lines to determine the start and end of transient stage are shown in  In addition to the experimental and model results, additional experimental tests for 10% initial concentration and different temperatures were performed to show the generality of Eq.  Using the model results, the fraction of start time of crust formation for saline droplets to the evaporation time of pure water droplets with the same initial conditions are listed in From the energy point of view, using saline water in spray cooling systems affects the heat transferred to the droplets. The evaporative heat transfer declines because the initial concentration of the droplets with the same sizes increases (the water content decreases).  According to A robust mathematical model was presented that can be applied for a wide range of initial and boundary conditions to predict the behaviour of evaporating saline water droplets. This model was validated with a comprehensive set of experimental tests. These tests were performed for different air velocities, gas temperature and initial concentrations. The experimental correlation suggests the start time of crust formation. Replacing pure water by saline water in cooling systems has two important effects: lower heat transfer rate, and a shorter time with wet surface. The first effect can be compensated by using a larger volume of water whilst the second effect allows a decrease of the distance between the nozzle and heat exchanger. Further work is needed to study the behaviour of droplets in spray cooling systems. Specifically the total displacement, corrosion levels and deposition of solid particles need to be investigated. None declared. This research was performed as part of the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI), a project supported by the Australian Government, through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA).