An operational optimization control for a mineral grinding process is limited by unmeasured load parameter inside a ball mill given its complex and unclear production mechanism. A mechanism characteristic analysis and soft measuring method for mill load parameter based on mechanical vibration and acoustic signals in the mineral grinding process is reviewed in this study. The modeling process based on the mechanical vibration and acoustic signals for the mill load parameters are summarized as a class of intelligent selective ensemble modeling problem. The applied soft measuring strategies for mill load parameter measurement are divided into three types, namely, off-line modeling, online modeling, and virtual sample generation, followed by a detailed discussion. Possible directions for mill load soft measurement techniques are provided for future research. These techniques include a vibration mechanism-based multi-component signal analysis, off-line intelligent ensemble soft measuring model based on simulation operational expert cognitive process, online updating strategy based on intelligently identified samples, and a mill load status intelligent recognition mode based on reinforcement learning strategy.Operational optimization control and reduction on energy consumption for the entire production process of mineral processing enterprises are urgent problems that should be solved ( A mill load is defined as the instantaneous total charge of a ball mill and is composed of a new feed ore, slurry, water, and steel balls inside the mill ( The mill load measurement problem should be analyzed in terms of the practical running conditions of the mineral grinding process and the grinding mechanism inside the mill. The latter involves many different disciplines, such as crushing mechanics, slurry rheology, mechanical vibration and noise, physical mechanics, and physical chemistry, thereby leading to metal wear and corrosion. A numerical simulation based on a discrete element method (DEM) can aid in analyzing the complex grinding mechanism and constructing the mill load prediction model with mechanism support ( The rest of this paper is organized as follows: A grinding circuit (GC) releases valuable minerals ( In The fresh ore is continuously conveyed into the wet preconcentration by a conveyor belt, and period-added steel balls are fed in Stage I of the GC with a certain amount of mill water. Wet preconcentration is used to select valuable ores by a magnetic field that continuously flows in the ball mill when recycling hydrocyclones. Ores are crushed to fine particles in the ball mill, and a continuous flow of mixed ore slurry is discharged from the mill and flows into the sump. A certain amount of water flow (called sump water) are added to the sump, and the pulp of sump is pumped into the hydrocyclone at a constant pressure. The feed stream to hydrocyclone is separated into an overflow that contains fine particles and an underflow that contains coarse particles (recycle). The underflow is recycled to the ball mill for regrinding, and overflow is the final product of Stage I and is transported to Stage II of the GC. The grinding process of Stage II is the same as Stage I, which is also a closed-loop process. The final concentrate ore is obtained by using the concentrated magnetic filter.  The outlet load is ore slurry and can be represented as The inlet and outlet loads of the ball mill cannot be accurately calculated if all the required instruments, such as levels, motor power, rotation speed, pH, slurry density, slurry pressure, and flow rate are installed in the GC. Therefore, the material, ball, and water load inside the ball mill based on the first principle model of the grinding process are difficult to measure. Therefore, other methods should be used. In practice, technicians/experts are constantly required to determine the mill load status by using the information from different sources to maintain the efficient working conditions of the ball mill. The right-top side of Mill load is defined as the instantaneous total charge of the ball mill and is composed of the new feed ore, slurry, water, and steel balls inside the mill ( In the practical mineral grinding process, the mill load parameters, such as MBVR, PD, and CVR, are constantly used to represent the running status of the mill load. Their definitions are presented as follows ( Mill load parameters are considered the key process variables in the mineral grinding process. The high values of these parameters induce overloading. These parameters may cause “the mill to eject the ore” in addition to the particle coarsening of mill outlets, “mill blockage,” and the interruption of the production process. Conversely, the low values of these parameters cause underloading, and such parameters may result in “the mill that operates under ball load alone,” thereby wasting power, increasing steel consumption, and damaging the grinding devices. Therefore, the mapping among the mill load status, mill load, and mill load parameters can be represented as Mechanical acoustic signals are constantly used by operational experts in estimating mill load parameters and status. Therefore, the mineral, ball, and water loads inside the mill can be calculated based on the estimation values of mill load parameters (MBVR, PD, and CVR) using the following equations: Based on the above analysis, the mechanical signals based on the mill load soft measuring process can be expressed as The important step is constructing soft measuring models between mechanical signals and mill load parameters. Therefore, the production mechanism and characteristics of such mechanical signals should be analyzed. A ball mill is a heavy rotating device. The mineral load comminution process mainly relies on the cyclical movement of the ball load ( The motion track of the ball can be divided into ascending and descending phases. In the ascending phase, the ball rises from dropping point B to leaving point A with a circular track that follows the rotation of mill shell. In the descending phase, the ball descends from leaving point A to dropping point B at a parabolic trajectory. Therefore, ball motion is divided into four parts, namely, falling, impact, grinding, and sliding, as indicated by the red dotted lines in In the mineral grinding process, the ball motion is also influenced by buoyancy and viscous effect of the mineral pulp. The friction coefficient between the steel ball and mill liner determines the “shoulder” zone of the ball that leaves the mill liner and the “toe” zone of the ball dropping instance. The rebound coefficient between the ball and mill liner influences the rebound velocity. Both coefficients are affected by mill load parameters. The impact and peel-grinding energy of a single ball to the mill shell are related to many factors, such as mill rotation speed ratio, mill load parameters, pulp viscosity, and temperature. Thus, the impact force at point B The impact forces of the outermost layer (the first layer) of the ball load on any point of the mill shell during a mill rotating period can be represented as The shell vibration caused by In practice, the mill contains numerous balls. These balls are layered and thrown simultaneously at different impact forces. These impact forces with different amplitudes and frequencies overlay one another. The mass imbalance and installment bias of the ball mill can also initiate the shell vibration. These signals are coupled and layered. Thus, the shell vibration signal can be represented as The acoustic emission of shell vibration, that is, structural noise, is the main component of the acoustic signal. Noises within the ball mill are continuously reflected because the mill shell is an acoustic hard wall (i.e., a strong reflector). Then, a mixed sound field is formed. The acoustic energy that is transmitted from the ball mill through the shell and bolts is called air noise. Moreover, the measured acoustic signal contains noise from adjacent mills and other grinding devices. Thus, the acoustic signal consists of structure, air, and environmental noises at a minimum, as exhibited in Thus, the acoustic signal can be represented as Therefore, shell vibration and acoustic signals are characterized by multiple components and time scales. They must be adaptively decomposed for building a meaningful and reasonable soft sensor model. Mechanical vibration signals at different locations are used to build mill load soft measuring models for different types of ball mills in various application backgrounds. The measuring devices are installed on an industrial-scale dry ball mill (only ball and material loads are inside the mill) in the power and cement plants. For example, the shaft seat vibration detection for power plant coal mills ( The shell vibration signal measuring devices are also installed on an industrial-scale semi-autogenous (SAG, with larger characteristics of low ball load and particle size in material load than in the balls) mill. For example, The aforementioned analysis indicates that shell vibration and acoustic signals consist of different sub-signals with various interesting data. Normally, domain experts can hear acoustic signals to estimate a familiar mill load. Long-term economic working conditions are difficult to maintain considering the insufficient vigor and differences in experience despite the monitoring of the mill load status. In fact, the ears act as sets of band-pass filters to discern valuable sub-signals from the original ones. Moreover, the human brain is characterized by a multi-level structure that can determine valuable multi-source features and multiple operating conditions to make a final decision. Thus, the estimation process by experts must be simulated through the data-driven modeling method based on the analysis of shell vibration and acoustic production mechanism. In addition, the time variant characteristics of the ball mill system must update the off-line training model. A sufficient number of well-represented training samples may be obtained by disregarding either economic benefits or an extended waiting period.  The valuable modeling samples can be obtained in the experimental design and restarting phases of the ball mill given the closed rotating working characteristics and complex grinding mechanism of the ball mill. This restriction suggests that only domain experts with extensive experience can estimate the mill load parameters. Compared with the estimation process that involves such experts, the data-driven modeling method should focus on several problems as follows: (1) decomposing signals similar to human ears, (2) selecting effective features in a manner similar to the multi-level feature extraction and selection processes of the human brain, (3) constructing an estimation model that mimics the experts’ selective fuse multi-source information and historical experience process, (4) online updating the soft measuring model, and (5) using VSG to enhance the prediction accuracy and robustness of the off-line constructed prediction model. Thus, the mill load modeling based on mechanical signals encounters training data, which are characterized by small samples, high dimension, and incomplete conditions. In summary, the mill load parameter modeling problem is selectively fusing valuable information to make predictions. Thus, this problem is a selective ensemble modeling problem based on minimal sample high-dimensional data. The nonlinear mapping between mill load parameters and different feature subsets of multiple sensors can be described as: The DEM is a common simulation tool for particle flow analysis, and the DEM simulation of the grinding process can aid in analyzing the grinding mechanism and formulating reasonable decision and prediction. From the theoretical and experimental viewpoints, the mixed movement status of the falling and dropping steel ball is analyzed ( The abovementioned DEM-based simulation studies are conducted for the dry mill. In Ref. In Ref. Therefore, a research that combines the DEM numerical simulation results and the actual measured shell vibration signal should be conducted. In theory, explaining the grinding mechanism inside the ball mill and the production mechanism of the shell vibration can be helpful. Moreover, extracting the frequency spectrum features of the mechanical signal and constructing the soft measuring model with reasonable physical explanations can provide a theoretical guidance. At least three sub-problems should be focused on to construct a mill load parameter soft measuring model based on mechanical vibration and acoustic signals. These sub-problems are time/frequency domain pre-processing, mechanical spectral data dimension reduction, and soft measuring method based on a mechanical spectral feature in terms of selective fusion multi-condition samples and multi-source features. Fast Fourier transform (FFT) is a commonly used method for analyzing mill shell vibrations and acoustic signals, which are called single-scale frequency spectrum ( Other sub-signals cannot be provided with reasonable physical explanations considering the insufficient analysis on the ball mill grinding mechanism. Thus, numerical simulation and domain knowledge should be investigated to overcome this shortcoming. These IMF-based frequency spectra are called multi-scale ones relative to the single-scale frequency spectrum. Ensemble EMD (EEMD) can overcome the mix-mode problem of the EMD by using noise assist technology ( Studies show that local mode decomposition outperforms the abovementioned methods in terms of the effectiveness of time/frequency analysis ( In general, these time/frequency methods can provide interesting sub-signals from various viewpoints that can be used to simulate the band-pass filter of human ears. Several valued sub-signals with reasonable physical interpretation can be obtained in the future given the support of the grinding mechanism analysis and numerical simulation results. The single- and multi-scale frequency spectrum data contain hundreds and thousands of input features. For example, the curves of the shell vibration multi-scale frequency spectrum with the former 12 sub-signals based on EMD are demonstrated in  A principal component analysis (PCA)-based feature extraction method for vibration frequency spectrum is proposed in Ref. The mutual information (MI)-based feature selection method is a more comprehensive approach than the other method ( In To utilize the advantages of each type of features, such as extracted features based on KPCA and selected features based on MI, adaptive GA (AGA) is used to re-select these features ( Generally, feature extraction and selection methods have their own advantages and disadvantages. Dimension reduction based on supporting the grinding mechanism should be investigated. Moreover, feature reduction algorithms for online and robust frequency spectrum should be focused on in future studies. Zeng et al. selected different single-scale frequency sub-bands of the mill shaft seat vibration and acoustic signals based on manually set threshold values ( The ensemble model can improve the generalization, validity, and reliability of the prediction model. An important problem in ensemble modeling is constructing ensembles. Many methods, such as sub-sampling the training examples, manipulating the input features, manipulating the output targets, and injecting randomness, have been proposed. A high-dimensional problem of the mechanical frequency spectrum, most of the mill load parameter models have focused on “manipulating In the practical application of the mineral grinding process, operational experts identify the mill load to selectively fuse the multi-source information but use the accumulated historical experience. That is, constructing a mill load parameter model by simulating the expert’s cognition mechanism that requires the valuable multi-source information and the representative multi-condition training samples. The above SEN modeling approaches only use the “manipulating the input features”-based ensemble constructing strategy in terms of selective fusion multi-source information. Meanwhile, the GA-based SEN ( In The dual-layer SEN modeling strategy is suitable for the single- and multi-scale frequency spectra. Several in-depth studies, such as the adaptive selection of kernel parameters, detailed interpretations of the different sub-signals based on numerical simulation results and laboratory scale mill experiments, and industrial mill application research, should be performed in the future. Generally, the industrial process soft measuring model is constructed off-line based on historical data. The off-line modeling data should cover the working conditions as much as possible, and the model parameters should also adopt the changing working conditions. The modeling industrial objects have time-varying characteristics, which are mainly influenced by raw material properties, product quality, production, and environmental climate. Process and sensor drifts change the measured signal dynamics, which are called concept drift in a machine learning domain ( Considerable research has been conducted to identify the new samples that can represent the drift characteristics of the modeling plant; as the following methods have been utilized: recursive least squares and SVMs based on kernel feature space approximate linear dependence (ALD) ( Recursive SVM ( Therefore, many online updating model algorithms based on mechanical signals should be explored. The structure and parameter updating of the grinding mechanism-based ensemble model is necessary. In practice, the valuable shell vibration and acoustic modeling data can only be obtained in two phases, namely, the experimental design and restarting phases of the ball mill. Only accurate true value can be obtained in the former phase. Thus, a sufficient number of well-represented training samples may be obtained by disregarding either the economic benefits or extended waiting period. Therefore, considerable studies must be conducted to address the problem of modeling high-dimensional small samples. A method for solving this problem involves artificially generating virtual samples based on the domain knowledge of the studied problem and the originally available samples. In the image recognition field, Poggio and Vetter first proposed the concept of VSG ( Therefore, considerable research on combining VSG with mill load parameter off-line prediction model should be conducted. The accuracy and stability of the soft measuring model for mill load parameter should be improved. In this section, different soft measuring methods for mill load parameter and their characteristics are summarized and explained, and their limitations in terms of statistical characteristics are also presented. This study aims to address these limitations. Moreover, the planning and methods used to conduct this study are discussed. In The explanation and limitations of these methods from different viewpoints are presented as follows: Most recent studies are based on the multi-scale frequency spectrum. In a recent study ( Most of these approaches are based on the off-line modeling method. The main purpose of most of the off-line modeling methods is to selectively fuse multi-source spectral feature sub-sets ( Most of the studies are based on the laboratory-scale ball mill. This limitation is due to the true value of the mill load parameter in the industrial-scale ball mill cannot be obtained easily compared with the laboratory-scale ball mill ( The KPLS-based methods are used extensively in the present methods ( A special feature selection method based on SC and PLS for considering spectral data characteristics is proposed by using the single- and multi-scale frequency spectra ( The abovementioned discussion shows that considerable works should be conducted for a profound interpretation of the grinding mechanism and industrial application of the mill load soft measuring method. Thus, the method and purpose of recent studies can support the industrial application objective in different backgrounds must be addressed. Most of the studies are based on laboratory experiments for wet ball mill. However, the measuring devices of a mechanical signal have been installed on the industrial-scale dry ball and SAG mills ( In this study, several processes, such as the production process of the mechanical vibration and acoustic signals and its numerical simulation, operational expert cognitive process to a familiar ball mill, and soft measuring method for different mill load parameters, are reviewed. The relationships among these problems are demonstrated in In The foundation of all the other parts, except the “human brain experience model,” is to understand the “production process of the mechanical vibration and acoustic signals.” That is, understanding the “grinding mechanism inside the ball mill” and the “mechanical signal production mechanism” can aid in building a meaningful “numerical simulation” model. Numerical simulation can provide the mechanism support to the “soft measuring method,” which can aid in constructing the mill load parameter model with characteristics of a detailed physical explanation. The combination of the “human brain model” can cause the operational expert to monitor the mill load parameter to their familiar ball mill. Therefore, further studies on the modeling object (i.e., ball mill system) are the basis for all the other problems. The construction of the “numerical simulation” model can aid in the profound understanding of the mechanical vibration and acoustic production mechanism for containing interesting mill load parameter information in these mechanical signals and the support of the frequency spectral feature selection and model construction theoretically. In fact, a detailed and repeated analysis of the mill shell mechanical vibration and acoustic signals for mill load parameter modeling can be performed by coupling different commercial numerical simulation software with a certain customize development. On the basis of the multi-scale and multi-component characteristics of mechanical vibration and acoustic signals and the inference and compensation mechanism of the human brain experience model, the “operational expert cognitive process to the familiar ball mill” can be realized in many practical industrial processes. In fact, this process provides a motivation to simulate the human auditory perception mechanism for constructing the soft measuring model. Therefore, further cognition of the artificial intelligence in the industrial process is crucial to achieving the modeling mill load parameter. The “soft measuring method based on different modeling strategy” obtains the support from four parts, namely, a mechanism support from the “production process of the mechanical vibration and acoustic signals,” feature selection and modeling construction support from the “numerical simulation,” motivation to simulate the human auditory perception mechanism from the “operational expert cognitive process to the familiar ball mill,” and inference and compensation mechanisms for the soft measuring model construction from the “human brain experience model.” Overall, a clear understanding of the different parts is necessary for building an effective soft measuring model for mill load parameter. Moreover, the principle is also suitable for analyzing the similar industrial processes and modeling the difficult-to-measure process parameter in these processes. Most of the soft measuring methods for mill load parameter discussed in this study focuses on the wet ball mill and are based on laboratory-scale mill. Thus, a bottleneck occurs for their application to the industrial-scale mill. The industrial application problem should be solved by constructing the intelligent soft measuring method based on the simulation of the operational expert cognitive behavior. Moreover, the support from the practical industrial enterprise and his operating experts is crucial. Thus, we must understand that the inapplicability of the existing studies to practical uses may be due to the grinding process can run with the optimum mill load status by using excellent experts. Thus, constructing the mill load status recognition mode is necessary at the first phase in terms of simulating the intelligent cognitive process of the optimum operational expert. Then, the soft measuring method for mill load parameter can be realized in the following phase. “No free lunch theory” indicates that we can construct a special model for a special problem ( In this study, a review of the current developments on mill load soft measuring methods based on mechanical vibration and acoustic signals for the mineral grinding process is presented. An analysis of the mill load measuring problem in the practical grinding process, the mill grinding mechanism based on numerical simulation, and the soft measuring method of mill load parameter based on off-line, online, and virtual sample generation are discussed in details. The reviewed problem is difficult for the industry and academe. Most of the existing data-driven modeling methods cannot successfully solve the reviewed problem. The intelligent cognitive mechanism of operational experts should be completely imitated and its shortcomings be overcome simultaneously. Thus, the prediction stability of the soft measuring method based on the mechanical signal can be guaranteed. Several aspects should be focused on, although many interesting studies have been conducted. Shell vibration mechanism and multi-component signal analysis: A numerical simulation of the ball mill grinding process should be investigated in terms of constructing and assisting soft measuring model for mill load parameter. The reasonable interpretation and analysis of the different components of shell vibration signals can be obtained by combining numerical simulation and multi-scale time/frequency decomposition results. This process can provide a support mechanism for frequency spectrum feature selection and construct a significant soft sensor model. Moreover, this process can provide a support mechanism for online updating of the soft sensor model. Construction of off-line intelligent ensemble mill load parameter soft measuring model: The valuable sub-signals from the decomposition results of the original shell vibration and acoustic signals should be selected. Thus, a data-driven model with strong interpretative and clear physical meaning can be obtained. However, such soft measuring model can only fit the training data with the optimal performance, thus indicating a weak extrapolation performance. Operational experts can effectively infer and identify mill loads based on their years of experience. In theory, mechanism analysis based on numerical simulation of grinding process can support the extraction of fuzzy rules. Selective ensemble fuzzy reasoning model based on such mechanism support demonstrates robust extrapolation and self-adaptive capabilities. Therefore, intelligently ensemble the data-driven and fuzzy reasoning models is one of the effective strategies. Moreover, the prediction error can be compensated with several neural network-based nonlinear models. Online updating of a soft measurement model for mill load parameter: The valuable modeling data under different grinding conditions are frequently obtained gradually. Most of the true values are provided by operational experts in terms of discrete and inaccurate style. The updating of off-line soft sensor model using these discrete true values and the updating of ensemble model structure with the intelligently identified updating samples adaptively should be investigated. Thus, the online updating algorithm should adopt the time-varying characteristics and selectively fuse the multi-source information simultaneously. A certain support based on the grinding mechanism is necessary. Construction of mill load status recognition model: Only small and incomplete modeling data can be obtained in the practical industrial process. The research should focus on data-driven mill load status recognition model based on small samples with labeled data. Moreover, the unsupervised depth feature extraction method based on a large number of unlabeled data should be investigated to support the automatic acquisition of knowledge rules. Furthermore, an intelligent ensemble fuzzy inference recognition model with robust extrapolation capability can be constructed by using the operational experts to correct the rationality and completeness of these fuzzy rules. The two types of models should be integrated as an ensemble model, which should be dynamically updated with reinforcement This work is partially supported by the