Transparent conducting tin(IV) oxide thin films have been developed with a sol–gel method, which is a low-cost process for the electrode materials of solar cell substrate. The precursor solution was made of tin isopropoxide dissolved in isopropyl alcohol. The hydrolysis rate was controlled by the addition of triethanolamine. Dipping and spin-coating technique were applied to coat tin oxide on borosilicate glass. The resistivity of the thin film was lower than 0.01Ω-cm and the transmittance was higher than 90% in a visible range.Transparent conducting tin(IV) oxide coated glass are currently receiving attention and being developed for solar cell substrate and LCD display due to its high transmittance and low resistivity. The high transmittance in visible light is due to high band gap (over 3 Tin(IV) precursor solution was prepared from tin(IV) isopropoxide dissolved in isopropyl alcohol. To prevent rapid hydrolysis, triethanolamine (TEA) was added. Tin(IV) isopropoxide was dissolved and stirred for 2 Spin- and dip-coating techniques were applied. In spin coating, spin-coating machine can control the rotational speed and time. In dip coating, dip-coating machine can control the lifting speed with step motor. Precursor solution coated glass was cured for 1 The thickness was measured from SEM image of cross-sectional view. The transmittance in visible wavelength range was measured with UV-VIS spectrophotometer. The electrical conductivity and sheet resistance were measured and calculated with four-point probe and hole measurement equipment. X-ray diffractometer was used to analyze the surface crystalline. To analyze the temperature effects on crystalline, TG-DTA was used. TEA was added to the precursor solution to control the rate of hydrolysis. When the molar ratio of TEA to tin(IV) isopropoxide is <1, the precursor solution was gelatinized. To prevent rapid hydrolysis of precursor solution, the ratio should be maintained as at least 1. However, when the molar ratio is too high, stains were observed on the film surface. It is due to the late vaporization of TEA during the heat treatment. To examine the heat treatment characterization, TG-DTA analysis was conducted on the powder obtained from drying of precursor solution. Even the characteristics of powder and film were not exactly the same, the heat treatment temperature can be obtained from the TG-DTA analysis. The optimum thickness and conductivity of the film was hardly obtained at once in sol–gel method. And then multiple coating was required to obtain the desired film thickness. The transmittance of the film was measured with application number. The important conclusions derived from the research conducted are enumerated below: The stable sol precursor solution was obtained from tin(IV) isopropoxide. To control and inhibit the hydration rate, the ratio of TEA to tin(IV) isopropoxide should be at least 1. The thickness of coatings were 50 and 100 The transmittance of thin film, with 1 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Korean Ministry of Education Research Fund for Advanced Materials in 1997.