Discrete element methods can be based on either penalties or impulses to resolve collisions. A generic impulse based method, the energy tracking method (ETM), is described to resolve collisions between multiple non-convex bodies in three dimensions. As opposed to the standard sequential impulse method (SQM) and simultaneous impulse method (SMM), which also apply impulses to avoid penetration, the energy tracking method changes the relative velocity between two colliding bodies iteratively yet simultaneously. Its main novelty is that impulses are applied gradually at multi-point contacts, and energy changes at the contact points are tracked to ensure conservation. Three main steps are involved in the propagation of the impulses during the single- and multi-contact resolution: compression, restitution-related energy loss, and separation. Numerical tests show that the energy tracking method captures the energy conservation property of perfectly elastic single- and multi-point collisions. ETM exhibits improved angular velocity estimation, as compared to SMM and SQM, as demonstrated by two numerical examples that model multi-point contact between box-shaped objects. Angles of repose estimated for multi-object pack repositioning of spheres, cubes, and crosses are in good agreement with the reported experimental values.The numerical simulation of collision-driven interactions between a large number of bodies has many applications in engineering, ranging from the simulation of rock fragmentation in mining engineering processes The impulse method, first proposed by Hahn The penalty method iteratively computes penalty parameters to enforce collisions as a set of non-penetration constraints The hybrid finite element–discrete element method In analytical methods, the simulation of non-penetration constraints is treated as a linear complementary problem Energy conservation is critical to ensure stability of a numerical method, especially for contact and collision problems The generalized impulse method presented here, called the energy tracking method (ETM), addresses the individual shortcomings of the sequential impulse method (SQM) and simultaneous impulse method (SMM). It is aimed at efficiently and accurately modeling high-frequency collisions of non-convex bodies. ETM treats multiple concurrent collisions as a series of single-point collisions, and introduces an additional level of iteration at each collision time step. At the beginning of the collision analysis the relative velocity is negative, indicating that the bodies are on a collision course. An impulse is applied to each body to avoid penetration, in a step-wise manner, incrementally increasing the relative velocity until it reaches zero. At each step, velocities at each collision point are updated. During this process, kinetic energy decreases and elastic energy at the contact points increases. Subsequently, the relative normal velocity continues to increase until all of the elastic energy is released. As opposed to the standard SQM, ETM gradually applies impulses to change relative normal velocities of multiple collisions iteratively yet simultaneously. In contrast to the SMM, ETM yields low angular velocity errors when dealing with multi-contact collisions, due to its ability to simulate the interaction of forces during collision. ETM is advantageous as it processes collisions in a simultaneous, albeit iterative, manner. Energy is shown to be conservative for large multi-body systems of spheres, cubes and non-convex crosses. Numerical experiments evaluating the angle of repose of systems of these objects compare well with macroscopic laboratory experiments reported in the literature The energy tracking method is based on two levels of iteration: iteration for time steps, In SQM and SMM, the relative normal velocity is directly inverted. The energy tracking method (ETM), on the other hand, gradually applies the impulses to change the relative normal velocity over a set of iterations, applying impulses to multiple collisions at the same time. This procedure is described for a single-point collision. Without loss of generality, the colliding objects are assumed not to deform. A body First, an assumption for the change of relative velocity before and after applying an impulse without considering energy loss is described. Energy loss caused by the impulse in the normal direction of the contact surface is handled by Stronge’s hypothesis Once the change of relative velocity is known, impulses are computed from the collision matrix ETM applies Stronge’s hypothesis For the following analysis, a local orthogonal coordinate system in Mirtich   According to Eq.    According to Eq. By manipulating Eq. In SQM and SMM, the impulse is defined by Eq.  The tangential impulse is derived as follows. Once collisions are identified, a series of impulses are applied to avoid penetration. Unlike SQM and SMM, ETM does not invert the relative normal velocity,  The compression of two colliding bodies is modeled while taking friction into account. The assumption of the change of relative normal velocity from iteration Once the assumption for the change of the relative normal velocity is established, the impulse is obtained from Eqs. At the end of the first stage, the work done by the normal impulse reaches the maximum value, and the sign of the relative normal velocity changes to positive. Energy dissipation in the normal direction is expressed by Stronge’s hypothesis Separation of two colliding bodies is modeled taking friction into account. The change of relative normal velocity from iteration   Impulses are applied to eliminate all negative relative normal velocities among contact points. At each iteration Energy dissipation in the normal direction is applied sequentially over all collisions, applying Stronge’s hypothesis (Eq. Impulses are applied to progressively release energy at all collision points. At each iteration ETM is investigated using selected numerical tests. The collision of two tetrahedra validates the performance of ETM for single-point collisions. A series of multi-contact scenarios are selected to exhibit ETM advantages as compared to SQM and SMM. In some cases gravity is disregarded, certain examples are assumed perfectly elastic to evaluate possible artificial energy losses and gains, and in all the cases time step size is assumed to be 1/600 seconds. Energy conservation and repose angles are evaluated for a series of packing and repositioning numerical tests involving spheres, cubes, and non-convex cross objects. In the following tests, the total system energy, The energy tracking method is investigated using a single-point collision of two tetrahedra, The progression of the relative normal velocity, elastic and kinetic energy at the contact point, and the total system energy are plotted in The influence of The simultaneous impulse method (SMM) inserts all collisions into a system of linear equations, so that constraints on the relative normal velocities, Consider the collision of two box-shaped bodies, where one is static and the other dynamic, and gravity is ignored. The initial linear velocity of the cube is (0, 0, −10) m/s and its angular velocity is zero. The moving cube is expected to rotate after the collision, as all of its contact points are located on one half of the contact surface, and are repelled upwards after the collision, generating a positive rotational moment that throws the body out of balance. For SMM, since relative normal velocities at all contact points are the same before the collision, The collision of a 2×2×1 m box-shaped body and the ground is now investigated. Gravity is ignored, and the collision is assumed to be perfectly elastic. The initial linear and angular velocities are (1, 1, −10) m/s and zero, respectively. Since there is no initial angular velocity of the cube before collision, and the ground surface is perfectly horizontal, the linear velocity after the collision should be exactly inverted, and the angular velocity should remain zero. In this test, the relative error of the velocity is used to track the effect of SQM treats multiple collisions as concurrent collisions, and simply inverts the relative normal velocity after applying the impulse. Thus, impulses are applied to collisions one by one, and not simultaneously. In contrast, ETM applies the impulses to multiple collisions simultaneously, but does so by gradually increasing the relative normal velocity during the collision. In this numerical experiment, multiple collisions occur simultaneously between the box-shaped object and the ground, exposing the difficulty of SQM in treating impulse propagation during collisions, as compared to ETM. The object collides with the ground at time step 166 ( The energy conservative property of multiple bodies is now investigated. A necessary condition for the impulse-based method to be energy-conservative has been previously identified The experiment models the interaction between multiple bodies of different shapes, including cubes, spheres, and concave units, discretized using a tetrahedral mesh ( The ETM is used to investigate the repose angle of the slope generated by removing the right boundary of the previously generated stacks ( To measure the angle of repose, the floor of the container is subdivided using an 8×16 grid, where the longest side of the container is subdivided sixteen times. Eight lines are fitted, using least squares, through the highest nodes identified in each of the sixteen cells. The slopes of these are regarded as the repose angles in these eight zones ( For comparison, angles of repose obtained experimentally and numerically for spheres A novel energy tracking method (ETM) has been proposed to solve collision responses in a multi-body system. The ETM belongs to the family of impulse methods, which apply impulses to avoid penetration. In previous versions of the impulse method, The authors thank Rio Tinto for supporting this work, through the In the SQM, the relative velocity at single collision is updated directly by impulse in one iteration. Alternatively, the SMM Consider a single-point collision, Firstly, due to the principle of impulse and linear momentum, Secondly, according to the principle of impulse and angular momentum, Thirdly, the relationship between the relative normal velocity before collision, In SMM, multiple collisions are resolved simultaneously, and the assembly of a system equations, Firstly, applying the principle of impulse and linear momentum for body Secondly, according to the principle of impulse and angular momentum, the relation among impulse, angular momentum of body The solution to this linear system of equations, Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.