Advanced methodologies in control theory continue to find applications in the mining, mineral and metal (MMM) processing industries. Fields of application include steel making, iron making, metal or mineral processing and mining; however, environmental processes such as recycling, wastewater treatment, etc. also apply. The MMM industry is a very difficult field of application and the designer is faced with many challenges, primarily due to the complexity of the technical processes which usually are on a large dimensional scale. In addition, time-varying characteristics and many variables which are not measurable as well as physical properties of the manipulated products which are often unknown add to the challenges of the field. The 11th MMM symposium was organised in September 2004 in Nancy, France under the sponsorship of the IFAC MMM Technical committee. The MMM symposium was also co-sponsored by the SAFEPROCESS technical committee of the IFAC. The main objective of the symposium was to review state-of-the-art data in the field of automation in MMM processing. The scope of the symposium covered all major aspects in these areas and was thus the appropriate forum for reporting recent technological and methodological advances. The focus of the 11th MMM symposium was also to highlight specific recent results in the development of methods and tools which are of a particular interest for MMM industries such as computational methods including multi-agents systems, fuzzy logic and neural networks, as well as fault diagnosis and fault tolerant control. The emphasis was placed on practices of those technologies, accompanied with practical experience and the treatment of data collected in industrial processes. A number of important topics were addressed, including theoretical developments in process control, modelling, identification & estimation, fault diagnosis, advanced control, fault tolerant control, optimisation, measurement & instrumentation, supervision, safety, etc. The papers presented here are examples from a range of contributions representing important research topics emerging from the symposium. The issues addressed in the presented papers are of prime importance for the control of mineral processes. They concern the reliability of information and access to product quality measurement. Reliable process data are the key to efficient operation of industrial plants. In particular, data reconciliation techniques are widely applied to processing industries in order to improve the accuracy and precision of raw measurements. While almost all existing data reconciliation methods are based on ideal hypotheses assuming that measurement errors are normally distributed with a zero mean and a known covariance matrix, the paper by M. Alhaj-Dibo et al. Online measurement of product quality, which generally represents the main output variable in the control loop, is also a major challenge. Particle size is a good example of a key variable in the mineral industry which cannot be easily accessible online. For that purpose, adaptive soft-sensors seem to be attractive solutions. In the paper, The other papers selected for that special section are relevant to steel and metal industries. Fuzzy techniques, neural networks and advanced control methodologies are considered here. In the steel industry, one of the main objectives is to guarantee that the alloy steel has the required mechanical properties such as ultimate tensile strength, reduction of area, elongation, etc. This can be achieved when selecting optimal reference inputs. In For FDI of complex technical processes, neural networks represent an attractive solution when analytical models are not available. The paper, Design of Fault Detection for a Hydraulic Looper Using Dynamic Neural Networks by T. Marcu et al., presents interesting results which have been validated by using the industrial benchmark developed in the framework of the MAGIC European project. The core of the FDI system is represented by a generalised dynamic functional-link mural network used to approximate different nonlinear models of a hydraulic looper. An innovative control scheme is also applied to a looper in the paper by Furlan et al., Finally, in the paper The papers selected here represent a wide cross-section of modern developments applied to the monitoring or control of MMM processes. It is gratifying that so many of the papers presented at the MMM symposium were concerned with real plants and real data, as well as online situations.