Bicondylar Hoffa's fractures of the femur is very uncommon. Conjoint bicondylar Hoffa fracture with ipsilateral patellar dislocation, Bicondylar Hoffa's with patellar fracture and extensor mechanism rupture has been described in literature. We report a case of unconjoint bicondylar Hoffa's fracture with lateral patellar dislocation in 17-year-old male patient treated with open reduction and cancellous screw fixation that subsequently healed well with good functional outcome.Bicondylar Hoffa's fracture of the femur is very uncommon. Albert Hoffa was credited for describing the unicondylar Hoffa's fracture first in 1904, A 17-year-old college going student presented to outpatient department with history of road traffic accident 2 weeks back and injury to right knee without any other associated injuries. On local examination there was swelling of knee joint with altered anterior contour of the knee joint, sutured wound of size 4 cm over the antero-lateral aspect of the knee. On palpation the patella was lying laterally and not mobile. Movements of the knee joint were restricted and there was no distal neurovascular deficit. Radiographs revealed bicondylar Hoffa's fracture with patellar dislocation ( The patient was operated on 2nd day after admission. He was put in supine position under spinal anesthesia, and tourniquet was used. An anterior midline skin incision was followed by a lateral parapatellar arthrotomy as the plane created by trauma in medial retinaculum was not sufficient to reduce the patella, that was impacted in lateral femoral condyle fracture. The patella was found to be displaced laterally and in close approximation with fracture surface of proximal fragment. Dorsal periosteum of patella was stripped off partially and superior patellar articular surface showed minimal contusion. Patella was reduced back to trochlea and everted medially to expose the fracture after flexing the knee to 90 There was difficulty in reducing the lateral condyle because of soft callus which was debrided for anatomical reduction of the fracture, fixation was accomplished using four 4-mm cancellous screws (2 for each condyle) introduced antero-posteriorly through the non-articular surface, in a direction perpendicular to the fracture line so as to achieve inter-fragmentary compression. Although there was a comminution in the lateral condylar fragment, the strength of screw purchase in the bone was adequate for providing inter-fragmentary compression. The reduction and the alignment of the screws were confirmed by intra-operative fluoroscopy. Intra-articular insertion of the screws was ruled out. Before wound closure, satisfactory stability was tested with complete knee flexion. Wound was closed in layers taking care to prevent excessive tightness of lateral structures, and patellar tracking was checked and found to be very stable ( The patient was followed up to 9 months post-operatively and sequential radiographs showed successive bony union without further dislocation of patella ( Bicondylar Hoffa's fracture is very uncommon injury resulting from high energy trauma and the probable mechanism of injury is axial compression to the knee with transmission of the ground reaction force through the tibial plateau to the posterior femoral condyles when the knee is flexed more than 90 Routine clinical examination reveal effusion and painful restriction of movements. In our case the contour of the knee joint is altered because of patellar dislocation. Initial antero-posterior and lateral radiographs may be unimpressive because Hoffa fractures, especially when undisplaced, are sometimes difficult to detect. As this kind of fracture morphology is exposed to continual shear stresses in both the coronal and sagittal planes, it is an intrinsically unstable type of intra-articular fracture that warrants operative fixation. Nonoperative treatment in the form of plaster cast or skeletal traction leads to loss of extension, nonunion, instability, joint contracture, and deformity. For open reduction of bicondylar Hoffa fracture, most authors have used a combined medial and lateral approach. However, we used a swashbuckler approach as advocated by Dua et al Primary traumatic patellar dislocation should be treated surgically In conclusion, we described a rare case of a bicondylar Hoffa fracture with patellar dislocation managed successfully by open reduction and internal fixation with good clinical outcome at 9 months of follow up. The Swashbuckler approach allows reduction of patella and excellent exposure of the condyles. Anatomic reduction and rigid internal fixation allows early mobilization and excellent long term outcome. (1) The patient gave the informed consent prior to being included into the study; (2) The study was authorized by the local ethical committee and was performed in accordance with the Ethical standards of the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki as revised in 2000. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.