Heavy metal ions readily adsorb onto the nonliving biomass of many aquaphytes. Further, in many cases the metal ions can be readily desorbed from the biomass by use of a suitable eluting agent. It has been shown in certain cases, at least, that the biomass can be subjected to a number of loading and elution cycles without the biomass losing its adsorption capacity. It has been widely reported that the adsorption is through a specific ion exchange mechanism and a number of researchers have shown experimental evidence supporting such a mechanism. However, there is also evidence that the adsorption is through simple surface precipitation of metal hydroxide species. The present study examines some of the existing data on adsorption of metal ions onto aquaphyte biomass and attempts to evaluate which mechanism is the more likely.Heavy metal ions sorb onto many solid surfaces including the surfaces of living and dead microorganisms and higher plants. A characteristic of the sorption of heavy metal ions onto surfaces, both biotic and abiotic surfaces, is that at a set bulk solution heavy metal concentration the sorption is greatest at a pH value that is just slightly more acidic than the pH at which there is bulk precipitation of the metal hydroxide. As pH is further raised, once the bulk solubility limit is reached, the sorption is greatly reduced because the metal ion is removed from solution by the bulk precipitation. It has long been reported that the sorption of heavy metal ions onto algae, bacteria and higher plants is through a specific ion exchange mechanism. The sorption is thought to involve the replacement of protons, alkali, alkaline earth, or other cations by the heavy metal ions. Evidence presented by various researchers includes evidence that for each heavy metal ion sorbing an equivalent of protons and/or other metal ions appear in solution Evidence against such a mechanism is the often reported very low sorption activation energy, which is not consistent with strong sorption onto specific sites, the extreme rapidity with which the sorption takes place and the very rapid and easy and rapid desorption An alternate sorption mechanism is the surface precipitation or condensation of heavy metal hydroxides onto the biosurfaces. Such precipitation is possible if there is an accumulation of the heavy metals within the diffuse part of the electrical double layer. The accumulation will take place if there is a net negative charge on the solid surface. Thus, although the concentration of the metal ion in solution may be much less than the solubility limit with respect to metal hydroxide and oxide solids, the solubility limit near the solid surfaces is exceeded and precipitation onto the solid surface takes place. The concentration of heavy metal ions within the electrical double layer can be roughly calculated by use of the Boltzmann equation In the present paper an attempt is made to evaluate the magnitude of the effect of the concentration of Cu(II) within the electrical double layer and determine if the concentration is sufficient to account for the sorption of Cu(II) onto a macrophyte.   It can be noted from Recent work by Electrostatic models for exchange reactions at humic–water interfaces In addition to the various models, there is considerable question about the true surface areas of dried plant biomass and soil organic matter (SOM) since various surface areas can be measured depending on measurement technique and there is the possibility of the materials swelling upon reaction with water. Immediately evident from the table is that BET surface area measurements using N Furthermore, regardless of mechanisms involved, displacement of protons from the anchored layer and diffuse layer by metal cations will take place. In addition, the replacement of one species of metal ion by another species should take place both at and near the biomass surface. Although the data can usually be fitted to a Langmuir isotherm, careful inspection of the data often shows some evidence, at low equilibrium concentrations of the metal ion, of a stronger sorption mechanism also taking place In attempting to distinguish between adsorption and surface precipitation in the accumulation of metal ions onto solid surfaces, Considering the data and analysis presented in this paper, it is suggested that both mechanisms can be thought of as taking place in sorption of heavy metal ions such as Cu(II) onto plant biomass surfaces.