The most commonly used commercial process for acid mine drainage (AMD) treatment today is lime neutralization. However, it is accompanied by the treatment of produced metal hydroxide precipitate. Because of the decrease in the capacity of landfill disposal site and the increase in the price of base metals such as copper (Cu) in recent years, it is expected that not only to treat but also to recover these base metals from AMD. For the subsequent smelting process, the major issue is how to separate the Cu and zinc (Zn) over iron (Fe) from AMD as selectively as possible.
                  In this work, we attempted to achieve this objective by modifying the present lime neutralization treatment process with sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS) sulfidization. An AMD sample generated from an abandoned copper mine located in east Japan was utilized in this study. At first, lime neutralization was applied to the AMD to find the precipitation behaviors of Cu, Zn, and Fe. Next, NaHS sulfidization as well as the integration with lime neutralization were conducted to separately precipitate Cu, Zn, and Fe from the AMD. Finally, two modified treatment approaches for selectively recovering Cu and Zn over Fe from the AMD were proposed. The results of consecutive experiments for the two proposed approaches showed that Cu, Zn, and Fe in the AMD were removed and separated into individual precipitates, and that the concentrations of each heavy metal in the final effluent were also able to meet the Japanese effluent standards.Acid mine drainage (AMD) generated from a metal or coal mine (usually abandoned one) contains high acidity and a broad range of heavy metals which have adverse effects on aquatic life and human beings ( One abandoned copper mine located in east Japan discharges about 12 The objective of the present study is to separate Cu and Zn over Fe from the AMD by modifying the present lime neutralization treatment process with NaHS sulfidization. Using NaHS as the sulfidizing agent is more adequate than H AMD sample taken from the inlet of the AMD purification plant located in east Japan was utilized in this investigation. Before experiment, filtration was carried out to remove the brown precipitates presented in the sample. The pH and the concentrations of Cu, Zn, and Fe in the AMD as well as the effluent standards in Japan are shown in All experiments were carried out by batch experiment at room temperature (i.e. at about 293 In a second phase of this study, the integrated approaches including multiple treatment stages based on the optimal conditions obtained from the lime neutralization and NaHS sulfidization experiments were applied to 5 At first, the lime neutralization was applied to the AMD to find the precipitation behavior of Cu, Zn, and Fe in the present treatment process. The concentrations of Cu, Zn, and Fe in the AMD as a function of pH adjusted by lime are shown in Theoretically, specific metals precipitate at specific pH levels ( In this investigation, Cu and Zn in the AMD precipitated near the theoretical pH level, whereas Fe fully precipitated quite below the theoretical level. Here, we attempted to confirm the experimental results by thermodynamic consideration. The thermodynamic stability areas of the chemical species of Cu, Zn, and Fe existing in an aqueous solution can be expressed as the Eh–pH diagrams shown in The ORP of the AMD at pH 5, pH 7, and pH 9 after the pH was adjusted by lime were 546 In this work, we attempted to integrate the sulfidization treatment with the present lime neutralization process for selectively recovering Cu and Zn, over Fe from the AMD. According to the results in Section For NaHS sulfidization conducted at pH 5 (where Fe had already been fully precipitated during pH adjustment), all of the Cu precipitated when 10 The theoretical dosage of NaHS for the sulfidization of Cu, Zn, and Fe in the AMD is discussed as follows. Generally, the solubility equilibrium and solubility product ( The solubility products of CuS, ZnS, and FeS calculated from thermodynamic data ( In this investigation, NaHS was used as the sulfidizing agent. The introduced NaHS exists as H As mentioned above, more than 2.88 The effect of reaction time on the concentrations of Cu, Zn, and Fe in the AMD with a 20 After Cu was precipitated from the AMD by NaHS sulfidization at pH 2.8, lime neutralization was conducted to separately precipitate Zn and Fe. The concentrations of Zn and Fe in the AMD as a function of pH adjusted by lime are shown in This co-precipitation of Fe and Zn is likely a result of the slow kinetics of Fe (II) oxidation. According to the Eh–pH diagram of the Fe–H In order to promote the precipitation of Fe, an attempt was made to transform the comparatively reductive condition of the AMD to comparatively oxidative condition by introducing H Based on the results above, two kinds of modified approaches that involve integrating NaHS sulfidization with lime neutralization for selective recovery of Cu and Zn over Fe from the AMD were proposed, as shown in the flowcharts in The second approach shown in Comparing with the results of Cu, Zn, and Fe contents in the precipitate generated by applying the lime neutralization treatment to the AMD as shown in For the purpose of selectively recovering Cu and Zn over Fe from the AMD generated from an abandoned copper mine located in east Japan, the feasibility of integrating NaHS sulfidization with conventional lime neutralization treatment was investigated. The following results were obtained: By lime neutralization treatment, Fe started to precipitate when the pH of the AMD was adjusted from initial pH 2.8 to pH 4, and fully precipitated above pH 5. Cu started to precipitate between pH 5–6, and fully precipitated above pH 8. Zn started to precipitate at pH 7, and fully precipitated above pH 9. As a result, Cu and Zn coprecipitated at pH 6–8 and could not be separated individually. By adding more than 20 After Fe was fully precipitated by lime at pH 5, all of the Cu precipitated when 10–15 Two modified treatment approaches for selectively recovering Cu and Zn over Fe from the AMD were proposed based on the above results. The results of the consecutive experiments showed that in both proposed approaches, Cu, Zn, and Fe in the AMD were removed and separated into individual precipitates. The concentrations of Cu, Zn, and Fe in the final effluent from both approaches were able to meet the Japanese effluent standards. The present study was a collaborative research project between the University of Tokyo, Japan and the Furukawa Co., Ltd., Japan. This work was supported in part by the 21st Global COE program, “Mechanical Systems Innovation”, Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Sciences and Technology of Japan, as well as the JST CREST of Innovative Technology and System for Sustainable Water Use Research Area (Shibusawa group).