Based on the definition of swelling in emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) process, the concepts of apparent swelling and actual swelling are proposed to illustrate the relationship between the emulsion swelling (the osmotic swelling and entrainment swelling) and the membrane breakage, focussing on the effect of the volume change caused by emulsion swelling and membrane breakage on the experimental results. Theoretical analyses indicate that “zero” or “negative” swelling may occur under certain experimental conditions. A bi-tracer method is further proposed and then used to measure the osmotic, entrainment swelling and the membrane breakage simultaneously, only requiring some initial operation conditions and measurements of concentrations of both tracers in the external and internal phases. It has been experimentally proved that this new method is highly applicable in ELM process and provides a useful tool to specify the effects of membrane breakage, osmotic swelling and entrainment swelling in the same experiment. “Negative” swelling may occur under certain operating conditions, particularly when the electrolyte concentration in the external phase is higher than that in the internal phase. The experimental results also indicate that the effect of membrane breakage on the measurement of emulsion swelling should not be neglected to avoid measurement error. Polymeric surfactant LMA is superior to other commercial surfactants as it imparts high membrane stability and small emulsion swelling.concentrations of tracer II in the external phase at time 0 and concentration of tracer I in the external phase at time concentrations of tracer I in the internal phase at time 0 and concentration of tracer II in the internal phase at time initial volume ratio of emulsion to the external phase initial volume ratio of the oil phase to the internal phase volume of the external phase at time 0 and initial volume of emulsion (l) volume of the internal phase at time 0 and volume changes in the internal phase caused by the membrane breakage and entrainment swelling at time volume changes in the internal phase caused by the osmotic swelling and actual swelling at time initial volume of the oil phase (l) membrane breakage ratio at time actual and apparent swelling ratios at time entrainment and osmotic swelling ratios at time Emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) separation technique, invented by Li It is known that membrane breakage in ELM systems includes the rupture of the emulsion and the leakage of the internal reagent and extracted solute through the membrane phase to the external phase, both resulting in the decrease in the volume of the internal phase. As a result, the membrane breakage causes a decrease of driving force for mass transfer and an increase of the raffinate concentration, thereby lowering the extraction efficiency While emulsion swelling is a rather complicated process, it usually refers to the phenomenon of the increase in volume of the emulsion during operation, due to the incorporation of the external phase solvent — or external phase itself — into the emulsion globules. And it will dilute the solute that has been concentrated in the internal phase, thus preventing a highly concentrated solute solution from being obtained; reduce the driving force for solute extraction; decrease the separation efficiency; increase the membrane breakage and change the rheological properties of the emulsion to cause difficulties in emulsion transport and phase separation There are two types of emulsion swelling, i.e. entrainment swelling and osmotic swelling In view of the above-mentioned analysis, the membrane breakage and the emulsion swelling may have different effects on the change in volume of the internal phase during operation, it is required to clarify the relationship of these two factors in order to get better understanding of ELM process and to provide necessary guideline for determination of both the membrane breakage and emulsion swelling. In the determination of the membrane breakage, a tracer method is the most widely used one, while many different methods are employed for the measurement of emulsion swelling such as the volume variation method The aim of the this study is to present detailed theoretical and experimental analyses of the relationship between emulsion swelling and membrane breakage and to propose a new method so as to determine the osmotic as well as entrainment swelling of emulsion and the membrane breakage simultaneously. Factors affecting the membrane breakage and emulsion swelling, including the membrane formulation and operating parameters will also be examined experimentally. As mentioned above, emulsion swelling is a phenomenon that occurs during the dispersion operation, leading to the change in the volume of emulsion and internal phase. Usually, emulsion swelling is evaluated by the emulsion swelling ratio, which can be calculated by two commonly used expressions. One is defined as the volume ratio of the change in volume of the emulsion after dispersion operation to the initial volume and the other as the volume ratio of the change in volume of the internal phase volume after dispersion operation to the initial volume. We believe the later is more reliable since emulsion swelling usually only changes the volume of the internal phase, while the volume of the membrane phase can be kept unaffected by swelling. Obviously, both emulsion swelling and membrane breakage occur simultaneously during the operation, and both cause the change in the volume of the internal phase. So far, the calculation of emulsion swelling ratio is simply based on the final volume of the emulsion or the internal phase after dispersion operation in most of the papers published. This implies the combined effect of both emulsion swelling and membrane breakage, and thus we name it “apparent swelling” in this study; while the emulsion swelling caused by both osmosis and entrainment is called “actual swelling”. Therefore, the apparent swelling ratio ( When a tracer method is employed to measure the membrane breakage, the breakage ratio ( Since the tracer cannot be transported through the membrane phase from the internal phase to the external phase, the tracer substance in the external phase can be caused only by the membrane breakage. From the mass conservation law, it gives Assuming that both the aqueous and organic phases are ideal, it follows therefore that a decrease in the external phase volume must be balanced by an increase in the internal phase volume. During all our experimental runs, there was no detectable change in the volume on mixing the aqueous and organic phase; also the volume of the membrane phase was not affected by swelling. As a result, we can get the following equations: when Δ when Δ when Δ Theoretically, the former two cases are absolutely valid, and a large membrane breakage can be observed in some ELM systems. It should be emphasised that there are differences between the apparent swelling and actual swelling both in their physical meanings and their measured values; even when Δ It is worthwhile to examine the situation with Δ Therefore, it is important to specify the effects of the membrane breakage, the osmotic and entrainment swelling on the measurement of emulsion swelling. It may be inferred that the “apparent swelling” defined in this article and used to evaluate the emulsion swelling in many previous papers cannot reflect the real situation of emulsion swelling in operation. Very often it may lead to a wrong conclusion, such as no emulsion swelling in some systems when Δ The bi-tracer method considered here is specially designed for the simultaneous measurement of the membrane breakage, the entrainment swelling and osmotic swelling in the same experiment. This method employs two different tracers, one (tracer I) is added into the internal phase and the other (tracer II) in the external phase, both of them cannot be transported through the membrane phase. As a result, in the operation of ELM process, the tracer I in the external phase is caused by membrane breakage only while the tracer II in the internal phase by entrainment swelling only. By measuring the concentrations of tracers I and II in the external and internal phase, the ratios of membrane breakage, osmotic and entrainment swelling can be easily calculated as discussed in the following sections. As mentioned earlier, both the organic and aqueous phases are assumed to be ideal, and tracers are carefully chosen so that they cannot exist or accumulate in the organic phase, the mass balance of tracer I in the system gives Rearranging From A mass balance of tracer II yields It has been proved in many previous papers that the entrainment swelling mainly occurs at beginning of the dispersion operation From The actual swelling ratio is the sum of the osmotic swelling ratio and the entrainment swelling ratio and, therefore, the osmotic swelling ratio can be easily calculated from From The membrane solvent with a boiling point range of 200–250°C was obtained from the distillation of commercial kerosene. Surfactants Span 80 (sorbitan monooleate) was purchased from Longyou County Chemical Co., Zhejiang Province, China, Lan 113A from Lanzhou Oil Refinery, Gansu Province, China, ENJ-3029 was kindly provided by Exxon Chemical Co. and LMA (polyamine-type polymeric surfactant with an average number molecular weight of 9150) was synthesised in our laboratory. All these surfactants were used directly without further purification. NaCl, NaOH, H An ELM process usually comprises following three steps: (i) emulsion preparation (emulsification); (ii) dispersion (ELM extraction) and (iii) demulsification (emulsion splitting). In the present study, a batch operation was employed. The emulsion was prepared by mixing the membrane (oil) phase with the internal phase under vigorous stirring (about 3000 The emulsion was contacted with the external phase containing another tracer (II) in a cylindrical flat-bottom glass tank with an inner diameter of 100 The spent emulsion was separated from the mixing container after a given time of mixing with the external phase, followed by 20 The concentrations of KCl in the external and internal phases were measured by an ORION 720A pH/ISE Meter (Orion Research, USA) and atomic absorption spectrometry (Perkin-Elmer 1100B) and the concentrations of Cr(VI) by a Model 721 Spectrophotometer (Shanghai No. 3 Instrument Factory, China) using a colorimetric diphenyl carbazide method. The viscosity of the emulsion was measured with a Model NDJ-1 Rotary Viscometer (Shanghai No. 1 Balance Factory, China). It has been emphasised previously that the tracer selected must not be transported through the membrane phase. Matsumoto et al. In order to examine the accuracy of measurement of emulsion swelling, experiments were conducted as follows. The external phase containing 10.0 It is well-known that surfactant plays an important role in both the membrane breakage and emulsion swelling. As already indicated, a “negative” swelling may occur when the electrolyte concentration in the external phase is greater than that in the internal phase.  The effects of different surfactants on the emulsion swelling are shown in From entrainment of the external phase in the emulsion globules; secondary emulsification of the entrained solvent, due to excess surfactant in the primary emulsification; encapsulation of the external solvent by reversed micelles of surfactant; solvation of the surfactant by the external solvent; solvation of the transferring solute by the external solvent. Skelland and Meng In order to form a stable liquid membrane a sufficient amount of surfactant is required, or the membrane breakage ratio usually decreases with the increase in surfactant concentration. On the other hand, the emulsion swelling will increase as the increasing of surfactant concentration in terms of the second to fourth swelling mechanisms mentioned above. Experimental results in As can be found in The chemical potential difference between the internal and external phases is the driving force of the osmotic swelling. Obviously, the increase in the chemical potential difference between the internal and external phases will results in the increasing of the osmotic swelling.   In the mixing vessel, the emulsion is dispersed generally into a large excess of the external, continuous phase. In order to create a large interfacial area for mass transfer, a relatively high stirring speed is required. Usually, increasing the stirring speed could increase the mass transfer rate, but it will also increase the shear energy, thus increasing the membrane breakage. Stirring speed is also an important factor affecting emulsion swelling. As shown in The concepts of apparent swelling and actual swelling have been proposed to clarify the effect of the membrane breakage on the measurement of emulsion swelling and the feasibility of the bi-tracer method proposed in the present study has been experimentally verified. With this new method, the main factors affecting the membrane breakage and emulsion swelling have been examined and the following conclusions can be drawn. The bi-tracer method is a simple and feasible method for measuring the ratios of membrane breakage, entrainment and osmotic swelling simultaneously in the same experiment. Membrane breakage always causes a decrease in the volume of the internal phase. The neglect of the effect of the membrane breakage may result in a significant error in determining the emulsion swelling when the membrane breakage is relatively high. Entrainment swelling occurs at the beginning of the dispersing operation and remains almost unchanged throughout under stable mixing conditions, which always causes an increase in the volume of the internal phase. Osmotic swelling is shown to vary with the time taken by the mixing operation. Furthermore, the osmotic swelling may cause an increase or a decrease in the volume of the internal phase, depending on which phase, the internal or external phase, has higher ionic strength. “Negative” swelling is the combined effect of entrainment swelling and osmotic swelling, which may occur under the condition that the concentration of electrolyte in the external phase is higher than that in the internal phase. “Negative” apparent swelling may also be measured when the membrane breakage is extremely high. Surfactant plays a most important role in promoting the membrane stability and minimising the emulsion swelling. Polymeric surfactant LMA having high molecular weight and low hydration capability forms the most stable ELMs with the least emulsion swelling compared with commercial surfactants Span 80, Lan 113A and ENJ-3029. Span 80 seems not to be a suitable surfactant for ELMs. This work was funded by the Guangdong Provincial Foundation of Natural Science and Technology (Grant No. 950137). The authors thank Prof. Richard Darton, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, for his helpful comments and discussions on the manuscript.