The removal of contaminants from liquid effluents by the adsorptive particulate flotation (APF) process, including new adsorbents and flotation devices, are reported. Herein, contaminants are adsorbed (and/or absorbed) onto the surface of a particulate carrier and both are separated attached to rising bubbles. The adsorbents were coal, charcoal, coal beneficiation tailings, modified Brazilian smectites and barite. Emulsified oils in water, dyes and metal ions present in synthetic and industrial effluents were successfully removed using various carrier and DAF, induced air flotation, IAF or jet flotation for the separation of the loaded carrier. Process efficiency was found to be a function of the carrier/contaminant mass ratio, size distribution of the carrier and system hydrodynamics. Results and mechanisms involved are discussed in terms of adsorption and flotation phenomena.Mining, metallurgical, petroleum and chemical industries generate huge amounts of wastewater usually polluted by solid powders, process chemicals, organic and other compound Different authors have proposed flotation since its application to wastewater treatment has showed technical and economical advantages This work shows advances in APF with dissolved, induced air and jet flotation to remove heavy metals ions, oils and dyes from synthetic and industrial effluents. Petroleum adsorbing carrier: All were sized at 100% <74 μm and added in a concentration of 625 mg l Coal fines: 18% ash content and Coal shale: Charcoal: Coal beneficiation (jigging) tailing? CBT, Barite, very fine particles (<74 μm) Metal ions carrier: CBT. Dye carrier: CBT and Smectite (Bentonite). Samples of Na Petroleum emulsions: These were prepared to simulate offshore petroleum effluents, in a salty medium (NaCl) using a heavy oil, crude petroleum, having a specific gravity ( Dyes: brilliant green, and methylene blue in concentrations of about 40–50 mg l Heavy metal solutions: NiSO IAF studies were performed in a Denver D-12, 1 L cell. Thus, 0.8 l of emulsion or dyes were conditioned in the same cell at 1450 rpm during 1 min, with the carrier and frother. Flotation proceeded introducing an air flow-rate of 15 l min Modified jet flotation, MJF. A Jameson type cell here has been redesigned placing an internal cylinder which receive the downcomer suspension allowing all particles to enter the separation zone by the top. This artifact highly improved process efficiency Dissolved air flotation (DAF) studies were conducted at bench and pilot (0.6–1 m  The hydrophobic adsorbents such as coal and the CBT interact with the oil droplets by hydrophobic association (forces) as in coal froth flotation. Yet, barite may adsorb the oil via chemical and/or electrostatic mechanisms between the carrier surface sites and anionic groups present in this type of oils. Eventually, silanol groups “activated” with ferric or aluminum ions, present at the surface of quartz or clays (coal cleaning tailings) may also serve as adsorption sites.  Here, with less difficult-to-treat emulsified feeds (603 mg l   The same figure shows that a separation efficiency of about 70% was reached for the heavy metal removal from the electroplating industrial effluent. This can be explained by the presence of other ions which also adsorb and reduce available adsorption sites and complexes which interfere and do not adsorb. Only the presence of these substances may explain the high amount of “soluble” ions and possess a huge problem for the treatment of this effluent. Bentonites were modified with ortophenanthroline and ethylenediamine as sorbing material for oils, metal ions and dyes In this work, the adsorption capacity for brilliant green, (BG) showed to be strongly dependent of solids concentration (MB-OP), achieving almost 100% efficiency with 1000 mg l  High separation values were found for oil droplets—emulsified in water by APF (IAF or jet) using mineral particles or coal wastes as carrier. Treated solutions had very low content of oil, lower than emission limits. Best carriers were the hydrophobic adsorbents, coal and coal beneficiation tailings. The present investigation shows high removal efficiencies by APF (jet, IAF or DAF) using coal jigging tailings and modified bentonites. These carrier showed to possess good adsorbing and flotation characteristics for oils, dyes and heavy metal ions removal such as copper, zinc and nickel. The authors are grateful to Copelmi Mineradora for the CBT samples, to the Panamanian agency SENACYT-UTP (Scholarship to A.T.De León), to PADCT/FINEP and CNPq, CAPES, UFRGS and FAPERGS (all Brazilian Agencies) for their financial support.