The treatment of tibial plafond fractures is challenging to foot and ankle surgeons. Open reduction and internal fixation and limited internal fixation combined with an external fixator are 2 of the most commonly used methods of tibial plafond fracture repair. However, conclusions regarding the superior choice remain controversial. The present meta-analysis aimed to quantitatively compare the postoperative complications between open reduction and internal fixation and limited internal fixation combined with an external fixator for tibial plafond fractures. Nine studies with 498 fractures in 494 patients were included in the present study. The meta-analysis found no significant differences in bone healing complications (risk ratio [RR] 1.17, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.68 to 2.01, p = .58], nonunion (RR 1.09, 95% CI 0.51 to 2.36, p = .82), malunion or delayed union (RR 1.24, 95% CI 0.57 to 2.69, p = .59), superficial (RR 1.56, 95% CI 0.43 to 5.61, p = .50) and deep (RR 1.89, 95% CI 0.62 to 5.80) infections, arthritis symptoms (RR 1.20, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.58, p = .18), or chronic osteomyelitis (RR 0.31, 95% CI 0.05 to 1.84, p = .20) between the 2 groups.Tibial plafond fractures occur at the distal end of the tibial bone and often involve destruction of the ankle joint Various methods have been introduced for the treatment of tibial plafond fractures As an alternative to ORIF, LIFEF minimizes the operative incision and soft tissue disruption and, thus, was generally advocated for tibial plafond fractures. Nevertheless, whether these theoretical advantages will result in better outcomes remains controversial. Some studies have shown that LIFEF was associated with few complications, and other studies have reported more postoperative complications in the LIFEF group Therefore, we conducted a meta-analysis to quantitatively compare the postoperative complications between ORIF and LIFEF. Our meta-analysis was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines The search terms included “open reduction and internal fixation,” “ORIF,” “limited internal fixation,” “LIFEF,” “external fixation,” “external fixator,” “external device,” “tibial plafond fracture,” and “tibial pilon fracture.” PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, ISI Web of Knowledge, and Chinese Biomedical Database were searched for the eligible studies to November 2013. All searches were conducted without language, date, and publication status restrictions. Two of us (D.W. and J.-P.X.) independently performed the searches and included the relevant reports. Disagreements were resolved by discussion with a third author (Q.-T.Z.). All randomized controlled trials and nonrandomized studies, whether prospective or retrospective, were included in the present study. The following criteria were considered in the included studies: Studies comparing ORIF and LIFEF in tibial plafond fractures Adult patients, excluding children A follow-up period of at least 6 months The primary outcomes included nonunion, malunion or delayed union, superficial and deep infections, arthritis symptoms, and chronic osteomyelitis. Two independent authors (D.W. and X.-H.C.) extracted the data, including participant characteristics, country in which the trial had been centered, and the number of participants allocated to each intervention group. The methodologic quality of the included studies was assessed using the Center for Evidence-Based Medicine (Oxford, UK) rating scale The meta-analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.2 software (Cochrane Informatics and Knowledge Management Department; available at  In the included studies, a total of 498 fractures in 494 patients were involved. Of these fractures, 273 were treated with ORIF and 225 with LIFEF. The average patient age ranged from 37.2 to 57.6 years. Using the quality rating scale of Evidence-Based Medicine of Oxford A subgroup analysis was performed for bone healing complications (nonunion, malunion, and delayed union). A total of 7 studies with 450 fractures were included in the meta-analysis A total of 5 studies with 363 fractures reported the results of malunion or delayed union The overall effect showed that the rate of bone healing complications was 21 of 354 and 22 of 459 in the LIFEF and ORIF groups, respectively. The meta-analysis of overall effect demonstrated that no difference was present between the LIFEF and ORIF groups (RR 1.17, 95% CI 0.68 to 2.01, A total of 7 studies were included in the meta-analysis Two studies reported the results of arthritis symptoms Two studies were included in the meta-analysis To investigate the effect of the poor-quality studies, a sensitivity analysis was performed by excluding the level III studies. The analysis showed that all the results were consistent with the previous meta-analyses. Generally, it is difficult for orthopedic surgeons to design a prospective or randomized study. This is understandable, because the ethical considerations make it difficult to conduct a clinical trial with reliable outcomes This is the first quantitative meta-analysis directly comparing the clinical efficiency of ORIF and LIFEF. A total of 9 studies involving 3 RCTs and 6 non-RCTs were included in the meta-analysis. These studies included 498 tibial plafond fractures, of which 273 were in the ORIF group and 225 in the LIFEF group. The meta-analysis showed no differences in the postoperative complication rate between the LIFEF and ORIF groups. However, this evidence is relatively weak and should be treated with caution because only 3 RCTs were included in the meta-analysis. Tibial plafond fractures are complex fractures frequently associated with severe soft tissue damage The mean nonunion rate was 4.5% (range 0% to 22.2%) in the LIFEF and 4.0% (range 2.8% to 15.0%) in ORIF group. None of the individual studies found significant differences in the rate of nonunion between the 2 groups. The meta-analysis also provided a similar result for the 2 groups. Regarding the results of malunion and delayed union, the ORIF technique might decrease the risk of malunion. However, the increased surgical dissection around the fracture probably led to delayed union of the tibia. Although the mean rate in the LIFEF group (7.6%, range 0% to 20.7%) was slightly greater than that in the ORIF group (5.8%, range 4.8% to 7.7%), the meta-analysis did not find a statistically significant difference between the 2 groups. This result also was confirmed by the individual studies. Infection was an essential problem for the patients concerned. For the differences in the types of infection, we performed a subgroup analysis of superficial and deep infection. The meta-analysis showed similar results between the 2 groups. However, the significant heterogeneity found in the deep infection subgroup might reduce the reliability of this result. From the individual study ( Regarding arthritis symptoms and chronic osteomyelitis, the meta-analysis showed no differences between the 2 groups. These findings were consistent with those from other studies. Davidovitch et al The present study had several limitations. First, this meta-analysis included both RCTs and non-RCTs. The included non-RCTs have possible risks of bias that could lower the reliability of our conclusions. Second, heterogeneity was statistically significant in the meta-analysis of superficial infection. Although subgroup analysis and the random-effect model are used to incorporate statistical heterogeneity, this result should still be treated with caution. Third, several of the included studies were not homogeneous and had an internal bias. For example, Wang et al In conclusion, the current evidence has shown that the LIFEF and ORIF groups will have a similar incidence of postoperative complications. However, multicenter RCTs with large patient samples are needed to compare the clinical outcomes of ORIF and LIFEF for the treatment of tibial plafond fractures.