The effects of Dowfroth 250 (D) and Tennafroth 250 (T) in combination with saponin (S) on zinc deposition current efficiency and power consumption during electrowinning of zinc from industrially supplied spent electrolyte solutions were investigated. The surface morphology and crystallographic orientations of the zinc deposits were also examined by scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction techniques, respectively. Acid mist suppression efficiencies were measured and investigated by frothing behavior of the additives and by surface tension measurements. Concentrations of 5, 10, and 15ppm of each of the additives were mixed with all possible combinations into spent electrolyte to study the effects. Results showed that addition of Dowfroth 250/Tennafroth 250 as well as saponin decreased the current efficiency, increased the energy consumption while maximum acid mist suppression efficiencies of 86.1% and 87.0% were obtained at D5+S5 and T5+S5, respectively. The increase in saponin concentration resulted a change in preferred crystal orientation from (104) (112) (103) (102) (101) at low saponin concentrations to (101) (112) at higher saponin concentration. Bright and compact deposits were obtained at a mixture concentration level of T5+S5 and D5+S5.The impurities and acids in zinc electrolyte play an important role during electrowinning in the zinc industry ( Surfactants such as 2-butyne-1, 4 diol ( Dowfroth, in addition to controlling acid mist during electrowinning, also adversely affects the zinc deposition current efficiency (CE) and zinc deposit morphology ( In previous work we have reported the individual effects of Dowfroth 250, Tennafroth 250, saponin, and licorice on acid mist suppression efficiency, current efficiency, energy consumption, deposition morphology, and polarization behavior at different addition concentration levels in industrially supplied spent electrolyte during electrowinning ( The electrolyte solution and additives used for the test were supplied by Kidd Creek and the electrolyte solution has been referred to as spent electrolyte. To degrade the residual suppressants from the Kidd Creek electrolyte (Dowfroth 250 The electrowinning (EW) apparatus consisted of four water-jacketed cylindrical cells, which were constructed from ¼-inch thick Lexan and had dimensions of 43 The acid mist above the electrowinning cell was sampled during deposition at a rate of ~ The gas sampler cartridge filter membranes (vinyl/acrylic copolymer; pore size 0.8 Surface tension measurements of the preheated spent electrolyte with and without addition of acid mist suppressants were performed at 38 where, ΔP is the pressure difference, γ is the energy per unit area, and r is the bubble radius of the liquid. Keeping the two probes at the approximate same immersion depth cancels the effects of liquid level. The temperature was maintained using a temperature controlled water bath. A Rigaku X-ray diffractometer, model: Multiflex 2kW was used to examine zinc deposits to determine their preferred crystal orientation relative to standard PDF# 087–0713 data file of zinc metal. The surface morphology of the deposits was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Hitachi, model: S-3000N microscope. The acid mist suppression efficiencies during the electrowinning of spent electrolyte with additive mixtures (Tennafroth/Dowfroth and saponin) are listed in It was observed that higher concentrations of either Dowfroth or Tennafroth (10 The current efficiencies (CE) for the different acid mist suppressants are shown in This lowering of current efficiency at higher additive mixture concentrations might be due to the fact that the active sites for the electro-deposition on the cathode surface were blocked ( The comparison of current efficiencies of different mixture concentrations of Dowfroth or Tennafroth with different concentrations of saponin are shown in  The effect of these additives on energy consumption (EC) has almost the opposite trend observed for CE's. This was expected because CE and EC are inversely proportional to each other. The maximum and minimum difference in EC observed between duplicated tests was 349   The surface tension of the test solutions are listed in It may be concluded that the lower the surface tension, the better the bubble formation and thus the higher the acid mist suppression efficiency of the cell. For Dowfroth–saponin and for Tennafroth–saponin each at the (5 The deposition morphologies and the crystal orientations of the deposited zinc for the mixed additive schemes are presented in At lower additive concentration levels for D5 or T5 with S15/10/5 For all of 5, 10 and 15 The acid mist is most efficiently suppressed at lower mixture concentrations of the Dowfroth/Tennafroth–saponin mixtures. The maximum suppression efficiencies observed were 86.1% and 86.7% for D5 Increasing the concentration of saponin, in combination with Dowfroth, resulted in a change to the preferred deposit orientations from (101) (102) (103) (112) and (104) at low saponin concentrations to (101) and (102) at higher saponin concentration. Regardless of the saponin concentration, at 5 Saponin is a natural surface-active compound and has considerable foaming action in aqueous solutions. Chemically, saponins are glycosides of either a steroid or a triterpene, with the sugar moiety attached at the C-3 hydroxyl group. Tennafroth 250 and Dowfroth 250 basically consist largely of polypropylene glycol methyl ether, dipropylene glycol methyl ether, propylene glycol monmethyl ether, and 1-methoxy-2-propanol at different concentrations. The probable percentages of compositions (w/w) are listed in These large surface active moieties present in all these surfactants play a crucial role during electrowinning. First the surface active frothing behavior helps to reduce the acid mist concentration on the surface of the electrowinning cell and thus enhances the acid mist suppression efficiencies as observed in The combined effects of additives and impurities in zinc electrowinning are very difficult to predict. Due to the detrimental effects of the surfactants Dowfroth 250 and Tennafroth 250 on zinc electrowinning, their combined effect with saponin was investigated. Saponin is not an effective acid mist suppressant however in general, saponin did not have the negative effects on current efficiency and energy consumption that Dowfroth and Tennafroth did. Dowfroth 250 and Tennafroth 250 both produced low quality zinc deposits in concentrations higher than 10 The authors would like to thank Xstrata's Kidd Creek division and Silvana DiCarlo in particular, for supplying the spent electrolyte, reagents and electrode materials.