The effect of the combined actions of milling and hydrophobization procedures applied in construction composites synthesis was investigated. The mortars were prepared with cement (CEM I 42.5) and calcite aggregate complying the standard 1:3 mix ratio. The limestone filler (10 wt%) was added to the mixture upon its mechano-chemical activation in an ultra-centrifugal mill. The activation variables (milling time, rotor velocity, sieve mesh size) were altered to achieve the optimal quality of the powder. The treatment was optimized via chemometric tools. The r2 values (0.955–0.998) of second order polynomial models accurately predicted the output and the Standard score analysis chose the optimal activation parameters: 4.25 min; 48.58 m/s and 80 μm sieve. The selected filler and all three aggregate fractions were coated with stearic acid via dry procedure. The mortar mixes, prepared with uncoated (M1) and coated (M2) aggregate and filler, were cured for a period of 28 days during which compressive strength and water absorption were monitored. The dimensional changes in mortars were estimated via TMA dilatometer measurements. Thermo-analytical methods (DTA/TGA) were applied in the thermal behavior analysis. Mineralogical and morphological changes in the structure of hardened composite were detected by XRD and SEM, respectively. Limestone aggregate led to lower final compressive strengths in mortar, but it produced an infinitesimally small shrinkage at 1000 °C. The hydrophobization via stearic acid initiated the decrease in water absorption and formation of needle-like micro-network that filled structural voids reducing open porosity. The assessment of the effects of limestone utilization as a filler and as an aggregate on the mortar performances confirmed that this novel water-repellent composite is applicable in structural design.Mortar is often inequitably omitted from the exploration of new eco-friendly sustainable solutions for construction composites. With the composition alike that of concrete, mortar can follow the same design pattern and use readily available primary and secondary raw materials as aggregates, binder replacements and fillers. The masonry mortar generally provides lower final strengths and higher deformability than concrete, but it defines the structural elements, protecting them from the direct exposure to pollutants from ground/waste-waters and acid rain The limestone assimilation in a composite can be accomplished by grinding Portland cement (PC) clinker with limestone during cement production, or by adding the powdery limestone filler (LF) to the mortar mixture The mechano-chemical activation, as a common procedure applied in the beneficiation of construction material compounds, can further emphasize the role of the limestone addition Stearic acid (SA) is a universal and economical surfactant that is often used to improve the CaCO The focus of this study was to develop a mortar, which conforms to the rules of sustainable production and natural resources preservation, by using limestone as a substitution for the standard siliceous aggregate. A very fine limestone filler processed in an ultra centrifugal mill prior to the application was applied to minimize the void coalescence. The optimal activation output, selected via chemometrics, was submitted to the dry SA surface treatment in order to obtain the filler which will produce water repellent mortar with low porosity. The acquired mortar was characterized by relevant physicochemical and mechanical techniques to assess its engineering application possibilities and to ascertain that its performance is comparable to that of traditional mortars. The limestone used in this study originated from The chemical composition of the limestone was analyzed via atomic emission spectroscopy (AES) technique on a PinAAcle 900 instrument (Perkin Elmer) according to the principle provided in the ASTM C25/C1271/C1301. The contents of present oxides, given in An ultra-centrifugal mill (ZM-1 Retsch) was applied in the mechano-chemical activation due to its prompt and effective grain-size reduction ability The grain-size distribution and the mean grain diameter (d The experimental results of the LF activation were expressed by mean values, for each treatment. The collected data underwent analysis of variance (ANOVA) to evaluate the effects of process variables. The Principal component analysis (PCA) was used in the classification of the LF samples obtained with divergent process parameters. This pattern recognition technique was within result descriptors to characterize and differentiate samples. The evaluation of the results was performed via StatSoft Statistica 10.0 The second order polynomial (SOP) model was fitted to the experimental data. Nine models were established to relate nine responses (mill capacity - Q, specific energy consumption - SEC, grain sizes - d The adopted optimal mechano-chemically activated limestone filler was coated with stearic acid (C The mortar samples were prepared according to standard procedure (EN 1015-2:1998/A1:2006). The bonding agent was a standard Portland cement (CEM I 42.5R; Lafarge). 97.5% of cement particles were in the range 0–0.63 mm, and the quantities of main cement oxides were as follows: SiO The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis was conducted on a Philips PW-1710 automated diffractometer using a Cu tube operated at 40 kV and 30 mA. The instrument was provided with a diffracted beam curved graphite monochromator and a Xe-filled proportional counter. Measurements were performed at ambient temperature (25 °C). The diffraction data were assembled in the 2 The morphology of the crushed mortar samples was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (JEOL JSM–6610LV). The investigated samples were covered with gold using a sputter machine, type BALTEC-SCD-005, for improvement of the conductivity prior to the imaging. The size of the filler is an important parameter which can influence and define properties of a composite material. The alternations in LF granulometry bring about number of chemical and mechanical changes in mortar. The chemical reactivity of cement is enhanced by an increase in specific surface area of applied filler. Namely, smaller grain size and higher SSA of limestone filler induce the appearance of additional nucleation sites for Ca(OH) The statistics highlighted an average activation period, which ranged from 1.1 to 5.1 min. The values of used CI and CRS varied very little within the MS80, MS120, MS200 and MS500 experimental sets. The MS500 set of parameters was characterized by a very low specific energy consumption (45.5 kW h/t), but the activated limestone product had considerably bigger grain diameters (d Principal component analysis detected the structure of the relationship between process parameters and measured/calculated values. The data trends and discriminating efficiency of the used descriptors are visualized on the scatter plot ( An orderly separation of the observed samples is obtained, according to used assays. LF produced in MS80 and MS120 experimental sequences are located at the right of the PCA graphic, having the greatest SSA and SEC values. The fillers produced in MS200 and MS500 sets are located on the left side with the highest d The analysis of variance isolated important independent variables, interactions of these variables and significant effects they hold to the responses, and indicated responses that were significantly affected by variations in treatment parameters ( The response surfaces were fitted to designed SOP models, and the models were found to be statistically significant for all variables. The Q calculation was mostly affected by the interchange terms of MS × CI and CI × MAP. The d SS, as the mean value of standard score transformed from the initial data generated with different assays for each item, was calculated assigning to calculated/measured parameters equal weight. SS is unitless value and has a consistent agreement with observed assays. Although it is a relative index and may not represent a specific property of a sample, SS provides a reasonably accurate rank of activated LF-s. The SS above 0.700 stands for the high standard in LF properties. The SS analysis of experimental data isolated the optimal processing parameters ( According to SS analysis, the optimal sample was obtained using MS80 set of processing parameters (SS = 0.79). Other sets (MS120, MS200, MS500) gave unsatisfactory low SS, between 0.60 and 0.70. Therefore, the MS80 set of activation parameters can be considered as optimal. The optimal processing parameters are: CI = 3 A, MAP = 4.25 min, CRS = 48.58 m/s; Q = 1.285 kg/h, and SEC = 513.62 kW h/t; while the projected optimal values obtained for the activated LF are: d The physico-mechanical performances of the experimental mortars M1 and M2 were characterized by the values of compressive strength and water absorption which were monitored during 28 days of curing. The achieved properties were afterwards compared with those of the referent mortar samples (M3). Mortar M3 had the same mix proportions regarding cement and aggregate, as well as the aggregate grain fractions, as mortars M1 and M2. M3 samples did not contain filler, and quartz aggregate (SiO The compressive strengths increased from starting 5.2 MPa and 4.5 MPa to final 10.1 MPa and 9.5 MPa for mortars M1 and M2, respectively. The mortar M2, which comprised coated aggregate and LF, exhibited lesser strengths than M1 at all testing time-points during 28 days. The reason for this occurrence is the application of stearic acid, which prevented stronger adhesion of the binder particles to aggregate grains, and therefore disabled the creation of a stiffer cement-aggregate bond. The compressive strengths of limestone based mortars registered during the first 7 days were relatively high in comparison with strength values of referent mortar: 5.1–8.8 MPa for M1, 4.5–7.1 MPa for M2; and 3.5–6.1 MPa for M3. This is explained by the fact that one of the main characteristics bounded to the limestone filler addition is the increase of the early mechanical strengths. The modifications in the nature of contacts within the interface of cement particles were accomplished owing to the presence of extra amount of calcite. The additional CaCO The water absorption values for M1 mortar ranged from 15.5 to 4.2% ( The SEM microphotographs of the investigated mortar samples ( The fractures on the surface of the M1 mortar sample induced by increasing mechanical load were detected predominantly in the cement matrix area ( The mineralogical compositions of the experimental mortars after 28 day of curing were detected by X-ray diffraction analysis. The recorded XRD patterns are illustrated in The XRD characterization of M1 and M2 mortars resulted with identical mineral phases, of which calcite is the most abundant. Certain small amounts of talc were detected in both samples. The talc originated from the utilized limestone, which was mainly composed of CaCO The presence of additional amount of calcite filler accelerated the cement hydration, which was previously confirmed by high mechanical strengths achieved in a short time interval upon preparation of mortar samples and during the first 7 days of curing ( The thermal behavior of the mortar samples and mechanisms of their solid state decomposition reactions induced by temperature were assessed by differential thermal and thermo-gravimetric analyses. The testing, which has been conducted under the same controlled atmosphere (Chapter 2.5), gave resulting diagrams for samples M1 and M2 ( Several characteristic peaks were observed on the DTA curves of M1 and M2 mortars. The first effect, detected at approximately 110 °C, was rather stretched. The endothermic maxima for M1 and M2 samples are located at 107.30 °C and 107.72 °C, respectively. The initial DTA effects on M1 and M2 curves can be associated with endothermic reactions that are characteristic for the dehydration of AH The following significant effects were located in the vicinity of 450–500 °C. Both peaks were endothermic with their maxima located at 428.97 °C and 464.61 °C for M1 and M2, respectively. These reactions can be associated with the decomposition of Portland cement aluminate phase - C The most prominent thermally induced reaction that took place in the investigated mortar samples, which are predominantly composed of calcium carbonate, is calcination. The calcination of the carbonate is an endothermic event which exhibits a single smooth decomposition step. The rate of the decomposition reaction is administered by the temperature of the reaction and heat transfer rate. High-calcium limestone decomposes at temperatures in the vicinity of 800–900 °C, in one stage with the formation of calcium oxide and carbon dioxide The TGA curves for the samples M1 and M2 have an identical profile ( The investigation of the shrinking process and the assessment of possible fusion behavior of experimental mortars were conducted by means of the thermomechanical analysis (TMA) ( The shrinkage of a mortar and its compatibility with the base material (e.g. concrete, brick) can be regarded as one of the critical parameters for the durability design of structures. The thermal shrinkage of hardened mortar is caused by the movement of internal water. The other factor that plays important role in the thermal deformation of mortar is the coefficient of thermal expansion of aggregate whereas it comprises the largest fraction of the composite material's total volume. The other factor that plays important role in the mortar deformation is the aggregate’s coefficient of thermal dilation, whereas aggregate comprises the largest fraction of the composite’s total volume. This coefficient depends on the mineralogical composition of used stone; i.e. for limestone it ranges from 3 to 33 mm m The recorded microstructure of the experimental composites is illustrated in The statistical quantities obtained by analyzing the SEM figures in Gwyddion program The acquired mean value of the surface area of pores in M2 sample (0.02·10 The SEM analysis ( The cementing matrix present in both samples (visible in The conducted investigation revealed that the developed construction composites, with limestone as a substitution for the standard siliceous aggregate and as filler, have the properties that are comparable to those of traditional mortars and conform to the rules of sustainable production. The main conclusions are summarized below: The retrogression influence of the atmospheric water on the mortar is neutralized by application of the surface treatment with stearic acid on the limestone aggregate. The combined actions of mechanical activation and hydrophobization of the limestone filler influenced the decrease in open porosity thusly improving the final water repellency of the mortar. The properties of the optimal filler can be precisely established via chemometric analysis of the alternations in the grinding parameters. The r The addition of 10 wt% of limestone filler was enough to mechanically and chemically change the cementitious system and to improve the resulting performances. These effects implied granulometry modifications and heterogeneous nucleation. The micro-filler refined the packing of the componential grains and reduced the number of open and capillary pores. The filler particles acted as nucleation sites accelerating the precipitation of hydration products. The DTA/TG analysis proved the increase in rate of hydration reactions by indicating over-all shifting of the peaks towards the lower temperatures. The accelerated precipitation of cement minerals induced the development of early strengths in mortar. The dilution was avoided by creation of needle-like network made of secondary ettringite and carboaluminates which consumed empty spaces in the structure (as proved by SEM analysis) and improved the later strengths. In the M2 mortar, which comprised coated aggregate and filler, stearic acid crystals merged with hydration outgrows filling out the voids and additionally reducing the porosity. The image- and statistical analyses showed that the M2 mortar comprised lesser diameters (3.81 μm) and depths (0.30 μm) of pores, as well as smaller surface area (0.07·10 The stearic acid coating applied on the filler buffered the intensity of the hydration reaction (as illustrated by DTA/TG curves) but still it enabled the creation of a strong bond between cement and aggregate grains, making the difference in strengths between mortars with coated and non-coated limestone insignificant. The application of the limestone aggregate, as a replacement of the siliceous granular skeleton, led to lower final compressive strengths in mortar, but produced an infinitesimally small shrinkage at 1000 °C as it was confirmed by TMA. The mortar with coated limestone (M2) returned into the initial dimensional state, while the recorded shrinkage for the mortar with non-coated limestone (M1) was only 0.465%. The investigated mortars can be classified as composites with low sensitivity on thermal changes. The assessment of the effects of limestone utilization as a filler and as an aggregate on the mortar performances confirmed that these novel composites are applicable in the structural design. The application of the activated limestone powder is a step towards the mortars which have maximal density acquired by packing of well graded aggregate and reduced void space. Although, the difference in the compressive strengths of M1 and M2 mortars was very small, the mutual action of the activated filler and the stearic acid led to decrease in water absorption in mortar that comprised coated limestone (M2), as well as the smaller open pores' area which is complimentary for its water repellence and the application in the exterior structural design. This investigation was supported by 