This chapter gives an introduction to suspension spray techniques and discusses present research activities in the field of suspension spraying using plasma and flame spray-based methods. Suspension spraying feedstock is in liquid form, leading to unique and complex interaction with the plasma jet or flame. Therefore, the main focus of the present research activities deals with the interaction of the liquid with the hot gas jet followed by particle formation in the downstream of the gas jet. Due to small size of spray particles that are order of magnitudes smaller compared to ordinary spray processes, consolidation of coatings derived from a suspension spray process exhibits unique features that are not found in coatings manufactured by standard spray methods. Although there are some problems related to coating formation, suspension spraying has the potential to create coatings with advantageous properties for many future applications. In order to install a suspension spray process, manufacturing equipment has to be adapted to meet the special requirements for suspension spraying. Present activities concerning component development comprise suspension feeder devices, suspension injectors, and spray torches. Development activities are concentrating on plasma spray and combustion spray processes. Most activities are initiated by research labs, but first, components are already offered commercially. The most important question is what technological benefit can be offered by suspension spray technique in general. In fact, there are numerous potential applications that are seriously discussed. Virtually all fields of modern technology can be addressed by suspension spray applications. Some of the most promising application fields will be discussed in this chapter, like thermal barrier applications, high-temperature fuel cell (SOFC) development, catalytic coatings, biomedical applications, and wear resistance and tribofunctional surfaces.atmospheric plasma spraying chemical vapor deposition direct current deposition efficiency diethylene glycol electron beam physical vapor deposition gadolinia-doped ceria high-velocity oxygen fuel spraying high-velocity suspension flame spraying hydroxyapatite Ca inductively coupled plasma Institut für Fertigungstechnologie keramischer Bauteile lanthanum strontium manganite the Ohnesorge number polymer electrolyte membrane the Reynolds number radio frequency scandia-stabilized zirconia samarium-doped ceria scanning electron microscope simulated body fluid solid oxide fuel cell suspension plasma spraying solution precursor plasma spraying the Stokes number thermal barrier coating tricalcium phosphate Ca tetracalcium phosphate Ca thermal spraying vacuum plasma spraying the Weber number yttria-stabilized zirconia Ordinary thermal spray techniques use feedstocks in a solid form. Following modern practice and common standards, these are powders, wires, or rods. However, thermal spray techniques are not at all restricted to solid feedstocks. Plasma CVD processes (also named reactive plasma spraying) were introduced in the 1980s to synthesize diamond films on various high-temperature substrates like cemented carbides. Reactive gases (H Suspension spraying expands the thermal spray techniques by using a liquid feedstock in form of a suspension. Regarding the process route, it is closely linked to the solution spraying where a liquid containing a chemical precursor is used as a feedstock ( Especially the liquid phase significantly alters and disturbs the spray process, that is, the thermal and kinetic characteristics of the expanding gas jet after injection has taken place. This interference is one of the key problems that developers have to deal with and that also concern the field of solution spraying (this chapter in this book). The in-flight behavior of a suspension significantly differs from ordinary spray materials, for instance, solid powders. Whereas in an ordinary spray process any powder particle more or less converts into a single molten droplet, in suspension spraying, many effects contribute to the final droplet formation. Suspension properties play an important role in the spray process and are closely linked to their fabrication procedure. All aspects concerning this subject will be described in Probably the strongest motivation in developing suspension and solution spray techniques is the aim to process submicron powders and nanopowders (particles diameter However, suspension plasma spraying (SPS) processes were rapidly developing in parallel. Since then, numerous activities have been undertaken to evaluate SPS and SPPS processes, mainly in the field of TBC and SOFC research. Soon, it was recognized that SPS coatings revealed a unique microstructure that could not be achieved by ordinary spray processes like plasma and combustion flame spraying. In parallel, spraying of liquid precursors for the fabrication of nanoscale powders and deposits was investigated, for example, by At the beginning of the new millennium, suspension spraying—based on the HVOF process—came into the focus of several research groups. During the last decades, numerous review articles have been worked out by several authors discussing virtually any aspect of suspension and solution spraying. The following reviews have been considered for this chapter and should be consulted if a further study of the subject is required.  Injection of the suspension into a high enthalpic plasma jet or a flame current is the first crucial step in the spray process. Unlike in powder spraying where solid particles, accelerated in a feeder gas, enter the gas stream, suspension injection basically offers several alternative ways to inject the liquid into the gas stream. Basically controlled by the liquid pressure and the nozzle geometry, either the liquid stream may form a compact liquid jet or it may be atomized to form small droplets or it is fragmented into distinct droplets of equal size at a constant frequency by means of an external mechanical excitation source; refer to The ordinary injector geometry comprises a tube with a small bore forming the nozzle exit (turbulent nozzle). Under laminar operation conditions, a compact liquid jet is formed. By either reducing the nozzle diameter or increasing liquid pressure to critical values (the Reynolds number The theory of spray formation and liquid atomization distinguishes two types of atomization in a spray: primary atomization, in or near the nozzle exit, and secondary atomization, which is the aerodynamic breakup further downstream (discussed in the following section). Primary atomization basically depends on liquid geometry, relative velocity of liquid to surrounding gas and gas/liquid properties such as density, viscosity, and (liquid) surface tension. The main forces acting on the liquid are inertia, viscosity, and surface tension. Their interaction is described by two important dimensionless numbers, the Reynolds ( Depending on the nature of the gas stream, atomization of the suspension is not always reasonable. Considering high enthalpic plasma jets, as it is the case in standard SPS processes with radial suspension injection, gas viscosity of the ionized gas is reasonably high, and small droplets will not be able to enter into the center of the plasma stream due to their low inertial forces. Those droplets will thus follow the gas stream in the comparatively cold fringe, not sufficiently heating the solid particles within the liquid. They will end up as overspray dust or will be incorporated in the coating in form of unmolten or resolidified agglomerates, mainly increasing the porosity level of the coating. Cooling of the suspension nozzle, by either a gas or a closed water circuit, can significantly increase operational stability in SPS and HVSFS. Especially in HVSFS applications, where an internal axial injection of the suspension into a combustion chamber is required, an independent jacket cooling will prevent the suspension from clogging due to overheating of the nozzle, which is directly facing the combustion chamber entrance. This may also occur in high-power plasma spray devices where the (plasma facing) feeder nozzle heats up to a critical level. Interaction of a suspension with the hot gas current in a combustion or plasma jet is much more complex than particle flame interaction observed in ordinary powder combustion/plasma spray processes. The presence of the liquid dispersant has a tremendous impact on the hot gas stream. First of all, evaporation will take place, leading to a significant energy consumption within the flame/plasma jet depending on the evaporation enthalpy of the liquid. As evaporation occurs rather rapidly, disturbance of the gas stream will take place. In case of organic liquids, its combustion will occur farther downstream in the flame or plasma jet. This way some of the energy, consumed during evaporation process, is fed back into the process. No doubt, the role of the solvent is eminent for spray and particle forming in both combustion and plasma spray processes. Droplet formation is the second phenomenon that has to be considered in suspension spray processes. As the liquid enters the hot gas stream, a further fragmentation, called the aerodynamic breakup, will occur. Due to aerodynamic forces acting on the liquid, the droplet is dynamically deformed and excited to oscillation until a further defragmentation may occur. Mainly depending on the value of the Some of the breakup mechanisms are illustrated in Parallel to droplet formation, several processes within the suspension droplet body take place. Temperature gradients lead to thermodiffusion effects; density and surface tension gradients can lead to microcirculation of the liquid within the droplet. At lower solid content levels, this microcirculation can lead to a concentration of solid particles near the outer boundary. This way, liquid and vapor transport outward from the droplet center can be hindered favoring the formation of hollow spheres. This can be especially observed in suspensions containing submicron particles/agglomerates or nanoparticles/agglomerates (also refer to next section and Eventually, all liquid has evaporated and only the solid particles remain from the former droplet, forming an agglomerate. Melting of the particle material starts from the outer zone of the particle. Depending on the heat flux and time of flight that is available for further particle heating, a complete or partial melting will occur. This will basically lead to several types of droplets/particles hitting the surface of the substrate. In Basically, coating formation works similarly as in ordinary thermal spray processes, as it mainly consists of molten droplets deforming during impact and building up the layered structure. However, due to the fact that size of the droplet volume can be a factor of 10 As described at the end of the previous section, many different types of particles are formed in the hot gas jet, hitting the substrate surface and contributing to the microstructure. Depending on process parameters and suspension properties, a nonnegligible amount of resolidified or semimolten particles can be incorporated in the coating. Semimolten droplets and molten hollow spheres can lead to a doughnutlike splat structure exhibiting either a cavity in the center or residuals of unmolten primary particle agglomerates as discussed, for instance, by In suspension spraying, particles commonly are much smaller than in ordinary spray processes, especially when submicron or nanosized powders are used. As a consequence, they show a different behavior in gas currents not observed in ordinary spray processes, described, for instance, by the dimensionless Stokes number Overall porosity structure of SPS and HVSFS ceramic coatings strongly depends on operational conditions and involved materials. Any porosity level, from dense coating layers to open porous structures, can be produced. In general, with HVSFS, it is possible to form fully dense coatings, due to the high particle velocity that can be achieved. However, high-power plasma torches like the Mettech Axial III (Northwest Mettech Corp., Vancouver, Canada) also achieve reasonable particle velocities and form dense coatings (see HVSFS and SPS application examples in In SPS processes, when spraying nanosized feedstocks, it has been found that a shorter spraying distance as compared to APS favors postsintering of small particles in the coating due to the increased heat flux. This often leads to an overall stabilization of the rather porous coating structure. The effects of postsintering are discussed in depth, for instance, by Regarding deposition efficiency (DE) and deposition rates, SPS and HVSFS can reach comparable values compared to their standard process counterparts (APS and HVOF) but are lower in many practical cases (so far). However, DE strongly depends on many details of the spray process, that is, properties of the suspension (solid content, chemical composition of the solid and the solvent, injection method, torch type used, etc.). Concerning achievable coating thickness of SPS and HVSFS coatings, at least for oxide ceramics and phosphate-based biomaterials (hydroxyapatite, tricalcium phosphate, and others), it can be stated that a closed coating structure already starts at 10 Coating adhesion levels are also comparable to standard TS coatings with typical values ranging from 20 to 40 So far, suspension spraying has been preferentially used to spray micron- and nanosized oxide ceramics. Interestingly, phase composition of SPS and HVSFS ceramic coatings can significantly differ from standard TS coatings. This has been observed and intensively investigated for TiO Due to their refined microstructure, mechanical properties of SPS and HVSFS coatings can show several improvements with respect to APS and HVOF. It has been observed by Suspension spraying can be operated using standard thermal spray device. However, it requires a suspension feeding line and a suitable injection system as already discussed in Suspension feeders are designed to deliver nanoscale, fine micron, or submicron powders in dispersed form to a thermal spray torch. Ideally, injection mass flow and injection pressure can be controlled separately. Typical feeder data comprise a powder size range between 10 Two feeder concepts are commonly in use: (1) the pressure-based concept using a pressurized vessel containing the suspension and (2) a mechanical feeding by appropriate mechanical pumping devices. Both concepts have their own benefits and drawbacks. A pressure-based feeding device offers pulsation-free feeding; there are no moving parts (except steering devices) that may suffer from erosive or abrasive wear that especially occurs when ceramic suspensions are in use. However, exact control of suspension mass flow is rather expensive as external mass flow controllers or scale units have to be implemented. Appropriate mechanical pumping devices either eccentric screw pump or peristaltic pumps are commonly used. However, both systems lead to a certain pulsation of the suspension stream that cannot be fully avoided. Flow control on the other hand is technically simple. Several institutes and companies have started to publish concepts and offer commercial feeder systems that can be used as a stand-alone system or can be fully integrated into modern thermal spray control systems. Two examples of commercially available systems are given in Numerous plasma torch types have been successfully used for suspension spraying based on either ICP or direct current (DC) plasma jets. First approaches date back to 1997 using ICP plasma torches. ICP torches allow axial injection of powders, suspension, and liquid precursors. As there are no electrodes present, injection of any kind of feedstock is straightforward. ICP torches feature a rather voluminous plasma jet that efficiently vaporizes any solvent. One big advantage of ICP torches is the possibility to use virtually any plasma medium, reactive or nonreactive. However, ICP torches generate a rather slow plasma gas flow velocity below 100 m/s, inefficiently fragmenting liquid droplets and thus making it impossible to generate nanostructured coatings as stated by DC-based plasma torches are operated using a high-current arc as energy source. The torch design restricts the usage of plasma gases to those that do not chemically attack the electrode material like argon (Ar), helium (He), nitrogen (N A three-cathode-type plasma torch design has been developed and introduced to the market at the end of the last century. The torch is operated with three electrically separated cathodes distributing the electrical energy through three parallel arcs striking at a single anode preceded by insulating rings. As they are operated in low-current but high-voltage arc mode, these torches achieve higher thermal efficiencies compared to their single stick-type counterpart (i.e., the F-series). In this new design, the torches feature extended electrode lifetime, as well as higher deposition rates and efficiencies. Standard designs require an Ar–He gas mixture for stable operation. The most commonly used commercial torch is the Triplex II system, distributed by Sulzer Metco, Wohlen, Switzerland. Following the threefold symmetry of the generated plasma jet, the torch can be operated with three simultaneous working radial feedstock injection lines. Of importance (especially for SPS) is the radial injection position where the feedstock enters the plasma jet. Injection should be performed in such a way that the feedstock is “caged” in the interstice between the three plasma flows. A DC torch featuring an axial injection has been developed and commercialized by Northwest Mettech Corp., Vancouver, Canada (Mettech Axial III). The torch comprises three independently operated cathode–anode pairs. The three created plasma jets are converged before entering the nozzle creating a powerful plasma jet. This design allows axial injection of the feedstock materials from the rear into the converging individual plasma jets. Particle trajectory in the hot plasma zone is therefore two to three times longer compared to single-stick types with radial injection. For SPS applications, this design is especially advantageous, as cooling effects from the solvent get less denotative and particles experience an efficient heat and impulse transfer. A collection of commonly used plasma torches is shown in HVOF has been designed to achieve high particle velocities by means of combustion of a gaseous or liquid fuel inside a chamber and its expansion through a barrel. To achieve an optimum in heat and impulse transfer, feedstock injection should occur axially into the rear of the combustion chamber. So far, this is accomplished for HVOF torches operated with gaseous fuels. In HVSFS, suspension injection is done accordingly, making the process more complex as combustion is strongly influenced by solvent vaporization and—in case of organic solvents—subsequent combustion. The most commonly used HVOF torches operated with fuel gases are the Diamond Jet DJ 2700 hybrid (distributed, for instance, by Sulzer Metco, Wohlen, Switzerland) and TopGun-G (distributed, for instance, by GTV, Luckenbach, Germany). The development of both HVOF torches dates back to the 1980s. Due to the historical development path, both torch designs show some distinct differences. The TopGun system comprises a fully water-cooled jacket, whereas the Diamond Jet system combines compressed air cooling of the combustion chamber with a water cooling of the barrel. Further differences concern design details of nozzle geometry, gas injection, and mixing. This allows the exclusive usage of acetylene in case of the TopGun-G system, making it possible to spray oxide ceramics with hypersonic speed. Apart from that, both torches can be operated using propane, propylene, and ethane. Both torches have been used for spraying suspensions containing micron-, submicron-, and nanosized feedstocks (HVSFS). Although feasibility has been demonstrated and suspension spraying with HVOF has proved its clear potential, a future torch design will need distinct adaptations to improve long-term process stability and efficiency of the process. Major improvements concern the internal suspension injection system and an adaptation of the combustion chamber and the expansion nozzle geometry. Like in powder spraying, the suspension liquid is injected directly into the combustion chamber of the operating torch. The suspension is fed against the combustion chamber pressure, just like in conventional HVOF. Especially the use of an organic liquid phase can improve the spray performance as vaporization enthalpies are lower than that of water, and reaction enthalpies should contribute to the combustion process. However, in a first step, vaporization deprives energy from the combustion process. To really take advantage out of the organic solvent combustion, ideally, it should take place in the combustion chamber to fully feedback combustion enthalpy into the process. The degree of atomization of the suspension is one important parameter that controls combustion as well as accompanying droplet and particle forming. Unlike in DC plasma spraying, direct observation of these processes is not possible. Commonly used HVOF torches are shown in Therefore, numerical modeling of the combustion process along with suspension atomization and droplet forming is especially of importance to understand and improve the HVSFS process. Both processes, SPS and HVSFS, are subject of numerical modeling efforts. Modeling of spray atomization by one or two fluid injectors is the first important step when describing the suspension spray process. A fluid dynamic model for suspension atomization was presented by Extensive CFD modeling using advanced turbulence models has been performed to better understand the SPS process. The following sections will discuss some important applications in which suspension-sprayed coatings are under consideration. These applications are thermal barrier coatings (TBCs), biofunctional coatings, coatings for high-temperature fuel cell, catalytic coatings, as well as wear-resistant and tribological coatings. Most suspension-sprayed applications are still under evaluation, and although there are many promising results, it will need more time to convince industry to implement suspension spray processes as a supplement or even as an alternative to standard spray processes. Protective coatings in gas turbines are one of the most challenging applications in thermal spray technology. This is particularly true for thermal protection of turbine parts that are in direct contact with the hot combustion gases, as it is the case for the rear section of the turbine, where the conversion of thermal to mechanical energy takes place. Zirconia-based TBCs have been used for decades to protect combustion chamber walls and stator and rotator blades. Especially in aircraft turbines, for dynamically highly loaded components like rotator blades, another coating technology has been favored: EB-PVD. Although EB-PVD coatings exhibit a slightly higher thermal conductivity, they show a better performance related to thermal cycling and erosion resistance. In Improving thermal efficiency of modern gas turbines is the main technological driver for coating development. This is mainly achieved by increasing the turbine entry temperature; therefore, TBCs have to withstand higher temperature gradients and should exhibit improvements in terms of low thermal conductivity and low infrared transparency values, high thermal cycling and erosion resistance, and reduced sinter activity. It is well known that nearly all aspects of the coating microstructure affect thermophysical properties (i.e., thermal and radiative conductivity): coating thickness, grain size and related grain boundary volume density, phase composition, pore volume, and pore size distribution. Especially the radiative contribution becomes more pronounced at higher gas temperatures. Using new ceramic materials that complement or replace the standard yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) material. They show lower thermal conductivities, do not undergo phase transitions due to the existence of metastable phases, and show less postsintering effects during their operational lifetime ( Applying new coating technologies that allow for cost reduction and/or improved microstructures resembling those achieved in EB-PVD processes ( Improving the microstructure of a TBC by modifying and improving existing spray methods ( Numerous research activities are engaged in the development of TBC using the SPS process. It was demonstrated that SPS TBC can be fabricated exhibiting a high porosity level ( First attempts for fabrication of finely structured TBCs were in the field of SPPS using liquid precursors by Demonstrating the versatility of SPS, It is believed that insertion of Nd In biomedical applications, coating technology plays an important role, as surface functionalization is indispensable in order to ensure a proper and durable integration of artificial materials into the human body. Today, many surface coating and modification methods are employed: thin film deposition techniques like PVD as well as anodizing of metal surfaces and thermal spray methods ( Biocompatible coatings on endoprosthetic implants replacing pathological human bone hip, shoulder, and knee joints using thermal spray technique have been practiced since the 1990s. Especially for hip and knee joint implants, conventional plasma spraying (APS and VPS) of biocompatible biomaterials like hydroxyapatite (Ca HA is one of the most investigated and widespread coating materials fulfilling these requirements to the best of knowledge. It is regarded as bioactive as it stimulates a chemically induced direct cell growth in vivo. HA in its pure and crystalline form does not or only rarely undergo resorption in the human body. The material has undergone intensive studies, elaborately described by Bioactive glass materials, so-called bioglasses, were proposed by L. Hench in the late 1960s and have been intensively studied since the first publication from Suspension spraying of biomaterials has been performed employing SPS and HVSFS processes. As suspension-sprayed coatings feature a refined microstructure, even coatings with a reduced layer thickness compared to industrially established spray processes (mainly APS) can be fabricated. The main motivation for suspension spraying is to improve the mechanical properties and to properly control biodegradability in the body by tuning the amount of crystallinity. In case of bioglasses, spraying via APS leads to rather porous coatings with insufficient mechanical properties. HA, TCP, and bioglass coatings produced by suspension spray techniques have been investigated for this purpose. The single-anode torch SPS process has been used to spray HA suspensions in several studies by  Analogous studies were performed by the same group using bioglass materials and spraying them on titanium substrates, for instance, the recently developed so-called Bio-K (SiO Fuel cells are electrochemical devices that directly convert chemical energy of a reaction into electrical energy. In general, fuel cells provide many advantages over traditional energy conversion systems including high efficiency, reliability, modularity, fuel adaptability, and very low levels of emissions. Numerous concepts of fuel cell designs have been developed in the past decades or are still under development ( A SOFC essentially consists of two porous electrodes separated by a dense, oxygen ion conducting electrolyte. Different planar and tubular designs have been developed and successfully introduced in various applications, for instance, by Westinghouse (stationary power systems) and Delphi (gasoline-fueled APU); more information can be found, for instance, in In the anode material, where hydrogen is formed, catalytically active Ni/YSZ-based composite materials are well established. For the cathode, where the decomposition of the oxygen molecule takes place, lanthanum strontium manganite (LSM, La Originally, for the electrolyte material, YSZ was found to be the best working material, exhibiting excellent oxygen ion conductivity at a reasonable technical and economical effort in manufacturing ( A generally followed direction to increase ion conductivity at an intermediate temperature range between 600 and 800 °C is to use materials with a higher ionic conductivity, such as scandia-stabilized zirconia (ScSZ), gadolinia-doped ceria (GDC), or samarium-doped ceria (SDC), for instance, Ce To move toward a cost-saving and economically satisfying production process of SOFCs, numerous manufacturing methods have been evaluated, like screen printing techniques and wet spraying of liquid suspensions ( Manufacturing of thin and dense electrolyte layers by means of SPS and HVSFS was subjected to intense research. Numerous efforts have been reported using the SPS process with different plasma torches and submicron- or nanobased suspensions to produce YSZ-, GDC-, and SDC-based electrolyte layers.  SPS was also intensively evaluated regarding anode and cathode fabrication—often in combination with electrolyte deposition—using the same spray method, but in this case, a highly porous structure containing a high amount of three phase boundaries is desired. Spraying of LSM-based suspensions for cathode fabrication was carried out by Titanium oxide coatings have been intensively studied because of their interesting physical, chemical, and electrical properties. The application of TiO  A comparison between external atomization and internal continuous stream injection in SPS when spraying water–ethanol-based TiO Spraying of TiO Wear resistance and tribofunctionality are denotative application fields in TS. Several oxide ceramics in the system Al, Zr, Ti, and Cr have been suspension-sprayed for this purpose preferentially using nanosized feedstocks. Well-known application fields are paper and printing machines (rollers), textile machine elements (for instance, yarn carriers), pump and valve parts, and engine parts only to mention a few examples. Feedstocks using submicron- and nanosized alumina and alumina-zirconia have been sprayed (SPS) by several authors, as described in The potential of HVSFS TiO Only few articles present data about suspension spraying of metal- or cermet-based materials. Directly spraying these materials in form of suspensions could bring down production costs, as the production of agglomerated spray powders is still expensive. Although spraying of metals, carbides, and cermets is basically possible by means of suspension spraying, benefits are not yet clearly visible, as those materials undergo transitions and oxidation reactions in most cases. This is simply due to the high surface reactivity of the small particles, which are separately subjected to the hot gas stream. Further research is necessary to solve this issue and it is not yet clear if suspension spraying of cermet materials can produce coatings with superior performance compared to HVOF coatings produced with high-quality standard powders.  Discussed and practiced since the 1990s, suspension spraying is a spray method that is still under development. Research work is closely linked to precursor solution spraying, sharing many of the involved phenomena. Whereas in the first decade of development the focus was more on SPS, HVSFS joined a decade ago and even enhanced the possibilities of suspension spraying. The research work in suspension techniques has clearly shown that liquid injection, gas/liquid interaction, and subsequent droplet formation and breakup are the critical phenomena that need to be understood and tuned in order to gain full control of the process. Besides the application of various diagnostic methods that may not always be capable of fully monitoring the process due to a decreased particle size or for other reasons, numerical modeling and dynamic simulations of these phenomena are important key tools for ongoing research efforts. Any successful spray method starts with a good feedstock. Suspension fabrication requires an in-depth knowledge in powder processing, in surface chemistry, and in rheology in order to fabricate a stable feedstock featuring a good flowability and processability. Properties of suspension-sprayed coatings clearly differ from standard TS coatings leading to a change in their electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties when compared to their ordinarily sprayed counterparts. Responsible for this are the strongly refined microstructure and altered phase compositions not observed in standard spray coatings. The use of nanosized feedstocks gained major interest among the research community, although it turned out that it is not always beneficial. Spraying of nanopowder containing suspensions is challenging in the sense that fully preserving the nanostructure during the whole process—starting from suspension injection—until finalization of coating formation is difficult. Suspension spraying will for sure not replace the well-established standard thermal spray methods, but it can give an add-on in several application fields such as TBC development, fuel cell development, biofunctional coatings, tribofunctional and wear-resistant coatings, catalytically active surfaces, and much more applications that may come in the near future. The immense potential of spraying with suspensions and liquid feedstocks in general has just been discovered. Feedstock creation in the liquid phase gives a high degree of freedom in combining powders, powder and liquid precursors, and so on. Any limitation of particle size has been removed. Where nanosized particles may be of advantage, they can be used. For industry, however, the most important issue is the availability of stable suspensions, as well as their safe handling and storage capability. Spraying torches should be designed and optimized towards suspension spraying, ensuring safe handling, high robustness, and long-term process stability. Suspension feeders should combine robustness and high accuracy in terms of mass flow control and reproducibility. Last but not the least, feedstock and production costs will also decide about the future success of this spray method.