Various leach approaches have been developed for the alkaline cyanide leaching of platinum group metals (PGMs) from ores, concentrates and from secondary wastes such as spent automobile catalytic converters. Recently, the adsorption and elution of PGM cyanide complexes onto activated carbon has also been demonstrated and is similar to the activated carbon process for gold. The stripping of adsorbed tetracyanoplatinate(II) ([Pt(CN)4]2−) from activated carbon consists of a two-step batch process which involves the pre-treatment of the metal-loaded activated carbon with a relatively strong sodium cyanide and sodium hydroxide solution prior to the elution step with de-ionized water at 80°C. This paper models the elution and describes the mechanism of platinum elution from activated carbon. The equilibrium and film transfer constants were determined by fitting the model to experimental results and then validated by comparing to additional experiments. It was found that the rate of release of the platinum ions is governed by the amount of platinum and sodium on the activated carbon and the concentrations of these ions in the bulk of the liquid. It was found that the adsorption-elution of the single component system can be adequately described by using a modified Freundlich isotherm and a mass transfer diffusion equation. The rate of platinum elution interchangeably depends on the equilibrium of the Pt ions at the carbon-liquid interface and the mass transfer of these Pt ions from the interface to the bulk liquid. As both of these rate limiting factors were found to depend on the sodium concentration, the dominant platinum elution rate limiting factor shifts as the sodium concentrations change as the elution progresses. The elution process could be modelled accurately and it is shown that the second step (elution) of the two-step batch process (pre-treatment and elution) can be broken down into a sequence of four consecutive stages. The benefits of fundamentally understanding this process can ultimately lead to improved elution, better process control, shorter elution times, smaller elution columns or assist in the development of a continues elution process.parameter in Freundlich isotherm expression parameter in mass flux equation and modified from the Freundlich isotherm expression Base Metals (Copper, Nickel, Cobalt…) bed volume (m liquid phase concentration (mg/L) bulk liquid phase concentration (mg/L) inertial resistance factor mass diffusivity (m external force vector (N) gravitational acceleration (m/s specie (subscript) diffusion flux (kg/m film transfer coefficient (m/s) mass transfer coefficient (kg/m length (mm) concentration of adsorbent on carbon surface (mg/kg) mass (kg) parameter in Freundlich isotherm expression mass transfer (kg/m static pressure (Pa) Precious Group Metals (Platinum, Palladium, Gold) time (s) temperature (°C) gas constant (J/mol superficial velocity (m/s) mass fraction permeability computational domain porosity density (kg/m stress tensor (Pa) dynamic viscosity (N del operator which represents the partial derivative of a quantity with respect to all directions in the chosen coordinate system Numerous direct leach technologies, including a number of cyanide-based leach processes has been reviewed by In a previous paper by the authors ( Since no fundamental studies regarding the elution of platinum cyanide from activated carbon exist in the open literature, the AARL process, and to a lesser extent the Zadra elution process, for gold were studied as a basis for the modelling of the platinum elution process.  A model of the AARL process was developed by Importantly,  In another study, Optimization and control of the elution process demands that mathematical models be developed. As no model currently exists for Pt elution, the aim here is to develop such a model and to determine the appropriate rate constants through fitting of the models to experimental results. Such a model would aid in the prediction and simulation of breakthrough curve modelling as a function of some operating parameters. The experimental set-up was described in detail in Analysis of the experimental data highlighted certain features in the elution profiles that were consistently present. These features were deemed important factors in understanding the elution mechanism and were therefore incorporated into the numerical model. The first involved the explanation and incorporation of the reduction in elution kinetics during the first 1500 The second challenge was to determine the parameters that effect the position of the peak and also the extent and position of the reduction in elution rate when loaded carbon were treated with an identical pre-treatment solution (2 The dimensionless numbers for the specific column and following elutions were calculated and are shown in Schmidt numbers relate the diffusion due to momentum to the mass diffusivity. The larger this number, the less mass diffusion occur with Considering the relatively low column to particle diameter ratio of 5.2, the column was evaluated for the influence of wall effects. Larger diameter columns packed with the same activated carbon were therefore evaluated and the porosity found to be similar to that of the column used for modelling. The wall effects were therefore deemed to be small and not included in the model. The model for the elution of platinum cyanide from activated carbon is shown graphically in The two basic equations that govern the laminar flow of liquid through a bed of packed bed of solid particles are the Convection–Diffusion Eq. The value for A general assumption related to the fluid flow is: All processes within the column are isothermal. The elution column is assumed to be at a constant temperature of 80 To calculate the rate at which platinum cyanide desorb from the activated carbon into the solution, the following assumptions were made: All metals are on the surface of the activated carbon and not diffused into the micropore structure of the activated carbon. SEM–EDX analysis ( The metal concentration on the carbon surface and in the liquid at the carbon/liquid interface is in equilibrium and diffuses from this interface through a liquid film into the bulk of the liquid ( The diffusion through the liquid film is described through the well-known mass transfer equation By substituting Eq. The Pt mass balance for the amount of Pt left on the carbon at a time ( Early on in the development phase of the model, it became clear that the elution of Na Substitution of Eq. As no water is eluted from the activated carbon, unlike the case for Pt and Na, Eq. To analyse the problem mathematically, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software was chosen to solve the associated flow- and mass balance equations. CFD is a convenient numerical tool to analyse flow and heat transfer phenomena as well as coupled chemical reactions in engineering processes. Given the multiple spatio-temporal partial differential expressions presented in the coupled equations above, commercial CFD code offers a ready numeric solving routine to calculate the outcomes of the set of equations. A commercial CFD code A cylindrical column with dimensions of 12 The water inlet velocity was specified at between 0.09 and 0.15 Since the elution column is assumed to be at a constant temperature of 80 The governing equations (Eqs. Numerical values ( The experimental data that were used for determining the parameters are shown from The parameter fitting also included experiments that were seemingly completed at similar conditions. The activated carbon loading in both experiments was similar (≈650 Elution experiments that were pre-treated with higher sodium cyanide and sodium hydroxide concentrations were also included in the parameter fitting and are shown in To explain the shape of the curve and the ‘slow down’ in elution kinetics as previously discussed, instead of single parameter values for the film transfer and equilibrium coefficients, it was rather found that both the film transfer coefficient ( The constant From both As stated before, the cyanide pre-treatment has a significant influence on PGM elution. Experimentation has shown that the Pt elution recovery increases significantly as the concentration of NaCN in the pre-treatment step is increased from 0% to 2% with 2% been found to be the optimum. Model predictions, as shown in  The change to the equilibrium constant To verify the proposed parameters, the model was validated against several more experiments shown in From this developed Pt elution model, it can be concluded that the shape of the Pt elution profile for an AARL process is a function which mainly dependent on the removal of the Na The loading of Na During period 2, the Na The Na The Pt on the activated carbon surface becomes depleted and the concentration in the bulk liquid slowly decreases as the Pt flows out of the column. The need for the addition of a correction factor for lower cyanide concentrations in the pre-treatment step is hypothesized to be due to the insufficient elution of the Pt, Pd and Au complexes from the activated carbon that results in an additional amount of complexes remaining on the activated carbon surface which leads to a lower value for the equilibrium constant The sensitivity of the model towards the amount of Na A mathematical model describing the elution of platinum cyanide complex in an analogue of the AARL process was developed. The model assumes the Pt cyanide complex to be at an interface on the activated carbon surface where equilibrium with the liquid phase exists. From this interface the platinum then diffuses through a liquid film into the bulk of the liquid. This rate of release of the platinum complex is described by a function which includes a modified Freundlich isotherm equation and the mass transfer diffusion equation of which the constants were found by data fitting. Both the equilibrium constant and the mass transfer constant were found to be dependent on the Na The shape of the Pt elution profile was found to be a function which is mainly dependent on the removal of the cations (Na The authors would like to thank Lonmin Plc for their funding of this study as well as Qfinsoft (PTY) Ltd for their assistance in the development of the modelling code.