A swivel dislocation is an uncommon variant of a sub-talar dislocation, where a medially or laterally directed force dislocates the talo-navicular joint, and subluxates but does not dislocate the subtalar joint. The calcanuem rotates or swivels on an intact interosseous talocalcaneal ligament without tearing it. It is important to recognise this injury as its treatment and prognosis differs form a subtalar dislocation. A case of lateral swivel dislocation of the talo-navicular joint treated by closed reduction and percutaneous wire fixation is reported. Excellent clinical and functional outcome were achieved.Isolated dislocation of the talo-navicular joint without associated sub-talar dislocation or a tarsal fracture is rare. Such injuries are usually caused by a severe abduction or adduction force exerted to the forefoot. Ever since, Ross and Mitchell described a case of talo-navicular dislocation associated with a talar head fracture, there have been other reports of the same associated with fractures of the talus (medial column disruption of the foot) and fractures of the calcaneus (transcalcaneal talo-navicular dislocation) Main and Jowett (1975) described a variant of sub-talar dislocation termed a tarsal rotation injury or swivel injury A case of lateral swivel dislocation of the talo-navicular joint treated by closed reduction and percutaneous K wire fixation is presented. A 45-year-old female catering assistant presented to our department with a history of having fallen off a stool from a height of about three feet on to her right foot. She complained of severe pain, swelling and deformity of the foot and was unable to weight bear. Clinical examination revealed a closed injury to the foot with marked swelling and diffuse tenderness of the midfoot. The talar head could be felt prominently over medial border. There was no neurovascular compromise. X rays showed a complete lateral talo-navicular dislocation, subluxation of the subtalar joint and a compression fracture of the calcaneo-cuboid joint ( On follow-up at 24 months, the patient is back at work as a catering assistant. The foot was pain free and stable with a normal range of ankle and subtalar movements. X rays show a normal talo-navicular joint with no evidence of any secondary arthrosis of the subtalar or calcaneo-cuboid articulations ( The midtarsal joints comprising the talo-navicular and calcaneo-cuboid joints is a synovial plane lying transversely across the medial and lateral longitudinal arches of the foot In a medial swivel injury, the force is directed medially and the talo-navicular joint dislocates medially rotating the foot medially. Here, the calcaneo-cuboid joint is left intact These injuries differ from a subtalar dislocation in that the deforming force probably falls more anterior to that which produces subtalar and ankle injuries. Secondly, the interosseous ligament, which consists of numerous vertical and oblique fibres spanning between the articulating surfaces of the talus and the upper surface of the calcanues remains intact In a swivel injury, antero-posterior views of the foot will show dislocation of the talo-navicular joint and rotation of the calcanues beneath the talus and lateral views rotational subluxation but not dislocation of the subtalar joint. Antero-posterior views of the ankle will show a normal or near normal vertical alignment of the calcanuem, in contrast to a similar view in a subtalar dislocation where the calcanuem everts/inverts in the vertical plane It is important to distinguish this injury from the more severe lateral subtalar dislocation. While a lateral subtalar dislocation is reduced by traction and inversion, a swivel dislocation is reduced by traction and medial rotation of the foot A good clinical and functional outcome was achieved in the case presented, and also in the solitary case from Main and Jowett's series The case presented merits mention because of its rarity, unusual mechanism and the excellent outcome achieved. It highlights the importance of distinguishing it from a lateral subtalar dislocation due to the differences in treatment and prognosis.