Iron-based powders were deposited on the internal wall of a cylinder by means of plasma transferred arc centrifugal cladding. The as-fabricated coating was a functionally graded triple layer coating with microstructures varying from hypereutectic firstly to near eutectic, and then to hypoeutectic structures along the radial direction. Significant enrichment of carbides [M7C3 and M23(C, B)6] was observed in the inner layer. The centrifugal force was responsible for the chemical composition gradient which resulted in the microstructures gradient. Theoretical analysis revealed that Cr, C and B atoms moved toward the inner layer whereas Fe, W and Mo atoms moved toward the outer layer under the effect of centrifugal force, which was confirmed by the quantitative analysis and line-scan profile. Wear resistance of the inner layer of the coating was fairly higher than that of the substrate.Functionally graded materials (FGMs) are an innovative class of materials with gradual change in properties, which can be tailored to specific applications in aerospace, automotive, defence, electronics, biomedical and power engineering sectors. The specific properties obtained by the use of FGMs include high temperature surface wear resistance, surface friction and thermal properties, adjustable thermal mismatching, reduced interfacial stresses, increased adhesion at metal–ceramic interface, minimized thermal stresses, increased fracture toughness and crack retardation Plasma transferred arc centrifugal cladding (PTACC) is a novel method for processing iron-based functionally graded coating on the internal walls of cylinders. Plasma transferred arc (PTA), as a unique heat source of surface modification technology, has advantages of low cost, high heat input, free of pre-treatment, high efficiency, convenient operation and powder-feeding in synchronism. So, PTA cladding is a promising approach for fabricating thick coating on steel plates Fe–Cr–M–C (M Based upon those considerations, the present work reported the manufacturing of iron-based functionally graded coating on the internal wall of a cylinder by PTACC technology from Fe–Cr–M–C (M A commercial cylinder was selected as the substrate for the PTACC, the dimension of the cylinder was 80 A schematic representation of the PTACC process was presented in The cladding specimens (10 The wear resistance of the coating at ambient temperature was evaluated on an improved block-on-wheel dry sliding wear tester (M-2000, China).   According to liquidus projection of the iron corner of the Fe–Cr–C ternary system It is worthwhile to mention that the morphologies of primary carbides [M As shown in From the experimental results, one can notice that primary phases change with layers, so, the graded structure could not be explained by migration of the primary carbides. In this study, the graded structure may result from a chemical composition gradient which is formed before the crystallization of the primary phase. The origin of the compositional gradient is discussed as follows. The level of centripetal force applied in this study is characterized by G number (= The motion model of the atom A is quite complex. To simplify it, only the initial transient is considered, when The effective density of the melt can be obtained by averaging the molar volumes The melting temperatures of the minor alloy components [such as W, Mo, C (graphite) and B] are quite high. Thus their molar volumes are calculated from the solid densities. According to the literature The difference in interfaces ( As shown in The hardness profile across the coating is presented in The block-on-disk test results indicate that the mass loss of the graded coating is about 18 times less compared with the unprocessed substrate (as shown in A novel PTACC technology was applied to fabricate functionally graded coating on the internal wall of a commercial cylinder with Fe–Cr–M–C powders. Microstructure characteristics and properties of the coating were studied. Moreover, the effect of centrifugal force was discussed. The results can be summarized as follows: The coating, metallurgically bonded with the substrate, has a gradient microstructure ranging from hypereutectic structure consisted of coarse multiphase [primary M The diffusion of alloying atoms is ascribed to the centrifugal force, under which, Cr, C and B atoms move to the inner layer while Fe, W and Mo atoms move on the opposite trend. Both the line-scan profile and the hardness profile exhibited gradients from the inner layer to the outer layer, which is consistent with the microstructure observation, quantitative analysis and mathematical analysis. Wear resistance of the graded coating could be improved by around 18 times compared with the cylinder substrate. This work was supported by the