As a rule, the change in mechanical properties of rock by specimen size is regarded as scale effect. A rock mass basically consists of two components: intact rock and discontinuities, each of which has different scale effects. In order to numerically analyze the behavior of discontinuous rock masses, sufficient mechanical properties must be determined not only for discontinuities but also for intact rock taking into consideration the different scale effects. This paper reviews the scale effect on strength and deformation characteristics of intact rock, and also discusses the possibility of using standard specimens to estimate strength and deformation characteristics of actual-scale rock. Finally, we propose an adequate method for the practical determination of mechanical design parameters based on the above discussions.It is well established that uniaxial compressive strength of “intact rock ( This kind of change in the mechanical properties of rock with size is referred to as scale effect. A rock mass consists of two components: intact rock and discontinuities, each of which shows a different scale effect. Highly developed numerical analysis methods now make it possible to explicitly express the effect of discontinuities on the mechanical behavior of rock masses ( Intact rocks within a rock mass to be considered in numerical simulation range in size from several tens of centimeters to meters on average. However, it eventually becomes difficult to obtain the strength and deformation characteristics of actual-scaled samples from the viewpoint of equipment cost and loading capacity. Therefore, it is worth considering the possibility of estimating the strength and deformation characteristics of actual-scale intact rock from laboratory tests using “standard” size specimens ( Research on the scale effect of intact rocks is conducted mainly by uniaxial compression tests for hard rocks and by triaxial compression tests for soft rocks. Based on the test results, several equations to express the scale effect have been proposed for solid and/or intact rocks ( In this paper as the difference of testing methods to be used, “intact rock” is classified into hard rock and soft/weak rock, and its threshold is 25 MPa with uniaxial compressive strength in accordance with ISO14689-1  Eq. A study on scale effect in hard rock was performed on Lac du Bonnet granite sampled from a level of 240 m in an underground research laboratory (URL) in Canada ( Two testing devices of different loading capacity were used according to the diameter size: from 33 to 141 mm and from 194 to 294 mm.    Those results suggest that it is necessary to rewrite Eq.  As is well known, Eq. Assuming that the scale effect expressed in the empirical Eq. Using equivalent length, we considered the experimental results of Nos. 7 and 8 in  The fitting curves to Eq. The scale effect on the uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock in hard rock using the data noted in Eq. Exponent Change in strength due to scale effect is significant in the range of about 20 mm to 200 mm in diameter. Specimens smaller than about 50 mm exhibit a large deviation. It is possible to estimate scale effect on strength of intact rock by uniaxial compression tests in the laboratory, using a series of specimens about 30 to 200 mm in diameter, and applying the results to Eq. Here, we treat as soft and/or weak any rock for which unconfined compressive strength is 0.5–25 MPa as described in On the other hand, there are few studies on the scale effect of soft and/or weak intact rock. Systematic studies on the scale effect of sedimentary soft rock are summarized in The relationship between uniaxial compressive strength and length of specimen in pumiceous tuff is shown in In contrast to the scale effect in hard rocks, The scale effect of homogeneous siltstone (Pliocene, fine sandstone to sandy mudstone) and mudstone (Miocene) has also been investigated ( These results suggest that the scale effect on ( The size effect of cement-treated rock-like materials was studied in laboratory tests (Omine et al., The mechanical properties obtained were uniaxial compressive and tensile (radial compression) strength as shown in  Studies on the scale effect of siltstone (Miocene rock, Research was conducted on large undisturbed specimens of volcanic breccia (Miocene rock, Mechanical properties of highly weathered granite were investigated by consolidated–drained triaxial compression tests ( Research on the mechanical behavior of stiff intact London Clay was recently summarized from the viewpoint of geological structure ( The scale effect on strength of soft rocks is summarized as follows: The scale effect on soft rock is generally not significant. However, in the case of mudstone, etc. with a high degree of consolidation and/or cementation, properties similar to hard rock are occasionally exhibited. In this case, the decrease in strength due to scale effect shows significant occurrence in cohesion and not in angle of shear resistance. Exponent Failure criteria were not significantly affected by the scale effect (for details, refer to Only a few studies have been systematically performed on the scale effect of elastic constants (Young's modulus, shear modulus and Poisson's ratio) of intact rock, compared to studies on the scale effect of strength. The main studies are listed in   On the other hand, Although the results of The In order to evaluate the effect of boundary conditions on deformation characteristics, two-dimensional finite element analysis (FEM) was carried out on the A–A′ section under plane stress conditions assuming that the rock is an isotropic and linear elastic body. An example of the results shown in The corrected values of Young's modulus obtained from these simulations are plotted in The relationship between Poisson's ratio and specimen diameter in the three rock types discussed above is shown in Summarizing these results, the scale effect of deformation characteristics is insignificant in fresh to slightly weathered hard rock. For practical purposes, it is reasonable to obtain the Young's modulus using standard specimens 50–100 mm in diameter obtained from laboratory tests. The studies presented in In the results of the triaxial compression test using homogeneous siltstone ranging from 35 to 500 mm in diameter (  Although the available data is limited, it can be concluded from the above that the scale effect of the deformation characteristics in soft rock is not significant. Confining pressure affects Young's modulus of intact rock and the effect can be expressed by the following empirical equation ( Eq.  This paper briefly reviewed the research on the scale effect of mechanical properties of hard and soft intact rock and discussed a method for estimating the design parameters for practical use. The conclusions are as follows: (1) Strength properties The strength reduction of intact rock due to scale effect occurs in both hard and soft rock, but the trend of change depends on rock type, strength, texture, etc. Generally, the scale effect in soft rock is insignificant. The power function in Eq. (4) is useful for evaluating the scale effect in practical use. All constants of the equation can be obtained from laboratory tests, using specimens of different size ranging from about 30–200 mm in diameter. Considering the above results, it can be applied to estimate of up to about several meters in length. (2) Deformation characteristics (elastic constants) There is little or no scale effect on Young's modulus and/or Poisson's ratio. The constants above can be obtained through laboratory tests with standard-sized specimen. (3) Specimen size and scatter of test results The scatter of test results greatly affects the validity for evaluation of scale effect. Therefore, it is necessary statistically to consider the test data for the determination of mechanical properties. The boundary conditions of The test results for small specimens exhibit large deviation. Therefore, it is necessary to use the test results obtained from specimens 50 mm in diameter and 100 mm in height, and from larger specimens in the case of heterogeneous It assumes that the strength of a brittle solid depends upon the minimum strength of cracks within the solid, namely, (1) a lot of micro-crack exists in solid, (2) the number of included The probability when the strength of one within Therefore, the probability density function If the strength of solid with According to the relations mentioned above, the strength The strength determined by Eq. From relations above and Eq. The assumption mentioned earlier, that cracks