A large amount of plant residue containing heavy and hazardous metals is generated in Iranian lead–zinc plant annually. The plant residue is known as hot filtercake (HFC) which contains 8–20% zinc, 6–16% manganese, 5–25% calcium and 0.5–3% cobalt. This paper is devoted to the mechanochemical alkaline leaching (MCAL) of zinc from HFC. The possibility of complete selective zinc leaching from HFC by the MCAL method was investigated through a 2×4×5 full factor design wherein effects of NaOH concentration, leaching time and milling speed were evaluated. In addition, the results were compared with the results of conventional leaching method.
                  The results from the conventional alkaline leaching (CAL) indicated that just after a while from the beginning of the reaction, as confirmed by XRD investigations, an insoluble calcium manganese hydroxide layer forms on active surface of ZnO particles which prevents diffusion of leaching solution. Consequently, leaching process was halted and maximum recovery did not exceed 82.4%. Mechanochemical leaching results revealed that intensive milling in an attritor enhanced leaching performance, selectively. This is attributed to a wide structural change and abrasion of insoluble layer during MCAL. Subsequently, zinc recovery of 99.9% was obtained. The statistical analysis of the results showed that NaOH concentration, milling time and milling speed were statistically significant factors affecting the leaching process at 95% confidence level. In conclusion, approximately complete zinc recovery from HFC using the MCAL method can assist cobalt and manganese extraction process from the plant residue in the subsequent process.Zinc is often produced from its sulfide, carbonate and oxide ores as well as electric arc furnace dusts or some other secondary resources and residues by hydrometallurgical, pyrometallurgical or their combination processes ( It has been determined that the zinc plant residues (ZPRs) are solid wastes having long-term pollution potential. According to the result of the leaching procedures by Arzu Özverdİ and Mehmet Erdem, concentration of the contaminant released is higher than the threshold values which cause HFC to be classified as a hazardous waste ( Many researchers studied Co, Mn and Zn recovery from solid wastes and secondary resources. Chu Yong Cheng reviewed the various leaching method for manganese recovery from secondary materials ( It was well established that mechanochemical treatment enhances the reactivity of material through a wide structural changes occurring during the extensive milling. Structural changes like lattice strain, bond breakages, X-ray amorphization degree, decrease in crystallinity, and increase in dislocation density and surface area are responsible for the reactivity improvement ( The objective of this study is to investigate the process of zinc recovery from the complex Iranian zinc plant residue (hot filtercake, HFC) by selective mechanochemical alkaline leaching (SMCAL). The main aim was to evaluate the possibility of complete zinc recovery from HFC using the ability of mechanochemical alkaline leaching. In addition, the performance of the conventional leaching was compared with the performance of MCAL. To optimize the mechanochemical leaching process, a full factor design was employed for running the experiments and the effects of different factors on the process were investigated. Furthermore, leaching mechanisms are developed and presented in this paper. Chemical analysis was determined with standard procedures using an atomic absorption spectroscopy, AAS (USA, GBC 902). Our preliminary study showed that the alkaline leaching process is only selective for zinc. Therefore, it is not required to analyze the other elements in filtrate. The average particle size of the HFC sample was measured by Malvern Instrument particle size analyzer (UK, MS 14). For phase identification of the HFC and leaching residues, X-ray diffraction Spectrometer (USA, Bruker Axes D-8) with Cu Kα radiation was used. The patterns were recorded over the range of 10–60° 2θ, using a step size of 0.05° and counting time of 3 A representative hot filtercake (HFC) sample was collected from ALVAN zinc plant, Zanjan, Iran. In order to remove the soluble salts and the trapped pregnant solution as a result of deficient filtering, the as-received wet HFC was first washed with distilled water several times, afterward known as PHFC. The pre-treated HFC (PHFC) was dried in an oven at 95 Needless to say, zinc, manganese and cobalt as valuable metals in PHFC have high grade. The average particle size of the initial PHFC sample was 6.5 The XRD pattern of PHFC is shown in SEM–EDS analysis was used to find more information about the shape and chemical composition of different particles present in PHFC. As shown in The mechanochemical alkaline leaching (MCAL) experiments were performed in a vertical stirred ball mill (attritor) with a stainless steel chamber. A schematic view of the apparatus is shown in The conventional alkaline leaching (CAL) experiments were conducted in a two neck glass reactor of 250 After the leaching tests, the pulp was filtered and then the filtrate was diluted subject to zinc analysis by AAS. The leaching efficiencies of zinc were calculated according to the following equation: XRD analysis revealed that the main zinc bearing phase in PHFC sample is zincite (ZnO). Among the phases present in PHFC, it was the only phase that could be dissolved in alkaline medium. Our preliminary experiments showed that lead and cadmium have not leached, remarkably. Analysis of the filtrate after leaching with optimum condition (C Noticeable leaching of mentioned elements is probably prohibited with high concentration of zinc. So, the leaching process could be completely selective for zinc. It is thought that zincite dissolves in alkaline medium according to the reaction shown below: Our preliminary experiments (based on a L16 Taguchi design) disclosed that temperature didn't affect the leaching process significantly. For further clarification, some of the obtained results are given in At first, several primary experiments were performed to evaluate the performance of zinc leaching by MCAL and CAL methods. The results are summarized in It is obvious that, at any conditions compared with CAL, MCAL generally can result in high recovery. It is expected that the enhancement of zinc leaching performance through MCAL approach would be possible by changing the milling conditions. To precisely explore the leaching of zinc from PHFC, two different series of experiments were carried by MCAL and CAL methods. The effects of NaOH concentration and leaching time in both methods as well as milling speed in mechanochemical leaching method were investigated. A 2 It can be seen that when leaching time progressed at any NaOH concentration, there were three different behaviors for zinc alkaline leaching: 1. Through the CAL method, the recovery of zinc remains approximately at a constant value; 2. In the MCAL method, a slight increase in the recovery of zinc can be observed by applying low milling speed (R As presented in Results of the MCAL method through a 2 The goodness factors confirms an excellent model fitting to zinc recovery response. As seen in The coefficient plot of the final model is shown in  In the beginning of the leaching, direction of this arrow was close to the NaOH concentration axis, indicating that NaOH concentration has more effect on the process. However, contribution of milling speed increased as time progressed. This phenomenon is shown with increasing the slope of arrow as more inclined to the milling speed axis direction. In the next section, more evidences will be presented about leaching mechanism. Based on the results given in The common model for leaching kinetics of zinc ores or concentrates is shrinking core model, SCM. During leaching with SCM, a progressive size reduction in particle size happened. Meantime, recovery gradually increases to reach a maximum value. For small particles, SCM in stokes regime should be used ( As previously seen, during the CAL method, zinc recovery increases by NaOH concentration. Based on solution chemistry, increasing of zinc recovery vs. NaOH concentration can be attributed to the increasing of diffusion rate of NaOH through diffusion layer to the active surface with increasing of NaOH concentration. If it would be assumed that the formation time of resistant layer at different NaOH concentrations is equal, it can be concluded that the higher the NaOH concentration, the higher the diffusion rate of NaOH through diffusion layer. Consequently, it leads to more leaching of ZnO particles before the complete formation of resistant layer. According to the obtained results, the MCAL method is more efficient than the CAL method. As generally known, the dominant mode of grinding in attritor is abrasion and attrition. Therefore, this insoluble layer could be continuously removed during attrition through mechanochemical leaching. Consequently, the remained unreacted core could be leached completely. For evaluating the claimed theory, leaching residues of CAL and MCAL methods were analyzed for phase assessment. XRD patterns of the leach residues at NaOH concentration of 9 Comparison of patterns (b) and (g) discloses that the crystal growth of calcium manganese hydroxide in the MCAL method is better than in the CAL method. Therefore, in addition to abrasion and attrition, a part of transferred energy during attrition process in the MCAL method, expends to crystal growth of new phase. Furthermore, a wide structural changes like bond breakage, amorphization and phase transformation could occur during intensive milling. Based on comparison of patterns (a) and (h) which just activated with wet extended milling for 48 The maximum recovery of zinc leaching from PHFC by the CAL method under C This work has been supported by the