Globally the nuclear industry has a large number of legacy wastes that have been stored in ponds, silos and tanks nearing the end of their design lifetime that need processing. In the UK there are significant quantities of radioactive sludge that have arisen from the corrosion of early Magnox fuel cans stored underwater. As part of the aggressive clean-up programme these wastes will be retrieved, separated, processed and immobilised as dry products for long-term storage. The retrieval of these will require the design of new engineering systems that will locate, re-suspend the wastes such that the impact of shear and risk of pipe blockage are minimised.
                  In order to optimise the retrieval design, BNFL are continuing to examine retrieval technologies, the key factors that influence the waste's re-suspension, transport behaviour and ultimately methodologies to model this.
                  This paper discusses some of the retrieval technologies trialed, aspects of slurry management that are unique and important to the nuclear industry. The approach that was taken to model the waste, the experimental strategy to validate them and the results from preliminary models are presented.There are a variety of legacy sludge/slurry wastes that currently reside in ponds, silos and tanks on nuclear sites across the world. At Sellafield they largely arise from Britain's early Magnox and AGR nuclear generation programmes. The range of fuel cans used in the UK Magnox reactors is illustrated in Retrieval of these wastes raises a number of technical issues that need to be taken into consideration:– As the Magnox continues to corrode, hydrogen is produced, some is released harmlessly through natural ventilation and some is held-up within the sludge. Due to the activity, the heterogeneity and the generally restricted access to these wastes, the extent of the characterisation is limited. Consequently processes developed may be designed to cope with unduly broad feed envelopes. This increases process costs and technology options being reduced unnecessarily. In the nuclear industry it is very difficult to retrofit new technology into existing plant as this may necessitate breaking of containment and this may give rise to potential releases of airborne activity. Processes that require additives to enable or to enhance the process are not favoured by the nuclear industry as these generate further secondary waste and/or have the potential to impact upon the long-term stability of the final waste product. Retrieval technologies themselves should be simple, robust and have a minimal number of moving parts. Due to the radioactive nature of the waste the pipe-work and retrieval processes have to be shielded and this may impact upon our ability to monitor slurry properties. As the waste is sheared a proportion of its activity is released from the solid to the liquor phase. Therefore, if the energy that is induced into the waste from pumping is reduced, then the impact on downstream effluent treatment plants will be minimised. In contrast to mineral processing the nuclear industry has tended to transport its slurries at low solid contents for fear of pipe blockages. Ironically, the converse has been shown for mineral processing industry. In contrast with mineral processing the nuclear industry processes volumes that are generally much smaller and often in batches. Consequently, the economics of the process are somewhat different; in the nuclear industry these are primarily driven by safety, robustness to handle broad feed envelopes and the requirement for minimal intervention. In the early stages of the development of a new slurry process the hazards of the waste are identified, ranked and assessed. The key waste characteristics, parameters for the process are identified and assessed. However, due to the potentially, limited data available it may be necessary to either acquire further data from the waste or identify an appropriate simulant material based upon experience. In the final stages of process development a series of pilot-scale trials are usually performed followed by full-scale trials with one or two of the lead process options. Inactive trials are expensive, time consuming and very often the simulants may only replicate one or two of the key parameters required. If further data from the waste is required then the extraction and characterisation of ex-situ samples will very often require remote handling and this can limit the scope of the characterisation work that can be done. An alternative approach would be to make use of quicker in-situ waste measurements and modelling to predict waste behaviour under process conditions so that the number and nature of the trials if required can be optimised. This paper describes the proposed modelling and experimental strategies that have been developed to overcome some of the difficulties encountered with earlier sludge modelling work. Alternative technologies and approaches used by other related industries and in-situ measurement techniques are also presented. The scope of this work was directed towards the mobilisation, transport, collection, dewatering and filtration of sludge wastes. The programme consisted of three key elements, modelling and new technologies both being underpinned by experimental work. The modelling strategy encompasses a number of fluid, particle simulation technologies and chemical modelling to predict material properties that will feed into the CFD fluid model framework. Many approaches to the modelling of sludges have been described in the literature, focusing on different aspects of the particular phenomenon being considered. Several of these approaches have been selected for development, on the basis of being most likely to give useful results within reasonable time-scales. Sludges and slurries are inherently complex and there are many parameters that need to be specified to give a complete description of the system. All of the models available so far are idealisations of real systems, and hence represent some degree of approximation. The aim of modelling is to select an appropriate level of approximation, so as to reproduce the observed behaviour of interest, without introducing unnecessary complexity. For most aspects of the modelling of sludge/slurry transport it is reasonable to suppose that fluid flow is the central feature and other aspects will feed into this. This view is taken in the strategy presented here. This can reasonably be argued from a practical point of view since if fluid flow is required as part of any calculation, this is most likely to be the limiting factor in terms of software development. However, the problem with using the “traditional” CFD techniques is that the accuracy of these reduces as the solids concentration increases above 10% or so and consequently they can only give an indication of the likely behaviour. In this work the “drift-flux” class of models was selected as the framework model. In this model the volume fraction of solids is tracked as a scalar (or several scalars for different sizes/types) and empirical (or otherwise derived) expressions are used to fix the rheology and settling behaviour. In other words the viscosity, for example would be prescribed as a function of particle concentration and potentially shear rate, as would the effective settling velocity. Particle fluxes to account for settling are then introduced. Drift flux models have the advantage of being flexible in its rheology, but has the disadvantage of requiring detailed data as input. The underpinning experimental strategy is described below. Experimental work may be used either to directly provide input data, or models which allow the data to be calculated prior to a CFD calculation taking place. The latter would then be appropriately used as input data or by use of sub-models to augment the CFD deficiencies with the rheology of systems containing high solids contents. It was intended that the Lattice Boltzmann (LB) method and Large Eddy Simulation (LES) would be used to augment the CFD code. The LB method has several advantages which make it suitable for calculating particle-laden flows. At present it is envisaged that the LB method could be used to give data on rheology, settling and re-suspension in the laminar regime. The second, Large Eddy Simulation (LES) would be employed again to model particle-laden flows, but in the turbulent regime, as would occur in pipe-flow or during sludge mobilisation. The method appears to have been mostly used for dilute particle concentrations in air. It is therefore considered that care will need to be taken to ensure that there is confidence that the method would be capable of providing results for higher volume fractions in liquid. A series of trials have been carried out on a rig. The rig consisted of a circular tank with a 2.65 m internal diameter. The bottom portion of the tank was filled with simulated sludge with water as the supernate above the sludge. Various operations involving jets and/or power fluidic devices were carried out to assess their effectiveness at mobilising the sludge. In order to reduce the mesh size and therefore reduce simulation run times only a portion of the rig was modelled. The initial set up is shown in In this simulation the inlet is modelled explicitly as a velocity inlet, although is simplified to a square section with the same area as the inlet in the rig to allow a good mesh to be easily created. In larger models which may need to model complete full-scale tanks it may not be possible to resolve the inlet due to the difference in scale between the inlet and the overall tank size. In this case source terms in the momentum (and possibly mass in some cases) equations may be used to represent inlet jets etc. The sludge surface after 2 s of jet operation is shown in  It can be observed that the sludge has been eroded further than in the previous figure. The simulation runs for approximately a further 10 s, but there is no further erosion, so that the position shown in The crater predicted by the model in this case is in fairly good agreement with the results obtained in the trial, which is encouraging. In addition a simulation has been carried out on an identical system in which properties of this stimulant were replaced with those for kaolin. The yield strength of kaolin is significantly less and in accordance with expectation a much larger crater was predicted by the model. There are, however, several open questions with regard to this method, the two most obvious are: What is the effect of mesh size? Is the transient behaviour correct? These questions may be closely related. It is believed that the steady state crater profile predicted by this method should be correct provided that the assumption that a yield stress exists is correct the shear stress is correctly obtained. The first of these is essentially a matter of experiment, or could possibly be predicted by chemical modelling methods. The second could be a function of, for example, the turbulence model. For consistency of the method it would be necessary to compare this against a method where the mesh is deformed rather than allowing cells to be “freed” as described here. For cohesive sludge this deforming mesh method will give only the steady state crater profile. If the two methods give the same crater profiles, this will give confidence in the steady state behaviour of the methods. The transient behaviour of the method is much less clear. Physically the sludge is eroded from the surface, however the model allows sludge to be mobilised in chunks with a size given by the size of a computational cell. It is not clear that this will mimic the physical case, or that the rate of erosion will be independent of the grid resolution. Hence, a mesh refinement study should be carried out. This will give an insight into both of the open questions mentioned above. If the rate at which the crater is eroded is independent of the mesh resolution this will give confidence in the validity of the method. The experimental strategy has three primary aims; To generate data for model input and validation. To underpin and evaluate new technologies. To define a minimum set of key parameters that can be used to define a waste's transport behaviour and develop techniques measure these. An overview of the experimental strategy is given in The experimental strategy consists of a hierarchy of experimental work from the very small-scale investigations into inter-particle forces, to the considerably larger scale of a modular rig, designed to investigate appropriate unit operations and technologies. Within the modelling strategy discussed previously, the modelling ‘toolbox’ will also consist of a hierarchy of scale thus the experimental strategy has been developed to compliment this. From For the CFD overarching model, validation will be through many of these macro bulk properties in the first instance, similarly by use of idealised system to validate fundamental assumptions, followed by more complex systems. With the development of the modelling programme, a minimum list of key parameters required from the real waste sludges would be developed and optimised. The key parameters being measured by use of remote measurement systems to be developed. Fundamental validation of each of the models will be achieved by use of a synthetic, idealised, simple sludge. The use of synthetic sludges allows the ability to ‘switch off’ and ‘switch on’ many of its particle properties such as charge, shape and surface roughness. Properties that are otherwise incredibly difficult to control yet can have a significant effect on chemical and physical properties of any slurry system. Synthetic sludges will also allow greater control over the test materials physical properties such as particle size distribution, particularly for validation of the smaller-scale models such as chemical modelling. Synthetic particles within these sludges can be labelled and tracked with greater ease and are generally relatively inexpensive to manufacture. The tighter the control on the test material during experiment ensures greater the confidence in the validation and robustness of the model. The intended vision for this work is to develop new slurry management processes in the nuclear industry that are more efficient, more compact and more environmentally friendly. Rather than retrieve unnecessarily high liquor volumes, wastes could be concentrated in-situ using a hydro-cyclone and transferring the sludge solids at 30–70%. Using an in-situ tube rheometer the rheology of the pumped material could be controlled. The ability to then predict slurry behaviour will aid risk reduction, reduce number of trials required and ease safety case production. Dense conveying potentially offers significant advantages over conventional processes as it significantly reduces process volumes, degradation of the waste and would ultimately lead to compact, fit for purpose processes. However, to gain acceptance into the nuclear industry it does need to be very robust against unplanned shut downs or irregularities in the feed. As well as new processes there is room for incremental technologies, whereby existing methods and infrastructure are used to trial new technologies. Here, it is proposed that experimental rigs would be built to pump test materials, and develop new instrumentation and visualisation techniques to guide the extraction processes more precisely. In-situ measuring techniques have varied from modifying simple standard techniques, for example, in-situ yield stress measurements of sludge in a tank. In this case, a vane tool on the end of long stringer of steel rods was successfully used to acquire a series of measurements throughout the depth of the sludge in an active tank. To more novel solutions where more sophisticated kit has been developed. For example, There is also real scope to combine different types of imaging techniques for the characterisation, location, monitoring and quantification of active slurries. By doing this we can: Validate computational fluid dynamic simulations to improve the fundamental understanding of the slurry systems. Develop a novel, multi-modal tomography imaging systems that can monitor location, quantification, flow characteristics which could be used to prevent pipe blockages. Optimise settling times in between batches.   A modelling strategy has been developed that will enable a prediction of multiphase flows under process conditions within a reasonable timeframe. Preliminary model simulations indicate that the “drift flux” CFD code is promising. It is recognised that the common clay type simulants used in the industry are complex materials and that there is a need for idealised, synthetic sludges where inter-dependent parameters may be controlled for model validation. Whilst, dense conveying of wastes potentially offers significant advantages over conventional processes, for it to gain acceptance by the nuclear industry its robustness to unplanned shut downs and waste feed irregularities needs to be demonstrated. Multi-model tomography techniques have the potential to provide model validation data, process optimisation and preventative measures against pipe blockage.