Mesozoic granitoids were extensively altered by hydrothermal fluids in the northwest Jiaodong Peninsula, and gold precipitated from the fluids developing prevalent mineralization in this district. The 160–158Ma Linglong granite and 130–120Ma Guojialing granodiorite are the major Mesozoic granitoids in this district, both of which are hydrothermally altered and intimately associated with gold mineralization. Although numerous studies were carried out by previous researchers, mainly focusing on tectonics, lithology, mineralogy, geochronology, and fluid geochemistry, knowledge about hydrothermal alteration processes of these granitoids and their gold mineralization efficiency (i.e. which one is more effective to precipitate the gold from its parent solution) is far beyond clear illumination. Geochemical simulation software GEM-Selektor (based on the Gibbs energy minimization algorithm) was applied in this study, which aims to test the gold mineralization efficiency of these two granitoids during the hydrothermal alteration processes. Simulation results indicate that solutions in equilibrium with the Linglong granite are capable of hosting more sulfur than that with the Guojialing granodiorite, since the latter contains more Fe. However, the solutions with these two granitoids display similar gold solubility. “Bulk cooling” simulation results show that the gold mineralization pattern is similar between the Linglong and Guojialing case; “Rock titration” simulation results reveal that the Guojialing granodiorite is prone to precipitate gold more strongly than the Linglong granite, as gold-bearing solutions (or ore-forming fluids) flowing-through at high temperature, equivalent to a deeper level, implying that if the gold mineralization is developed at depth, the Guojialing rock will precipitate more gold. If the gold-bearing solution flow-through the wall rocks relatively fast, and gold mineralization fails to take place, then the Guojialing granodiorite is probably unfavorable for subsequent gold enrichment of the ore-forming fluid. The Linglong granite will precipitate the gold more efficiently from its parent solution at low temperature or at a shallower level, and this is consistent with previous mining prospecting results. Therefore, we suggest that the Guojialing granodiorite should be treated as the main target during future deep prospecting project.Hydrothermal alteration is extensively developed in gold deposits in the Jiaodong district, and the mineralization type is called “Jiaojia-type” (e.g. The mineral assemblages developed by hydrothermal alteration are generally uniform, mainly consisting of K-feldspar In this work, we attempt to illuminate the details of the gold mineralization during hydrothermal alteration of the wallrocks of the Linglong and Guojialing intrusions and to interpret the differences of the gold mineralization efficiency between them, providing information for further prospecting projects in this area. The Jiaodong Peninsula in the eastern part of the North China Craton (NCC) constitutes China’s largest gold province and one the major gold field in Asia ( The origin of the gold deposits in the Jiaodong Peninsula is being debated, although numerous scientific studies have been carried out (e.g. Hydrothermal alteration process always commences from potassic alteration, through silicification and sericitization, to sulfidation, and ends at the carbonatization stage ( All these hydrothermal alterations were acting on the chemical composition of granitic wall rocks, especially the widely distributed Linglong and Guojialing granitoids. The Jurassic Linglong granite (158–160 To evaluate the differences of gold mineralization efficiency in hydrothermal alteration processes of the Linglong and Guojialing granitoids, we have performed multicomponent fluid-rock equilibria geochemical modeling. All calculations were done with the GEM-Selektor Gibbs free energy minimization package ( The thermodynamic dataset used for this geochemical modeling covers all main aqueous species and rock-forming minerals in the Si-Al-Fe-Mg-Ca-Na-K-Au-C-S-H-O-Cl system involved in this study. Data for charged and neutral aqueous species were compiled from Slop98 database in SUPCRT92 package developed and extended by We have compiled the latest thermodynamic dataset for aqueous Au species, since these are the most important aqueous components in this study. Since the aqueous activity coefficients were calculated with the extended Debye-Hückel equation ( Previous research revealed that the ore-forming fluids for gold mineralization in the Jiaodong district exhibit low salinity (0–8 Since the initial composition of the fluid was constrained, geochemical simulations were then designed based on the geologic settings in Jiaodong district ( Gold concentration decreases as the ore-forming fluid flows through wall rocks, i.e. dilution process. Simulation 1 is specifically designed to evaluate the degree of gold dilution as the ore-forming fluid flows through the granitic wall rock. The Fluid01 produced above will become saturated with pyrite and gold here at fixed T-P condition, and finally turn to be Solution-1, with T, P, A subdivisions corresponding to Fluid01-T, Fluid01-P, and Fluid01-A, respectively ( Simulations 2 and 3 are designed to model the gold precipitation process during hydrothermal alteration of the granitoids, in which the ore-forming fluids are also evolved from Fluid01. Because the major basement rock in Jiaodong district is the Archean TTG gneiss of the Jiaodong Group ( Simulation 2 is called “Bulk cooling” process, sequentially lowering the temperature to 100 Simulation 3 is a “Rock titration” process ( When a gold-bearing solution flows through wall rocks, gold could be precipitated and dispersed in rocks, causing diminution of gold concentration in the primary solution. In order to test the gold precipitation capability of the Linglong and Guojialing intrusive rocks, Simulation 1 was executed. The primary gold-bearing solutions were evolved from Fluid01-T, −P and −A, flowing through the basement rocks, TTG gneiss, paragneiss, and amphibolite, respectively. These rock types outcrop extensively in Jiaodong Peninsula. These solutions then passed through the Linglong and Guojialing granitoids, and their gold concentration varied progressively as displayed in The iron content in these two different rocks is distinct, and the Guojialing granodiorite contains more Fe than the Linglong granite ( Therefore, the same quantity of Guojialing granodiorite consumes more H More FeCl Conclusively, the wallrock Guojialing granodiorite is less favorable for gold precipitation from the ore-forming fluid. Gold solubility is controlled by many factors, such as temperature, pressure (especially that in vapor), concentration of ligands (such as S and Cl), pH, oxygen fugacity, and others ( For comparing the gold fertility of the solution in equilibrium with the rocks in interest, we executed a simulation testing gold saturation capacity. The point of pyrite precipitation is treated as gold saturation state, since gold is predominately hosted by pyrite. Simulation results show that both at high (400 If gold mineralization took place in a fractured zone where an ore-forming fluid is injected and then steadily interacts with the granitoid rocks, “ Simulation results show that gold precipitation pattern is similar between the Linglong-Solution03 and Guojialing-Solution04 bulk system ( In summary, despite the chemical differences between the Linglong and Guojialing granitoids, their gold mineralization efficiency is probably similar, if the Rock-titration model, also called “mass transfer”, is most useful for studying hydrothermal alteration of wall rock along a fluid flow path, where it simulates the reactions responsible for forming the zoned alteration envelopes around the ore veins. As opposed to the Titration of fresh wall rock into the solution resulted in progressive precipitation of gold. In the Linglong-Solution03 system, gold precipitation is prolonged. In the Guojialing-Solution04 system, gold steadily precipitated from the solution until the mass of the titrating rock reached 3000 Gold precipitation process is chemically described as: Since the host mineral is pyrrhotite, and as mentioned above, the Guojialing can provide more FeO than the Linglong can in an unit rock mass. This is probably the reason causing their difference in gold mineralization efficiency. The results indicate that the same quantity of gold precipitated from its parent solution altered less Guojialing granodiorite, which means the Guojialing granodiorite is more efficient for gold mineralization relative to the Linglong granite at high temperature, or equivalently at deep level, partly consistent with the deep prospecting results (unpublished mining reports). The simulation results are significantly different from those at 400 Numerous prospecting results show that gold is predominately associated with Linglong granite in shallow level ( The geochemical simulations in this study are based on the geologic background in the Jiaodong Peninsula, including lithology, mineralogy, and geochemistry. Hence, we consider that the research results are reliable in interpreting geological observations and guiding future prospecting and exploration. According to the simulation results, in pathway of the gold-bearing solution, the wallrock Guojialing granodiorite is less favorable for gold precipitation from the ore-forming fluid. If the We gratefully acknowledge two anonymous referees, Associate Editor Dr. Juraj Majzlan and Editor-in-Chief Prof. Alex Deutsch for their constructive reviews and valuable comments which greatly contributed to the improvement of the manuscript. This study was financially supported by the