In the approach presented, attrition of bulk solids in pneumatic conveying is regarded as a result of a process function (stress conditions) and a material function (influence of material properties). For dilute phase conveying the process function was determined by employing computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Opposed to what was expected initially, the numerical simulations indicate that sliding friction apparently is of importance in dilute phase conveying. This conclusion can be drawn from the low calculated impact angles in a pipe bend (r
                     B/D
                     n=5; D
                     n=80mm) which lie between 5 and 35°. Consequently, the tangential impact velocity components ranging from 33 to 44m/s are considerably higher than the normal ones (5–25m/s). These results were at first endorsed by observations made in experiments to determine the material function. The relative attrition behavior of four different polypropylenes (PP) under pure sliding friction conditions closely resembles that observed in attrition experiments carried out in a pipe bend of the above geometry, while differences are observed for normal impact conditions. But further experiments with polymethylmethacrylates (PMMA) and polystyrenes (PS) showed that here the attrition behavior encountered under normal impact conditions is similar to that observed in the pipe bend. With dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) it was possible to show that PP on one hand and PMMA and PS on the other are attrited by different mechanisms and that the glass transition temperature of the polymers is a key factor in the determination of the prevailing attrition mechanism.Pneumatic conveying belongs to the well established processes for transporting a vast variety of bulk solids. Especially in the handling of granular polymers it is used extensively. Nevertheless, the problem of product degradation due to attrition is unresolved to date. This is partly due to the fact that research was focused on different topics like bend erosion or pipe wear In the present paper, the approach chosen at our institute to study the phenomenon of attrition is briefly presented. In the results section, the link between bulk solids’ material properties and attrition results is discussed. The findings document the suitability of our approach for identifying material specific attrition mechanisms. The approach chosen goes back to the work of Rumpf Peukert and Vogel Consequently, attrition formation in pneumatic conveying is interpreted as the result of a process function describing the stress conditions the particles are subjected to in the conveying pipelines and a material function summarizing the material specific response to the process function in terms of intrinsic material properties. This approach is schematically shown in Since pneumatic conveying is largely applied to transport granular polymers and on the other hand even smallest amounts of attrition of these solids cannot be tolerated the results presented are focused on these materials. Polymers of four chemically different polymer classes were examined. Polypropylene (PP) and polyethylene (PE) belong to the semicrystalline polymers, which possess both, an amorphous phase and a crystalline phase. The polymethylmethacrylates (PMMA) and polystyrenes (PS) are fully amorphous. Some material properties of the polymers are summarized in The particle shape was determined by visual inspection of the particles. To determine the particle diameter Since a detailed description of the determination of the process function for dilute phase conveying has been given elsewhere The computational domain consisted of a straight pipe with a diameter In Since the results were unexpected, the particle wall impact locations were plotted from the data generated in the simulations for a total of 2000 individual particles. They are shown in For reasons of completeness, results for the determination of the process function for plug flow conveying shall be stated briefly as well. Since in this case a two phase flow with high particle concentrations is regarded the options to simulate this flow are very limited. Therefore, experimental results obtained by Mi and Wypych It is generally known that different bulk solids might exhibit widely varying attrition rates even if conveyed in the same mode, q.v. The crucial point is to simulate the previously identified basic stress modes impact and friction under well defined stress conditions. This way, material properties can be related to attrition caused by these stress modes and the respective attrition mechanisms in effect. For this purpose it was chosen to perform single particle experiments in simple experimental setups to realize the defined stress conditions. Details on these setups are given in the next section. Ideally, the stress conditions obtained from the process function are used as input parameters for the single particle experiments. But due to practical reasons this is not always possible, since a compromise between stress conditions closely related to the conveying process and conditions where the attrition rates can be measured reliably has to be found. The knowledge gathered from the single particle experiments will be broadened by and compared to results of the defined stressing of a particle ensemble. For this purpose, experiments in a pipe bend are carried out to investigate the polymers under conditions closely related to those in the conveying pipelines. The results of the attrition experiments are compared to various material properties in order to identify those relevant for attrition. The long term goal is to develop a physical model of the attrition process which makes it possible to predict the amount of attrition that will be encountered in a pneumatic conveying installation by knowledge of the process and material functions. The experimental setups of two out of the three installations used to date are shown in For the attrition experiments approximately 25 The installation to simulate sliding friction shown on the right-hand side of The experimental parameters for the sliding friction experiments, were chosen to simulate dense phase conveying conditions. Basically, two different sets of experimental parameters were used. The polypropylenes were tested against different wall materials. Here, steel possessing different surface roughness values was used. Since a sandblasted surface lead to high attrition rates, a low contact pressure of 61 The third installation was constructed to conduct single particle attrition experiments under well defined stress conditions which are closely related to conditions in industrial conveying installations. For this purpose a pipe bend was chosen. The exact setup is given in The installation was constructed as a negative pressure system with the blower being located downstream of the filter. This way a high flexibility in feeding the particles was realized. For the experiments presented, the particles were fed into the pipe along its center axis by a specially designed feeder in which they are accelerated with pressurized air to approximately 41 Similar to the normal impact experiments, the attrition rates were determined after three, six and nine impacts. Here it is assumed that only the first particle wall impact in the pipe bend contributes significantly to attrition formation and that further impacts are of minor importance. Again 25 The first results of the single particle experiments carried out for different polypropylenes have shown that the relative attrition behavior changes between the normal impact and the sliding friction tests In the middle diagram, the error bars were omitted for reasons of clarity. Although the attrition rates cannot be compared directly due to the different stress conditions, it can be observed that the relative attrition behavior of the polypropylenes in the sliding friction experiments is identical to that observed in the pipe bend experiments, i.e. in both cases PP 2500 H is the least attrited material, while PP 1148 RC is the most attrited one. For normal impacts, considerable deviations from the results in the pipe bend are found. This leads to the conclusion that attrition formation can be mainly attributed to sliding friction. This is in good agreement with the findings from the process function for dilute phase conveying discussed earlier. In case of PMMA and PS a different behavior is observed (see These findings clearly show the significance of the material function, since the material reaction to similar stress conditions in the pipe bend can vary greatly. In contrast to PP, PMMA and PS apparently are attrited by the same mechanisms in effect under normal impact stress conditions. This also clarifies that it is only possible to deduce the stress mode from the process function but that without knowledge of the material function no conclusions concerning the governing attrition mechanisms can be drawn. One of the most important tasks in the determination of the material function is to identify those material properties relevant to attrition formation. A comparison of the above results to classic mechanical material properties, e.g. Young’s modulus For the measurements, the single cantilever flexure mode was chosen. For this, rectangular polymer samples of Prior to the experiments, the polymer sample is fixed between two clamps and the sample dimensions are measured carefully. One of the two clamps is fixed, while the other can be moved up and down. To this clamp, a sinusoidal deformation with an amplitude The viscoelastic behavior of the polymers is reflected in the phase lag The storage modulus is proportional to the amount of energy which is stored in the material elastically, whereas the loss modulus corresponds to the energy that is dissipated during one load cycle. Both quantities are combined in the damping factor tan After checking the influence of various experimental parameters as well as the reproducibility of the measurements, a standard procedure was developed. The polymer samples are cooled quickly with liquid nitrogen to a temperature of −140 From the measurements the typical viscoelastic behavior of the polymers becomes obvious. The polymer chains are fixed relative to each other at low temperatures. Thus the amount of energy that is stored elastically is high which is reflected in a high value of the storage modulus. The corresponding values of the loss modulus are low. The mobility of the polymer chains increases with increasing temperature and consequently the storage modulus decreases while the loss modulus increases. In the glass transition regime the maximum of energy dissipation is reached (maximum of loss modulus) and the storage modulus falls rapidly. The structural differences between the semicrystalline polypropylenes/polyethylenes and the amorphous polymethylmethacrylates/polystyrenes are reflected as well. After the glass transition, the storage modulus reaches a plateau for PP and PE due to the crystalline structures which do not change in stiffness significantly until melting. The amorphous polymers on the other hand fully soften during glass transition leading to very low storage modulus values. In It can be observed that the agreement of the corresponding temperatures is quite well. As Ehrenstein et al. If the ambient temperature at which the single particle experiments were carried out is regarded as the macroscopic stress temperature, it can be observed with respect to the experimentally obtained attrition rates, that the polypropylenes which are attrited by sliding friction are stressed in their glass transition regimes whereas the glass transition temperature of PMMA and PS lies well above the stress temperature. Obviously, the relation between the values of the macroscopic stress temperature and the glass transition temperature can be used to evaluate which material specific attrition mechanism – impact or sliding friction – is dominating in attrition formation. This conclusion is also valid for PE 5031 L, while PE 2420 H which is a very soft material (see Young’s modulus in For PP it was furthermore found that the attrition rates observed in the sliding friction experiments decrease with decreasing values of both storage and loss modulus. A possible explanation for this behavior can be found in the microscopic attrition mechanisms known from tribology and was briefly discussed in If the above comparison is made for the attrition results from the pipe bend installation, again a decrease in attrition rate for the polypropylenes corresponds to decreasing The results presented show that three levels have to be distinguished when investigating attrition processes. The first one is the stress mode as derived from the process function which is essential to know if the attrition process is to be simulated successfully in a simple experimental setup. The second point is the material reaction to this stress mode, i.e. the material function which varies depending on material properties like storage and loss modulus as measured by DMA. Finally, the microscopic attrition mechanisms (see In the present research project the problem of attrition in pneumatic conveying was addressed by regarding it as the result of a process and a material function. The process function summarizes the influence of all process parameters and as a result provides the stress conditions in terms of stress mode, intensity and number of stress events. The material function on the other hand contains material properties which govern the attrition behavior of individual bulk solids and as a result supplies an attrition function. With knowledge of these two functions it should be possible to predict the amount of attrition that is encountered in pneumatic conveying. For dilute phase conveying numerical simulations with a commercial computational fluid dynamics code were carried out. The analysis of particle wall impact conditions in a pipe bend showed that they take place under low wall impact angles of 5–35° which results in low normal (5–25 This was corroborated by experimental results obtained in single particle experiments carried out for polypropylenes. It was possible to show that the relative attrition behavior under pure sliding friction stresses was identical to that observed in a pipe bend whereas deviations to that under pure normal impact conditions were found. For polymethylmethacrylate and polystyrene on the other hand, the relative attrition behavior in the pipe bend corresponds to that of the normal impact experiments. An explanation for this was deduced from material properties obtained by dynamic mechanical analysis. It was found that the glass transition temperature or glass transition regime is a key factor in the determination of the mechanism the polymer particles are attrited by. If the stress temperature lies below the glass transition temperature, an impact-like mechanism is observed (PMMA, PS) while in the other case friction is the dominating mechanism (PP, PE). It is thus possible to identify the dominating attrition mechanism by knowledge of the glass transition and the macroscopic stress temperature. Furthermore the results indicate that both a low storage modulus as well as a low loss modulus are feasible for low attrition rates if sliding friction is the dominating attrition mechanism. This correlation was also observed for the PMMA granules but not for PS. An explanation for this has still to be found. The investigated polypropylenes are difficult to categorize. While PE 5031 L fits in the above findings and apparently is mainly attrited by sliding friction as expected from analysis of the DMA measurements, PE 2420 H does not fit into this scheme. Here different mechanisms like adhesion might play an important role, which can be neglected for the other polymers. Nevertheless, the presented results indicate that if it is carefully distinguished between the process function (stress mode), the material function (material specific attrition mechanisms) and microscopic attrition mechanisms (attrition formation on the microscale) in the analysis of attrition processes, significant progress in the understanding of the complex phenomenon of attrition can be made. This project is sponsored by the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology, grant AiF-No. 13252 N/1. The authors appreciate the financial support.  attrition rate (%) pipe diameter (m) Young’s modulus (Pa) complex modulus (Pa) storage modulus (Pa) loss modulus (Pa) force (N) energy release rate (kJ/m microhardness (Pa) J-integral (kJ/m length (m) mass (kg) number of revolutions (s pressure (Pa) heat flux (W/s) radius (m) sliding distance (m) time (s) temperature (°C) velocity (m/s) particle diameter (m) cartesian coordinates (m) angle (°) phase lag (−) deformation (m) frequency (Hz) density (kg/m stress (Pa) after attrition amplitude bend critical, contact entrance filter, fluid glass transition initial particle sliding Vicker’s initial component in yield