SO2-sensing characteristics of the Nasicon cells with Na2SO4–xBaSO4 (x=0–40mol%) auxiliary electrolytes have been investigated in 5–95ppm SO2 concentration range at 400–550°C. The cell Na2SO4 alone and Na2SO4–xBaSO4 auxiliary electrolytes exhibit stable behaviors above 450°C in dry SO2 atmosphere. Long-term stabilities for the cell with Na2SO4–10mol% BaSO4 auxiliary electrolyte are obtained at 550°C for 30 days. Response time is the shortest for the cell with Na2SO4–10mol% BaSO4 auxiliary electrolyte, which is due to the porous, needle-like surface. Increase of BaSO4 content in Na2SO4 leads to decrease in moisture effect of these cells under SO2 atmosphere containing 4.242kPa water vapor. Slight decrease in emf is inevitable because the inlet SO2 gas and water vapor react to form H2SO4 and then the gas composition is reduced by the degree of dissociation.Electrochemical SO Present work includes sensing stability, response time, and moisture effect of the Nasicon sensors with Na Nasicon was prepared from ZrSiO The disc type sensors were constructed as follows: The auxiliary electrolyte and the reference electrode are attached to either side of the Nasicon disc, fixed to the end of a quartz glass tube with an organic adhesive. Na All the emf measurements were performed in such a cell as shown in The moisture effects were measured with wet gas mixtures prepared by bubbling the gas through the water reservoir at a given temperature. The emf values are at equilibrium even if most sensor case measures a given percentage of the equilibrium value. The attainment of equilibrium was verified by observing the course of the emf over a period of time. Thus, the equilibrium was considered when no more than 0.5 The cell with Na The cells with Na For the cell with Na Long-term sensing stabilities were measured for the cells with Na On the other hand, emf difference, which might be due to a little chemical reaction of Nasicon with either electrode or gas atmosphere, is only within 3 Response times are within 5, 3 and 4 According to Roth et al. The effects of water vapor on the SO Increase of BaSO SO