This paper attends the study of froth behaviour for the design of future launder, crowder and scraper configurations. The effect of gas superficial velocity (Jg) and Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol/Sodium Isopropyl Xanthate (MIBC/X-343) reagent dosage on froth horizontal displacement, bubble size of the froth surface, froth velocity, froth carrying capacity, grade and particle size of the concentrate obtained, was studied. A novel experimental apparatus was constructed to promote the free transport of froth in its horizontal displacement using three output sections each 200mm long to extend the overflow lip to 200, 400 and 600mm from the flotation cell. The aim of this new experimental apparatus was to magnify the phenomena that occur in the froths. Attending this consideration, the present apparatus cannot be compared with industrial flotation cells but was particularly useful for describing phenomena on froth transport. The results show that the froth horizontal displacement was promoted at high levels of Jg, while high levels of frother/collector reagent dosage promote high froth carrying capacity and longer media half-life inhibiting bubble collapse as an effect of the mineral layer and the hydrated layer on the bubble. An adequate selection of both study variables generates a well loaded and fluid froth, which can survive for longer distances toward the overflow lip. On the other hand, the galena concentration increased or decreased across the horizontal displacement as a function of both Jg and frother/collector reagent dosage.Flotation is the most commonly used process to concentrate sulfide minerals. However, it is a complex process because it involves many physical and chemical phenomena occurring on the collection zone and on the froth zone ( As regards industrial operation of flotation cells, it is well known that the froth must be recovered immediately after they emerge to the surface of the froth zone because phenomena, such as coalescence and bubble collapse, can decrease the froth recovery ( In response to this problem, the design of flotation cells has been developed with launders and crowders that decrease the froth retention time and distance that the froth travels toward the weir. There are different launder and crowder configurations, governed by two main design parameters: the froth carry rate (dry mass of concentrate per surface area per time (g/cm Some authors have focused their efforts on the modelling of froth transport. In this context, the present paper is original and contributes to the body of knowledge of froth transport and focuses on the distance travelled by froths in their froth horizontal displacement, froth velocity, bubble size of the froth surface, froth carrying capacity, grade and particle size of the concentrate obtained as To complete the present research, an innovative experimental apparatus and methodology were used, which made it possible to obtain interesting information that could be useful for the design and construction of future launder, crowder and scraper configurations. But the present experimental apparatus cannot be compared with industrial flotation cells because the froth horizontal displacement was isolated to promote free froth horizontal displacement above a water surface. This scenario is not used in conventional flotation cells but was very useful to describe phenomena on froth transport. The experimental set-up is presented in The pulp to float was fed to the main cell by a peristaltic pump (Cole-Parmer Masterflex L/S 07552-95) at a rate of 0.013 dm The main flotation cell ( The bubble sampler is 20° inclined so that bubbles collide against its frontal wall. This collision places them in the same neighboring focal plane. The inclination allows the photographic camera to capture the bubbles easily; a similar accessory was used by The three extensions attached to the main flotation cell were manufactured from a galvanized sheet and are 200 Three video recording cameras (Logitech 180c; UR) were installed above each extension to capture the froth behaviour once it emerged to the surface. Above the extensions, fluorescent lamps were also placed to improve the visualization of the froth surface to obtain good quality images for later analysis. For the collection of drained particles, three containers were placed below each extension (T-C1 to T-CF). Each mass flow rate involved in the system was named as indicated in A WEMCO® Mechanical laboratory cell was coupled with an air compressor and a calibrated rotameter (FIC) to allow more control of the air flow rate. With the aid of a pressure transducer (Omega PX605-2K; LT) and a PID controller, the pulp level was held constant in all the tests. This pressure transducer monitors the changes in the hydrostatic pressure of the pulp and sends an electrical signal to the controller (Omega CN44011; LIC), which regulates the flow of the peristaltic tailing pump (Cole-Parmer Masterflex L/S 07552-95), which in turn drives the tailing pulp to a tailing process tank. Prior to the experimental stage, 60 To the mixing tank were added the ore, water and reagents in quantities needed for the pulp to obtain the desired characteristics. Before starting the flotation test, the pulp was held in the mixing tank for conditioning over a period of 20 The pulp was maintained at the desired level in the main flotation cell. Then extensions were filled with water at the mirror level. The bubble sampler, also filled with water at the same concentration of reagents used in the test, was then placed just above the main flotation cell. At this point, the test could then be carried out. The test starts when the air supply valve is opened and the desired level of Jg is adjusted by a calibration between the air pressure measured by the rotameter and the air flow rate. At this juncture, the froth starts to generate on the froth zone and flows toward the extensions. Once the froth was flowing constantly, the bubble sampler was placed in the location described in To obtain the bubble size distribution in the collection zone/froth zone surface and an estimation of froth velocity and froth kinematic viscosity, the registered images and video (converted to images) were analyzed using IMAGEPRO® software. Subsequently, the concentrate (drained particles) obtained in the three sections was recovered to estimate the grade and particle size distributions of each extension. This was also done to evaluate the particle size selectivity occasioned by the horizontal displacement. The percentage of solids in each stream ( For data reconciliation, the technique proposed by A comparative of bubble size generated in collection zone and froth zone by gas superficial velocity and frother/collector reagent dosage is presented in Considering that bubble surface flux ( The increase in MIBC/X-343 reagent dosage and in aeration has a positive effect on the froth stability and wetting of the froths, favouring the collection of solids and consequently improving the overall recovery and water recovery (see In   On the other hand, the froth carrying capacity was characterized by two parameters as  As can be seen froth carrying capacity and horizontal displacement were highly related to gas superficial velocity and reagent dosage. Both study variables affect the froth rheology, as has been mentioned by   The figure also shows a contrast between the lead grade and iron grade in the drained particles (blue axis). The lead grade shows a tendency to decrease while the iron grade tends to increase, both metals being evaluated as a function of the horizontal displacement. These results show that there is detachment of particles of different grades depending on the horizontal displacement and the operating conditions. Interestingly, contrasting the effects on the reagent concentration in  It is interesting to note, in the analysis of the effects of the reagent dosage on the floatable particles that drainage obtains higher lead grades at lower reagent concentration under both aeration conditions (0.37  When comparing the results of Aeration and reagents dosage have effects on the horizontal displacement, bubble size of the froth surface, froth velocity, froth carrying capacity, grade and particle size of the concentrate obtained. An adequate selection of both aeration and reagents dosage, can improve the metallurgical performance if grade or recovery is seeking in a determinated stage of the process. This paper showed difference between bubble size in collection zone and how this bubble changes their behaviour in froth zone when reach the surface and moves horizontally toward overflow lip. it was demonstrated that different kind of froths can be produced and they can survive during longer distance than others as an effect of froth rheology (influenced by aeration and reagents dosage), this knowledge and carrying capacity calculations can be practical for the designs of launder, crowder and scraper configurations. It was found that the horizontal froth displacement decreases, logarithmically, the percentage of solids drained, but combining this effect with the aeration and reagent dosage, the grade of the concentrate drained may increase or decrease, because it affects water recovery, modifying selectively the drainage of particles by composition and particle size as an effect of the thickness of Plateau borders. The authors are grateful to