The electrowinning of cadmium in the presence of zinc has been investigated. As such, the effects of initial cadmium concentration (40–160g/L), current density (50–150A/m2), free acid concentration (0–196g/L), initial zinc concentration (20–120g/L), and temperature (25–70°C) on current efficiency (CE) and specific power consumption (SPC) in electrowinning of cadmium have been examined. Under the optimum working conditions (initial cadmium concentration 120g/L, current density 80A/m2, free acid concentration 98g/L, and temperature 40°C), CE and SPC were 98% and 1.21kWh/kg, respectively. The presence of zinc (20–120g/L) had no systematic effect on CE and SPC, but decreased the purity of the deposited cadmium down to 99.92%.Cadmium metal has a wide variety of applications, such as rechargeable nickel–cadmium (NiCad) and silver–cadmium storage batteries, coatings for corrosion protection on ships or aerospace applications, synthesis of chalcogenide compounds, the production of semiconductor intermetallics, control rods in nuclear power plants, and in pigments for plastics or stabilizers in polyvinyl chlorides (PVCs) in order to protect from chemical attack, sunlight, or heat degradation ( As the global demand for cadmium steadily increases, mainly due to the high consumption of cadmium by battery industry, successful treatment of primary (zinc plant purification residues) and secondary (used batteries) cadmium resources has come to the forefront. Cadmium can be recovered from pregnant leach solution (PLS) through cementation or electrowinning, depending on the specific conditions. The electrowinning of cadmium is a well-known process that has been practiced over the past century (     The typical composition of sulfate solutions used in the electrowinning of cadmium is; Cd 80–160 In operations with circulating electrolytes the current density may be increased to 100–200 The most important impurity in the cadmium electrowinning cells is zinc which comes mainly from the un-reacted zinc powder used in the course of cadmium cementation ( In this research, the effects of initial cadmium concentration, current density, free acid concentration, initial zinc concentration, and temperature on the electrowinning of cadmium were studied. No glue was added to the electrowinning bath since no dendrite formation was observed under the optimum conditions and the obtained cadmium sheets were easily stripped from the cathodes. A stock solution of cadmium and zinc sulfates was prepared by dissolving analytical grade (AR, Mallinckrodt) sulfates of cadmium and zinc (3CdSO The electrowinning experiments were performed in a mono-compartment cubic cell made of Plexiglass Each experiment was run for 6 The effects of initial cadmium concentration, current density, free acid concentration, initial zinc concentration, and temperature on current efficiency (CE) and specific power consumption (SPC) were studied. The concentration of zinc was fixed at 80 The purity of the cadmium sheets was determined by dissolving parts of them in nitric acid and measuring the concentration using AAS. The quality of deposits was rated by visual observation. Good deposits had less dendrite formations and were easily removed from the cathodes without crumbling ( Each experiment was repeated twice, and the average value of responses was considered as the result. The deviation was within ± It is worth noting that cadmium sulfate salt, cadmium sulfate solutions, and the cadmium sheets were handled using gloves, because of the toxicity of cadmium and its compounds. Also, all experiments were run within a fume extraction hood to minimize inhalation of acid mist. The effect of initial cadmium concentration on current efficiency (CE) and specific power consumption (SPC) is shown in According to The decrease in SPC is primarily due to a decrease in the cell voltage as a result of an increase in solution conductivity as the ionic strength of the solution increased. It was observed that the quality of cadmium deposit was good up to 120 Decreasing the cadmium concentration below 80 Therefore 120  The SPC increased as expected from the decrease in CE. The increase in SPC (23.8%) was noticeably greater than the decrease in CE (10%); this was due to the concomitant increase (12.5%) in the cell voltage from 2.4 to 2.7 The quality of cadmium deposits was good up to 80 According to In order to observe the effect of zinc concentration on CE and SPC, experiments were performed under the optimum electrowinning conditions. As shown in This is a significant advantage as it offers the prospect for the selective electrowinning of cadmium from zinc without any necessity to previously separate the two metals. Further work is underway to determine the best method of processing the cadmium depleted solution to recover the remaining cadmium and zinc from solution. One possibility is to recycle the solution to the zinc calcine leaching stage, although this will result in increased consumption of zinc through having to cement the circulating load of cadmium. It may also be possible to increase the extent of Cd depletion from solution at high CE and low SPC by using a cell with high mass transfer to reduce the effect of solution diffusion. Temperature is an important factor during the electrowinning of metals. The effect of temperature was studied over the range 25–70 The current efficiency dropped drastically at temperatures higher than 50 These results suggest that by choosing 120 The effects of initial cadmium concentration, current density, free acid concentration, initial zinc concentration, and temperature on current efficiency (CE) and specific power consumption (SPC) in the electrowinning of cadmium were studied. It was found that increasing the initial cadmium concentration up to 120 The presence of zinc up to 120 The authors would like to acknowledge the