We have previously demonstrated that a sulfuric acid-free ethanol (EtOH) cooking treatment enhances the enzymatic digestibility of eucalyptus wood and bagasse flour. In the present study, a reconfigured process that achieves similar performance was developed by identifying possible cost-competitive pretreatments that provide high cellulose-to-glucose conversion during subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis. The series of reconfigurations reduced EtOH usage in the pretreatment by more than 80% in comparison with our previous research. Higher initial pressures and intensive size reduction of the starting material are not required. The reconfigured process was applied to rice straw and Douglas fir, in order to confirm the feasibility of feedstock diversity.Dilute sulfuric acid-based chemical pretreatment ( In recent years, a number of pretreatment methods other than the dilute sulfuric acid-based chemical pretreatment have been widely assessed ( While this earlier work was promising in terms of the superior enzymatic digestibility from the cellulosic fraction, the cost factors, including EtOH usage, processing pressure, and comminution, remain serious barriers to practical implementation. In the previous study, a tentative combination of optimal cooking conditions was as follows: EtOH/water in-feed weight ratio, 75/25; initial pressure, 5 Eucalyptus and Douglas fir wood chips (major axis, 25–50 The biomass flour (particle size,<0.2 The holocellulose content was determined as the amount of NaClO The α-cellulose content was determined as the amount of residue insoluble in a 17.5% NaOH aqueous solution according to TAPPI 203: 25 The Klason lignin content was determined as the amount of residue insoluble in a 72% sulfuric acid aqueous solution ( The dry-basis contents of holocellulose, α-cellulose, and Klason lignin in the original materials were calculated using their respective weights. The α-cellulose content was considered the cellulose content. The hemicellulose content was determined by subtracting the α-cellulose content from the holocellulose content. The compositions of the feedstocks used in this study are presented in A sample of the humidity-conditioned biomass flour (net flour content, 2–10 The 5-hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) and furfural contents in the cooking liquors were determined using a CCP & 8020 HPLC system (Tosoh Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with an Aminex 87H column (Bio-Rad Laboratories K. K., Tokyo, Japan) at 40 The enzyme used for hydrolysis was a commercial product “Meicelase,” derived from the fungus A severity parameter can be used to unify the data obtained for different combinations of temperature, time, and catalyst concentration. The severity parameter for water-only hydrolysis is defined as follows: where where [H In previous research, highly enzymatically digestible eucalyptus and bagasse substrates were produced by SFEC pretreatment using the following tentative optimal cooking conditions: EtOH/water in-feed weight ratio, 75/25; initial pressure, 5 SFEC treatments for cutter-milled eucalyptus flour (particle size, <0.2 Among the EtOH/water ratios employed here, we considered 25/75 to be the most appropriate for reduced EtOH usage as well as higher digestibility. Compared to our previous study ( Another reconfiguration of the cooking conditions was made to address the initial pressure, which is a major plant cost factor. A wide-ranging examination was conducted for eucalyptus flour (particle size, <0.2 As listed in Even though some of the hemicellulose and lignin were eluted by the cooking process, the degrees of removal do not lead directly to high enzymatic digestibility. In Subsequently, we attempted to further reduce the EtOH usage. The initial EtOH dosage can be decreased not only by regulating the EtOH/water ratio but also by reducing the cooking liquor/feedstock ratio. EtOH usage can also be further reduced by reconfiguring the washing process conducted after cooking. In the previous study, the cooking products were filtered and the solid parts were washed with EtOH and/or aqueous EtOH ( Size reduction is a necessary preliminary step in order to obtain adequate yields in the production of EtOH from lignocellulosics by any of the available methods. Usually, the particle size of feed materials is 10–50 In order to examine feedstock diversity, we conducted pretreatment of rice straw, bagasse, and Douglas fir. Both the herbal feedstocks (rice straw and bagasse) could be easily converted into highly digestible materials by pretreatment with the mildest conditions estimated for eucalyptus. The conditions are as follows: particle size,<5 The SFEC pretreatment conditions were reconfigured, mainly for eucalyptus, in order to identify cost-effective SFEC pretreatment conditions that can provide high cellulose-to-glucose conversion during the subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis. The reconfiguration of parameters, including EtOH usage, processing pressure, and comminution, allowed a reduction in both the processing and capital costs without sacrificing enzymatic digestibility. The reconfigured process could be applied to herbal plants (bagasse and rice straw). However, slightly severer conditions (AA content and initial pressure) were required to improve the enzymatic digestibility of softwood (Douglas fir). The authors are deeply grateful to Ms. Naomi Kadotani (AIST), Ms. Manami Asano (AIST), and Ms. Noriko Tanaka (AIST) for their assistance with the experiments.