Validated knowledge and experience are derived from observations and the historical study of training, exercises, and operations that lead to a change in behavior at the tactical (standing operating procedures, tactics, techniques, and procedures, etc.), operational, or strategic level domains. Information on these cases was extracted from several sources: (1) federal criminal court case records (indictments, Federal Bureau of Investigation affidavits, transcripts, etc.); (2) newspapers, books, and print media; and (3) other open source data to include Internet searches and other publicly available documents.Criminals Anarchists Violent Protesters Gangs Felons Terrorists International Professional/State Sponsored Amateurs, Wannabes, and Lone Wolves Domestic Terrorist (U.S.) Amateurs, Wannabes, and Lone Wolves Homegrown Violent Extremist Antigovernment Single Issue  Validated knowledge and experience are derived from observations and the historical study of training, exercises, and operations that lead to a change in behavior at the tactical [standing operating procedures, tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs), etc.], operational, or strategic level domains. Information on these cases was extracted from several sources: (1) federal criminal court case records [indictments, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) affidavits, transcripts, etc.]; (2) newspapers, books, and print media; and (3) other open source data to include Internet searches and other publicly available documents. Just about every criminal act from a mall parking lot mugging to robbing a bank is preceded by the criminal conducting some level of surveillance upon his target. Hollywood movies such as the casino heisting Ocean’s 11 and “The Town” where a group of local men hit armored cars and the like carry Hollywood liberties, but nonetheless are good examples. They know the armored vehicle routes and the drivers and what type of weapons carried. They did their homework through surveillance to be successful—but more importantly to Different from terrorist surveillance, which has been show to last for weeks to months and even years, a criminal may surveil their targets for perhaps a few minutes or seconds before striking. Regardless, the criminal is in the open and can be detected prior to the attack. In South Africa, criminals have been known to target passengers and tour groups upon arrival at O.R. Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg. Typically, criminals receive word from inside operatives when “high-value” individuals are exiting the airport terminal. The victims are then followed and robbed at gunpoint upon arrival at their residence or hotel. An attacker’s need for critical information about a target provides an opportunity for organizations to detect and disrupt an attack. Many of us have at least heard of the On May 1, 2012, the FBI arrested five individuals in a planned attack to blow up a Cleveland-area bridge and wage similar attacks upon a then-upcoming NATO summit. Surprisingly, this plot seemed to have no connection to Islamist extremism. Instead, three of the suspects were said to be self-proclaimed anarchists, and the motivation for the thwarted anarchists plot is largely where the difference ends. The would-be attackers followed the pattern of the attack cycle by researching targets that were deemed attractive to their cause to destroy private property “to send a message to corporations.” Moreover, an attack they could accomplish successfully without getting caught. The plotters conducted surveillance of many local critical infrastructures and settled on the Route 82 Brecksville–Northfield high-level bridge. This bridge crosses from Brecksville, Ohio to Sagamore Hills, Ohio over the Cuyahoga Valley National Park. Once they settled on their final target, the group went to the site on numerous occasions and took photos of the support structures of the bridge. In several recent print and online communications and publications, radical anarchists of Spain boasted of their crimes against public and private property, as well as targeting certain individuals. They also openly discussed tactics and strategies for further disruptions, vandalism, and terror for imposing anarchist ideals on the public. A Barcelona-based anarchist stated: “It’s easy to attack…there are banks, real estate offices, car showrooms, airline offices, supermarkets, surveillance cameras, ticket machines in the metro, blank walls, advertisements.” The anarchists encourage “more actions... carried out in broad daylight.” The surrounding streets must first be watched by the perpetrators “to make sure there’s no passing patrols,” followed by “dedicating thirty seconds to your target... and disappearing into the multitude.” Clandestine attacks at night are also necessary because “sometimes our goal is not to communicate but to cause damage, to sabotage....” Several communications were collated in which Spanish anarchists listed attacks they saw as effective and successful. They were organized by tactics used and assets targeted, and over 400 cash machines throughout Barcelona were vandalized and put out of commission. Police cars had their locks glued. Police stations have been stoned, as well. Attacks involving paint bombs, fireworks, arson, hammers, or stones were perpetrated against employment agencies, a real estate office, and several banks, as well as a social security office and at least one municipality building. More than a dozen supermarkets had their locks glued in 1 day. Masked anarchists pulled various objects into the streets and set them on fire, shutting down major thoroughfares. In one case, over 200 people took part in road blockings in four different locations simultaneously in order to make law enforcement more difficult. Several dozen anarchists blocked traffic and hung a banner from a bridge. Anarchists involved in the traffic blockage also slashed the tires of police vehicles. A tourist bus was targeted with paint bombs. An explosive was detonated outside a government building. A major passenger train line was blocked by a burning barricade on the tracks, while other rail sabotage included a steel cable tossed over the electric lines and incendiary devices detonated in the electrical and mechanical boxes along the tracks. On October 23, 2009, a group of 20 anarchists occupied the broadcast studios of Radio Cataluña in Barcelona, trying to read a communiqué on the air. One sophisticated attack deserves separate mention: On October 5, 2009, anarchists in a neighborhood in Barcelona described as “perfect for an ambush” set dumpsters on fire and called the police. When two officers arrived at the scene and exited their car, they were pelted with rocks by attackers on a street higher up the hillside. The policemen were forced to retreat and the attackers smashed the patrol car’s windows. Over the centuries, organized societies often have spawned violent civil disturbances. Countless civil uprisings have been motivated by personal, religious, or political purposes, and many have prompted significant societal changes. Recent decades witnessed race riots across the United States in the 1960s, protests over American involvement in Vietnam in the 1970s, abortion clinic demonstrations in the 1980s, disturbances stemming from allegations of police brutality in the 1990s, and protests over American involvement in the Middle East in the 2000s. The Founding Fathers considered the right of the people to protest to be among the most fundamental rights accorded to humankind. The U.S. Constitution nearly failed ratification because the antifederalist coalition was concerned that no codification of the rights of the citizenry was included, prompting the Federalist coalition to develop the Bill of Rights. Some serious criminal activities have been associated with public protest. The right to protest is acknowledged in law, but it is not unconditional. In particular, the public right to peaceful protest does not provide a defense for protesters who commit serious crime or disorder in pursuit of their objectives. Police face the challenge of identifying those individuals intent on causing crime and disruption, while simultaneously protecting the rights of those who wish to protest peacefully. Key to being able to differentiate between the two is reliable intelligence. Intelligence helps those responsible for protecting communities from serious crime and disruption to make better decisions (and therefore to prevent crime) by improving their knowledge about the level and type of threat the public might face. The starting point for gathering such intelligence is prior reasonable suspicion that serious criminal acts may be in preparation. It has been this author’s personal experience from the impromptu protests that broke out across the United States (particularly San Francisco, CA) following the start of the second Gulf War that violent protesters are some of the most cunning and dedicated surveillants. A very detailed and illustrative booklet utilized commonly in the protester community provides exceptional understanding on how to conduct preprotest surveillance. Again, much of the information in this booklet focuses on ways not to get caught while conducting operational surveillance. Make no doubt about it, violent protesters have, will, and do conduct extensive surveillance of the locations and areas they intend to attack. For informational purposes, the following presents some past known tactics, techniques, and procedures of “nonviolent” protest groups [Act Now to Stop War and End Racism (ANSWER), Greenpeace], affinity groups, and civil disobedient groups (Black Bloc). Traditional activism that involves civil disobedience has developed a highly choreographed routine when it comes to getting arrested by the police. Lately, there have even been examples of where civil disobedience has generated into civil Some of the TTPs for civil disobedience include the following. Using handcuffs/chains to form a human chain. To avoid bolt cutters, a large PVC pipe may be placed over the full length of each of the protester’s arms. Protester A, with handcuff attached, places arm into pipe (approximately 5–6 in. diameter and 3–4 ft long) and protester B places hand and arm from other end and attaches handcuff inside the pipe. A circular saw, used commonly by emergency first responder personnel, has been used in the past to cut the pipe in two in order to get to the handcuff. Sometimes protesters will keep packets of fake blood in their hand, inside the pipe, to pretend being cut by the saw, complicating removal further. A group will surround an immovable object (building column, tree) and link themselves together. Die-ins are popular nonviolent civil unrest methods. Simple pretending to be dead, even when being arrested and placed into a vehicle. The throwing of paint is a common TTP. However, more serious groups have talked of using acids to damage property. It is unknown if decisions are made to use this TTP against law enforcement officer personnel. The ones to watch: Black Blocs are known for their use of innovative tactics that are unfamiliar to traditional activists ( Unarresting an activist(s) is quite simple—when an activist is arrested, the bloc of anarchists acts swiftly to pull that person free from the police. Sometimes a tugging match is required to free the activist, but when they have the element of surprise, they can usually be successful because the police are so shocked that activists aren’t playing the game correctly (i.e., negotiating their own imprisonment). Unarresting works in two situations: (1) when there are few police and several activists involved or (2) when the unarresting bloc outnumbers the officers by a ratio of 3:1 or better. Gangs, like all criminals, will not attack unless they feel they have the advantage. Their advantage is knowing all your movements and security protocols (and ways to defeat them) prior to the attack. The largest concern of gangs, outside of being in the wrong place at the wrong time during gang-on-gang violence or robbery, is kidnapping. Of course, this refers mainly to international gang activity, as kidnapping among U.S. gangs is not as prevalent. While this type of gang activity is known the world over, the major hub of gang kidnap activity occurs in Latin America countries. For instance, regarding El Salvador, many academics and political analysts conclude that the problem of gangs is the second most important sociological phenomenon of violence, after civil war. The high number of homicides—approximately 40 per 100,000 inhabitants—gives El Salvador the unenviable ranking as one of the most dangerous countries in Latin America. Criminal street gang members, prison gang members, and individuals associated with transnational criminal organizations study books such as MS-13 arrived in the United States having had ties to La Mara, a violent street gang in El Salvador. Many had actually seen fighting in El Salvador’s civil war. Ex-members of the paramilitary Farabundo Marti para la LiberacionNacional (FMLN)[Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front] also numbered among the early founders of Mara Salvatrucha. Using guerilla tactics and urban terrorism, the FMLN had fought an insurgency against the Salvadoran government; as a result, many Salvadorans arrived in Los Angeles as “veterans,” already adept in the use of explosives, firearms, and reconnaissance. On January 31, 2009, in Pharr, Texas, an alleged gang member tossed a South Korean-made grenade into a bar with off-duty police officers. The grenade failed to explode due to the safety pin not being pulled properly. This is an example of targeted violence that certainly required a particular amount of surveillance and planning to know as much as possible about the target area and its intended victims. The grenade that failed to explode in the bar had the same markings as grenades thrown in October at the U.S. consulate in Monterrey, Mexico, and at a television station in early January in the same city. The grenade thrown at the consulate failed to explode, and no one was injured when the grenade hit the Televisa network’s studio as it aired its nightly newscast. However, all three grenades were manufactured at the same time and place and were at one point together in the same batch from South Korea. After the grenade bounced off the floor and landed on a pool table, an off-duty police officer picked it up and threw it back out the door. No one was hurt, no arrests were made, and authorities are divided about whether the targets were rival gang members or off-duty police officers. Gang recruitment of active-duty military personnel constitutes a significant criminal threat to the U.S. military. According to multiple law enforcement reportings, members of nearly every major street gang, as well as some prison gangs and outlaw motorcycle gangs, have been reported on both domestic and international military installations ( Criminal gangs in Ireland and England are reportedly using reconnaissance units to stake out houses before leaving chalk markings outside denoting if they’re ripe for burgling or too risky to enter. This method has also been known to be utilized by transient or “hobos” in the United States that travel illegally by train from place to place leaving signals for the next hobo to come through the area. It is understood at least eight signs are being used by the “recon unit,” one of which indicates the occupant is a vulnerable female who is conned easily. Another points to the householder being nervous and afraid, while other signs indicate the house is a good target and its owners are wealthy. Reconnaissance units also save their burglar colleagues time by leaving signs showing there is nothing worth stealing from a house or that it is too risky to attempt burgling it ( Violent felons that fall into the routine of prison time have been known to be targeted by terrorist groups as they are introduced and radicalized in Islamic extremism. Years from now when criminologists write their textbooks on American terrorism, the name Kevin Lamar James may appear alongside such infamous figures as Timothy McVeigh, Ramzi Yousef, and Osama bin Laden. Kevin James was sentenced in February 2009 for conspiring to wage war against the United States. James pled guilty to the charge after he and three other men were indicted in 2005 for plotting to attack U.S. military facilities, Israeli government facilities, and Jewish synagogues in Los Angeles. At the time of the indictments, the FBI described the plot as the most operationally advanced since September 11. Even more troubling is that James designed the plot while serving time in a California state prison. Prisoners, especially those in gangs, have long recruited other inmates to act as their collaborators upon release. James, however, was the first gang member to radicalize inmates into joining a prison gang with a terrorist agenda. A study funded by the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) and conducted by author Mark S. Hamm, Ph.D., took a closer look at the Kevin James case as part of a larger study on radicalization in prison. Three of the alleged conspirators—Levar Haney Washington, 26; Gregory Vernon Patterson, 22; and Hammad Riaz Samana, 22, a Pakistani national—confessed to 11 gas station robberies that the FBI alleges were perpetrated to finance terrorist attacks on military recruitment centers, synagogues, and the Israeli consulate. The fourth man indicted was Kevin Lamar James, 29, who had been housed in a California state prison in Sacramento since 1996 for committing a gang-related armed robbery. Terrorist shoe-bomber Richard Reid and Jose Padilla, who was held as an enemy combatant for attempting to detonate a “dirty bomb” before being charged with material support of terrorism and conspiracy to murder individuals in a foreign country, were both radicalized during stints in prison. Levar Washington ( Washington converted to Islam while serving 3 years in Corcoran State Prison on a robbery conviction. While serving a subsequent sentence at High Desert State Prison, he was determined “violent and incorrigible” and was assigned to the highest level of security. Washington was at High Desert on September 11, 2001. He reportedly met Jam’iyyat Ul-Islam Is-Saheeh, Arabic for “Assembly of Authentic Islam,” founder and leader Kevin James while incarcerated at California State Prison in Sacramento. It is alleged that he took an oath of allegiance to James in November 2004, shortly before being paroled. James is alleged to have given Washington instructions to prepare for and then execute a terrorist attack on Los Angeles. After his release, Washington worshipped at the Inglewood mosque. He reportedly held very radical views, which were not embraced by the leaders or members of the mosque. It is believed that Washington met his two alleged accomplices, Gregory Patterson and Hamad Samana, at the Inglewood mosque. In late May 2005, Washington, Patterson, and Samana allegedly began surveilling and conducting a string of gas station robberies in and around Los Angeles. Initially, police made no connection between these robberies and any terrorist activities. On July 5, 2005, Washington and Patterson were arrested after Patterson dropped a cell phone at the scene of one of the crimes. A subsequent search of their apartment turned up bulletproof vests and jihadi materials not available readily via the Internet. Also found were the addresses of National Guard facilities, two synagogues, the Israeli consulate, and the El Al Airlines ticket counter at the Los Angeles airport. Studies by the NIJ in 1999 revealed that terrorists are far more careful in planning and preparing for the completion of their attacks than other categories of criminal (as cited in Smith, Damphouse, & Roberts, 1999). This is due to the differing paradigms between both groups. While “average criminals” commit crimes with individualized self-serving motives, terrorists conduct attacks with religious, ideological, and/or political objectives in mind, which their parent organizations believe to serve the “greater good.” Over the past several decades, the United States has begun to articulate terrorism as a distinctive category of criminal activity. The United States Code (USC) uses several definitions of terrorism that address specific legal situations, all of which have entered into the legal lexicon only since the 1970s. The FBI subdivides the terrorist threat facing the United States into the broad categories of international and domestic terrorism, each of which involves violent acts intended to (1) intimidate or coerce a civilian population or (2) influence the policy or conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination, or kidnapping. In cases of international terrorism, these acts transcend national boundaries in terms of the means by which they are accomplished, the persons they intend to intimidate, or the locale in which perpetrators operate [18 USC § 2331(1)]. In cases of domestic terrorism, the FBI defines the source of coercion as a group or individual based and operating entirely within the United States, or its territories, without foreign direction [18 USC § 2331(5)]. These legal definitions revolve around terrorism as coercion—as a violent means to a political end. There is no single, universally accepted, definition of terrorism. Terrorism is defined in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations as “the unlawful use of force and violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives” (28 C.F.R. Section 0.85). For the purpose of this book, let’s use the FBI’s definitions of domestic terrorism and international terrorism:   At 2149 hours on June 25, 1996, security police sentries posted on the roof top of Building 131 observed a septic tank truck and car traveling east bound in the parking lot just outside the north perimeter fence. When the truck was abeam Building 131, it turned left away from the compound. The truck then began to back up into the hedges just outside the fence. Occupants of the truck jumped in the waiting car and sped off. Sentries radioed the situation into the security desk and began alerting building occupants in Building 131 of Khobar Towers. One American sentry, Air Force Staff Sergeant Alfredo R. Guerrero, stationed atop Building 131, witnessed the men, recognized the vehicles as a threat, and began a floor-by-floor evacuation of the building. His actions are credited with saving dozens of lives. Many of the evacuees were in the stairwell when the bomb went off. The stairwell was constructed of heavy marble and was located on the side of the building away from the truck bomb, perhaps the safest location in the building. For his actions, Guerrero was awarded the Airman’s Medal, the U.S. Air Force’s highest peacetime award for valor. While working for the Department of Defense, the author of this book had the distinct honor of having Al Guerrero as one of his antiterrorism level II instructors. At 2155 hours, the bomb detonated. Estimates of the bomb’s size vary. One estimate states the bomb was equivalent to 3000–8000 pounds of TNT, but was most likely 5000 pounds. Another estimate puts the bomb size at 20,000–30,000 pounds of TNT. Nineteen American service personnel were killed and more than 200 injured. Hundreds of Saudi citizens and third-country nationals (TCN) living in the complex and immediate vicinity were also injured; some were probably killed. The bomb blast blew out windows throughout the compound and created a crater 85 feet wide and 35 feet deep. The blast was felt in Bahrain, 20 miles away. This was a watershed event for Department of Defense Antiterrorism Force Protection. From the UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT EASTERN DISTRICT OF VIRGINIA ALEXANDRIA DIVISION indictment: From April through June 1996, the security police reported 10 incidents of possible surveillance of the Khobar Towers ( These incidents were investigated by the Air Force Office of Special Investigations, the Saudi military police, and local civilian police. Five incidents were explained and dismissed. Four incidents were reports of surveillance where the vehicle used in the getaway was sighted as Middle Eastern men who drove by or parked and observed the compound. Saudi police thought this was not uncommon due to curiosity and an increased number of people in the area during the Hajj season. One incident in May was a possible threat indicator when a Jersey barrier on the east perimeter was rammed by a slow-moving car. The driver very likely may have been testing to see if the barrier could be moved. This test of the barrier reinforced to the wing leaders that a penetration attack was the most likely threat. Force protection actions taken included staking all Jersey barriers down with steel rods, stringing more concertina wire on perimeters, compiling a list to monitor TCN workers, obtaining night vision scopes for observation posts, briefing residents of Buildings 131 and 133 to maintain increased vigilance, training explosive detection dogs by explosive ordnance disposal personnel using 250-pound category bombs, increasing security police posts to 13 for day and 15 for night, initiating roof-top observation posts at night, updating building evacuation plans, and coordinating with the Saudis to implement a procedure to check license plates of suspicious vehicles. After action reports and investigations detail the intense preoperational surveillance efforts of the attackers: Saudi Hezbollah three-person surveillance team Conducted preattack surveillance operations against various U.S. targets in the city of Dhahran Conducted 40 dedicated preattack surveillance missions against Khobar Began on-ground operations 21 months prior to the attack Several of the sightings of suspected surveillance came from two minarets that had direct line of sight of the buildings and compound ( British-born Muslim convert Dhiren Barot ( This cover apparently worked well, as the surveillance plans he outlined reportedly were very detailed. They included descriptions of what vehicles would be able to enter the basement of the Prudential building, potential getaway routes (implying they were not suicide attacks), and notes on a visit to Newark City Hall to (unsuccessfully) gather blueprints. Barot was not arrested in the United States, however, but in the United Kingdom in early August 2004, soon after the July arrest of alleged al Qaeda operative and computer expert Mohammed Naeem Noor Khan in Pakistan, who reportedly had copies of the surveillance plans on his computer and compact disks. The discovery led U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) officials to declare an “orange alert” for the financial sector on August 1, 2004, even though the casing reports were old. He flew to the New York area twice from the United Kingdom: first from August 17 to November 14, 2000, with conspirator Nadeem Tarmohamed; and again from March 11 to April 8, 2001, with Tarmohamed and Qaisar Shaffi. According to a Department of Justice indictment, during this time they visited and conducted surveillance: In addition to surveillance tapes, Barot kept specific notes about security in and around the targeted buildings ( At Citicorp, for example, he mapped the best place to plant bombs, kept track of security personnel and times of heaviest pedestrian flow, and highlighted exact times and locations of when puppet shows for children are held in the building’s atrium. At the stock exchange, he had detailed information on the building itself. He timed traffic lights and patterns and mapped out detailed escape routes for bombers through subway and sewage tunnels. At the Prudential building, he had the exact location of the garage, timed traffic lights around the building, and suggested driving and exploding an oil tanker through the lobby to bring down the building. As previously released documents show, Barot planned to use gas-filled limousines as bombs. The document also refers to the Madrid bombings of March 11, 2004 as a “respectable project” that “deserved to be emulated.” In a 2006 story highlighted by a Metro U.K. newspaper, terror plotter Dhiren Barot and his alleged coconspirators had clearly been trained in antisurveillance techniques. On one occasion, the two of them traveled from London to Swansea just to use an Internet cafe before driving straight back. Prosecutor Edmund Lawson QC told Woolwich Crown Court: “They were plainly surveillance conscious and they plainly received training or instruction from someone on the use of anti-surveillance techniques” ( Barot and others set up Yahoo e-mail accounts to send coded messages to each other, the prosecutor said. “They used code in their communications… a code which has not yet been cracked such as to yield material such as could be used evidentially,” Mr. Lawson said. “These were written in the style of teenagers discussing music, television, etc etera, and using language and employing sexual references which would not normally be considered appropriate to devout Muslims.” The three e-mail addresses highlighted to the court were Sent from the nightwithkylie address to the bridget-jones address the day before Barot was arrested, it read: “make sure u don’t bring your friend the 1 who loves listening 2 red hot chillie. u know I don’t like her at all.” Mr Lawson said: “It appears to be a warning on its own to make sure that you are not tailed.” Another message between the same addresses read like a love note, he continued. It began: “baby tears, nice 1 love, u know that I can never let you down, especially you.” The QC told the court: “Whatever else that was, it was not a love letter.” He went on: “One extreme example of the use of email by Barot was that (two codefendants) traveled hundreds of miles to Swansea solely for the purpose of using an Internet cafe, then returned to London.” The 400-mile round trip was “entirely idiotic” and could “only have been to seek to avoid surveillance,” he added. In a surprise move on October 12, 2006, Barot pled guilty to conspiracy in the plot to blow up the New York Stock Exchange and the other high-profile U.S. financial targets he had reportedly surveilled, along with plotting to conduct attacks in the United Kingdom. On November 26, 2008, terrorist masterminds executed an intricate attack on India’s financial and entertainment capital, Mumbai ( Elevator closed-circuit television (CCTV) footage captured the terrorists attempting to operate an elevator during the early stages of the 3-day siege ( The attackers received reconnaissance assistance before the attacks. Ajmal Kasab, the only attacker who was captured alive, later confessed upon interrogation that the attacks were conducted with the support of Pakistan’s ISI ( Headley’s role in the terror attack included the following ( Starting in 2002 and continuing into 2005, Headley attended five separate Lashkar training camps where he was indoctrinated on the merits of waging jihad and trained in combat skills. At the instance of LeT leaders, he changed his given name of Dawood Gilani and enlisted the assistance of his friend Tahawwur Hussain Rana to travel to and stay in Mumbai without detection starting in 2006 and continuing into 2008. Headley provided video of and intelligence about the locations that later were targeted during the Mumbai attacks. Headley also assisted in plotting out a portion of the nautical route that the attackers would take and recommended the landing point that they later used to enter Mumbai without being detected. After seeing what took place in Mumbai in November 2008, Headley traveled to Denmark in January 2009. There, he gained entry to two separate facilities for the newspaper, using the same cover story provided to him that he used in Mumbai. Before each trip, Lashkar members and associates instructed Headley regarding specific locations where he was to conduct surveillance. After each trip, Headley traveled to Pakistan to meet with Lashkar members and associates, report on the results of his surveillance, and provide surveillance videos. Before the April 2008 surveillance trip, Headley and co-conspirators in Pakistan discussed potential landing sites in Mumbai for a team of attackers who would arrive by sea. Headley returned to Mumbai with a global positioning system (GPS) device and took boat trips around the Mumbai harbor, entering various locations into the device. Headley trips included the TajMahal and Oberoi hotels, the Leopold Cafe, the Chabad House, and the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus train station, each of which Headley had scouted in advance. In March 2009, Headley made a sixth trip to India to conduct additional surveillance, including the National Defence College in Delhi and Chabad Houses in several cities. According to his plea agreement, Headley made trips to Mumbai to conduct surveillance in September 2006, February and September 2007, and April and June 2008. On each occasion, posing as a tourist, he took extensive videos that he delivered to his LeT and ISI handlers in Pakistan. He did not learn of the planned assault from the sea until just before his April 2008 trip to Mumbai, when potential landing sites were discussed. After arriving in Mumbai in April 2008, Headley identified the various landing sites with GPS, traveling by boat to each one so he could further describe the sites upon his return to Pakistan. Video became essential to the surveillance phase of the operation. In fact, when doing his surveillance activities throughout the city, Headley stayed frequently at the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel, eventually a prime target, going on in-house tours and photographing and shooting surveillance videos. By the time he finished his surveillance there, he had documented almost every square inch of the very large hotel. In addition to the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel, the final targets were the Leopold Café, the Chabad House Jewish Community Center, the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus train station, and the Oberoi-Trident Hotel. The Oberoi was considered a target of opportunity because it had not been on Headley’s original list of potential targets; however, he took an opportunity to video the hotel and it was eventually selected for the attack. Why these targets were eventually selected is subject to speculation. However, the fact that Mumbai has nearly 22 million people in one of the world’s most populated countries guarantees immediate publicity, which is what terrorist groups thrive on. Without media coverage, the event would never get noticed, nor would the terrorist group’s political message be conveyed to the general public. The two hotels attacked are some of the largest in the city and traditionally host many foreigners. It can be assumed that these hotels were chosen for maximum casualties. The Jewish community center appears to have been a target because of the traditional animosity between Muslims and Jews. The Leopold Café is a popular restaurant and bar hangout for foreigners. Drinking and bars are against Muslim religious practices, so it is possible that the bar was chosen as a target because of its affront to Islam. Finally, the train station was an excellent target because of the large number of Indian passengers frequently present in its terminal. Over 21 months of extremely detailed surveillance occurred in preparation for the attack. The terrorist knew the target locations and city better than the local police—the most incredible point to this is that Anders Behring Breivik, a Norwegian, killed 77 people in a bombing and shooting rampage in Oslo and on Utoya Island, a summer camp for young political activists, on July 22, 2011 ( Breivik, a right-wing extremist, admitted to the slayings in a court hearing shortly afterward, but denied criminal guilt, portraying the victims as “traitors” for embracing multiculturalism and Muslim immigration policies. On August 24, 2012, a Norwegian court sentenced Breivik to 21 years in prison after ruling that he had been sane at the time of the massacre. The sentence is the longest provided by Norwegian law. Breivik’s presurveillance activities are noteworthy; however, what is of particular interest was his meticulous and extreme measures to ensure he did not get caught in his preattack planning and logistics phase, most of which can be found in his manifesto entitled Financing your operation Safe research and intelligence gathering Acquirement of weapons, body armour and other equipment Transportation (having a car/scooter available or rely on expropriation) Safe storage in remote caches (the elimination of evidence) Reconnaissance or exploration of the terrain Study and timing of routes Simulate the operation again and again (study and practice) Success The car bomb Breivik detonated at the Government Quarter weighed about 2100 pounds (950 kilograms), and its main components were fertilizer and diesel. Breivik used online recipes to build it and purchased the ingredients from retailers in Norway and abroad. He ordered 6 tons of fertilizer from the Norwegian cooperative Felleskjøpet on May 4, 2011. The aluminum powder—a core ingredient in fertilizer bombs—was bought online from a Polish company. Breivik originally wanted to build three bombs, but realized he was running short of time and finances so decided to make only one. After July 22, police found great quantities of leftover bomb-making materials at Breivik’s farm. Most of Breivik’s special equipment was purchased on eBay, including a tactical rifle fore grip from a Hong Kong-based trader, a zoom spotting scope from a Chinese supplier, and a LaserLyte pistol bayonet from a U.S.-based retailer. He also bought 15 vinyl air bags that may have been used to stabilize the car bomb during transport. As for the weapons Breivik used on July 22, his initial plan was to buy them on the black market in countries he considered “European criminal network hubs.” This somewhat naive idea led Breivik into one of his tactical misfortunes as he drove all the way to the Czech Republic to actively approach people he believed to be criminals. In his book, which is also known as his “compendium,” he described the trip as a complete failure as everyone he approached thought he was crazy. He therefore lost his motivation and returned empty-handed. Surprisingly, acquiring weapons legally in Norway proved much easier than buying them on the black market abroad. Breivik simply used his hunting license and pistol club membership to buy a Ruger Mini 14 (semiautomatic rifle) and a 9-mm Glock 17 (semiautomatic pistol). Incidents suggest that Breivik may not have been as cool-headed as is commonly portrayed. For instance, he was kicked out of a bar in Oslo a year before the attacks, having annoyed a Norwegian celebrity by talking extensively about crusades, Islam, and Templar Knights. While being escorted out of the bar, he reportedly shouted at the celebrity: “A year from now, I will be three times as famous as you!” Moreover, in March 2011, Breivik apparently called the central switchboard of Norwegian ministries, threatening to kill members of The Workers’ Youth League at Utøya. This incident was logged, but never forwarded to the Police Secret Service as it was considered an empty threat. Breivik later acknowledged making the call, but said he does not remember its contents. Finally, not everything went according to Breivik’s plan on the day of the attacks. His original idea was to be in Oslo and start the distribution of the compendium at 3:00 In any case, Breivik did not wake until 8:00 In July 2010, Breivik wrote he had “successfully finished the ‘armour acquisition phase,’” including buying a protective case to store the weapons underground in a forest that was a 2- hour drive away from his farm. It was not an easy operation, however, as he was plagued by mosquitoes, spiders (with which he says he has “serious issues”), and underground rocks while he dug the hole, which took him 5 hours. In September 2010, Breivik says: “I now have to acquire a semi-automatic rifle and Glock [pistol] legally... I don’t have a criminal record so there is no reason why the police should reject my application.” He goes on: “I have now sent an application for a Ruger Mini 14 semi-automatic rifle (5.56)... On the application form I stated: ‘hunting deer.’ It would have been tempting to just write the truth; ‘executing category A and B cultural Marxists/multiculturalist traitors’ just to see their reaction :P.” He goes on to say: A video entitled Later in the same entry: In October–November 2010, he writes: Fears of detection are described repeatedly in the log. Breivik details his calculations of operational discovery if future attackers do not want to get caught Part of the tract details his “personal reflections and experiences during several preparation phases,” apparently in the run-up to the July 22 attacks. Over dozens of pages, Breivik details his efforts meticulously to create cover stories for his plot, to build up his personal fitness levels, and to acquire the weaponry and explosive materials needed. It also sketches out aspects of his mental preparation for the act he intends to commit. However, according to the Norwegian anti-Islamic citizen journalist website to which Breivik himself was a frequent contributor, large parts of the manifesto are copied directly from “Unabomber” Ted Kaczynski’s own manifesto, with minor changes, such as replacement of the word “leftist” by the phrase “cultural Marxist.” The manifesto begins with an entry for April/May 2002, in which the author claims to have been “ordinated as the 8th Justiciar Knight for the PCCTS, Knights Templar Europe”—the “resistance movement” that elsewhere he claims has been established to combat the “Islamisation” of Europe: From 2002 to 2006, the log claims, Breivik raised funds for his venture—with 2006–2008 spent researching and writing his manifesto. By the autumn of 2009, the author claimed to be preparing for the next phase: Geofarm is a farm that has been linked to Anders Behring Breivik. Breivik speaking about surveillance, The subject says that he also took the battery out of his cell phone during a visit to Prague in 2010. “I was good at hiding clues,” he said. When asked, he explains that he took the battery out of the phone both to “avoid being registered on the base stations, and to avoid wiretapping. In general, the last year I tried to leave the phone at home. I also used technology to hide my IP address.” The subject says he has been thinking a lot about wiretapping the last couple of years. “I took my precautions,” he says, “but did not see any certain indications before June 18, 2011. Then I put together a number of factors.” The incident happened while the subject lived on his farm in Ã “Now the PST is on my farm installing cameras,” the subject thought at that time. “It was unlikely to be local police, since they had a civilian police car. They were parked next to a bus stop and there were two men in the front seats.” “When I got home, the barn door was left wide open” and the subject thought “there still might be someone inside the house.” He waited for 20 minutes, and says: “I thought about fighting my way to the Glock and then keep fighting. But I thought it was too much opposition, and that it was better to surrender without a fight.” It appears that the subject on this day was sure that surveillance cameras had been installed on the farm. He went searching for cameras inside the house when he got home. He says: The subject says he has had thoughts about surveillance by cameras since February 2010. At that point, he considered getting detection equipment to find any cameras, but ended up searching carefully around him. In the period from February 2010 to July 2010, the subject went into what he calls “the armor phase.” He says: “I made a prototype body armor for a potential battle with Delta” (police special unit, experts’ note). “I bought a box and put in it four bulletproof vest inserts, a pair of self-made bullet-proof pants, a bulletproof vest, and bulletproof shoes. And then I added smoke grenades and other things into the box, and drove to the Swedish border.” The subject explains how he found a deserted dirt road near Kongsvinger, and buried the box “next to a mosquito pond, so hunting dogs could not find it. Hunting dogs are in fact bothered by mosquitoes,” he adds. The subject says he spent a whole day digging and made a hole a meter and a half deep. He put the box in it and camouflaged it with a rotten tree root on top. He says: “It was terribly hard work, but I made it.” As was highlighted before, it seems clear that Breivik was eager to paint himself as a lone warrior who was a single sleeper cell that was self-indoctrinated and planned over a period of 9 years with minimal interaction with others. His own account of obtaining equipment suggests he did this by himself with no outside support. He was also meticulous in building cover stories for himself prior to purchasing items that are available commonly but could raise suspicions if bought abruptly and in large quantities. From an ideological standpoint, some key meetings seem to have helped form his worldview, specifically his meeting in London in April 2002, although a number of key interactions appear to have taken place online as well. In the last part of the compendium’s diary entries, the subject described a history of gold mining in Finnmark on July 21 and 22, 2011. This he describes as the  On July 11, 2008, the hostile surveillant entered Liverpool Street Station, a major London transit and retail hub. Liverpool Street Station is the third busiest station in London after Waterloo and Victoria stations. During peak hours, approximately 26,000 people per hour move through the main concourse area and an additional 100 trains an hour travel through the underground station, transporting another 30,000 people. At 11:15 Further investigation discovered that the surveillant arrived in Britain approximately 10 years prior; his brother arrived in the United Kingdom in 1997. Once in the United Kingdom, both men obtained national insurance numbers and took blue collar jobs in the service sector. They maintained a low-profile, living very simply in a one-room apartment in the London borough of Brent with the third Algerian. Having established themselves, they became involved in large-scale credit card and identity theft fraud, obtaining multiple credit cards on bogus applications, which they used to buy luxury goods to export to Algeria. The subjects also bought £5000 worth of cell phones with fraudulent credit cards. According to a detective chief inspector involved in the case, “Extremist material suggesting a link to al- Qa’ida in North Africa was found during the search of one property…but he added that no connection was found between the Algerians and any known terrorist group in the United Kingdom.” In addition to being involved in large-scale fraud, police believe that before going back to Algeria, the brothers carried out surveillance for a future terrorist attack. “There are cameras, there are cameras everywhere.” Voice of Subject 1 while filming Liverpool Station, July 7, 2008. The investigation further revealed that the surveillant conducted extensive video surveillance from July 7 to 11. Although July 7 was the anniversary of the July 7, 2005 terror attacks in London, there is no indication that this was anything more than a coincidence. The video footage included the concourse at Liverpool Street Station, the nearby Broadgate Circle shopping and restaurant plaza, Mornington Crescent (one of the deepest stations on the tube network), and the Northern Line platforms at Camden town station ( He also took a tour bus ride through central London, getting off at the Oxford Circuit Underground Station. He filmed the foyer area of the station in which approximately 230,000 people travel through every day. Film footage also showed the brothers visiting the Galleria shopping centers in Hatfield and Bluewater, the Ashford shopping centers in Kent, and a trade outlet in Bridgend, South Wales. It is not known if their visit to the shopping centers was to conduct preoperational surveillance, make fraudulent credit card purchases, or both. Although the surveillant did a significant amount of travel on the London tube and bus network during the cited period, police were unable to track him via his “oyster card” (electronic ticketing used on public transportation services in the greater London area of the United Kingdom). It is believed that the oyster cards were being swapped among multiple users to frustrate any subsequent CCTV research carried out by police. Other indicators of surveillance tradecraft include conspicuously covering the red light on his mobile phone when video recording in the presence of others. When visiting various Tube and mainline stations, he concentrated on filming maps, trains, entrances/exits, and CCTV cameras. Throughout the film footage, he focused the camera on himself periodically. In these segments, he appears secretive and nervous, which are not synonymous with tourist photography. The reasons he did this were to (a) prove to others that it was him conducting the surveillance; (b) avoid unwanted attention from the public; and (c) capture footage from various angles, such as location of CCTV cameras on the ceilings of the stations. Of particular interest is when he turns the camera on its side to almost 90 degrees for no reason. This could signify the beginning and/or end of surveillance or highlight a specific target or targets. Interestingly, this was also done by al-Qa’ida operative Dhiren Barot while conducting video surveillance of the World Trade Center in New York City prior to the 9/11 attacks. The surveillant is also periodically overheard making comments while video recording security countermeasures at some of the sites he visited. Around midnight on July 10, the day before his arrest, he visited Mornington Crescent, which is a “deep hole” Tube station only accessible by elevator. Inside the elevator, he is heard making comments about the location of CCTV cameras. After taking video footage of the CCTV cameras in the elevator, he turns the camera 90 degrees on its side ( In 2001, al-Qa’ida operative L’Hoyssaine Kherchtou testified in New York City that he took a 2-week surveillance seminar in a training camp in Pakistan in 1992. When asked if he trained in any particular equipment to use during surveillance, he replied, “Yes. We were trained how to use different cameras, especially small ones, develop the pictures, and to take the pictures holding the camera so that the surveillant is not looking through it.” The July 7, 2005 London bombings (often referred to as 7/7) were a series of coordinated suicide attacks in London, England that targeted civilians using the public transport system during the morning rush hour. On this routine Thursday morning, four Islamist home-grown terrorists detonated four bombs, three in quick succession aboard London Underground trains across the city and, later, a fourth on a double-decker bus in Tavistock Square ( The four suicide bombers were later identified and named as Mohammad Sidique Khan: aged 30. Khan detonated his bomb just after leaving Edgware Road tube station on a train traveling toward Paddington at 8:50 am. He lived in Beeston, Leeds, with his wife and young child, where he worked as a learning mentor at a primary school. The blast killed seven people, including Khan himself. Shehzad Tanweer: aged 22. He detonated a bomb aboard a train traveling between Liverpool Street station and Aldgate tube station at 8:50 am. He lived in Leeds with his mother and father, working in a fish and chip shop. He was killed by the explosion along with seven members of the public. Germaine Lindsay: aged 19. He detonated his device on a train traveling between King’s Cross and Russell Square tube stations at 8:50 am. He lived in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, with his pregnant wife and young son. His blast killed 27 people, including Lindsay himself. Hasib Hussain: the youngest of the four at 18, Hussain detonated his bomb on the top deck of a double-decker bus at 9:47 am. He lived in Leeds with his brother and sister-in-law. Fourteen people, including Hussain, died in the explosion in Tavistock Square. Three of the bombers were British-born sons of Pakistani immigrants; Lindsay was a convert born in Jamaica. 10/20/74 Mohammad Sidique Khan (MSK) born in West Yorkshire: Attends local schools Works in local benefits agency and the department of trade and industry Goes on to study at Leeds Metropolitan University 12/15/82 Shehzad Tanweer (ST) born in West Yorkshire: Attends local schools Goes on to study at Leeds Metropolitan University Works in the family fish and chips shop 09/23/85 Germaine Lindsay (GL) born in Jamaica: Moves to the United Kingdom with his mother in 1986 Attends local schools in home town of Huddersfield Works occasional odd jobs 09/16/86 Hasib Hussain (HH) born in West Yorkshire: Attends local schools Goes on to college to study an advanced business program Late 1990s MSK: Starts youth work. 2000 GL: Following mother’s conversion, converts to Islam and takes the name Jamal. 2001 MSK: Joins staff of local primary school to work as a learning mentor. October 2001 MSK: Marries. Later moves to Batley and then Dewsbury. Mid-2002 ST: Religion appears to become the main focus of his life. 2002 HH: Makes Hajj visit to Saudi Arabia and to family in Pakistan. Returns to England. Increasingly religiously observant. October 2002 GL: Marries, lives in Huddersfield. Early 2003 MSK and ST: Become increasingly close. Early 2003 MSK: Hajj visit with his wife. April 2003 MSK and ST: Camping trip in the United Kingdom with other young men. July 2003 MSK: Visits Pakistan for training. September 2003 GL: Moves to Aylesbury. April 2004 GL: First child born. Works as a carpet fitter until early 2005. ST: Caution for disorderly conduct. May 2004 MSK: Daughter born. October 2004 HH: Cautioned for shoplifting. Late 2004 MSK and GL: Close association. September–November 2004 MSK: Long period of sick absence from work. Job ends. November–February 2005 MSK and ST: Visit Pakistan. Mar 2005: First purchase of material to make explosives. May 2005 GL: Rents Alexandra Grove, the bomb factory. June 2005 MSK and ST: White-water rafting trip with other young men. June 28, 2005 MSK, ST, and GL: recce visit to London The case of the Fort Dix Six is a victory for citizen reporting and should be heralded by the DHS when discussing the “See Something, Say Something” campaign as an example of why it is important to report something suspicious ( In 2007, a teenage clerk at Circuit City in Mount Laurel, New Jersey, was asked by two men to transfer a videotape to a digital video disk (DVD). When the teenager and another employee went into the back room and started the process of transferring the tape, they found themselves watching several men in “fundamentalist attire” and shooting “big, f-ing guns,” the teen later told co-workers. The teen frantically told his co-worker what he had witnessed. And then he said, “I don’t know what to do. Should I call someone or is that being racist” Sixteen months after the teenage clerk reported the video, the FBI arrested a group of terrorists that became known as the “Fort Dix Six.” At the time the FBI believed the “Fort Dix Six” were finalizing their plans for an assault on Fort Dix. The group was convicted on December 22, 2008 ( The defendants and the charges on which each was convicted are as follow ( Mohamad Ibrahim Shnewer, 23, of Cherry Hill: conspiracy to murder members of the U.S. military and attempted possession of AK-47 semiautomatic assault weapons to be used in the attack. Dritan Duka, 30, of Cherry Hill: conspiracy to murder members of the U.S. military, possession of machine guns, possession and attempted possession of machine guns in furtherance of a crime of violence, and two counts of possession of firearms by an illegal alien. Shain Duka, 27, of Cherry Hill: conspiracy to murder members of the U.S. military, possession of machine guns, possession and attempted possession of machine guns in furtherance of a crime of violence, and two counts of possession of firearms by an illegal alien. Eljvir Duka, 25, of Cherry Hill: conspiracy to murder members of the U.S. military and possession of firearms by an illegal alien. The jury acquitted on one count of possession and attempted possession of machine guns in furtherance of a crime of violence. Serdar Tatar, 25, of Philadelphia: conspiracy to murder members of the U.S. military. From the U.S. District Court District of New Jersey Criminal Complaint, In furtherance of the conspiracy and to effect the objects thereof, defendant ELJVIR DUKA, aka “Elvis Duka,” aka “Sulayman,” and others committed and caused to be committed overt acts in the District of New Jersey, and elsewhere, including but not limited to: On or about January 3, 2006, MOHAMAD SHNEWER, DRITAN DUKA, ELJVIR DUKA, SHAIN DUKA, and SERDAR TATAR conducted firearms training in Gouldsboro, Pennsylvania. On or about August 11, 2006, MOHAMAD SHNEWER traveled to the United States Army base at Fort Dix, New Jersey to conduct surveillance. On or about August 11, 2006, MOHAMAD SHNEWER traveled to the United States Army base at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey to conduct surveillance. On or about August 13, 2006, MOHAMAD SHNEWER traveled to Dover Air Force base in Dover, Delaware to conduct surveillance. On or about August 13, 2006, MOHAMAD SHNEWER traveled to the United States Coast Guard Building in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania to conduct surveillance. On or about November 28, 2006, SERDAR TATAR acquired a map of the United States Army base at Fort Dix, New Jersey, labeled “Cantonment Area Fort Dix, NJ” to be distributed to others. On or about January 31, 2007, DRITAN DUKA, ELJVIR DUKA, and SHAINDUKA collected weapons, including hand guns, shotguns, and semiautomatic assault weapons to be used in small arms training. On or about February 1, 2007, DRITAN DUKA, ELJVIR DUKA, and SHAINDUKA traveled by car from New Jersey to Pennsylvania in order to conduct firearms training. On or about February 2, 2007, DRITAN DUKA, SHAIN DUKA, and ELJVIRDUKA conducted firearms training in Gouldsboro, Pennsylvania. On or about February 4, 2007, MOHAMAD SHNEWER, DRITAN DUKA, ELJVIR DUKA, and SHAIN DUKA reviewed terrorist training videos. On or about February 26, 2007, DRITAN DUKA and ELJVIR DUKA conducted tactical training in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. On or about March 15, 2007, DRITAN DUKA and SHAIN DUKA conducted tactical training in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. On or about April 6, 2007, DRITAN DUKA ordered four AK-47 Kalishnikov fully automatic machine guns as well as M-16 firearms and handguns. On or about April 27, 2007, MOHAMAD SHNEWER ordered an AK-47 Kalishnikov fully automatic machine gun. On or about January 31, 2006, a representative of a retail store informed officials of the FBI that an individual had brought a video to their store to be duplicated onto a DVD. That DVD depicted conduct—recorded as having occurred on January 3, 2006—that the store representative described as disturbing. FBI agents reviewed the DVD in question. The DVD depicted 10 young men who appeared to be in their early twenties shooting assault weapons at a firing range in a militia-like style while calling for The FBI identified the 10 men depicted in the DVD, six of whom are Mohamad Shnewer, Dritan Duka, aka “Distan Duka,” aka “Anthony Duka,” aka “Tony Duka,” Eljvir Duka, aka “Elvis Duka,” aka “Sulayman,” Shain Duka, Serdar Tatar, and Agron Abdullahu. Immigration and customs enforcement checks showed that Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, and Shain Duka were residing in the United States illegally. In or about March 2006, a cooperating witness (“CW-1”) infiltrated this group successfully by developing a relationship with Mohamad Shnewer. Beginning in or about March 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded conversations with Shnewer and other targets of the investigation during meetings and telephone calls. On or about April 14, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Mohamad Shnewer. During that meeting, Shnewer stated that he and CW-1 should view a video stored on Shnewer’s computer, but that they had to do so in private because “it’s about something that can lead to prison.” On or about April 28, 2006, during a consensually recorded meeting with CW-1, Mohamad Shnewer downloaded a DVD from his laptop computer, which Shnewer then provided to CW-1. Shnewer instructed CW-1 to review the DVD alone. CW-1 provided the DVD to FBI and JTTF agents, who reviewed the DVD. The DVD contained video footage of various jihadist images while a narrator recruited the observer to the jihadist movement. On or about May 26, 2006, during a consensually recorded meeting with CW-1, Mohamad Shnewer gave CW-1 Shnewer’s laptop computer and told CW-1 to review particular DVD files on the laptop hard drive. CW-1 asked Shnewer to write the names of the DVD files Shnewer wanted CW-1 to review, which Shnewer did. CW-1 provided a business card to FBI and JTTF agents on which Shnewer had written the names of the DVD files CW-1 was to review. One file was named “19” and the other file was named “VTS_01_1.” Law enforcement officials made a copy of Shnewer’s laptop hard drive and were able to locate and view the files labeled “19” and “VTS_01_1.” The file labeled “19” contained what appears to be the last will and testament of at least two of the highjackers involved in the terrorist attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001. The file labeled “VTS_01_1” contained images of Osama Bin Laden and other Islamic extremists making various speeches in which the speakers call the viewer to join the jihadist movement. On or about July 7, 2006, a second individual who was cooperating with the FBI (“CW-2”) was approached by six males unknown to CW-2. One of the males identified himself as “Sulayman” and invited CW-2 to his home. The investigation revealed that Eljvir Duka uses the name “Sulayman.” On or about July 28, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Serdar Tatar during which Tatar asked CW-1 to fix Tatar’s vehicle. CW-1 and Tatar then switched vehicles. CW-1 delivered Tatar’s vehicle to law enforcement officers. CW-1 consented to a search of the vehicle. Inside the vehicle, law enforcement officers found a 50-round box of 9-mm ammunition. On the same day, CW-2 consensually recorded a meeting with Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, and Shain Duka. Eljvir Duka told CW-2 that the Dukas go target shooting with firearms but cannot go to regular gun ranges because none of them are legal residents of the United States. Dritan Duka showed CW-2 a video on Dritan Duka’s cell phone that depicted individuals shooting firearms. Dritan Duka stated that this activity took place in Pennsylvania. CW-2 informed law enforcement agents that during the meeting, CW-2 learned that the Duka brothers keep their firearms with Eljvir Duka’s brother-in-law, an individual named “Agim,” and an individual named “Mohamad.” Law enforcement officials determined that Eljvir Duka’s brother-in-law is Mohamad Shnewer and that the individual named “Agim” is Agron Abdullahu. On or about July 29, 2006, CW-2 consensually recorded a meeting with Mohamad Shnewer, Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, and Shain Duka. During the meeting, Shnewer showed CW-2 a number of videos on Shnewer’s laptop computer that depicted armed attacks on and the killing of U.S. military personnel. CW-2 observed that Shnewer seemed to enjoy watching the video and smiled during the viewing. On or about August 1, 2, and 5, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded meetings with Mohamad Shnewer. In summary, Shnewer stated that he, Serdar Tatar, Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, Shain Duka, and others were part of a group that was planning to attack a U.S. military base. Shnewer specifically named the U.S. Army base at Fort Dix, New Jersey, and a nearby U.S. Navy base. Shnewer explained that they could utilize six or seven jihadists to attack and kill at least 100 soldiers by using rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) or other weapons. Shnewer further explained that they could train for the attack in Pennsylvania. Shnewer also said that he and others in the group had saved money to pay for the weapons and that they were not afraid to die. Shnewer stated further that Tatar could obtain maps of Fort Dix in order to plan the attack. Shnewer also said that the group wanted CW-1 to help lead the attack based on CW-1’s prior experience in the Egyptian military. On August 1, 2006, Mohamad Shnewer said the following, in substance and in part: On August 2, 2006, Mohamad Shnewer said the following, in substance and in part: In response to how the group would get a map of Fort Dix, Shnewer said the following: “Serdar, he used to deliver there… Why did I choose Fort Dix? Because I know that Serdar knows it like the palm of his hand” On August 5, 2006, Mohamad Shnewer said the following, in substance and in part. In response to CW-1’s question regarding who Shnewer had in mind for the attack: Concerning training: In response to whether Shnewer had spoken with Eljvir Duka or Dritan Duka about being part of the group: During the consensually recorded meeting on August 5, 2006, Mohamad Shnewer also suggested that he and CW-1 surveil military bases to decide which one to attack. When discussing the naval base, Shnewer said, When CW-1 asked whether they could take pictures during their surveillance, Shnewer said that doing so would be very dangerous but that they could film the base using a cell phone camera: On or about August 11, 2006, CW-1 and Mohamad Shnewer traveled to the Fort Dix military base to conduct surveillance. CW-1 consensually recorded the trip. While Shnewer and CW-1 were driving to Fort Dix, Shnewer spoke with another person on the telephone—captured on the consensually monitored recording—during which Shnewer asked the individual what street the person’s pizzeria was on. Shnewer also said that Shnewer, Eljvir Duka, Dritan Duka, Shain Duka, Serdar Tatar, and CW-1 were part of the group that would attack the military base. When CW-1 asked what made Shnewer think of Fort Dix as a target, Shnewer replied, “My intent is to hit a heavy concentration of soldiers….” As Shnewer and CW-1 drove into a specific area at Fort Dix, Shnewer said, “ …this is exactly what we are looking for. You hit 4, 5, or 6 humvees and light the whole place [up] and retreat completely without any losses.” Shnewer and CW-1 then drove to Lakehurst Naval Air Station. On the way there, Shnewer remarked that “this is going to be easier to hit specially if you have 8 or 9 shooting with machine guns and they are good shooters.” During the surveillance trip, Shnewer received several telephone calls and lied about his whereabouts to the callers. After Mohamad Shnewer and CW-1 completed the surveillance trip, law enforcement officers observed Shnewer later that evening driving by himself to the U.S. Army base at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey ( On or about August 13, 2006, during the evening hours, Mohamad Shnewer called CW-1 ( On or about September 22, 2006 and September 29, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded two meetings with Eljvir Duka. In summary, Eljvir Duka stated that they would need to receive a “fatwa” before they could attack. On or about October 6, 2006, CW-2 attempted to consensually record a meeting with Dritan Duka, Shain Duka, and Mohamad Shnewer. The equipment, however, failed to record the meeting. CW-2 informed law enforcement officers that during the meeting, Shnewer told CW-2 that he had new videos for CW-2 to watch, one of which included training conducted by the attackers on September 11, 2001. CW-2 also informed law enforcement officers that Shain Duka mentioned planning a trip to the Poconos for a week so that the group could shoot firearms. On or about October 31, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Serdar Tatar during which CW-1 and Tatar discussed Fort Dix. When CW-1 expressed anger at the United States, Tatar stated in response, “You want to make them pay for something that they did . . . Okay, you need maps?” Tatar then told CW-1 that he would give CW-1 a map of Fort Dix. On or about November 3, 2006, during a consensually recorded meeting, Mohamad Shnewer and CW-1 discussed Serdar Tatar providing a map of Fort Dix. Shnewer also said that individuals likely to attend another trip to the Poconos included Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, Shain Duka, Serdar Tatar, and Agron Abdullahu. When CW-1 mentioned that he might have a source who could supply firearms, Shnewer expressed interest. On or about November 9, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone conversation with Serdar Tatar during which Tatar indicated that he would provide the map of Fort Dix to CW-1 shortly. On or about November 12, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Serdar Tatar during which Tatar explained that he would acquire the map of Fort Dix from his father’s restaurant. Tatar acknowledged that he was “in” the plan to attack Fort Dix, stating “I’m in, honestly I’m in.” However, Tatar cautioned CW-1 that they, the group, needed to ensure that their families would be protected. Tatar described a place at Fort Dix they could target that would cause a power outage and allow for an easier attack on the military personnel there. At the very end of the meeting, Tatar questioned CW-1 about whether CW-1 was a “Fed”—meaning a law enforcement officer. On or about November 13, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Mohamad Shnewer. Toward the end of the call, Shnewer said that he was coming to CW-1’s residence. CW-1 then consensually recorded that meeting. During the meeting, Shnewer and CW-1 discussed Serdar Tatar acquiring the map of Fort Dix, machine guns, and the upcoming trip to the Poconos where the group would train. Shnewer also told CW-1 that he hid his firearms inside the air conditioning unit at his house. Shnewer reiterated that Shain Duka and Dritan Duka knew of the plan and would be participating. On or about November 14, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Eljvir Duka during which CW-1 and Eljvir Duka discussed Serdar Tatar potentially acquiring a map of Fort Dix. When CW-1 repeated Tatar’s concerns about the need to take care of family before the attacks, Eljvir Duka responded that “Allah” will take care of Tatar’s family. CW-1 and Eljvir Duka also discussed the need to use coded language when discussing the upcoming trip to the Poconos. In a possible effort to determine whether CW-1 was a law enforcement officer, on November 15, 2006, Serdar Tatar contacted a sergeant with the Philadelphia Police Department and stated that he had been approached by an individual who had pressured him to acquire maps of Fort Dix. Tatar also told the police officer that he did not supply the map and was fearful that the incident was terrorist related. The sergeant telephoned the FBI in Tatar’s presence. The next day, on November 16, 2006, Serdar Tatar told CW-1 during a consensually monitored telephone call that Serdar Tatar would supply CW-1 with a map of Fort Dix. On or about November 27, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Serdar Tatar during which Tatar said that too many people were in the restaurant for Tatar to take the map of Fort Dix. On or about November 28, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Serdar Tatar. During the meeting, Tatar acknowledged that if he were to provide a map of Fort Dix he could be deported. Tatar also expressed his willingness to participate by providing the map, even in the face of significant consequences: Later in the evening of November 28, 2006, Serdar Tatar called CW-1 when CW-1 was not at home (a call, therefore, that was not recorded) and stated, in substance and in part, that Tatar had left a package for CW-1 at the guard shack outside of CW-1’s residence. This call was unrecorded. CW-1 then called Tatar back from CW-1’s residence while consensually recording the call. Tatar immediately asked CW-1, “You get it brother?” CW-1 then asked Tatar where Tatar had put the map. Tatar then described the location where he had hidden the map. After the call, CW-1 went to the location described by Tatar and found a map labeled “Cantonment Area Fort Dix, NJ” ( On or about November 29, 2006, CW-1 turned the map Serdar Tatar had provided over to law enforcement officers who made copies of it and returned the original to CW-1. Law enforcement officers also reviewed CW-1’s call log on CW-1’s cell phone and observed that CW-1 had received a telephone call at 10:51 On or about November 30, 2006, during a consensually recorded telephone call, CW-1 informed Mohamad Shnewer that Serdar Tatar had provided the map of Fort Dix. Shnewer stated that he would come see the map shortly. On or about December 1, 2006, CW-2 consensually recorded a meeting with Shain Duka, Dritan Duka, and Eljvir Duka during which the firearms needed for the upcoming trip to the Poconos were discussed. Dritan Duka said the group had a shotgun and a .357 magnum firearm, which they had purchased on the black market. Shain Duka explained that they hid this weapon. Eljvir Duka said they also had a small automatic weapon. On or about December 7, 2006, law enforcement officers with the FBI interviewed Serdar Tatar. Tatar provided his cell phone number as 856-520-4291—the same number law enforcement officers had observed previously on the call log of CW-1’s cell phone. Tatar falsely told the interviewing officers that he was not a part of the plot to attack Fort Dix and did not know any of the parties that may be involved. Tatar denied falsely three times that he had provided a map of Fort Dix to anyone. On or about December 8, 2006, during a consensually recorded meeting, Mohamad Shnewer confirmed that Serdar Tatar had told Shnewer that Tatar had given CW-1 the map of Fort Dix. Shnewer also stated that they had missed an opportunity to attack U.S. military personnel during the Army–Navy football game that had been played recently in Philadelphia. On or about December 27, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Mohamad Shnewer during which Shnewer informed CW-1 that the trip to the Poconos was scheduled for February 1, 2007. Shnewer further stated that he would take the map of Fort Dix from CW-1. On or about December 28, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Shain Duka and Eljvir Duka. During the call, Eljvir Duka told CW-1 that the Pocono trip was scheduled for February 1, 2007 and that they had already rented a house. On or about December 29, 2006, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Mohamad Shnewer during which Shnewer reviewed the map of Fort Dix. Shnewer took the map from CW-1 and placed it in his mother’s car. Later, when Eljvir Duka joined the meeting, CW-1 discussed Serdar Tatar providing the map of Fort Dix. After Eljvir Duka left the meeting, Shnewer told CW-1 that Eljvir Duka had said that Fort Dix was a good target. Shnewer also stated that he was setting money aside to buy a fully automatic machine gun from CW-1’s source. Shnewer acknowledged the illegality of such a weapon, stating “it is forbidden to use fully automatic” and that the penalty was imprisonment. On or about January 5, 2007, CW-2 consensually recorded a meeting with Eljvir Duka and Serdar Tatar during which Eljvir Duka discussed the upcoming Pocono trip and stated that it had been scheduled for February 1, 2007. On or about January 7, 2007, during a consensually recorded telephone call with Mohamad Shnewer, CW-1 expressed concern that SHNEWER’s mother might find the map of Fort Dix that Shnewer had placed earlier in his mother’s car. Shnewer replied that he had hidden the map. On or about January 16, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Mohamad Shnewer during which Shnewer made arrangements with CW-1 to travel to the Poconos. On or about January 19, 2007, CW-2 consensually recorded a meeting with Eljvir Duka, Dritan Duka, and Shain Duka during which the Pocono trip and firearms were discussed. Dritan Duka explained that the group had four firearms. Eljvir Duka also said that they had a 9-mm handgun, an assault rifle, and a semiautomatic assault weapon. Dritan Duka explained that Agron Abdullahu brought the rifle and ammunition to them because he had a license for the weapon. Eljvir, Shain, and Dritan Duka all explained that they could not have firearms because they did not have “green cards.” During the consensually recorded meeting, Shain Duka identified the individuals who would be going to the Poconos, which included Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, Shain Duka, CW-2, Agron Abdullahu, Shnewer, and CW-1. CW-2 was told that everyone would meet at Dritan Duka’s house on January 31, 2007, sleep over, and then leave for the Poconos early the next morning. Between January 31 and February 1, 2007, law enforcement officers conducted video and photographic surveillance of Dritan Duka’s residence in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. Law enforcement officers observed Agron Abdullahu and Dritan Duka carrying dark-colored rifle-style bags into Dritan Duka’s residence at separate times ( CW-2 traveled to 2717 Eagleview Drive, Gouldsboro, Pennsylvania on February 1, 2007 with Shain Duka, Eljvir Duka, Dritan Duka, Agron Abdullahu, and others—the location of the house the Duka brothers rented for the Pocono trip ( On or about February 2, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Mohamad Shnewer and the two made arrangements to travel to the Poconos 2 days later. On the same day, law enforcement officers conducted video surveillance at Pennsylvania State Game Land 127—the same firearms range captured on the January 3, 2006 DVD described previously—and observed Dritan Duka, Shain Duka, and Eljvir Duka all firing weapons from various positions. Law enforcement officers subsequently learned that these individuals were using an SKS semiautomatic rifle, a Beretta Storm semiautomatic rifle, a Mossberg 12-gauge pump shotgun, and a 9-mm Beretta handgun. Law enforcement officers observed Shain Duka directing all the participants as they were setting up their shooting stations. Law enforcement officers also observed Agron Abdullahu teaching several individuals where to place the shotgun when firing it. Law enforcement officers observed Dritan Duka watching all the participants as they were shooting. On or about February 3, 2007, a surveillance camera at the firing range again captured Eljvir Duka, Shain Duka, Dritan Duka, and others firing weapons ( On or about February 4, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded conversations undertaken during his trip to the Poconos with Mohamad Shnewer. On the way, Shnewer recounted the earlier trip he made to the Poconos and stated that the group had used five firearms and that each shooter had fired approximately 400 bullets. CW-1 also again expressed concern that someone might find the map of Fort Dix that Shnewer had taken from CW-1. Shnewer replied that he had hidden the map in a room in his house that no one else enters. At one point, Shnewer remarked that the acquisition of RPGs by the group would increase the number of killings the group could cause. Mohamad Shnewer and CW-1 arrived at the rental house in the Poconos on or about February 4, 2007. CW-1 continued to consensually record once at the rental house ( In the early hours of February 5, 2007, while CW-1 was still consensually recording conversations involving the targets at the rental house, several members of the group engaged in a discussion concerning bombs, nitroglycerin, and the explosive C-4. Later in the day, CW-1 consensually recorded the group shooting weapons. That afternoon, CW-1 and Mohamad Shnewer left the rental house and CW-1 consensually recorded the conversations that took place during their trip back to New Jersey. On the way, Shnewer again identified which members of the group would participate in the attacks on the U.S. military, namely, Shain Duka, Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, CW-1, himself, and a younger brother of the Dukas. Shnewer also said that they could attack two American warships next year when they docked in the Port of Philadelphia. In addition, Shnewer discussed the weapons the group would need, saying “[t]he machine gun, we are going to buy the machine gun, but we need other than the machine gun. Something else.” On or about February 8, 2007, CW-2 consensually recorded conversations during CW-2’s return trip to New Jersey with Eljvir Duka and Dritan Duka. During this trip, Eljvir Duka and Dritan Duka discussed the need to train so that they could go overseas on “jihad.” Eljvir Duka indicated that the Pocono trip had been a training mission. He also stated: “ . . .and at the end when it comes to defending your religion, when someone is trying attacks your religion, your way of life, then you go jihad.” On or about February 18, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone conversation with Dritan Duka during which Dritan Duka and CW-1 discussed “training” by playing paint ball with paint ball guns. Later that evening, CW-1 unexpectedly encountered Mohamad Shnewer at a local store and was, therefore, unable to consensually record their conversation. CW-1 reported to law enforcement officers that Shnewer asked whether CW-1 had heard from CW-1’s source for firearms and other weapons. CW-1 said that the source had just returned from Egypt. CW-1 observed that Shnewer appeared happy to learn that the source had recently returned from Egypt. On or about February 26, 2007, Dritan Duka invited CW-1 to participate in a paint ball training exercise with Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, and their younger brother. CW-1 consensually recorded this exercise. Shortly before the training, CW-1 met with Dritan Duka and Eljvir Duka at Eljvir and Shain Duka’s residence to prepare for the training. CW-1 and Eljvir Duka discussed CW-1’s source for weapons, including AK-47 machine guns. Eljvir Duka asked CW-1 if CW-1’s source could be trusted. Eljvir Duka explained that “…I had one brother buy [a gun] for me with a Pennsylvania license. It’s my gun but he bought it under his name.” Eljvir Duka then relayed to CW-1 the fact that Dritan Duka had previously attempted to purchase an AK-47 machine gun from an individual in Camden, New Jersey. Dritan Duka did not ultimately buy the weapon because he believed that he was being set up by the FBI. Dritan Duka then joined the conversation and stated, “I’m telling you, I almost bought a AK- 47 from an agent.” Eljvir Duka then said, “Me right now we have the shotgun, we have the one which you was talking about, and we have the handgun .357 revolver.” Eljvir Duka also expressed his knowledge that AK-47 machine guns are illegal: “You can’t buy fully automatic… illegal.” When CW-1 said to let CW-1 know if they wanted any weapons, Eljvir Duka responded: “Right now, ah, we want automatic hand guns and ah, my cousin wants one. Handgun.” Later during the consensually recorded meeting, Eljvir Duka brought up the topic of CW-1’s source for firearms and said, “Don’t tell him about the AK-47 first. The handgun yes.” The paint ball exercise on February 26, 2007 occurred in a wooded area near Eljvir Duka and Shain Duka’s residence. While CW-1 recorded it, Dritan Duka remarked that paint ball is good training for an attack, “In military they use this in U.S. Army… It’s how they train you.” Shain Duka also agreed that playing paint ball is good tactical training. On or about March 9, 2007, CW-2 consensually recorded a meeting with Dritan Duka, Shain Duka, Serdar Tatar, and others during which Dritan Duka, Shain Duka, and Serdar Tatar discussed preparing for their operation in a military fashion. On or about March 10, 2007, CW-2 consensually recorded conversations during a meeting with Dritan Duka and Shain Duka. When CW-2 asked Dritan Duka and Shain Duka about Serdar Tatar, Shain Duka explained that TATAR wanted to join the U.S. Army so that he could kill U.S. soldiers from the “inside.” When CW-2 asked about Tatar again, Dritan Duka remarked, “He had only one mind, how to kill American soldiers.” Later during the consensually recorded conversation, Dritan Duka and Shain Duka said that instead of waging jihad overseas, they could do so in the United States. Shain Duka also stated, “Because as far as people we have enough, 7 people. And we are all crazy. That’s what is needed . . . .” Later in the conversation, Dritan Duka also stated, “For people, 7 people are a lot. We can do a lot of things with 7 people . . . We can do a lot of damage with 7 people . . . you do big things with 7 people.” Toward the end of the meeting, Shain Duka suggested that they could also join the Army and “do them, we can.” On or about March 15, 2007, Dritan Duka invited CW-1 to participate in paint ball training with Dritan Duka, Shain Duka, and the Duka’s younger brother. CW-1 met Dritan Duka and Shain Duka at Eljvir Duka and Shain Duka’s residence to prepare for the paint ball training. After the paint ball exercise, CW-1 traveled to Shain Duka’s and Eljvir Duka’s residence in Cherry Hill where Dritan Duka gave CW-1 a business card on the back of which Dritan Duka wrote, among other things, “A-K 47 Kalichnikov.” CW-1 consensually recorded this meeting, which captured Dritan Duka’s conversation with CW-1 about CW-1’s source for firearms. During the consensually recorded meeting, Dritan Duka again confirmed that he owned a black gun and a shotgun but acknowledged the illegality of doing so because he didn’t have a green card. Dritan Duka also said, “I tell you now I need AK47s. If you can get them, give me two . . . AK-47, Kalichnikov, Russian.” Dritan Duka then cautioned CW-1, “AK-47. Just don’t talk on the phone.” The consensual recording also captured CW-1 asking Dritan Duka to write down the name of the firearm Dritan Duka wanted to buy from CW-1’s source. On or about March 16, 2007, CW-1 turned over to the FBI the business card on which Dritan Duka had written “A-K 47 Kalichnikov.” Later that day, CW-1 consensually recorded a conversation with Mohamad Shnewer during which CW-1 and Shnewer discussed Dritan Duka’s request to buy AK-47 Russian machine guns. Shnewer asked CW-1 to have his source bring another AK-47 for Shnewer to purchase in addition to the two guns that Dritan Duka would purchase and the one gun that CW-1 claimed he would purchase. Specifically, Shnewer said, “Let him bring four. I know these guns as I used it in my country and I shot with it.” Shnewer also confirmed his knowledge about the illegality of such weapons: “It is not, there is nothing legal about it.” Shnewer went on to say, “[t]he beauty of this one when we buy it now, is that you can go train on it and you can leave it on the semiautomatic setting, one shot at a time.” When CW-1 and Shnewer discussed where to keep the AK-47s, Shnewer said that he would keep them at his residence in the attic. Also during the meeting on March 16, 2007, Mohamad Shnewer said that Dritan Duka and Eljvir Duka knew the reason why they were getting the firearms. When CW-1 asked Shnewer whether Shnewer had changed his mind about Fort Dix, Shnewer responded: Shnewer also said that “everyone that was in the Poconos less one or two of them” were part of the group that would attack the U.S. military. On or about March 23, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a conversation during a meeting with Dritan Duka. CW-1 told Dritan Duka that CW-1’s source would provide a list of weapons that the source was selling, which CW-1 would then provide to Dritan Duka. CW-1 further stated that the source did not want to meet the Dukas. Dritan Duka remarked that it was better that the Dukas not meet CW-1’s source. Also on or about March 23, 2007, CW-2 consensually recorded a conversation during a meeting with Dritan Duka, Eljvir Duka, Shain Duka, and others. Shain Duka, Eljvir Duka, and Dritan Duka discussed Fort Dix and the nearby air force base. They also told CW-2 that Serdar Tatar’s father owned a restaurant near Fort Dix and made deliveries onto the base. On or about March 26, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Dritan Duka during which CW-1 explained that CW-1’s source could not give CW-1 the list of firearms that weekend. On or about March 28, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Dritan Duka during which CW-1 explained that his source had given CW-1 a list of the firearms that his source had available for sale. Dritan Duka said that he would call later and instruct CW-1 where to meet. Later, Dritan Duka called CW-1 (a call that CW-1 was unable to consensually record), instructing CW-1 to meet at a convenience store on Route 38 near Cooper Landing Road in Cherry Hill. CW-1 consensually recorded the ensuing meeting with Dritan Duka during which CW-1 handed the list of weapons to Dritan Duka. Law enforcement officers retained a photocopy of the list before CW-1 gave it to Dritan Duka. The list identified the following weapons for sale: “AK-47, M-16, M-60 machine gun, RPG, rocket, handgun semiautomatic, Sig Sauer 9 mm, Smith Wesson 9 mm, Smith Wesson revolver.” The list also contained prices for the weapons. On or about March 30, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Mohamad Shnewer during which Shnewer asked, “[d]id you speak to the guy from Baltimore?” CW-1 explained that when Dritan Duka decided how many weapons they would need, CW-1 would instruct the source to come with the weapons. Shnewer said that $500—the price listed for the AK-47—was a “very good” price. On or about April 5, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a telephone call with Mohamad Shnewer during which Shnewer asked CW-1 about the delivery of the weapons. CW-1 explained to Shnewer that Dritan Duka had to first provide CW-1 with the type and number of weapons Dritan Duka wanted to buy. On or about April 6, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Dritan Duka, among others. Dritan Duka stated to CW-1, “The list. I need all the, the AKs. The M16s and all the handguns.” Dritan Duka then sought reassurance that CW-1’s source could be trusted by asking CW-1 whether the source was religious and whether “there something they need to know.” CW-1 asked, “Like what?” Dritan Duka responded, “To that list there was some stuff on the list that was heavy shit… the RPG.” Dritan Duka then said, During the meeting on April 6, 2007, Dritan Duka also expressed the need for secrecy: CW-1 and Dritan Duka also discussed how the sale of the weapons would take place. CW-1 said that the source would bring the weapons to New Jersey. In response, Dritan Duka said, “It’s better, it’s better if I get it over here [meaning New Jersey] cause we got no licenses.” On or about April 7, 2007, CW-2 consensually recorded a meeting with Eljvir Duka, Dritan Duka, and Shain Duka at Dritan Duka’s residence. At one point, Eljvir Duka and Dritan Duka went upstairs to use a computer. After a period of time, Eljvir Duka and Dritan Duka came back downstairs and discussed a high-powered firearm they were reviewing on the computer and how a round fired from the weapon could penetrate a soldier’s helmet. On or about April 13, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Dritan Duka and Mohamad Shnewer in which CW-1 responded that the source would bring the weapons in a couple of weeks. CW-1 told Dritan Duka and Mohamed Shnewer that they needed to have money, to which Dritan Duka responded that he had the money right now. CW-1 promised to call Dritan Duka when the source was ready to bring the weapons to New Jersey. CW-1 also told Shnewer about the weapons Dritan Duka had ordered. Shnewer discussed the RPG and the AK-47s, specifically referencing “Kalichnikov.” On or about April 27, 2007, CW-1 consensually recorded a meeting with Dritan Duka, during which Dritan Duka and CW-1 discussed the purchase of the weapons from CW-1;s source. CW-1 also consensually recorded a meeting with Mohamad Shnewer during which Shnewer told CW-1 that he only wanted to purchase the AK-47 machine gun at this time and to hold off on the sale of the RPG. Surveillance Activities Defined In the end, it was clear that these individuals were intent on an attack on a U.S. military installation. Understand that their Fortunately, one citizen made the right call to set the wheels in motion for law enforcement to intervene. Unfortunately, most, if not all, of their preoperations arguably would have gone undetected and a successful attack to an unknown degree would have occurred. This plot differs from the others in that it was an FBI sting, in which a single individual, Farooque Ahmed, believing he was working with al-Qa’ida operatives, carried out reconnaissance on the Washington, DC, Metro ( Ahmed, a naturalized U.S. citizen from Pakistan, had become increasingly radicalized by developments in the Middle East and southwest Asia and wanted to join al-Qa’ida’s global jihad ( Ahmed was assigned to conduct surveillance and photograph Metrorail stations around Washington, DC, which were to be the targets ( Ahmed had been influenced by radical American cleric Anwar al-Awlaki, who had preached in northern Virginia until he fled to Yemen. Awlaki urged Muslims in the United States to carry out terrorist attacks, and Ahmed listened to his sermons online. Ahmed planned to carry out a rush-hour attack because it would cause the most casualties, clearly indicating that his objective was a high body count. Ahmed scouted several Metrorail targets, including the Arlington Cemetery, Courthouse, Crystal City, and Pentagon City stations. The Arlington Cemetery Station is on the Metro’s Blue Line—one stop north of the Pentagon City station. The Crystal City and Pentagon City stations are on the Blue Line—one and two stops from the Pentagon City station. The Courthouse station is in Arlington, Virginia—on the Orange Line just before it connects to the Blue Line. All of these stations are used heavily by military personnel commuting to and from the Pentagon, and Ahmed’s expressed desire was to “kill as many military personnel as possible.” Of interest is Ahmed’s purposeful avoidance of the Pentagon City station itself by selecting the two stations above and two below the Pentagon. This is directly contributable to the “hard target” the Pentagon presents, as well as known or perceived countersurveillance teams in and around the immediate area. Although he told undercover agents he was willing to be a martyr, Ahmed planned to carry out multiple bombings. He had no terrorist training but prepared himself for jihad by training in martial arts and the use of firearms. Ahmed began to plan the operation in April 2010. He told undercover agents that he would be ready to begin his attacks in January 2011 after he completed a pilgrimage to Mecca in January. He said that an attack carried out during the afternoon rush hour, between 4:00 and 5:00 Security measures at Metro stations included CCTV, random patrols by Metro Transit Police Department officers, and a measure introduced in early 2010 called Blue TIDE (Terrorism Identification and Deterrence Effort), which teamed police officers with law enforcement officers from other agencies to conduct high-visibility, antiterrorism shows of force at Metro stations. Additionally, Visible Intermodal Prevention and Response teams of DHS–TSA’s office of law enforcement worked these transportation areas with canine and behavioral detection officers working in concert. After Ahmed’s arrest, the Washington Metro Area Transit Authority implemented random passenger screening and increased emphasis on enlisting passengers’ assistance in identifying suspicious behavior. Ahmed’s quest to join violent jihad first came to the attention of the authorities in January 2010 as a result of a tip from a source inside the Muslim community. The FBI created the elaborate sting operation to assess Ahmed’s intentions and capabilities. Timothy McVeigh was an American militant who carried out the Oklahoma City bombing on April 19, 1995 ( McVeigh was the middle child in a blue-collar family in rural New York State, and he expressed an interest in guns from an early age. He graduated from high school in June 1986 and spent a short period at a local business college. Around this time he first read McVeigh returned to New York but was unable to find steady work. He reunited with Terry Nichols and Michael Fortier, friends from his days in the army, and sold guns at fairs throughout the United States. In March 1993 he drove to Waco, Texas, to observe the ongoing FBI siege of the Branch Davidian compound. He viewed the U.S. government’s actions there as illegal, and it was during this time that McVeigh, Nichols, and Fortier made contact with members of militia groups in the Midwest. In September 1994, McVeigh began plotting actively to destroy the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City. It is this author’s understanding that McVeigh also conducted reconnaissance of the Minneapolis–St. Paul Federal Building, as well as others in various states, before deciding on Oklahoma City. Over the next 6 months, McVeigh and Nichols planned the bombing and acquired several tons (108 bags) of ammonium nitrate fertilizer, which, combined with fuel oil (three 55-gallon drums of drag-racing fuel), would provide the explosive power for the bomb. McVeigh and his co-conspirators used soup cans on a kitchen table to portray the truck bomb layout to include how to shape the charge for a maximum explosive effect into the target. While much of McVeigh’s movements and activities prior to the attack are of suspect, it is with certainty he, and likely his coconspirator, was only able to establish the logistics of the attack through careful planning and surveillance of the target. McVeigh was a meticulous sort who left nothing to chance and reconnoitered the attack site on multiple occasions. On April 19, 1995, the second anniversary of the deadly fire that ended the Branch Davidian siege, McVeigh parked the truck containing the bomb in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Building ( At 9:02 The two were indicted in August 1995, and Attorney General Janet Reno stated that the government would seek the death penalty against both. McVeigh’s month-long trial began in April 1997, and Fortier testified against him as part of a plea agreement. It took the jury 3 days to reach a unanimous guilty verdict. McVeigh was sentenced to death on June 13, 1997. Later that year, Terry Nichols was found guilty of conspiracy and eight counts of involuntary manslaughter and was sentenced to life in prison. On June 11, 2001, McVeigh became the first federal prisoner to be executed since 1963. During the past decade, dramatic changes in the nature of the domestic terrorist threat have been witnessed. In the 1990s, right-wing extremism overtook left-wing terrorism as the most dangerous domestic terrorist threat to the United States. During the past several years, however, special-interest extremism, as characterized by the Animal Liberation Front (ALF), the Earth Liberation Front (ELF), and related extremists, has emerged as a serious domestic terrorist threat. Special-interest terrorism differs from traditional right-wing and left-wing terrorism in that extremist special-interest groups seek to resolve specific issues rather than affect widespread political change. Such extremists conduct acts of politically motivated violence to force segments of society, including the general public, to change attitudes about issues considered important to the extremists’ causes. Generally, extremist groups engage in much activity that is protected by constitutional guarantees of free speech and assembly. Law enforcement only becomes involved when the volatile talk of these groups transgresses into unlawful action. The FBI estimates that the ALF/ELF and related groups have committed more than 1100 criminal acts in the United States since 1976, resulting in damages estimated conservatively at approximately $110 million. The ALF, established in Great Britain in the mid-1970s, is a loosely organized extremist movement committed to ending the abuse and exploitation of animals. The American branch of the ALF began its operations in the late 1970s. Individuals become members of the ALF not by filing paperwork or paying dues, but simply by engaging in “direct action” against companies or individuals who, in their view, utilize animals for research or economic gain or do some manner of business with those companies or individuals. “Direct action” generally occurs in the form of criminal activity designed to cause economic loss or to destroy the victims’ company operations or property. The extremists’ efforts have broadened to include a multinational campaign of harassment, intimidation, and coercion against animal-testing companies and any companies or individuals doing business with those targeted companies. Huntingdon Life Sciences (HLS) is one such company. The “secondary” or “tertiary” targeting of companies that have business or financial relationships with the target company typically takes the form of fanatical harassment of employees and interference with normal business operations under the threat of escalating tactics or even violence. The harassment is designed to inflict increasing economic damage until the company is forced to cancel its contracts or business relationship with the original target. Internationally, the best example of this trend involves Great Britain’s Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty (SHAC) organization, a more organized subgroup within the extremist animal rights movement. SHAC has targeted the animal-testing company HLS and any companies with which HLS conducts business. While the SHAC organization attempts to portray itself as an information service or even a media outlet, it is aligned closely with the ALF and its pattern of criminal activities—many of which are taken against companies and individuals selected as targets by SHAC and posted on the Internet website of SHAC. Investigation of SHAC-related criminal activity has revealed a pattern of vandalism, arsons, animal releases, harassing telephone calls, threats, and attempts to disrupt the business activities of not only HLS, but of all companies doing business with HLS. Among others, these companies include Bank of America, Marsh USA, Deloitte and Touche, and HLS investors, such as Stephens, Inc., which terminated their business relationships completely with HLS as a result of SHAC activities. Examples of SHAC activities include publishing on its website as a regular feature “Targets of the Week” for followers to target with harassing telephone calls and e-mails in order to discourage that company or individual from doing business with HLS. In recent years, the Animal Liberation Front and the Earth Liberation Front have become the most active criminal extremist elements in the United States ( Activists are believed to engage in significant intelligence gathering against potential targets, including the review of industry/trade publications and other open source information, photographic/video surveillance of potential targets, obtaining proprietary or confidential information about intended victim companies through theft or from sympathetic insiders, and posting details about potential targets on the Internet for other extremists to use as they see fit. The animal rights extremist and ecoterrorism movements are unlike traditional criminal enterprises that are often structured and organized. They exhibit remarkable levels of security awareness when engaged in criminal activity and are typically very knowledgeable of law enforcement techniques and the limitations imposed on law enforcement. There is a popular video of an ELF/ALF member, Rodney Coronado, attempting to incite students with ELF and ALF rhetoric to commit direct action activism and then demonstrating to students at Washington, DC-based American University how to make an incendiary device to commit arson for approximately $2. Coronado thinks he and ALF/ELF terrorists will be heroes 100 years from now While the radical environmental movement is on the decline, animal and environmental rights extremists continue to pose a threat to American public safety. Domestic terrorism attacks outnumber international ones seven to one in the United States (LaFree, Dugan, Fogg, and Scott, 2006), and animal and environmental rights extremists compose a dangerous segment of domestic extremist movements (Smith, 1994). To date, most terrorism research has focused on international terrorism (Lum, Kennedy, and Sherley, 2006), and research on domestic political extremists has focused mostly on far-right extremists (Blazak, 2001). For example, Gruenewald, Freilich, and Chermak (2009) identified over 320 studies on far-right extremists in the fields of criminology, political science, sociology, and terrorism, while a review of the literature on animal and environmental rights extremists in these disciplines found less than 70 studies. The criminal activities of these extremists are thus a neglected research topic.