Lead-free solders used in electronic components are predominately composed of alloys rich in tin. Significant quantities of partially oxidized tin alloy are generated during typical processing operations. The scrap has generally been considered to be tin oxide and suitable for recovery using electrolysis or reduction with charcoal and fuel oil at temperatures above 1000°C. This experimental work examines alternative processes for the recovery of metallic tin from this scrap. Microstructural and chemical characterisation of the scrap revealed that metallic tin was the predominant phase and was surrounded by a cover layer of tin oxide ranging in thickness from a few μm (micrometres) to 100μm. It was shown that even the thin layer of tin oxide prevented the coalescence of the metallic tin and inhibited recovery. It was concluded that removal of the oxide layer is the key step required in recovering the metal. The removal of the tin oxide was attempted using mechanical attrition (grinding in a ball mill) and chemical dissolution of the tin oxide layer by means of hydrochloric acid (HCl). The results of attrition in a ball mill indicated that the tin oxide covering layer was effectively reduced from the material over 53μm and the removed oxide was concentrated in particles less than this size. Furthermore, the remaining tin oxide layer can be almost completely removed by an acidic treatment with 2M HCl at room temperature and agitation for 30min. A flow sheet for the recovery of the metallic tin is presented below based on the obtained experimental results.Wave soldering is a method of soldering the joints on the underside of a printed circuit board ( A literature review indicated that there are no specific pyrometallurgical processes related to the recovery of “Dry Black”. However, processes of tin oxide cassiterite (SnO Studies related to the pyrometallurgical treatment of tin scrap are also reported in the literature. A comprehensive experimental study on the phase equilibrium between Sn–Fe alloy and the CaO–SiO Recent efforts to develop an appropriate tin recycling hydrometallurgy technology, at the wave soldering factories, have been reported. The methods include electrolysis of dissolved scrap in alkaline (NaOH) or an acidic medium (HCl or/and HNO The aim of this research is the characterization of “Dry Black” and analysis of methods for recovery of tin as metal from this material. During the characterization it was found that a large proportion of the “Dry Black” corresponded to metallic tin (> The “Dry Black”, which was formed from Sn–0.7Cu–0.05Ni solder alloys, was supplied from wave solder processing dross by Nihon Superior Malaysia. The colour of the “Dry Black” is probably more correctly referred to as brown and the appearance of the oxide is as shown in The samples were analysed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (JXA-8200 EPMA and JSM-6460LA, JEOL). The qualitatively composition of the observed phases was obtained using Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The results are show in The metallic tin corresponded to a large proportion of the observed samples as is shown in The ICP-MS elemental composition analyses of the raw “Dry Black” and at the different screen sizes are shown in Given that the predominant material was metallic tin surrounded by tin oxide, the direction of the experiments targeted the following possible processes: Smelting and coalescence of the metallic particles and physical separation of the liquid metal phase to the solid oxide phase. Physical separation of tin oxide by attrition and size separation. Combination of physical separation of tin oxide by attrition and chemical dissolution of the remaining tin oxide layer. The simple process using mechanical liberation of metal from oxides and gravitations techniques is not an option because the specific gravity of tin (7.31 The following sections describe the experimental procedures. The characterization of the sample indicated that metallic tin is the predominant phase. Thus, it will be expected that heating up the sample at temperatures above the melting point of metallic tin will produce a physical separation of liquid tin and tin oxide, with the metallic tin collected in the bottom of the sample container in a similar way to what occurs in the “Sweating” process. Following this reasoning, 10 The sample inside the tube was heated in the tube furnace, under various conditions as shown in “Dry Black” was wet ground for 10 Among the different chemicals reported in the literature to dissolve oxide surface layers from the metal are hydrochloric, sulphuric and phosphoric acids ( “Dry Black” in as-supplied and ground conditions was used as the sample. Dissolution experiments of oxide layer in “Dry Black” by using 2 The experimental results shown in Additional heat treatment experiments included “Dry Black” mixed with pure tin in the ratios 30/70, 50/50 and 70/30. Once again, the metallic tin did not coalesce. Microscopic observations of the sample after the heat treatment (600 The size distribution and chemical analysis of the “Dry Black” after wet milling are shown in The size distribution of the milled material is shown in These results suggest that tin oxide was effectively removed from the intermediate sizes and was concentrated in particles of a size < The grinded “Dry Black” was heated in the vacuumed ampoule. Only the particles larger than 500 This observation was corroborated with an additional experiment using high purity metallic tin. Tin pellets of 5 The chemical oxide dissolution tests were carried out for the grinded samples in the size between 50 The present attrition and acidic treatment are effective in reducing thin oxide layer from “Dry Black” with relatively low dissolution of the metallic phase. The results indicated that even a thin oxide layer prevents the coalescence of metallic tin. For the current material, grinding processes reduced the content of oxide that is collected in the small size of < The flow sheet of the proposed process is shown in The sizes between 53 The tin as Sn “Dry Black” has generally been considered in the industry to be mostly composed of tin oxide and is suitable for reduction at temperatures above 1000 The advantage of the present proposed process could enable the treatment of 75 The present work described and tested the general aspects of a methodology for recovery of the metal present in “Dry Black”. The experimental work can be complemented with detailed tests to determine the optimum grinding and acidic treatment variables. In addition, the possibility of using the treated materials as a source in the production of industrial soldering paste would also require further investigation. The authors would like to thank Nihon Superior Co. Ltd. The authors also thank the technical staff of Nihon Superior Centre for the Manufacture of Electronic Materials (NS CMEM), School of Mechanical & Mining Engineering, The University of Queensland. The authors acknowledge Mr. K. Sweatman from Nihon Superior Co. Ltd. for valuable help and discussions.