The objective of the study was to prepare ursolic acid (UA) nanoparticles using the supercritical anti-solvent (SAS) process and evaluate its physicochemical properties and oral bioavailability. The effects of four process variables, pressure, temperature, drug concentration and drug solution flow rate, on drug particle formation during SAS process, were investigated. Particles with mean particle size ranging from 139.2±19.7 to 1039.8±65.2nm were obtained by varying the process parameters. The UA was characterised by scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, thermal gravimetric analysis, specific surface area, dissolution test and bioavailability test. It was concluded that physicochemical properties and bioavailability of crystalline UA could be improved by physical modification, such as particle size reduction and generation of amorphous state using SAS process. Further, SAS process was a powerful methodology for improving the physicochemical properties and bioavailability of UA.Ursolic acid (UA) is a pentacyclic triterpenoid in nature. It widely exists in food products and in more than 120 plant species ( Oral bioavailability is limited by factors, such as membrane permeability, the solubility of the drug, and so on. In particular, the solubility of a poorly water-soluble drug is a critical factor for its oral bioavailability. UA is a natural compound with very poor solubility, which leads to a low bioavailability ( Many approaches have been developed to improve solubility and to enhance the oral bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs (e.g., salt formation) ( The supercritical anti-solvent (SAS) process is a micronisation technology developed in recent years. It is suitable for preparing micronic and nanometric particles of pharmaceutical compounds or biologically active substances because of the continuous, adjustable solvent power and selectivity obtained by varying process parameters, such as pressure and temperature, etc. ( The purpose of this study was to prepare nanoparticles of UA by SAS process and evaluate their physicochemical properties and oral bioavailability. The parameters of SAS process and how they affect the morphology and particle size of nanoparticles have been studied, and then a series of analytical methods have been used to characterise the samples before and after the SAS processing. The study could provide a useful reference for the micronisation of triterpenoid compounds with similar structural and dissolution properties. High purity CO The schematic diagram of the SAS apparatus is from There are many factors which affect the mean particle size (MPS) of UA, including precipitation temperature, precipitation pressure, UA solution concentration, UA solution flow rate, type of solvent, composition of solvent, solvent to solid ratio, pore diameter of nozzle and CO The mean particle size (MPS) of processed samples was measured with DLS (ZetaPALS/90 plus; Brookhaven Instruments Corporation, Holtsville, NY) particle size analyser. Processed UA was suspended in filtered pure water and treated by sonication for 3 The morphology of the unprocessed and processed UA particles was determined by using SEM (Quanta 200, FEI, Hillsboro, OR). Particles of representative samples were sputter coated with a thin layer of gold–palladium (5–10 The unprocessed and processed UA were diluted with KBr mixing powder at 1% and pressed to obtain self-supporting disks, separately. Tablets for FTIR measurements were prepared by pressing the powder mixture at a load of 5 Thermal gravimetric analysis (TG) was performed using a TA instruments (New Castle, DE) TGA 2950 thermogravimetrical analyser. The experiment was performed with a heating rate of 5 X-ray diffraction patterns were collected in transmission using an X-ray diffractometer with a rotating anode (Philips, Xpert-Pro, The Netherlands) with Cu Kα Sample (120 The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area (SBET) was obtained using N Male Wistar rats (7 The rats were divided into two groups of five animals each. After anaesthesia with diethyl ether, the processed and unprocessed UA were administered to rats by oral gavage at a dosage of 100 The area under the drug concentration–time curve from zero to 12 The data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA) and the significance of the difference between means was determined by Duncan’s multiple range test ( Compared with unprocessed drug, the SEM images show plenty of very small submicron particles after the SAS process. From The experimental design and the collected data for MPS of micronised UA are summarised in The effect of temperature was analysed in experiments 1–4 in The effect of pressure was analysed in experiments 5–8 in Experiments 9–12 in Besides, different solution flow rates can also change the global composition solvent/CO The drug was also precipitated from ethanol at various drug concentrations in the range from 1.25 to 5 We performed some analyses on unprocessed and processed UA to obtain information on the change of physical and chemical structure after SAS processing. FTIR spectra of the unprocessed and processed UA (sample 13 and sample 2 in TG and DTG analyses were performed on the two samples of unprocessed and processed UA power. As indicated in the TG and DTG curve shown in To investigate further the crystalline structure of particles, XRD analysis was performed.   UA nanoparticles, with approximately 139.4 The authors thank anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and careful corrections. The authors also thank the National Key Technology R&D Program (2006BAD18B04), the China-Germany Inter-Governmental Cooperation Program (CHN3/028) and the Graduate Technological Innovation Program of Northeast Forestry University (2009) for financial support.