The effect of mannitol and 1,2-octanediol on gibbsite crystallization from seeded sodium aluminate liquor was investigated and compared. The inhibitory effect of mannitol increases with its concentration, in good agreement with other strong inhibitors. Low concentrations of 1,2-octanediol have no apparent influence on crystallization but above 1.0 mmol/L severe inhibition occurs with crystallization rate rapidly decreasing until completely stopped 2.0 mmol/L. Unlike with mannitol, the inhibition cannot be alleviated by doubling the seed amount or by adding oleic acid. Unseeded experiments also show that a high concentration of 1,2-octanediol inhibits Al(OH)3 nucleation while the influence of low concentration of 1,2-octanediol is negligible. 1,2-octanediol appears to be a unique inhibitor for alumina crystallization. The effect is evident below the critical micelle concentration of 1,2-octanediol in sodium aluminate solution indicating it is a molecular effect. Infrared spectroscopy indicates that the structure of the solution might be changed when the concentration of 1,2-octanediol is relatively high. Clearly the inhibition by mannitol derives from adsorption on the active surface sites, while inhibition by 1,2-octanediol appears to be due to changing the characteristic of sodium aluminate liquor.Organic compounds accumulate in the pregnant sodium aluminate liquor circulating in Bayer process. These impurities, which are derived from the degradation of humic and fulvic materials in bauxite or from process additives, vary greatly with bauxite source and process parameters. It is difficult to evaluate the influence of these compounds on Bayer process comprehensively and exactly. However, the results would be disastrous to gibbsite crystallization if they build up in the liquor. Considerable research has reported the behavior of these compounds in caustic sodium aluminate liquor and how to eliminate or alleviate their negative effect. The major component of these organic compound is sodium oxalate, which can lead to a fine gibbsite product and an overall crystallization rate decrease ( The inhibitory effect of most polyols or polycarboxylic acids, as those mentioned in the above literatures, is proportional to concentration, which can be interpreted fairly well with adsorption theory or modified models. However, 1,2-octanediol was incidentally found to be an exception. In present investigation, we compared the effect of 1,2-octanediol with mannitol (a typical polyol inhibitor) on gibbsite crystallization, and attempted to demonstrate that there might be other inhibition mechanism than adsorption. Distilled water was used to prepare all solutions. Aluminum hydroxide (industrial grade, supplied by Zhengzhou Research Institute of Aluminum Corporation of China of Limited) was washed, dried and then screened with the < Supersaturated sodium aluminate solution used for crystallization experiment was prepared by dissolving aluminum hydroxide in hot NaOH solution. After the aluminum hydroxide had completely dissolved, the solution was filtered twice and then diluted to the required volume. In all cases, the initial concentration of alkali (Na In the seeded experiments, 900 mL of sodium aluminate solution was transferred to a 1 L batch crystallizer, consisting of a stainless steel vessel with double jacket and an overhead stirrer. After the temperature of the solution reached 75 °C, a certain amount of additive was added to the solution and 10 min later the seed was charged and time started. The crystallization time was 10 h in all experiments. Four concentrations (0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 mmol/L) of 1,2-octanediol and mannitol were chosen in this investigation, in order to examine their effect on gibbsite crystallization, a blank was also undertaken. A seed mass ratio ( Samples were taken at intervals and centrifuged. Optically clear solution was used for aluminium and alkali analysis. Metallurgical industry standard method YB-817-75 was adopted for the determination of chemical components. This is a titrimetric method based on the work of Where Experiments were also carried out without addition of seed to investigate the effect of 1,2-octanediol on nucleation at room temperature. Three solutions, the blank, solutions containing 0.2 and 2.0 mmol/L 1,2-octanediol were transferred to 10 mL colorimetric tubes. These solutions were allowed to stand for 24 h then photographed. The surface tension of the sodium aluminate solution containing various concentrations of 1,2-octanediol was measured at 75 °C on a DT-102 interfacial tensiometer (Huakun Electronic Instrument Company Limited, Zibo, China). The surface tension of pure water was initially obtained for each experiment for instrument calibration and determination of the water purity. Between the measurement runs, the platinum ring was cleaned with acetone, pure water and flamed. Infrared spectra were obtained at 2 cm The inhibitory effect of various concentrations of mannitol is presented in  The effect of 1,2-octanediol on gibbsite crystallization from seeded liquor is shown in The effect of 1,2-octanediol on nucleation was evaluated qualitatively. Three unseeded solutions, a blank and containing 0.2 and 2.0 mmol/L 1,2-octanediol were left standing at room temperature. The appearance of these after 24 h is shown in Referring to literature, it can be found that simple diols, which contain hydroxyl groups either adjacent or separated, have little effect on gibbsite crystallization ( The surface tension (γ, in mN/m) of the sodium aluminate solution is a function of the concentration of 1,2-octanediol and is shown in The crystallization curve in the presence of mannitol is shown in  It is proposed that 1,2-octanediol does not act on the seed crystals but modifies the liquor. A low concentration of 1,2-octanediol has no detectable influence on the sodium aluminate liquor but above a critical level the liquor is changed resulting in inhibition. When the concentration of 1,2-octanediol is high enough, the change is so significant that crystallization becomes extremely difficult. The amphiphilic 1,2-octanediol molecule shows a tendency to aggregate into supramolecular systems and self-organize as a liquid crystal phase. It has been shown that 1,2-octanediol forms monotropic mesophases which can be stabilized by the addition of water ( IR spectra of the three sodium aluminate solutions, the blank and the solution containing 0.2 and 2.0 mmol/L 1,2-octanediol are presented in In summary, there may be at least two inhibitory mechanism of organic inhibitors. The one is adsorption mechanism, which is in a good agreement with the performance of most inhibitors in seeded sodium aluminate liquor, such as mannitol, glycerol, xylitol etc. The other is the modification of the liquor in the presence of inhibitor, which has not been openly published before. So far, 1,2-octanediol is the only known inhibitor in this group but other liquid crystal forming molecules may have similar behavior. 0.01, 0.02 and 0.05 g/L oleic acid were added into seeded sodium aluminate liquor containing 2 mmol/L mannitol, The crystallization progress is shown in Oleic acid was also added at 0.01 g/L into the liquor containing 2.0 mmol/L 1,2-octanediol, and The inhibitory behavior of mannitol and 1,2-octanediol on seeded gibbsite crystallization process differs significantly under the experiment conditions used. At a seed mass ratio of 0.25, the inhibition effect of mannitol increases with concentration, until the crystallization is completely stopped. For 1,2-octanediol concentrations of < Doubling the seed mass ratio shows 2.0 mmol/L mannitol delay gibbsite crystallization while 2.0 mmol/L 1,2-octanediol prevents crystallization. The inhibitory effect of 1,2-octanediol is due to molecular effects and not micellular effects as the effect is observed below the measured critical micelle concentration of 1.63 mmol/L. Infrared spectroscopy in the presence of low 1,2-octanediol shows identical structure to a blank solution. At a higher 1,2-octanediol concentration, the shape and intensity of the peaks at about 625 cm It is proposed that there are two inhibitory mechanisms. The one originates from the adsorption of organic molecules on the active site of seed surface; the other is caused by the change of liquor characteristic when additive is charged. 1,2-octanediol is assumed to be the only known member of the latter type of modifiers. The complete inhibition effect of mannitol can be alleviated by addition of proper amount of oleic acid, while no improvement is observed when oleic acid was introduced into the entirely inhibited liquor containing 1,2-octanediol. So the selection of appropriate modifier on the basis of liquor conditions is very important. Authors are grateful to the financial support of National Priority Development Project Fundamental Research in China (‘973’project) “Fundamental research on extracting alumina from concentrated bauxite with high efficiency” (project number: 2005CB623702) and to Lijuan Zhang for a helpful discussion on this work. The help from Guihua Liu and Wei Shen is also appreciated.