10 mol% CaO stabilized ZrO2 (CSZ) singly and doubly doped with various amounts of FeO1.5 and TiO2 was prepared by a co-precipitation method, and characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and Hebb-Wagner method. The results show that relative densities of samples are above 97% and close to each other except CSZT0.29. FeO1.5 single doping improves the grain-boundary conductivity, but decreases the bulk conductivity, while TiO2 single doping decreases both the bulk and grain-boundary conductivities. FeO1.5 and TiO2 double doping increases the grain-boundary and bulk conductivities. The increase in bulk and total conductivities of doped CSZ is mainly due to the high relative density, which provides more migration pathway for O2−, while the increase in co-doping is attributed to the scavenge effect of TiO2 on the grain boundary. The electronic conductivities of all samples measured in air are low, being 10−7−10−6 S cm−1 in the temperature range of 670–850 °C.Calcia stabilized zirconia (CSZ) has been widely used in high-temperature industrial applications due to its excellent thermal shock resistance [ The effect of TiO Naito et al. [ FeO However, FeO Since Fe The effects of FeO In this work, FeO Five groups of samples were designed in order to systematically evaluate the effects of additions, as shown in The relative densities of sintered samples were measured by an Archimedes method in a water bath. The phase compositions of sintered samples were determined by XRD with Cu Kα radiation (40 mA, 40 kV). The cross-sectional microstructures of samples were observed by SEM. The average grain size was calculated with a linear intercept method by selecting more than 300 grains in the SEM images of polished surface. The ionic conductivity was measured by EIS with AUTOLAB PGSTAT 204 Frequency Response Analyzer (FRA). Pt paste was screen-printed on both polished surfaces of sintered pellet bonded with Pt wires, dried at 120 °C, and fired at 850 °C for 1 h. All measurements were performed in a temperature range of 550–850 °C with 50 °C steps over the frequency range of 1−10 Pt paste was screen-printed on both sides of CSZ solid electrolyte, and sintered at 850 °C for 1 h. The blocking electrode was prepared by bonding CSZ and Al   The impedance spectra measured at 600 °C, plotted in the Nyquist plane, are shown in The bulk, grain boundary and total (bulk plus grain boundary) ionic conductivities were calculated according to the following equation:  The GB conductivities of FeO Therefore, in order to verify the above prediction, the bulk, GB and total resistances of samples measured at 550 °C and 750 °C were shown in  The values of GB resistance were calculated not from the grain boundary geometry but the electrode area (  The electrochemical reaction between O If the charge carrier is anion, the relationship between electronic conductivity and steady-state current density, The relationship between The resulting lines of CSZ singly and doubly doped with FeO The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the