Aggregates constitute the biggest branch of mining by production volume and the second in value, after the sector of fossil fuels. Their close connection with the construction industry places them among the most used materials worldwide, second only to water. Despite its significance, the sector suffers from the non-systematic register of production data, resulting in weakness to study the main features affecting the sector’s structure and future capacity. The paper focuses on the aggregates production in 26 European countries. Data from available sources are gathered and combined for a 10-year period (1997–2006), as an effort to provide a clear view of the major attributes of this vital industrial sector. Through a thorough analysis, the main drivers in aggregates production are revealed and existing correlations and trends are identified. New findings are also presented, for example the significance of GDP from construction and the strong connection of aggregates production per capita with the residential building sector.Aggregates (crushed stone, sand and gravel) are one of the most important mining products. It is the biggest branch of mining by production volume ( There is a similar situation in the European Union, where aggregates’ contribution to the total mining sector was 67% by volume and 23% by value in 2006 (see According to the The aggregates industry differs from most other mining activities, since by their nature, aggregates are high-bulk, low unit value commodities that derive much of their value from being located near the market. More specifically, it has been proven that transportation is a major cost driver and a critical parameter for their market prices. About 80% or 90% of production is transported with trucks ( However, strict environmental regulations are a force towards limitation of exploitation sites all over Europe. In Sweden, for example, groups of stakeholders are now involved in the decision process for the establishment of new quarries and even the prolongation of current quarries, making approval in both the cases more complicated. In Italy, new quarries are only granted for a limited year’s license, making it difficult for producers to invest in necessary equipment. Given that the production of aggregates has and will continue to have an important role in European countries, the management of the sector in terms of sustainability has recently been of great concern. As a result efforts have been made to understand the factors affecting aggregates production, aiming mainly at forecasting aggregates demand. For example, Keeping in mind the uncertainties involved in aggregates data all over Europe, this paper attempts to analyse economic parameters associated with aggregates production. It focuses on the aggregates production in 26 European countries, during the decade from 1997 to 2006. Having in mind the uncertainties and the fluctuations involved in aggregates data all over Europe, this is a typical period in order to perform a trend analysis. The correlations and trends resulted from the statistical analysis between production and demographic/macroeconomic factors of the 26 European countries are presented below. The contribution of each sub-sector of construction to the total construction sector has been also taken into consideration, revealing the significance of the residential building sector as far as aggregate production per capita is concerned. Available data from the British Geological Survey (BGS), the European Aggregates Association (UEPG) and the European Mineral Statistics have been gathered and sorted on a uniform basis. Assumptions were made for the percentage of the recycled aggregate materials produced, based on European reports. Τhe five main producers of aggregates in Europe from 1997 to 2006 were Germany, Spain, France, Italy and United Kingdom. Each produced more than 200 million tons of aggregates per annum, while the volume of aggregates produced in other European countries was significantly smaller ( The output of aggregates production per capita presents significant differences with regard to the leading countries. The average output in Europe for the year 2006 was about 7.1 ton per capita ( As far as the five main producers are concerned, according to the Euroconstruct report (2006), the evolution in construction volume of three countries, namely France, Italy and Great Britain, was relatively even in the period from 1991 to 2005. The development in the remaining two economies in this group with regard to their construction output occurred in a completely different way. More specifically, in Germany the boom after the reunification in the early 1990s was followed by a decade of recession in construction activities. In Spain the demand boom began in 1993 and disappeared in 1996. It seems that the aggregate production per capita follows the trend of the growth rate of construction. The above average aggregate production per capita in Spain was contrary to the situation for the other four main producers. Spain was in fifth place in terms of per capita construction output while in terms of GDP it exceeded only Portugal among the Western European OECD member economies in 2008. This indicates the construction sector’s dominant role in the national economy, as is confirmed by the ratio of output of construction to total GDP, equal to 21%, as against an average of 12% in the 19 Euroconstruct member countries ( The mean aggregate production per capita in the European countries under examination, indicated as ‘eu’ in For countries bordering the North Sea, production of marine-dredged sand and gravel is a significant part of supply, like for example in the case of the UK. Crushed rock produced from onshore sites is also conveyed by sea from Norway and Scotland ( So despite the local character of aggregate extraction, there is an international trade of aggregate materials within Europe ( Aggregates are granular materials used in construction. Besides their use as an end-product in railway ballast or armour stones, aggregates are also a raw material used in the manufacture of other vital construction products such as ready-mixed concrete (made up of 80% aggregates), pre-cast products, asphalt (made up of 95% aggregates), lime and cement ( In order to examine the influence of those parameters both aggregated data (i.e. total annual production, total population, etc.) and country-specific observations were used. The necessary data used for calculations came from To further clarify the relationship of aggregates production with GDP, GDPCON and POP, the Pearson correlation coefficient ( In order to determine the relation between aggregates production with selected demographic and macroeconomic characteristics of each country, bi-variable and multiple regression models were developed using the country-specific annual data. The dependent variable was in all cases the production of aggregates in millions of tons and the independent variable(s) were the population (POP), the gross domestic product (GDP) in thousands of Euro, the GDP from construction (GDPCON), also in thousands of Euro, and the unemployment rate (UR) of each country. It should be noted that the unemployment rate represents unemployed persons as a percentage of the labour force, part of which is occupied in the construction sector. This explains the relevance of the specific variable to the construction sector output and thus to aggregates production. Other socio-economic and geographical factors were also involved in the regression models (i.e. share of construction GDP in total GDP, country area, population density, and employment rate), but they proved to be statistically insignificant and were dropped from the rest of the analysis. In order to avoid serial correlation (or autocorrelation) due to the occurrence of time series counts, data were analyzed using the Prais-Winsten generalized least squares method, assuming errors have a first order autocorrelation structure. The assumption of first order auto regression was verified by partial autocorrelation of the raw data. The constant in all regression tests is considered to be zero, since if each of the independent variables in the simple regression models was equal to zero (POP, GDP, and GDPCON) there could not be any aggregate production. Accordingly, in the multiple regression models the independent variables used could simultaneously have the value zero, resulting in the nullification of aggregate production. The results of the simple regressions show that POP, GDP and GDPCON were all good indicators for predicting the production of aggregates for the study area (i.e. the 26 European countries); nevertheless the highest In the multiple regression models, GDP per capita (GDPPC) and construction GDP per capita (GDPCONPC) were used instead of GDP and GDPCON in order to ensure the independence of the variables, since the two latter parameters are highly correlated with population. The results indicate that all coefficients were statistically significant at the 1% level and the signs were as expected. The coefficient of determination increases when GDPCONPC is used in a model instead of GDPPC. The correlation is even higher when UR is added. Thus, Model 7, which involves POP, GDPCONPC and UR, produced a slightly better fit ( In an attempt to identify relatively homogeneous groups of cases, with regard to aggregate production, hierarchical cluster analysis has been implemented. Tests have been made using different sets of the variables (POP, GDP, GDPCON, UR, GDPPC and GDPCONPC) for cluster formation. The cluster method conducted was the between-groups linkage and the measure used for calculating the distances between cases was the squared Euclidean distance. All of the variable combinations, where POP was included, resulted in two main clusters, with 6 and 20 countries, respectively. The cluster with the 6 countries included also Poland together with the five main aggregate producers, a fact helped, however, by its rank in population (sixth after the other five countries and with much distance from the other 20 countries). Differentiations in the clusters formation occurred when GDPPC and GDPCONPC were chosen for the analysis. In both of the cases it can be considered that two main clusters were formed. More specifically, clustering with GDPPC ( In general, each of the groups that have been discriminated through cluster analysis reflects areas with different development situations and also with diversified growth needs. In the first group that concerns mainly Eastern and Central European countries, the average construction output during the decade examined was 4.9%, while in the second group of western European countries the five main producers represent 70.7% of the total construction output ( The general picture is the same for the year 2007, with the two European areas presenting a significantly different internal composition with regard to their construction market structure. More specifically, as shown in Evidence that also reinforces this hypothesis is that countries with high aggregate production per capita in 2006 ( After cluster analysis, the regression models were analyzed for each of the formed groups in order to track down changes in the correlations ( Moreover, according to coefficients produced by the models, in the groups containing Central and Eastern European countries the production is mainly determined by the variables related to GDP or GDPCON, contrary to the groups containing Western European countries, where POP is a significant indicator. For example, according to Model 6 ( This situation reflects the differences of the economies of the countries of each group. In the case of the Western European countries this is mainly due to the even and relatively low annual average GDP growth rate, as a result of the development achieved. This practically means that in Western Europe construction activities and consequently aggregates production depend more and more on demographic dynamics, thus the population, and on the capacity to renew and upgrade existing buildings. In the Eastern European countries there is a higher GDP growth rate, since there is an increasing development there. However, the total degree of development in Eastern Europe is still much lower than in Western Europe. As a result, the same GDPPC increase in both groups of countries has a different influence. For the Central and Eastern European countries, where the average value of GDP per capita is 5300€, the increase of 1000€ represents a growth rate in GDPPC of approximately 18.9%, while in the Western European countries, where the average value of GDP per capita is approximately 25,000€ the same increase represents a growth rate in GDPPC of only 4%. The role of aggregates production in national economies remains significant and this is not going to change in the future. The analysis conducted in 26 European countries over a 10-year period confirmed that aggregates production is significantly correlated with socio-economic and demographic factors, such as the value of GDP and GDP from construction, the unemployment rate and the population, while, at the same time, other variables, such as the size of the area or the population density, failed to prove their significance. The degree of the correlation of the above mentioned variables depends on country characteristics. The five main producers of aggregates in Europe are Germany, Spain, France, Italy and the United Kingdom with an annual aggregates production over 200 million ton. The size of population, resulting in high GDP rates, has a dominant role in the aggregates production of the above countries. Nonetheless, this is not the case for Poland, which despite its large population has a relatively low production of aggregates due to the low degree of economic development during the period examined. The GDP from construction is also a safe indicator of aggregates production. Spain and Ireland are the countries with the highest share of GDP from construction to their total GDP on average for the decade examined. At the same time Ireland and Spain present the highest average on aggregate production per capita among the 26 countries and the five main producers, respectively. The average aggregates production per capita in the 26 European countries was 5.6 It seems that in Europe there are two main groups of countries presenting different potential with regard to aggregates production. For the Central and Eastern European countries, the average value of GDP per capita is 5300€, while the average GDP from construction per capita is 290€. In the Western European countries, including Ireland and Switzerland, the average value of GDP per capita and GDP from construction per capita is approximately 25,000€ and 1200€, respectively. The aggregate production in each country seems to be strongly affected by the share of residential building sector to the total construction sector, since residential production in the group of Central and Eastern European countries accounts only for 26%, by value, of the total construction sector, while in the Western European countries residential sub-sector accounts for more than 49% of the construction sector. On these grounds, keeping in mind that in the near future it is expected that the housing market will show a decline, the average production per capita in Europe will remain at the same levels. A declining demand is also expected in the housing market of Ireland, which will consequently lead to the decline of the aggregates production per capita in the country. This estimation confirms that the trend of high per capita production could not be continued for a long time. Differentiations may emerge between the two different groups of countries. More specifically, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe may increase their production, while the Western European countries will probably present stagnancy. Thus, the overall European picture, with regard to aggregate production, is not expected to change dramatically in the near future, since it is mostly determined by Western Europe.