The Na-based dual-ion batteries (NDIBs), combining the advantages of Na-ion batteries and dual-ion batteries, are attracting more attention due to their merits of abundant source, low cost and high energy density. However, the main challenges faced by NDIBs are their low capacity and poor cycling. Herein, we report a new ion storage mechanism for high-performance NDIBs using amorphous carbon (AOMC) as cathode. Unlike the graphite carbon that can only accommodate the PF6
                     − anion (typical DIB system), the AOMC herein can both accommodate Na+ cation and PF6
                     − anion due to its amorphous feature, which is conceptually new dual-ion system for achieving much higher capacity. Ex-situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction and Raman studies reveal that the disordered carbon in the AOMC can be transformed to the partial graphitic stacking in short range, improving both capacity and cycling stability of NDIBs. As a consequence, the AOMC delivers a highly reversible storage capacity of 136 mAh g−1 for 800 cycles at a very high current density of 2.0 A g−1, much higher than all the reported NDIBs. Such concept can be generalized to develop high-performance dual-ion full cell using sodium ion pre-intercalated materials as anode and AOMC as cathode.Portable electronics and electric vehicles with high energy density and power density are urgently needed due to the rapid growth of the environmental pollution, global population and urbanization and the consumption of traditional fossil sources Due to the advantages of high voltage plateau, eco-friendliness, low cost and good safety, the DIBs systems are showing promising prospect superior to LIBs Herein, we demonstrate a new sodium-based dual ion storage mechanism for boosting the performance of NDIBs in terms of capacity, rate ability and stability by the use of amorphous ordered mesoporous carbon (AOMC) as cathode. It is amizingly found that the AOMC has the ability to accommodate both the PF The GNF was synthesized through a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method SBA-15 silica template was synthesized according to the previous reports The morphology of the AOMC and GNF was characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL, JSM-6701F) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL, JEM-2010). TEM was operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV, and equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer (Bruker Quantax). Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) analyses were carried out using a Hitachi HD2700C (200 kV). The structure was characterized by X-ray diffraction measurement (XRD, Rigaku, D/max-RB). The Raman spectra were performed on an iHR550 Raman microscope using a laser with excitation wavelength of 532 nm at room temperature. The surface area was measured according to the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method. The electrochemical performances were conducted using the CR2032 coin type half-cells. The electrode was ground and made into a slurry containing 80 wt% of the active material AOMC and 20 wt% of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) in N-methyl-pyrrolidone. The mixture was thoroughly mixed and laminated onto a copper (for anode) or aluminium (for cathode) current collector and dried at 60 °C for 12 h under vacuum. Then a tablet machine was used to make a thin and smooth electrode slices. The diameter of every electrode slice is 14 mm and the thickness is about 50–100 μm. This electrode or GNF was used as the working electrode, and Na foil or sodium ion pre-intercalated SnO The schematic illustration of charge and discharge process of this new NDIBs system using AOMC cathode is shown in The AOMC cathode was synthesized by a template method using sucrose as carbon source and SBA-15 as template. The lattice structure of AOMC was tested by wide and low-angle XRD. Two broad peaks at approximately 23° and 44° are observed from the wide-angle XRD pattern ( The GNF cathode was firstly tested in the coin cell. However, when the AOMC electrode was used as anode for SIBs, the charge and discharge curves are quite different. The voltage plateau is inconspicuous, and the intercalation/deintercalation behavior is observed in a wide voltage range ( The cycling stability and Coulombic efficiency of the AOMC at 0.05 A g The rate performance of the as-prepared AOMC at different current densities was also evaluated from 0.5 to 3.0 A g Long-term cycling stability at a high current density of 2.0 A g For better understanding the intercalation and deintercalation mechanism, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to investigate the chemical composition and the surface electronic state of the as-prepared AOMC ( The above data reveal that both Na ions and PF In the discharge process of the first cycle: In the charge process of the second cycle: In the discharge process of the second cycle:  To study the formation of carbon layer and the variation of crystallinity, the Raman spectra of the AOMC at different charge and discharge states were performed ( The intercalation and deintercalation mechanisms for graphite and AOMC are illustrated in The reasons for the high-performance NDIBs are as follows: (1) The storage mechanisms of graphite and AOMC are quite different. In graphite, only PF In summary, we demonstrate a conceptually new NDIBs that both Na ions and PF The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the Wei (Alex) Wang and Shaojun Guo conceived the idea and designed the experiments. Wei (Alex) Wang, Hanxin Huang, Bin Wang and Zibin Liang performed the characterization and analyzed the data. Chang Qian, Peihao Li, Jinhui Zhou and Chao Yang performed the electrochemical test. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: