Bioleaching has been widely applied to recover sulfide minerals, however, little is known about the bioleaching behavior and mechanism of mixed oxide-sulfide copper ore with high-oxidative ratio. The leaching efficiency of artificial indigenous and exogenous microbial communities on a mixed oxide-sulfide copper ore with and without energy substrate was investigated. The results indicated that extra energy substrate was needed when bioleaching was applied to this kind of ore. The variation of leaching parameters caused by indigenous community was inferior to that caused by exogenous ones due to its lower activity. The leaching efficiency of sulfide part induced by indigenous strains was superior to that induced by exogenous ones, due to the stronger colonization ability of indigenous strains. It verified that both microbial activity and colonization ability were important properties affecting leaching efficiency. Sulfur oxidizers, which can oxidize sulfur or polysulfide formed on mineral surface and decrease leachate pH, played a more important role than ferrous oxidizers in bioleaching of high-oxidative oxide-sulfide ore.As non-renewable mineral resources are exploited and depleted unceasingly, it is becoming inevitable to make efficient utilization of low grade and complex refractory ores. Partially oxidative sulfide copper ore is an important copper bearing mineral. A traditional method for the recovery of this kind of mineral is sulfuration flotation, which is difficult in maintaining the flotation indexes due to oxidation rate fluctuation of raw ore ( More than 40 types of bioleaching microbial species have been discovered ( Employing native microorganisms is another effective way to improve leaching efficiency. Numerous researchers have obtained higher leaching efficiency by using indigenous microorganisms ( This work was the first investigation conducted on the leaching efficiency of artificial indigenous and exogenous microbial communities on a highly oxidized and low-grade oxide-sulfide copper ore (oxidation ratio 89.9%). The influence of energy substrate on the bioleaching of high-oxidative oxide-sulfide copper ore and its mechanism was clarified. Furthermore, the microbial properties of colonization and activity which was correlated with leaching efficiency were compared between indigenous and exogenous cultures, according to the leaching results and the community structures. Mineral sample was collected from Mulyashi, Zambia's Luanshya Copper Mines and ground to less than 74 The typical bioleaching strains in the exogenous consortia were isolated from Acid Mine Drainages (AMD) from Dexing copper mine (Jiangxi province, China) and were identified by 16S rDNA. The strains including Chalcopyrite was used as a typical sulfide mineral to evaluate the microbial attachment ability. Attachment experiments were performed in 100-mL shake flasks, each containing 25 Indigenous and exogenous communities were added to the leaching pulp with or without the additional energy substrate. The energy substrate contained 4.47 Samples of each group collected at regular intervals were measured for relevant physicochemical parameters. Cell density was measured by hemacytometer (XB-K-25, QiuJing, Shanghai, China). Redox potential (Eh, Ag Microbial samples at day 2, 6, 10 and 14 during the leaching experiment were collected. Free and attached microorganisms were harvested by filtration and centrifugation (12,000 The growth rate was selected as the index of the microbial activity. Sufficient work was done to detect the activity of the five indigenous and exogenous strains in pure culture medium before they were used for the bioleaching experiment. All exogenous strains had a higher growth rate than the indigenous ones ( Microbial adsorption on the mineral surface over time was present in Leaching behavior of the short-term colonized indigenous strains and the strong activity exogenous strains were compared. In the group without energy substrate, cell density ( As for the groups with additional energy substrates, higher cell density ( Microbial community assembly of the group without energy substrate was not analysed as the growth of the microorganisms was sluggish. Total DNA of the collected samples from the group with energy substrate was quantitatively extracted to detect the indigenous and exogenous microbial community assembly. The result of RT-qPCR showed that the density variation of Explorations on the influence of extra energy substrate on copper leaching efficiency of highly oxidized, low-grade oxide-sulfide copper ore were carried out. According to the reports of Xia et al. ( Comparison on the leaching efficiency of artificial indigenous and exogenous microbial community was conducted for the conditions that with or without energy substrate. Without energy substrate, the leaching parameters of the indigenous and exogenous strains showed similar variation trend, which could be attributed to the growth stagnation of microorganisms as sulfide part of the ore could not provide enough energy substrate. However, the performance of the indigenous and exogenous strains under the condition with energy substrate was obviously different. It seemed that the lower activity of the five indigenous strains had negative effects on the leaching process. Compared with the indigenous group, a faster leaching rate of copper ion, higher cell density and lower pH values were observed in the exogenous group because of their better activities and stabilities, which was not well agreed with the former study ( Community structure analysis showed that the proportion of indigenous iron-oxidizing microorganisms was apparently lower than that of the exogenous ones throughout the leaching experiment. It resulted in a lower leaching efficiency as coordination of iron and sulfur metabolism was pivotal in the bioleaching of simplex sulfide ore (  The high-oxidative oxide-sulfide copper ore could not provide enough energy substrate for the growth of microorganisms. Extra energy substrate should be added when the bioleaching technology was applied to recover valuable metals from this kind of mineral. During the bioleaching of oxide-sulfide copper ore in the presence of additional energy source, both colonization and activity were important microbial properties affecting leaching efficiency. Sulfur oxidizers, which can remove elemental sulfur and decrease leachate pH, played a more important role than ferrous oxidizers in bioleaching of high-oxidative oxide-sulfide ore. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This work was supported by