This work was undertaken to determine whether thermodynamic calculations can predict the amount and composition of ash produced by combustion of nickel hyperaccumulator (HA) plants in the context of agromining. To this end, three HA plants containing about 1wt% of nickel were submitted to isothermal combustion at 550, 815, 900°C and the solid residues were characterized by complementary techniques (TGA, XRD, ICP-OES, ion chromatography, SEM-EDX), while thermodynamic calculations were performed with the FactSage software using the dry biomass composition as input. We present an in-depth evaluation of inorganics behavior based on the combination and comparison of experimental data and calculations: effect of temperature on ash yield, nature of crystallized phases, ash elemental composition and inorganics volatilization. Our work confirms that equilibrium calculation is a powerful method to evaluate the behavior of inorganic elements during thermal treatment of biomass, despite some lacks in the databases. For the nickel HA plants, an innovative result is that, after combustion, nickel is always in the form of NiO particles, that can mix with MgO to form (Ni,Mg)O solid solutions. These results have direct implications for understanding the combustion process and for better design of the following leaching step aiming at Ni recovery.Agromining is a chain of processes that consists of cultivating hyperaccumulator (HA) plants to recover metals from soils, and extracting metals from plant tissues to obtain valuable products ( Various processes, mainly based on hydrometallurgy, have been designed to recover Ni from the aerial parts of In this work we have focused on computational thermodynamics, which has proven to be a powerful tool over the past decade to study the behavior of inorganics during biomass heat treatment such as gasification ( The present work was undertaken to determine whether thermodynamic calculation enables us to predict the amount and composition of ash produced by combustion of HA plants, based on knowledge of their initial composition and operating temperature. For this purpose, three HA plants were selected and carefully characterized: (i)  In the rest of this article, these three plants are simply called The following chemicals were used for the chemical analyses: HNO The combustion of each ground plant ( The combustion was performed in conditions corresponding to the NF EN ISO 18122 standard for ash content determination. The temperature was increased to 250 The combustion of the ground plants was characterized by a thermogravimetric analysis (STAR The residual mass fraction measured by the analytical device,   Solid samples of plants and ashes obtained by combustion were digested with 8.5 C, H, N and O were analyzed in all plants and ashes by CHNS-O Flash Analyser. The samples (1.5 Additional analyses were carried out by the SOCOR certified laboratory, who measured ash amounts and elemental composition at 550 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out with the Discover D8 Advance Bruker X-Ray diffractometer, equipped with a Linxeyes detector (2 An estimate of the phase concentrations was calculated by correcting the scale factor with factor The ash cross sections were prepared by embedding the powders in a non-conductive thermosetting resin (PolyFast, STRUERS) for hot molding (Mecapress 3, PRESI) and diamond polished to 1 We used the Factsage 7.2 software ( The initial system contains 100 We used a combination of compounds from the FactPS, FTOxid, FTSalt and FTmisc databases. As pointed out in the review of ( SLAGA, a liquid oxide solution phase including the major oxide compounds (Na SALTB, a liquid molten chloride solution phase including oxides and hydroxides (K LCSO, a liquid molten salt solution phase describing sulphate and carbonate mixtures of the two major inorganics contained in the biomass (K The choice of this last solution (LCSO) is based on the fact that sulphur forms liquid sulphate solutions under oxidizing conditions such as combustion, while it volatilizes as H In addition, we considered an oxide solid solution containing (NiO, FeO, ZnO, MgO, CaO, Na With the 15 elements taken into account in the calculations, the database combination leads to the inclusion of 283 gaseous species (the gaseous phase is considered an ideal mixture of all species), 3 liquid solutions (SLAGA, SALTB and LCSO), 464 solid compounds and 2 solid solutions (MeO_A#1 and MeO_A#2, representing the NiO and CaO base oxides). For each temperature step, the Equilibrium module of the Factsage software provides the amount of each stable phase (pure solids, solutions and gaseous species). The residual mass fraction of the condensed phases (    The value of The list of stable compounds is stored at each calculation step. The condensed phase assembly is then compared to XRD analysis of solid residues (see Section Eq.     The values of Eq.   A systematic comparison between the available experimental data (total mass, XRD analyses and elemental composition of solid residues) and thermodynamic calculations is presented in this section for the three HAs plants. The elemental composition of the three plants is given in The composition of Similarly to many other varieties of biomass, the main elements in the three HA plants are C  For all plants, acceptable repeatability of TGA measurements is obtained, indicating satisfactory sample homogeneity. Indeed, the maximal difference (in absolute value) between two measurements is about 1% for The weight of ash recovered after furnace experiments is very consistent with TGA measurements for For the calculated residual mass, the overall picture is convincing: the influence of temperature and the amount at 900 The results on phase assembly and elemental ash composition, presented in the next sections, will help us to discuss more specifically the influence of temperature on ash composition and the relevance of the thermodynamic calculations for understanding it. A representative diffractogram of each solid residue obtained after combustion at 550 and 900 Several remarks can be drawn from the diffractograms: Ni is present in each plant and at each temperature as a single phase of nickel oxide (NiO). K is involved in K Cl is not present in any crystallized phase at 900 Si is involved in several silicate phases (Ca Hydroxyapatite Ca Due to their low content in the initial HAs, the elements Fe, Na and Zn are not present in any phase identified by XRD. The calculated quantity (in wt% of the solid residue) of each phase is compared to the phases identified by XRD in A relatively good correspondence between the simulation and the experimental XRD is obtained, since almost all major and minor phases identified in the diffractogram analyses are predicted by equilibrium calculations. In addition, most of the major phases of the experimental diffractograms correspond to phases that represent more than 15–20 It can also be noted that, with our selection of liquid solutions from the thermodynamic database, practically no liquid phase is expected to form at 550 or 900 An important feature related to the analyses of the phases present in the ashes is that the calculation predicts the formation of a (Ni,Mg)O phase for each plant and at each temperature, while XRD peaks are attributed to NiO. As for the result of the calculation, the MeO_A#1 phase is a complete solid solution between NiO and MgO, which means that if NiO and MgO are both present, they will mix in all proportions. With regard to the identification of diffraction peaks, it appears that NiO, MgO, and the mixed oxide (Mg This aspect was confirmed by the additional SEM-EDX  Due to the combustion of plants, most organic matter has volatilized. As a result, the concentrations of inorganics in ash are much higher than in the original plant and, as shown in For each HA plant, two combustion tests and subsequent elemental analyses were performed independently at 550 With regard to the simulations, there is again a global agreement between the experimental data and the equilibrium calculations. For The specific case of carbon, whose amount was determined in  For each plant, there is a strong difference between 550 The most striking difference is the volatilization of K, which at 900 Similarly to K, the behavior of Na depends on the plant, with complete volatilization as NaCl(g) around 600–700 The behavior of Cl at 500 Finally, S remains mainly in condensed phases, such as the compounds K The thorough comparison between the experimental data and the calculations presented in Section Regarding the behavior of nickel, we show that this element fully stays in ashes and does not form any volatile compound during combustion, which is consistent with current knowledge related to the combustion of various biomass sources containing high levels of heavy metals ( Despite the overall good agreement, there is an important discrepancy between the experimental ash yields measured after furnace combustion and simulations ( Apart from the behavior of nickel, which is very specific to our selection of HA plants, it can be noted that our results are in line with general knowledge regarding inorganics behavior during biomass combustion. Indeed, as described for instance in In this work, we present the first application of thermodynamic calculations to evaluate the behavior of inorganic elements during the combustion of nickel HA plants, which is of importance in the development of the entire process chain for the recovery of Ni compounds. Combined with the experimental data acquired after isothermal combustion of three different plants, all the results allow us to draw several original conclusions. From a methodological point of view, our work confirms that, using commercial databases and software, equilibrium calculation is a powerful approach to evaluate the behavior of inorganic elements in the thermal treatment of biomass, and provide an accurate picture of the nature and respective amount of the phases composing combustion residues. Compared to “simple” rules based on fuel indexes, equilibrium calculations provide a much more accurate tool to determine the overall inorganics behavior and the release of volatile elements. A discrepancy concerns the final amount of ash that is systematically underestimated by about 20–25% by our calculations, attributed to differences in the final carbonate content. This might be due to the still incomplete database description for the multi-element system composed by the HA plants. Indeed, the main inorganic sub-system for our HA plants is CaO–NiO–K For the specific case of HA plants, an innovative result of this study is that, after combustion, nickel is always in the form of NiO particles, that can mix with MgO to form (Ni,Mg)O solid solutions. This result could not be deduced from the standard XRD analysis, and required a specific local elemental analysis guided by equilibrium calculations. The better understanding of the behavior of some of the main inorganic elements has direct application to the understanding of the combustion process as well as to a better design of the subsequent leaching process, which consists of dissolving the ash in an acidic medium. This work was supported by the EU LIFE-AGROMINE project (LIFE15 ENV/FR/000512); we gratefully acknowledge for this support. We gratefully acknowledge our colleagues, Pr A. Bani (UAT, Tirana, Albania), Dr P. Kidd (CSIC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain), Pr J.-L. Morel (Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France) for providing the HA plants. The support of M.-L. de Solan Bethmale for SEM-EDX analysis (LGC, Toulouse) was greatly appreciated. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: