In this study the potentiality of Bangladesh zircon as a raw material for opacifier was examined. Preparation of zircon flour was done by both wet and dry ball milling. Wet milling of zircon was found to be much efficient than dry milling. Zircon flour of peak size 8μm obtained by wet milling was purified by leaching in concentrated H2SO4 acid. Leaching time was varied from 2 to 20h and sulphuric acid concentration ranged from 10 to 80ml/l. Both un-purified and purified Bangladesh zircon flour were tested for their performance as opacifier in a couple of local ceramic factories. The whiteness and glossiness of glazes made with Bangladesh zircon were compared with that made with imported zircon. It has been demonstrated that Bangladesh zircon is quite satisfactory for the production of zircon flour in the ceramic industries. Zircon flour made from Bangladesh zircon can effectively replace imported zircon flour in ceramic glaze, if adequate size reduction and purification is carried out.Opaque glazes are those sufficiently low in light transparancy as to effectively hide the body from the view. They usually are white, but this is not a requirement. Zircon is classified in that type of inert opacifiers which remain in the glaze essentially in the same form in which they are added. The performance of an opacifier of this type depends on the amount present, its particle size and on the difference between the index of refraction of the opacifier and that of the glassy matrix in which it is present ( Zirconium compounds have found increasing use in the development of opaque glazes. Formerly they were used in glazes mainly in the form of ZrO Zircon sand occurs in the beach in the coastal area of Bangladesh along with other heavy mineral sands. Characterization of Bangladesh zircon concentrate has been done in the past ( Zircon flour was prepared from Bangladesh zircon obtained as zircon sand concentrate from the Beach Sand Exploitation Centre, Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission, Cox's Bazar. The grain size distribution of Bangladesh zircon was determined earlier ( Part of the zircon flour produced was purified by leaching in a custom made leaching apparatus. Leaching time was varied from 2 to 20 The suitability of Bangladesh zircon as an opacifier was investigated in a couple of local ceramic industries which includes table ware and sanitary ware manufacturers. For this purpose, both un-purified and purified zircon flours were used. Proprietary transparent glaze of each factory was used as the base. Zircon flour was added to the base glaze in an amount ranging from 8 to 12%. For every sample, 400 Comparative results on the sieve analysis of zircon flour obtained by 24 The effects of sulphuric acid concentration and leaching time on the purity of zircon flour were studied in order to find out an optimum leaching condition. It was found that lower concentration of sulphuric acid was not effective in removing the impurities. Sulphuric acid with a concentration of 80% was found suitable in removing the impurities within a reasonably short time period of time. It was found that a leaching time of 10 As has been mentioned, the opacifier tests were carried out in local ceramic factories. For proprietary reasons, these factories did not disclose the composition of the base glaze and bodies used. Glazes prepared using purified Bangladesh zircon in a local tableware factory are shown in Wet milling of zircon was found to be much effective than dry milling. 80% H The authors would like to thank Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission for supplying the zircon concentrate used in this study. The authors also acknowledge with thanks some experimental facilities provided by Bangladesh Insulator and Sanitary ware Factory, Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, and a local tableware factory.