This paper presents the results obtained by different oxidative processes when an aqueous solution containing sodium isopropyl xanthate is treated; this reagent is used in the flotation of copper minerals. The advanced oxidation processes used are UV photolysis, direct electrolysis and photoelectrooxidation. The solutions used containing sodium isopropyl xanthate were adjusted to the following concentrations: 6, 8, 10, 25 and 40mgL−1. The results show that the three oxidation processes proved to be suitable for the destruction of xanthate, with the following maximum destruction efficiencies: 76% for electrolysis, 95% for UV photolysis and 99% for photoelectrooxidation.With water being considered a scarce and expensive resource as well as the increasing importance of environmental legislation and sustainable development, the contamination present in industrial wastewater is of significant concern. Furthermore, mining consumes large quantities of water. Thus, improving water system design and practice are key strategic requirements in moving toward a more sustainable mining industry. The mineral processing and hydrometallurgical industries use an extensive range of inorganic, naturally derived organic and synthetic organic reagents, mainly in froth flotation and solid–liquid separation ( In contrast, in mining-metallurgical plants, industrial process water containing residual organic compounds that can affect the flotation operations are recirculated. The process water contains not only flotation products but also products from other unit operations, such as filtration and sedimentation. The organic compounds are used in these operations at varying concentrations, which means that the recirculated process water has variable characteristics in terms of organic substances and their degradation products. The use of recycle water has significant effects on flotation and selectivity because this water contains many dissolved compounds, both inorganic and organic, which radically alter the chemistry of the system ( Alkyl xanthates are by far the most used reagents, and they are the primary reagents used in sulfide collectors ( According to Reactions In an alkaline medium, xanthate hydrolysis and the trithiocarbonate Xanthates are also susceptible to atmospheric oxidation, and the reactions associated with this oxidation are: Some of the products formed, dixanthogens (ROCS Although xanthates have a high specificity for a given mineral surface and are utilized in relatively low dosages, excess and unreacted concentrations of these reagents end up in the plant effluents ( Due to the increasing necessity of procedures that are highly efficient in the treatment of effluents, several alternative techniques to organic composite degradation have been tested. Many research reports have appeared, mainly in the last two decades, on a special category of oxidation techniques called advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) ( One of these AOPs is the photoelectrooxidation process (PEO). The PEO consists of a combination of electrolysis and heterogeneous photocatalysis and uses oxide-coated electrodes. These materials, known as dimensionally stable anodes (DSAs), represent a class of electrodes in which a metallic titanium substrate is covered by metallic oxides. Coatings on metallic titanium, such as (TiO In this article, aqueous model solutions of sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX) and KOH—used for pH control at pH 12—were prepared as a surrogate for the effluent generated during the flotation of copper minerals. A comparative study of the degradation of sodium isopropyl xanthate was carried out using UV-photolysis (UV-P), electrolysis (EL) and photoelectrooxidation (PEO) processes. All oxidation experiments were accomplished on a jacket glass reactor, with an inner volume of 1.5 The amount of SIPX degraded after the oxidation treatment was determined by UV/VIS spectrometry. A total of 40 Electrolysis experiments with a nominal current of 10  The results obtained by UV-photolysis treatment are provided in The results of the photoelectrooxidation experiments are presented in  In general, the results indicate that higher initial SIPX concentrations result in a higher percentage of degradation. This result was observed for all the evaluated processes. Using electrolysis, it was possible to achieve 93% degradation after 7 Considering that the substrate material of the anode and cathode is a titanium mesh covered with TiO Gradual degradation of the organic matter will occur, as presented in reaction In the case of direct oxidation, the hydroxyl radicals act directly on the organic compound R, as shown in reaction The degradation reaction rate of the organic compound R to RO is calculated by the following: Eq. Because TiO Eqs. By isolating TiO Grouping Eqs. By isolating terms, we get: In contrast, it is possible to present the following: From Eq. By grouping Eqs. and isolating TiO By grouping Eqs. Assuming that the reactive species are present in low concentrations, that the initial water volume is high, that the water concentration is constant and that the TiO As in our case, it is true that: It is possible to verify that R In addition to considering Integrating Eq. Applying expression The kinetic model parameters that are presented in Eq. Because The following conclusions were derived from this study: The oxidative techniques tested (EL, UV-P and PEO) proved to be efficient in the destruction of sodium isopropyl xanthate. The abatement of organics by electrolysis reaches maximum values of 76% destruction with an initial SIPX concentration of 10 In the case of UV-photolysis, the efficiency values were close to 95% degradation for SIPX. The photoelectrooxidation reached degradation efficiency values of 99%. The PEO and UV-P show similar kinetics, both larger in magnitude compared with the EL. The kinetic mechanism developed largely fits the SIPX degradation kinetics of all methods studied. The developed kinetic mechanism helps in interpreting the results because it is possible to differentiate the action of direct and indirect SIPX degradation in all methods studied. The authors are grateful to FAPERGS, Capes and CNPq (Brazil) and to the DICYT from Universidad de Santiago de Chile for the financial support.