This preliminary study examined the role of microwave radiation on precipitation and aging of iron oxyhydroxides at 60°C. It was observed that due to rapid heating under microwave, transformation of two line ferrihydrite to α-Fe2O3 takes place within 4–10h. This is in contrast to the usual aging temperature of >100°C adopted in most conventional studies, and several days of aging. Besides rapid transformation, microwave helps forming nanoparticles, with crystallite size of ~60nm as determined from X-ray diffractograms, and <100nm particles as observed under TEM. Rapid transformation also promotes formation of α-Fe2O3 without the formation of intermediate γ-Fe2O3. This study brought out the advantages of low temperature microwave assisted precipitation/aging as a low energy process to transform iron oxyhydroxides, with likely applications in slurry rheology, synthesis of nanoparticles, and adsorption.Iron oxide and oxyhydroxides are important materials used in many areas, e.g. high density recording media, semiconductor industry, pigments and catalyst preparation, carrier for drug delivery, and adsorbents for anions and cations ( Microwave is an electromagnetic wave with 324–3033 A small number of published literatures are available on microwave synthesis of iron oxyhydroxides. Acicular goethite–magnetite particles have been prepared by microwave-driven hydrolysis of an aqueous solution of ferric and ferrous salts ( The available literature has little information on the role of microwave in low temperature transformation of iron hydroxide precipitate. Such transformation is energy efficient, because it operates below the boiling point of water. It will also have potential applications in mineral and hydrometallurgical industries, e.g. (i) in improving the rheology of slurry, (ii) in de-watering, (iii) in transforming the precipitate to incorporate different anions, and cations from aqueous system during transformation, and (iv) in preparing low cost iron oxyhydroxide adsorbents for anions and cations. In this preliminary study, iron hydroxide precipitates were treated with microwave energy at 60 Iron oxyhydroxide samples were prepared by adding 3 In this study, four different aging techniques were followed using three different methods. These are:   The precipitate was exposed to microwave radiation at 60 The precipitate was mixed with 100  The precipitate was placed in microwave oven cavity for aging at 25 During microwave radiation, the initial current was maintained at 2.5 In this study, a microwave high-temperature reactor was used ( Microwave System: 1.5 Operating temperature: Maximum is 1200 Microwave tube: A vertical quartz tube (with porous partition); effective space in the furnace tube was about 150 Thermocouple locations: One located about 2 Sample location: The sample for radiation was placed in a flask, which was covered with insulated material. After placing the flask in the furnace, a thermocouple was introduced from the top of the microwave cavity. Power consumption: In an average, approximately 150 A Rigaku X-ray diffraction unit (JDX.10P.3A) was used to generate XRD pattern of samples with Cu K Thermo gravimetric analysis was carried out using a NETZSCH 449 A Hitachi H300 transmission electron microscope was used to observe particle morphology. The powder sample was mixed in absolute ethanol, and then dispersed using an ultrasonic dispersing unit. An appropriate amount of sample was gained by copper mesh with 75 The pore structures of samples were analysed using an auto-sorption instrument (Contador's AUTSOR-1). The samples were first subjected to high pure helium desorption, prior to nitrogen adsorption at 77 X-ray diffractograms of precipitated iron hydroxide, Thermal analysis of the precipitates showed two endothermic peaks in the beginning, the first one for physically combined water (at < The transmission electron micrographs showed the ability of microwave radiation to produce nanosize α-Fe As presented in  Several studies have shown that Fe  In this sample, crystalline phase appeared after 8 The TEM image of MW610 at 12 As observed for samples M610, and MW610, microwave radiation during aging accelerates the formation of crystalline phase. If precipitation as well as aging are carried out under microwave, the kinetics of transformation is additionally increased.  The following may be concluded from the four different methods of aging of iron oxyhydroxides, used in this study: Low temperature aging of iron hydroxide at 60 Aging under microwave, in presence of excess water, helps the initial formation of crystalline non-stoichiometric Fe This study showed that microwave mediated aging can produce α-Fe The α-Fe The authors would like to express their gratitude for the financial support of