A new analytical expression was derived for the chemical potential of a hard sphere dipole in hard sphere dipole fluid at infinite dilution of the solute using the mean spherical approximation (MSA). A set of Monte Carlo (MC) simulations has been carried out to investigate the scope of applicability of the derived equation. The mean reaction field (MRF) approach was used in our MC computations. Two different MC methods (Widom particle insertion and thermodynamic integration) were applied for obtaining the chemical potential change associated with the dipole creation at the solute particle to provide adequate accuracy of the MC simulations. Also, corresponding changes in the mean potential energy were calculated by direct method and by thermodynamic integration. The solvation energies have been obtained for the systems of dipolar hard spheres with reduced dipole moment 1.0 at the reduced densities 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8. Computations have been made for solute particles with the reduced dipole moment varied from 0.0 to 1.5 and the hard sphere diameter varied from 0.5 to 2.0. The variation of those quantities with the molecular parameters was analyzed and compared with the MSA equation and Kirkwood classical expressions. It was found that the MSA calculations agree relatively well with MC simulations at densities less than 0.5 and solute dipole moment less than 1.0.This paper is devoted to the memory of Lesser Blum who passed away in April 2016. His analytical results for ionic and ion-dipolar systems are fundamentally important for the modern theory of electrolyte solutions. Polar fluids have been the subject of numerous theoretical and computer simulation studies. Many theories have recently appeared in the frame of rigorous statistical thermodynamics. They displaced the classical electrostatic theories One of the simple closure approximations used in integral equation theories is the mean spherical approximation (MSA). This was analytically solved for one-component dipole fluid by Wertheim A variety of the integral equation approximations based on the hypernetted-chain (HNC) equation Simulation studies of the dipolar fluids have been primarily focused on dipolar hard spheres and Stockmayer particles. Most of the early works are reviewed in details by Stell et al. The Ewald boundary conditions, which is commonly referred to as “periodic boundary conditions” (PBC), were applied to dipolar fluids by Adams and McDonald Another method that attempts to take into account the long-ranged dipolar interactions is the mean reaction field (MRF) method applied by Barker and Watts Neumann and co-workers In spite of the importance of the chemical potential in the theoretical and experimental studies, only a few computations of this thermodynamic quantity for dipolar or higher moment fluids exist. Verlet and Weis Surprisingly, a few computer simulations have been reported for the mixed dipolar systems. Henderson et al. Unfortunately, very few simulations of the chemical potential of other solute particles (embedded in the dipolar liquid at infinite dilution) have been published thus far. The chemical potentials of a hard sphere ion in the hard sphere solute have been studied by Bandura et al. The purpose of the present study is twofold. First, we propose a new expression derived using the mean spherical approximation for calculating the chemical potential of the dipole particle in the dipole fluid. Second, we obtain results of the computer simulation for solvation of hard sphere dipole in the hard sphere dipolar fluid and compare the obtained data with the MSA analytical results. Thus, our work has been motivated both by a general interest in the microscopic behavior of polar liquids and by a desire to provide the numerical data which can be used to test the mean spherical approximation theory. In this study we present the application of MSA for the description of the solvation thermodynamics of polar molecules in a polar solvent. We have derived an explicit expression for the electrostatic part of the standard chemical potential for an infinitely dilute solution of polar molecules in a polar solvent. In this case the energy of interaction ϕ As it was shown by Isbister with coworkers Using for The parameter Instead of the parameter ρ Using Eqs. In this spirit, we can give to Eq. This result has the same meaning as a generalization of the Born expression for the ionic solvation energy obtained in MSA In the infinite dilution the solute-solvent pair distribution function in MSA can be presented in the following form In our Monte Carlo (MC) simulations we used the spherical cut–off convention for the potentials given by Eqs. The mean reaction field technique treats the long-range dipole–dipole interactions using a surrounding truncation sphere for the particle being considered as a polarizable dielectric continuum. The total field acting on the center particle is then corrected by the reaction field produced by that dielectric continuum. As a result, in Eq. The distance Here, the expression in brackets (< >) indicates the mean square of the total dipole moment of the simulated system. The quantity, ε There are several methods for estimating Helmholtz energy in MC simulations The method proposed by Widom The first term in the right-hand side of Eq. To use this technique for obtaining the electrostatic part of the standard chemical potential μ Splitting the chemical potential into contributions from various terms of the intermolecular potential is not unambiguous, but should be useful for the estimation of the role of different interactions in solution. Two simulations are needed for every calculation of μ In thermodynamic integration approach, the Helmholtz energy change, Δ Kirkwood was the first who used this method and the approach became called as the Kirkwood charging procedure. Thermodynamic integration allows calculating the large free energy changes Using the mean reaction field approximation for the hard sphere dipole fluid we can write: The linear dependence of sum on the right hand of Eq. The Helmholtz energy is not the only quantity that is important for the theory of solutions. Also, the internal energy is of significant interest. Calculation of the internal energy fits naturally into MC approach because the mean total potential energy This equation provides the most obvious and direct method for calculating the internal energy of solvation Δ The thermodynamic perturbation approach In practice, it is more convenient to calculate this derivative using both the right- and left-side deviations of The method described above is, obviously, similar to the finite difference thermodynamic integration method of Mezei The results reported below have been obtained from MC simulations of the systems containing 256 or 500 hard spheres dipole particles. MRF approach has been used for taking into account the long-range forces. Generally, one of the particles was different from the others, and it was regarded as a solute particle and could have a different diameter and a dipole moment. Here and everywhere below, if not stated otherwise, we use the dimensionless solvent density ρ Most of the computations were made for the systems of 256 hard sphere dipolar particles, but in some extreme cases the number of particles has been raised up to 500. In addition, some pure and mixed hard sphere systems have been simulated for the purpose of comparison of the radial distribution functions. Widom insertion method has been used for obtaining the values of the solute chemical potential. However, for a number of systems, where the large statistical errors were expected, the thermodynamic integration scheme has been applied for the same purpose. Therefore, additional computations have been made at three intermediate values of solute dipole moment to provide the thermodynamic integration. Due to the linear dependence of the integrand on the value of solute dipole moment, five points numerical integration was found to be sufficient for precise evaluation of the integral in Eq. The radial distribution functions for dipolar sphere system at different densities are shown on Some additional information about solvent-solvent and solute-solvent radial distribution functions for considered dipolar hard sphere mixture at infinite dilution is presented in Supplementary material. The presented results demonstrate that for considered parameters the solvent-solvent and solute-solvent radial distribution functions are practically coincide with corresponded distribution functions of the hard-sphere mixture in agreement with the approximation (Eq. The dependence of the angular projections In Electrostatic contributions to the internal energy of the dipole solvation (at the constant volume) in the above mentioned systems are included in In In this paper we have presented an analytical expression for the electrostatic part of the chemical potential of a hard sphere dipole in hard sphere dipole fluid at infinite dilution of the solute. The relevant expression is derived within the framework of mean spherical approximation. It depends on the solvent dielectric permittivity, sizes of solute and solvent molecules and has a linear dependence from the square of solute dipole moment. It is shown that after introducing the effective size of solute molecules The obtained analytical results are tested by comparison with Monte Carlo (MC) simulations. The long-range character of dipole-dipole interactions in the provided MC simulations was treated in the framework of the mean reaction field technique. The Widom particle insertion and the thermodynamic integration methods were used for the calculation of the changes in the chemical potential of dipole molecules associated with dipole moment of solute at infinite dilution. It is shown that both schemes provide the correct results with adequate accuracy. The corresponding changes in the mean potential energy were also calculated by direct method and by thermodynamic integration. It is shown that MSA theory agrees relatively well with simulation results for not so dense and not so polar solvent. With increasing of density and polarity of solvent MSA theory slightly underestimates the absolute values of the electrostatic contribution. However, it gives better results than the Kirkwood classical model and also the Kirkwood model with empirical extension. The analytical results obtained for the electrostatic part of the chemical potential of the dipolar solute in dipolar solvent can be used for the description of standard thermodynamic state of polar molecules in polar solvents. The similar application of the appropriate generalization of Born expression for ionic solvation was used in This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors thank Dr. Derek Hall for reading the manuscript and providing useful suggestions.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at