CaO was validated as an effective grain refiner for cast Mg alloys. 0.7wt.% CaO addition led to significant reduction in grain size. As CaO particles were reproducibly found within the Mg grains, it was considered that CaO particles promoted heterogeneous nucleation. Additionally, some CaO particles were chemically reduced by Mg, which produced Ca solute and contributed to the grain refinement. The present work indicates that co-existence of active nucleants and solutes with high Q-values in the melt is essential to achieve the highest grain refining efficiency. For Mg alloys, chemical reactions should also be considered at inoculation treatment.Aiming at higher mechanical properties, intensive research efforts have been done on Mg alloys. One of the most successful processes to produce both high strength and ductility is grain refinement In an effective inoculation process, both the solute element(s) with high Q-value and potent nucleants should be available in the melt However, these grain refiners have limitations. For example, the grain refining efficiency of AlN can only be achieved at higher casting temperature of 760 Crystallographic calculations based on the E2EM model It is worth mentioning that the above prediction of the CaO potency has been, to some extent, supported by preliminary results from other researchers Commercial purity Mg, Zn, Al ingots and Mg–9 Samples were cut, mounted, polished then etched. A polarized light optical microscope was used to examine the grains. Using the lineal intercept method Addition of CaO particles to pure Mg melt effectively changed the morphology of grains from columnar to equiaxed. The columnar-to-equiaxed (CTE) transition was firstly observed at addition of 0.3 A recent study Wiese and co-workers To verify this hypothesis, the microstructure of the Mg–CaO alloy was further examined in SEM together with EDX analysis. A typical back scattered electron micrograph of the as-cast alloy is presented in TEM specimens were prepared using focused ion beam (FIB). CaO particles at the centre of Mg grains were selected. It was noted that, most recent researches have focused either on the inoculation or on the solutes effect. The conventional combined effects of heterogeneous nucleation and solute effects on grain refinement were less mentioned. In order to re-emphasize the importance of the combined effect and to further test the efficiency of CaO as a nucleant in cast Mg alloys, 1.4 The effect of CaO particles addition on grain refinement of the as-cast Mg–Ca and Mg–Zn binary alloys can be well understood in terms of the interdependency theory However, addition of 1.4 In the past a few decades, a number of theories/models have been developed to understand the mechanisms of grain refinement in cast metals Addition of CaO led to effective grain refinement in pure Mg and in some Mg alloys, such as the Mg–1.0 The highest grain refining efficiency in cast metals can be achieved when there are enough amount of solute with high Q-values and thermally and chemically stable effective and large enough nucleants in the melt. Due to the high chemical activity, the chemical reaction before solidification must be taken into account when developing new and more effective grain refiners for cast Mg alloys, Mg–Al based alloys in particular.